Main CPI office set on fire by unidentified people in Bengaluru

CPI office was set ablaze in Bengaluru last night

Bengaluru: The main office of CPI that is located in Malleswaram in Bengaluru was set ablaze last night. The people behind the incident, that took place late last night, are yet to be known. According to sources, some bike-borne people torched the office at about 1:30 in the morning by sprinkling petrol on it. A video that has now surfaced online clearly show a few people, who had helmets on, sprinkling petrol over the gate of the office and the vehicles parked outside the office and setting them on fire.

During the incident, six bikes that were parked near the office were also burnt down. The party has laid its suspicions on some people who have not been very happy about CPI opposing the Citizenship Amendment Act. State secretary of CPI, Sathi Sundaresh, while talking about the incident said that it was a ‘direct assault’ on democratic rights enjoyed by the people and his party. He also said that the party is planning to organise a protest against the incident.

The police, while talking about the incident, said that it was an attempt to torch the CPI office. However, the guard that witnessed the incident immediately informed the cops, who reached the spot and saved the office from burning down. The police also said that this could also be the handiwork of people who have been disappointed by the fact that the CPI held protests against the CAA during the tour of Kerala by the chief minister, BS Yediyurappa, to register its opposition to CAA.

Talking about same, Deputy commissioner of police, Chethan Singh Rathod, said that six motorbikes kept inside the CPI office compound were torched by bike-borne miscreants at around 1 am. He said that a case in this connection was registered in Vyalikaval police station and that the police will investigate to find out the culprits and their intentions. Meanwhile, the police said that they are investigating the CCTV footage and are trying to ascertain the real culprits behind the incident.

“The Communist Party of India strongly condemns growing intolerance and sheer desperation resulting into an attack on party state headquarters in Bengaluru as well as continuing detention of party leaders especially in Manipur and Uttar Pradesh,” said D Raja, General Secretary of the CPI, reportedly in a statement. “What happened in Bengaluru in the wee hours of December 25, 2019, that is 1.40 am, is an utter violation of all decency and unleashing of a brutal attack on the property of Opposition parties, their leaders and cadres,” he additionally told the publication.
