Victim of sexual assault glues predator's eyes together, slits his throat in Tamil Nadu

The deceased's body was found in a playground in Washermenpet (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The woman and the deceased person's daughter went to the same college, said police He had been, allegedly, sexually exploiting her for over four years When she told him about getting married, he threatened to post intimate pictures of her on social media, said the accused girl

Chennai: After her alleged abuser blackmailed her with the threat of releasing their intimate pictures online, a girl in Tamil Nadu took matters into her own hands. She reportedly told police that she glued the eyes of the 54-year-old man and slit his throat. His body was found in a playground in Washermenpet on Monday night. The 24-year-old girl was arrested on Tuesday and sent to jail by a court.

The man has been identified as Sekar, a resident of Thiruvottiyur. Police officers familiar with the case said that the girl was a friend of Sekar's daughter. He is said to have been sexually assaulting her for more than four years and she says she did not object to his actions because he was supporting her family financially. He even gave her presents from time to time in order to buy her silence. Earlier this year, she decided to get married.

The girl says that when she informed Sekar about her decision, he threatened to post intimate pictures of them together on social media platforms. He made similar threats to the girl's family. This is when she decided to take matters into her own hands. On Monday, she summoned him to a playground in Washermenpet where she glued his eyes together and slit his throat.

The man's body was spotted by locals who alerted the police control room. A team of personnel was dispatched to the scene of the crime. Sekar's body was sent to the state-run Stanley Medical College and Hospital for a postmortem. A businessman who dealt in camphor, Sekar was known to be romantically involved with a girl from his locality. Following his death, police traced the girl and brought her in for questioning. She admitted to the crime and told investigators that she had no other option than to kill the man. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and a police investigation into the matter is underway.
