Three teenage boys rape and murder 8-year-old girl in Bihar's Purnia

One of the accused was reportedly heard saying that he and two of his friends raped the girl before murdering her. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Three teenage boys rape and murder 8-year-old girl in Purnia district Two of the three accused have been sent to remand home Dhamdaha SHO claim the two accused have confessed to crime

Patna: In a shocking incident, an 8-year-old girl was allegedly raped and murdered by three minor boys in Purnia district of Bihar on Sunday evening.

The victim was allegedly abducted by the accused aged between 12 and 15 when she went to her neighbour's house to watch TV in the evening.

According to a report in Times of India, a search was mounted by the girl's family when she did not return home till late into the night. The girl's body was found the next day by her family members from near a betel shop under the Dhamadha police station area.

The report further suggests that the girl's family members allegedly decided to cremate the victim's body without autopsy under pressure from local residents, but the matter was leaked.

One of the accused was reportedly heard saying that he and two of his friends raped the girl before murdering her. Later the accused were caught by local residents and thrashed. The accused also told the locals about the involvement of two other persons in the crime.

The three suspects were later handed over to Dhamdaha police and the victim's body sent for autopsy to Sadar Hospital.

"The two accused, who are juvenile, have been taken into custody and produced before the Juvenile Justice Board. The two have been sent to remand home. We are conducting raids to arrest the third accused. The two accused are victim's neighbours and have confessed to the crime," said Dhamdaha police station SHO Raj Kishore Sharma.

According to the father of the victim, the bloodstains were spotted where the girl was possibly murdered. The forensic team has taken samples of the blood from the spot for further investigation.

The Station House Officer said that the postmortem report will reveal whether the girl was violated before she was murdered.
