“7 long years, will wait for few more days,” Nirbhaya’s Kin

For the parents of Nirbhaya, a name given to the victim of the December 16, 2012, brutal gang-rape in Delhi, the long and arduous journey to justice for their deceased daughter is nowhere near an end.

“When we left home this morning, we had a sense of hope in our hearts. We believed we would return with the news of death warrants of Nirbhaya’s convicts in our hands. But that was not to be. The wait continues,” says the father of the 23-year-old victim, who succumbed to sexual assault injuries at a Singapore multi-specialty hospital on December 29 seven years ago. “From December 16, 2012, to date, we have fought patiently for justice,” says the mother of the victim whose story inspired sweeping changes to India’s criminal laws.

The Supreme Court of India has rejected the review petition of one of the four convicts on death row for fatal sexual assault on the physiotherapy student who was returning home from a movie on the fateful night. What pains Nirbhaya’s family the most is the rigmarole of laws and a seemingly endless recourse to appeals the convicts of grave sexual assault can avail. “There has to be a reasonable way to deal with such matters. It is clear to everyone that the convicts are making a mockery of the law. What Akshay Kumar said today was a brazen attempt to delay justice. The system must rise to this challenge and ensure that speedy justice is done. Perhaps we must start where President Ram Nath Kovind has said—do away with mercy petitions in cases of sexual assault on children and then perhaps do away with mercy petitions in all cases of grave sexual assaults,” says Nirbhaya’s father, looking at his wife and describing her as an “embodiment of resilience”.

Through the Nirbhaya Jyoti Trust, the victim’s mother has been working to make capital’s spaces secure for women. All she had to say after the SC rejected Akshay’s review plea is: “We will continue our search for justice.” Coming from the mother of a victim, whose death became the test case for Indian criminal law on sexual assault, that is a tall order.
