FIR against five Shiv Sena workers for thrashing Wadala resident over alleged comment against CM Thackeray

Hiramani Vijendra Tiwari, a resident of Wadala was assaulted by Shiv Sena workers | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The man had posted derogatory comments against CM Uddhav Thackeray This attack came as a huge embarrassment for the ruling Maha Vikas Aghadi Aditya Thackeray appealed for calm over the assault-cum-tonsuring of a VHP-BJP sympathiser

Mumbai: Days after Hiramani Vijendra Tiwari, a resident of Wadala was assaulted by Shiv Sena workers for an 'objectionable' social media post against Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray, an FIR has been registered against five people.

A self-confessed BJP sympathiser was thrashed and his head forcibly tonsured allegedly by some Shiv Sainiks on Monday.

This attack came as a huge embarrassment for the ruling Maha Vikas Aghadi (MVA) alliance.

After the attack, the victim identified as Hiramani Tiwari, filed a complaint to the Wadala Police demanding strong action against the alleged attackers.

According to police sources, a couple of days ago, he had made posted derogatory responses to Thackeray's comments when he equated Delhi Police action on Jamia Millia Islamia students with the Jallianwala Bagh massacre.

Outraged over his post, some Shiv Sainiks from Antop Hill area in south Mumbai, led by Samadhan Jakdeo and Prakash Hasbe, barged into his home at Shantinagar on Sunday afternoon after which he was dragged and beaten. His head was shaved by the Sena workers who further warned him not to post anything against the Maharashtra CM. The party workers also referred to Thackeray as a God.

Talking to the media Tiwari said that after he wrote that post, he started getting threats and even he himself felt it (his post) was improper, which is why he deleted it.

"I may have committed a wrong, but who has given them the right to take the law in their hands and beat me up like this. The law should take its course," rued Tiwari.

The Wadala Police has registered a complaint, recorded his statement on Monday and are making a further investigation into the matter.

Shiv Sena leader Aditya Thackeray appealed for calm over the assault-cum-tonsuring of a VHP-BJP sympathiser saying that "nasty social media trolls and lynch mobs" who threaten and abuse all, including women and children should be ignored.
