Gujarat: Class VII girl jumps off scooter to escape molester

Representative image

VADODARA: A 15-year-old girl from a village on the outskirts of Vadodara city displayed tremendous courage on Tuesday afternoon when she managed to escape from the clutches of her molester by jumping off a moving scooter in Chhani area.

On Wednesday, cops arrested 40-year-old Suresh Vansfadia based on his mobile phone's location. He told cops that he repairs office furniture for his living. “The accused is married and has four daughters,” a cop said.

According to the police, the Class VII left her school in Chhani area early as she was not feeling well. As she was waiting for an autorickshaw outside a resort on Chhani Road, the accused Vansfadia, riding a scooter, approached her. “The accused offered to drop her off at her home, but the girl refused. He kept on insisting and when the girl did not budge, he told her that he would drop her near Fertilizernagar from where she can take an autorickshaw,” a police official said. Since the girl was not feeling well, she agreed to go with him.

The man drove the scooter towards Fertilizernagar, but after a kilometre, he turned towards Karodiya on a deserted road.

The girl questioned Vansfadia as that was not the route of her home, but the accused told him that he wanted to briefly meet his uncle nearby. As the road was deserted, the man started touching her inappropriately, while driving the two-wheeler. So she shouted for help. Hearing her shouts, Vansfadia increased his speed.

After a distance, he had to slow down the scooter as the road was uneven. “The girl thought that this was an opportunity for her so she gathered courage and jumped off the scooter and ran in the opposite direction,” the police official said.

Meanwhile, a food delivery man named Raviraj Gohil, who was going for work, came to the girl’s rescue and seeing him Vansfadia fled from the spot.

Chauhan offered his mobile phone to the girl to call her mother and then took her to Chhani police station. The girl’s mother too reached the police station and lodged a complaint of abduction, criminal intimidation and under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme court directives on cases related to sexual assault)


