Pulwama Attack: PM Modi Declares Full Freedom To Security Forces, Withdraws MFN Status From Pak

In Prime Minister on Friday declared that security forces have been given full freedom in the wake of one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir's three decades of terrorism.

A suicide bomber from the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed terror group rammed an explosives-laden vehicle into a CRPF bus in Pulwama district on Thursday, killing nearly 44 personnel and leaving many critically wounded.

The prime minister also chaired a meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Security during which a decision was taken to withdraw the Most Favoured Nation status that was earlier granted to Pakistan.

#WATCH PM Narendra Modi pays tribute to CRPF soldiers who lost their lives in #PulwamaTerrorAttack, says, "logon ka khoon khaul raha hai, yeh main samajh raha hun. Humare suraksha balon ko purn swatantra de di gayi hai." pic.twitter.com/kxdCIKe88q — ANI (@ANI) February 15, 2019

He further said the sacrifices of "our brave security personnel shall not go in vain", people across the country have demanded the strongest possible action against the dastardly terrorist attack.

“I urge everyone to refrain from any kind of political mudslinging, this is a very sensitive matter. We will combat this menace together, this is the message that we should be sending out to the world.”, he added.

Targetting Pakistan he said, “If our neighbor which is totally isolated in the world thinks it can destabilize India through its tactics and conspiracies, then it is making a big mistake.”

Experts of anti-terror commando force the National Security Guard (NSG) and investigators of the National Investigation Agency (NIA) left for Jammu and Kashmir on Friday to join the probe into the terror attack in Pulwama in which at least 37 CRPF personnel were killed, officials said.

The decision to send the teams was taken in view of the high number of casualties in the worst terror strike in the state since the Uri attack in 2016.

Mobile internet services have also been suspended in Jammu over security concerns.

This was the first suicide car bomb attack in Kashmir since the 2001 strike on the Legislative Assembly in which 41 people, including three suicide attackers, were killed.

ALSO READ: 41 CRPF Jawans Martyred In IED Blast In Jammu & Kashmir’s Pulwama

The mortal remains of the CRPF personnel killed in an audacious terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama will be sent to their homes across the country today afternoon, said, officials.
