Several taxi drivers at Mumbai airport found driving illegally

Several taxi drivers at Mumbai airport found driving illegally

Earlier this year, the Indian government introduced the contentious Motor Vehicles Act with the aim and hope to tidy up the mess that is road safety in India. And even though it was met with opposition from all quarters, a lot of state governments, thankfully, have remained steadfast in their decision to implement the stricter traffic rules and fines. Unfortunately, it seems we still have a long way to go as far as compliance with old as well as new traffic rules goes. Allow us to explain -- last week, the Maharashtra government undertook a campaign at the Mumbai airport to check for traffic violations. I am not even sure why I am surprised, but the officials found a total of 990 violators. The drive, focused on Uber, Ola, etc., recorded all sorts of violations, including driving illegally, i.e. without a valid driver's licence.

An ETAuto report noted that several Regional Transport Offices (RTO) platoons, put together especially for this drive, monitored cab drivers at the Mumbai airport. The decision was driven by the growing number of complaints against drivers, including for cancellations, difference in the scheduled and actual pick-up times, and more. Even though the drive started with the aim to catch erring drivers in the context their tardiness, officials stumbled upon drivers who were found to be in violation of several traffic rules as well, including driving without a licence, not wearing an appropriate badge, etc.

Another crucial violation to emerge in this drive was the absence of fire extinguishers in the taxis. The report adds that ride-hailing service providers, in an endeavour to ensure safety of passengers, had previously promised that all their taxis will get fire extinguishers. But it seems they were hollow promises since officials found 436 taxis had fire extinguishers well beyond their expiry dates.

The sheer number of violators found at just the Mumbai airport speaks volumes about the state of affairs in the state as well as the country in general. While the new traffic rules are a welcome change, the fact remains that they will fail to serve their intended purpose without the proper implementation. Sure, the Mumbai authorities did conduct a drive and intends to execute more such drives in the future, they are still not enough.
