Bengaluru: 54-year-old man rapes minor on pretext of playing with toys; booked under POCSO

The accused has been booked under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The accused is a daily wage worker in Bengaluru He lured the child who was playing with her friends and took her to his home The accused has been booked under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act

Bengaluru: A 54-year-old daily wage worker was arrested for allegedly sexually assaulting a two-and-a-half-year-old girl from his neighbourhood in Yelahanka area of the city.

The accused was identified as Mallapa, who migrated from Andhra Pradesh to Bengaluru around five years ago. According to a report by the Times of India, the accused lured the child who was playing with her friends around 9 am on Monday. He then took her to his house on the pretext of playing with toys and then he sexually assaulted the child. Around 9:30 am, she returned home, howling in pain.

Reportedly, her mother noticed bruises on the child's private parts and immediately informed the police about it. Yelahanka police officers rushed to the spot and sent the child for medical examination and treatment to a nearby government-run hospital. During the preliminary investigation, the police found out that Mallappa lives with his grandchildren and they are further probing if he has sexually exploited them as well or not.

However, the accused has been booked under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. And further probe in the matter is underway.

In another case reported from Uttar Pradesh, a minor was allegedly raped in Moradabad on December 22. Superintendent of Police, Moradabad City, Amit Kumar Anand told a media person that the victim's father found her in an injured state near the airport strip and rushed her to a nearby hospital. The medical examination report shows that she was raped.

Based on the complaint filed by the victim's father, the police have registered a case under Section 376 (rape) and the POCSO Act against unknown persons. Further probe in the case is underway.
