21-year-old girl alleges she was abducted, confined and raped repeatedly for a year in Vasai

Was made to sign blank papers and affidavits by the accused, she alleged (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights In her complaint, the girl alleged that she was abducted by a man she entered into a relationship with last July Police are yet to make any arrests in connection with the case The girl also gave birth to a daughter during this period

Mumbai: As many as 11 people have been booked by police in Maharashtra's Palghar district on charges of abduction, rape and illegal confinement. A case was registered in this regard after a girl approached Vasai police on Wednesday claiming that she had been held hostage and repeatedly raped by the accused for over a year.

In her complaint, the 21-year-old girl said that she entered into a relationship with one of the accused in July of last year. However, he abducted her along with his accomplices soon after. She was made to sign blank papers and affidavits to prove that she had married one of the accused. Police officers familiar with the case said that she was taken to a home in Vasai taluka of Palghar district.

The girl was confined and repeatedly raped for over a year. She even gave birth to a baby girl in this time period. After suffering for over a year, she decided to approach Vasai police and registered a complaint against 11 people. Police public relations officer (PRO) Hemant Katkar told Mumbai Mirror that the accused are residents of Rangaon and Kalam in Vasai.

All of the accused have been booked under sections 376, 366 and 342 along with other relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Katkar added that no arrests have been made in connection with the case as of yet and further investigation is underway.

The horrific ordeal brings back memories of a similar case that had come to light in June of this year from Tamil Nadu's Mysuru district. A 15-year-old schoolgirl was taken away by a moneylender after her mother failed to repay a loan. The child was then held hostage and raped by five different men for over a period of five months. All of the accused were booked under various sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.
