Female passenger assaults lady TTE, GRP head constable when asked to show ticket

Stills from a video of the incident at Ambernath railway station | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights A resident of Nerul, the woman was booked and arrested by GRP Videos of the incident are going viral on social media platforms This is the third such incident just in the last two days, said GRP personnel

Mumbai: A shocking incident has come to light from India's economic capital where a lady ticket checker was assaulted by a woman on Thursday. The entire incident was caught on CCTV cameras installed at the Ambernath railway station and videos of the same are doing rounds on social media platforms.

Preliminary inputs suggest that the woman launched a physical assault on ticket checker Namrata Shendge after the latter asked her to show her ticket. Later identified as one Minal Ghule, the woman also thrashed Government Railway Police (GRP) Ambernath chowki's Head Constable Anita Kamble who tried to break the scuffle.

In a video of the incident, Nerul-resident Ghule can be seen assaulting the ticket checker and the head constable right outside the GRP chowki at Ambernath railway station which is located about 55 kilometres from Thane district. An FIR was later registered against her and she was taken into custody later in the day. Similar instances of violent attacks on ticket-checkers have come to light from across the country over the years. A recent case was from Kerala where two policemen were caught on camera assaulting a travelling ticket examiner (TTE) onboard Janshatabdhi Express as it approached Ernakulam railway station.

However, a GRP official has told media outlets that this is the third such incident to have been reported from Maharashtra just in the last two days.

According to information furnished by GRP personnel, another ticket checker Vivek Kumar Rai was allegedly manhandled by a passenger at the Bandra station of Western Railway on Tuesday. On the same day, another ticket checker identified as Hareram Sharma was assaulted by a passenger at the suburban King's Circle station of the Central Railway. Both Sharma and Rai were reportedly assaulted and pushed on the tracks. This has led to the Central Railway Mazdoor Sangh, a labour union, to call for a silent demonstration outside the Divisional Railway Manager's office at Mumbai's Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus on Friday.
