'Take immediate & verifiable action against JeM': India summons Pakistan envoy over Pulwama attack, issues demarche

India summoned Pakistan's envoy on Friday and served a diplomatic notice demanding Islamabad take "immediate and verifiable action" against Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) which has claimed responsibility for Pulwama attack which claimed lives of 40 CRPF jawans.

Pakistan High Commissioner to India Sohail Mahmood was summoned by Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale and issued a very strong demarche in connection with the terrorist attack in Pulwama.

He also conveyed to Mahmood that Pakistan must immediately stop any groups or individuals associated with terrorism from operating from its territories, the source added.

The Foreign Secretary also rejected the statement made by the Foreign Ministry of Pakistan yesterday with regards to the attack, the source said.

#WATCH Delhi: Pakistan High Commissioner to India Sohail Mahmood(on the left) leaves from MEA. He had been summoned by Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale. #PulwamaAttack pic.twitter.com/0on0k0bPNX — ANI (@ANI) February 15, 2019

The Ministry of External Affairs has also called Indian High Commissioner to Pakistan Ajay Bisaria to Delhi for consultations in the wake of yesterday's attack.

As many as 40 CRPF personnel were killed after a suicide bomber attacked a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district with a vehicle laden with explosives.

The convoy comprised of 78 buses in which around 2,500 personnel were travelling from Jammu to Srinagar - the slain personnel were in a bus which had 42 CRPF men on board.

JeM, a Pakistan-based terrorist group, claimed responsibility for the attack which left the bus extensively damaged in the blast and ensuing gunfire on the vehicle.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi also warned Pakistan that it cannot weaken India by orchestrating attacks.

on Friday said those responsible will pay "a very heavy price" and security forces will be given a free hand to deal with terrorists.

Making it clear that India means business, the Cabinet Committee on Security, which met here on Friday morning, decided to withdraw the most favoured nation status to Pakistan.

(With agencies)
