Indian Police to Seek FBI’s Help to Resolve High-Profile Caste-Based Violence Case

"Since labs of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) are much advanced, the decision to send the hard disc there has been taken and necessary approvals have been given by the Union Home Ministry. A team of India's forensic experts and police will soon travel to the USA," the police officer said.

The prosecution recently submitted a draft charge sheet against 19 accused, including nine activists, who have already been arrested in connection with the Elgar Parishad-Koregaon Bhima case.

According to the police, the Elgar Parishad conclave was held on 31 December 2017 on the eve of 200th anniversary celebrations of the Battle of Koregaon Bhima in Pune. It was supported by Maoists. Some inflammatory speeches made at the event led to violence on the next day (1 January) at the Koregaon Bhima war memorial in the district of Pune.

The 1818 Battle of Koregaon was related to the Dalit community (untouchables). On 1 January 1818, about 800 troops of the British Army, with a number of Mahars (leather workers), defeated a numerically superior force of the Peshwa Baji Rao II, the last prime minister or Peshwa of the Maratha Empire (1674-1818).

A victory pillar was erected in Koregaon by the British, commemorating the dead soldiers. In 1928, the founder of the Indian constitution B. R. Ambedkar led the first commemoration ceremony here. Since then, on 1 January, Ambedkarite Dalits (Ambedkar followers) gather at Bhima Koregaon to celebrate their victory against the upper caste Peshwa regime, whom they view as their oppressors.

The 2018 Bhima Koregaon stone-pelting refers to attack on untouchables during an annual celebratory gathering at a place called Bhima Koregaon.

Police said the charges include a conspiracy to assassinate Prime Minister Narendra Modi and overthrow the government as well as waging war against the Government of India. These charges have been brought against all of the 19 accused by the prosecution in the Elgar Parishad-Koregaon Bhima case.
