Missing minor raped in bus in Madhya Pradesh's Rajgarh district, 2 arrested

The accused have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The missing complaint was filed by minor's father The minor was found on a bus with two men, who allegedly raped her The accused have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and POCSO Act

Bhopal: A minor girl was allegedly raped inside a bus at Biaora bus stand in Rajgarh district of Madhya Pradesh. The suspects in the case have been arrested by the police.

NK Nahar, sub-divisional officer of Police, told a news agency on Thursday that a man had earlier filed a complaint stating that his minor daughter had gone missing while they were going to Indore. The police registered a case and during the investigation, she was seen at Biaora bus stand. Meanwhile, tracking the CCCTV footage, the minor was found on a bus with two men. Upon interrogating, the police found out that minor was raped by the two men. Later, she narrated her ordeal to the police officials after which both the accused were apprehended in the case.

Rajgarh: Minor girl allegedly raped inside a bus at Biaora bus stand. N K Nahar, Sub Divisional Officer of Police says, "Girl complained she was raped by a man in presence of another person. Both accused arrested, case registered under relevant sections". #MadhyaPradesh (26.12) pic.twitter.com/jjLrKfnNWG — ANI (@ANI) December 26, 2019

The accused have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

In a similar case reported from Uttar Pradesh, a man was arrested for allegedly attempting to rape a six-year-old girl at the district hospital in Moradabad district. Moradabad ASP Deepak Bhukar said that the accused has been arrested based on the minor's complaint. The incident took place on December 25 at the district hospital where the girl's mother was admitted. Reportedly, the accused allegedly tried to rape her when she was inside the washroom.

However, the police have registered the case under Section 354 (molestation) of the Indian Penal Code and relevant sections of the POCSO Act.
