Kushal Punjabi changed his Twitter bio to 'Currently transiting planet earth', before committing suicide

Actor Kushal Punjabi suicide, Twitter | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights TV actor Kushal Punjabi was found dead in his apartment in Mumbai on 27 December He committed suicide and left a note Kushal is survived by wife Audrey and son Kian

TV actor Kushal Punjabi passed away on Friday. The actor was found dead at his Mumbai residence and suicide note was also retrieved from his apartment. The actor was found in his home in Pali Hill on Friday morning. As the industry is currently in a terrible shock over his sudden demise, many stated how the actor was always jovial and showed no sign of depression. However, we have learnt that the suicide was imminent as the actor changed his Twitter bio before committing suicide.

On his Twitter bio, the actor wrote, "Actor Writer Director Biker Adventurer. Currently transiting planet earth." It is a clear indication to suicide as the line says it all. The actor's body is being kept at Cooper Hospital in Juhu where the post mortem took place. The body will be kept at the centre's cold storage for another day before he is cremated. The actor's father is currently at the hospital.

Many TV celebrities bereaved the sudden demise of their contemporary and had good things to say about him. Actors like Karan Patel, Shweta Tiwari, Jay Bhanushali, Karan Patel and Baba Sehgal, to name a few, shared their grief over Kushal Punjabi's death. Taking to Instagram, actor Karanvir Bohra shared a long message about what a phenomenal personality Kushal was and how his death was too sudden to comprehend. “Your demise has shocked the hell out of me. I'm still in denial, Kushal Punjabi. I know you are in a happier place, but this is unfathomable,” Karanvir wrote in his post.

Kushal Punjabi is survived by wife Audrey Dolhen and three-year old son Kian. In his tenure as an actor in the industry, Kushal was part of various hit shows such as Kasam Se, Dekho Magar Pyaar Se and Kabhi Haan Kabhi Naa among more. In fact, he also made appearances in several Bollywood films such as Lakshya, Kaal, Salaam-e-Ishq and Dhan Dhana Dhan, Goal.
