Aishwarya Rai’s father refuses to accept dowry returned by Rabri Devi, says ‘could be explosives’

Aishwarya Rai and Tej Pratap Yadav | Photo Credit: IANS

Patna: Days after Rashtriya Janata Dal supremo Lalu Prasad Yadav's estranged daughter-in-law Aishwarya Rai filed an FIR in Patna, her father on Thursday night reportedly refused to accept the dowry articles returned by the family of his son-in-law Tej Pratap Yadav.

Former minister Chandrika Rai alleged that the family of Rabri Devi had not obeyed the process to return the goods and may have slipped in liquor or explosives to put him into trouble.

Rabri Devi had sent back the articles, mostly furniture, to Rai’s residence in the wake of the December 18 notice served to her by the women’s helpline. Rabri was asked to respond to an application submitted by Poornima Devi, the mother of Aishwarya Rai. Notably, Poornima Devi had sought the return of all articles given to Lalu’s family as ‘dowry’ after her daughter was purportedly thrown out of the house.

“As per the law, an inventory list shall be prepared in front of magistrate and police officer before dispatching the articles. How can I accept them, as the consignment might carry some contraband like liquor or explosives,” said Chandrika Rai.

Two pick-up vans full of articles stood near his residence overnight.

Chandrika Rai’s refusal to accept the articles has evoked a sharp response from Rabri Devi’s daughter Misa Bharti.

Misa alleged that Chandrika Rai was doing it to earn cheap publicity and malign the Lalu family. The Rajya Sabha MP further alleged that the articles were loaded in the vans in the presence of the protection officer of women’s helpline after breaking the lock of Aishwarya’s two rooms at the Rabri Devi's house at 10, Circular Road.

On December 16, Aishwarya Rai had filed an FIR in Patna, accusing Rabri Devi, Misa Bharti and Tej Pratap of harassing as well as assaulting her.

Aishwarya had claimed that she was dragged out of Rabri Devi's house. A divorce case is pending in court between Tej Pratap Yadav and his wife Aishwarya Rai.

At that time, Chandrika Rai had alleged that the Lalu family will be exposed. "Those who cannot respect women living in their homes, how can they respect others," Rai had said.

Tej Pratap had filed a divorce petition against Aishwarya Rai in November 2018, just months after their marriage was solemnised.
