Kushal Punjabi's body kept at Cooper hospital till his wife arrives from China

Ishq Mein Marjawan actor Kushal Punjabi was found dead in his Mumbai's Pali Hill home on Friday. The 42-year-old actor was found hanging. Popular actor Karanvir Bohra shared the news of Kushal's demise on social media. The autopsy report suggested hanging as a cause of death. There was a ligature mark on his neck due to hanging and thus, the doctors didn't suspect any foul play. However, they kept the final opinion reserved until they get the forensic reports. The actor's body has been kept at Cooper hospital until his wife arrives from China on Saturday.

The police have also found a suicide note at his residence. In his suicide note, Kushal Punjabi has mentioned that 50 per cent of his property/assets should be equally distributed among his parents and sister, and the remaining 50 per cent should be given to his three-year-old son Kian.

Karanvir Bohra took to his social media handle to break the sad news and he wrote, " Ur demise has shocked the hell out of me.I'm still in denial @itsme_kushalpunjabi. I know you are in a happier place, but this is unfathomable. The way you lead your life really inspired me in more ways than one....but what was I to know. Your zest for dancing, fitness, off-road biking, fatherhood and above all that, that smiling face of yours, your happy-go-lucky nature your warmth all that was such ingenuity. I'm gonna miss you so much #kushlani You will always be rememberd sad a guy who lived a full life."

Apart from Karanvir, several other television actors such as Baba Sehgal, Karan Patel, Mohena Kumari Singh, Kavita Kaushik, Shweta Tiwari, and Jay Bhanushali also expressed their grief over Kushal's sudden demise.

Kushal Punjabi got married to his European girlfriend Audrey Dolhen in 2015. The couple has a three-year-old son Kian.

The actor had featured in reality shows like Jhalak Dikhla Jaa and Fear Factor. He had also worked in popular TV serials like Kasam Se, Dekho Magar Pyaar Se, and Kabhi Haan Kabhi Naa among more. Kushal had also appeared in many Hindi films such as Salaam-e-Ishq, Lakshya, Dhan Dhana Dhan Goal, and Kaal.

ALSO READ| Kushal Punjabi, 37, found dead at Mumbai home

ALSO READ| Kushal Punjabi leaves a suicide note, doesn't blame anyone for his death

ALSO READ| Karanvir Bohra to Chhavi Mittal: Friends mourn untimely death of Kushal Punjabi

ALSO WATCH| Kushal Punjabi wins Zor Ka Jhatka
