Martyr status for protesters who died in district during anti-CAA protests: Firozabad Shahi Masjid Imam

Representational Image | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Mohammed Shafeeq, 40, and Mohammed Haroon, 33, had died in Firozabad during anti-CAA protests in the district Ahead of Friday prayers, there was a thick security cover in place in all the sensitive areas in the state Internet services were suspended in many places to check rumour-mongering

New Delhi: Shahi Masjid Imam of Firozabad Aarif Hussain has announced martyr status to those who have died during anti-Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 protests in the district.

Two men who had suffered bullet injuries during the anti-CAA protests in Firozabad on December 20 and succumbed in two separate Delhi hospitals yesterday. The victims were identified as 40-year-old Mohammed Shafeeq and Mohammed Haroon, 33. While Shafeeq was shifted to Safdarjung Hospital Haroon was admitted to AIIMS Trauma Centre.

The family of Haroon has claimed that he was shot in the face when he was returning home after selling his buffaloes in a nearby cattle market.

Meanwhile, Friday prayers passed off peacefully in Uttar Pradesh today amid tight security arrangements in anticipation of last week's violence by anti-citizenship law protesters.

"The entire state was peaceful," Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police O P Singh told PTI. He further said there was no report of any untoward incident from anywhere in the state.

There was a thick security cover in place in all the sensitive areas in the state with heavy deployment of central paramilitary forces.

Internet services were suspended in many places to check rumour-mongering, officials said.

To keep vigil, drones were also used in areas where violence had broken out last week after Friday prayers.

After last week’s Friday prayers, protesters hurled stones at policemen and set vehicles on fire. To control the situation the cops had to use lathis, tear-gas and even have admitted to opening fire in self-defence in some places.

Around 3,500 personnel of central paramilitary forces and 12,000 jawans of the UP Provincial Armed Constabulary (PAC) were on the job to maintain peace, the state police chief said.

As a precautionary measure, Internet services which were resumed after nearly a week were suspended again in over 20 of the 75 UP districts including Ghaziabad, Bulandshahr, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Shamli and Agra, PTI reported.

According to a statement by the Home Department spokesperson, the violence left 288 policemen injured, including 61 with firearm injuries. Around 327 FIRs have been registered and 5,558 preventive arrests have been made so far.

A preliminary probe in the violence in Kanpur pointed towards the role of people from Kashmir and Bangladesh.
