District records 77% turnout in first phase

COIMBATORE: The district recorded 77% polling in the first phase of local body elections held on Friday.The elections were held in five panchayat unions - Anaimalai , Madukkarai, Kinathukadavu, Pollachi north and Pollachi south. Madukkarai recorded the lowest of 73.2% while Pollachi north seen the highest turnout of 80.02% polling.There were people queuing up in a few booths right from the polling commenced. However, the polling was slow with just 23% till 11am. But voting gained pace after that and almost doubled by 1pm. In the afternoon, again there was a lull and only 77% turned up at the end of polling by 5pm. However, election officials said that the voter turnout was not bad and was in tune with the voting pattern in the past elections. “In fact we expected a maximum of only 70%,’’ an election officer said.Voters were enthused to vote using ballot papers after a long time. “We have been used to voting in electronic voting machines. After eight years we are voting in ballot papers, which is exciting,’’ said Rm Marudachalam from Kinathukadavu.There were 642 booths set up across the five panchayat unions where the votes were cast to elect representatives for 1,220 posts. Police said there were no untoward incidents but for minor glitches. Strict vigil was put in place and the polling was monitored through web cameras in sensitive booths. Besides, 4,000 odd election staff, there were 2,350 police personnel deployed in the polling booths to ensure that the polling was smooth.Though the campaigning was a peaceful affair in Coimbatore all these days, a case of assault was registered against two men, who assaulted each other in Pollachi on Thursday. Police said that Muthusamy, husband of a ward member candidate in A Sangampalayam village assaulted Kalingaraj, husband of another candidate, when he went for canvassing votes. Kalingaraj too returned the blows and cases were booked against both.While the second phase of the elections will be conducted on December 30 for the remaining seven panchayat unions, counting of votes will be done on January 2.
