Don’t turn cops into a band of assassins

Meerut and Muzaffarnagar

political or criminal

public hangings

At least 19 people have died in the state in the last two weeks during clashes with the police

custodial killings and third degree

legal system

ByThe Uttar Pradesh police’s reaction to citizens’ protests against CAA and the proposed NRC was on expected lines, given their history. Only this time, it was prompted and supported by a government which relishes communal divisions. Even when the state was ruled by ‘secular’ parties, its behaviour wasn’t very different. The only difference is that with the backing of a government that is vehemently ideology-driven, the vengeance – as evident in its response – was more demonstrative.With more than a dozen civilians killed and countless injured, these incidents brought back memories of Hashimpura for the people of, where the cops unleashed a reign of terror on minorities.The behaviour of the UP Police needs a serious discourse encompassing policies relating to its recruitment, training, personnel management and its relationship with society. We must answer a simple question ourselves: Why did our rulers not change the basic character of the police, which was created as a modern institution by the colonial masters in 1860–61? And as we are pondering over it, we must also confront another question – why did the British, who created modern police in more than two dozen countries, differentiate norms on the basis of culture? Why did they create an organisation that was supposed to be a law enforcement agency but one that has the least respect for the law of the land?It doesn’t take rocket science to understand that the colonial masters needed an institution which didn’t bother with the law of the land and which would go to any extent to further their interests. But then why did our rulers not tweak its basic fabric after 1947 to suit that of the country?I think our leaders also wanted a force that was corrupt, brute and had scant respect for the books of law. A chief minister loves a police officer who is willing to carry out all his orders with nary a peep.One dark spot in the current discourse will be our general acceptance of the violence unleashed by the police. The killing of the four accused in the Hyderabad veterinarian’s rape and murder case by the police in an ‘encounter’ should not have been an occasion to regale or rejoice; rather it should have been a matter of deep anguish for the whole nation.Police in India have always been accused of torture, euphemistically called “third-degree”. And it is also a fact that often the high-handedness has explicit support from some elements –. One must remember the infamous incident in Bhagalpur a few decades ago, when hardened criminals were publicly blinded as the whole town was overcome with bloodlust. This time, our own parliamentarians are seen and heard supporting lynchings; some are even suggesting castrations andThe acceptance of violence – be it mob violence, more recently seen in cow vigilante cases or police violence resulting inin police stations – is the manifestation of biases in the deeper layers of the Indian psyche. No doubt, contacts and conflicts with liberal ideologies is helping Indian society transform into a more civilised place where violence, even by men in uniform, is being shunned by society.The way the Hyderabad ‘encounter’ was celebrated clearly shows the overzealous support violence enjoys in our society. The savagery, perhaps, was also influenced by a similar gruesome case that took place in Delhi in 2012, in which a 23-year-old medical student was brutalised by a group of men in a moving bus and left to die on the side of the road. The perpetrators of that case are still waiting for their cases to reach their logical end.The vocal aggression in displaying their fascination for hangings shows the hidden acceptance for violence, even if it is perpetrated by the state. The accused in the Delhi case have been awaiting their hanging for seven years. Such examples strengthen the belief that the normal justice delivery system may not provide justice commensurate to the wrongs meted out.It is when people start feeling that they won’t get justice from the system that they start looking at the police to be the judge, jury and executioner. We forget the famous Latin maxim “it’s not the severity but the certainty of punishment which deters”. Most civilised societies are doing away with capital punishment. It will be a big game changer if we could evolve awhere punishment doesn’t remain a rare commodity. Then perhaps, women’s rights activists may not demand public hangings or support police brutality.The worst, however, is taking place in UP right now where, in the last two years alone, the police have maimed hundreds of ‘criminals’ by shooting them on their legs before producing them before a judge. This could not have happened without the blessings of achief minister. What else could you expect from a leader who has openly threatened to take revenge on people participating in the protests? He has effectively turned the police into a band of assassins.The writer is a retired IPS officer and author of Hashimpura, an account of India’s largest custodial killings in UP
