Pulwama terror attack: Modi govt will soon give befitting reply to Pakistan, says Yogi Adityanath

File Image of Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Adityanath, on Friday, deplored the Pulwama terrorist attack carried out by the Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), saying that the government will soon give a befitting reply to Islamabad.

Speaking to Times Now, Adityanath said, “There is anger among people of the country because of Pulwama attack. The Prime Minister (Narendra Modi) has already said that the sacrifices of our jawans will not go in vain. The Indian government will take stern action against the perpetrators of the Pulwama attack. We should support the government at this hour of need.”

He further said that there has been a slump in the incidents of terrorism in the country ever since the BJP government came in power.

“I can certainly say that earlier also we have fought against terrorism, therefore, there has been a decline in the incidents of terrorism, Naxalism in our country in the last four and a half years. The government has taken proper action in the matter and soon we will get to see the result,” the Uttar Pradesh CM said.

On Thursday, at least 40 security personnel lost their lives and several others were injured after a JeM terrorist rammed an explosive-laden car into a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy in Awantipora of South Kashmir’s Pulwama district. The convoy comprised 78 buses in which around 2500 personnel were travelling from Jammu to Srinagar.

The suicide bombing, which is being considered as the worst attack on security forces in the state ever, has drawn huge flak from various quarters.

Condemning the dastardly attack, India earlier today summoned Pakistan envoy Sohail Mahmood to lodge a strong protest against the cowardly act. India has also decided to withdraw the 'Most Favoured Nation' status granted to Pakistan.

The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), in an official statement, accused Pakistan for the attack and added that the JeM founder Maulana Masood Azhar had been "given the freedom to target India."

The international community, including the US, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Russia, and Bangladesh also condemned the attack on Indian security personnel.

Meanwhile, Prime Minister pledged that perpetrators of the cowardly attack will "pay a heavy price for it."
