Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi condemns Meerut SP for his 'go to Pakistan' comment; demands immediate action against him

Union Minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi said strict action must be taken against the policeman if he is found guilty The Meerut SP had purportedly asked Muslim protesters to go to Pakistan and threatened them with dire consequences

New Delhi: Union Minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi on Saturday slammed the Uttar Pradesh policeman, who had purportedly asked anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protesters in Meerut to "go to Pakistan" and threatened with dire consequences. The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader also demanded strict action against the policeman if his comments are found to be true.

When asked about the Meerut SP AN Singh's controversial comments to protesters in a video, the Minority Affairs Minister said, "If it is true that he made that statement in the video, then it is condemnable. Immediate action must be taken against him."

"Violence at any level, be it by police or by mob, it is unacceptable. It can't be a part of a democratic country. Police should take care that those who are innocent should not suffer," added Naqvi.

Earlier, senior BJP leader Uma Bharti has come out in support of Meerut Superintendent of Police Akhilesh Narain Singh after his video showing him shouting at Muslim protesters "go back to Pakistan" went viral on social media. The video clip was made during protests against the contentious CAA and National Register of Citizens (NRC).

The former union minister took to her official Twitter handle saying, "The reaction of Meerut City SP Akhilesh Narain Singh telling the protesters to go to Pakistan was natural as the protesters were raising slogans in favour of Pakistan, were abusing the police and were also throwing stones at them."

She also accused Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi of politicising the issue. "Both of them while making it a political issue are forgetting the human side of the story that even the police have families and the spirit of patriotism also prevails in them. The Congress is making it a political issue," said Uma Bharti.

Meerut SP AN Singh had earlier claimed that some young protesters were chanting 'Pakistan Zindabad' during protests and pelting stones on police. "I only told them if they love Pakistan so much, they should go there," he added.

However, in the video that has surfaced on social media, AN Singh could be heard saying, "The ones (protesters) wearing those black or yellow armbands, tell them to go to Pakistan. If you want to live in this country, ask them to leave. They eat in this country and praise the other. If anything happens in this lane, everybody will pay for this,"
