Rape of birthday girl in Coimbatore: 1 more accused held

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

COIMBATORE: The city police arrested one more accused in the gang rape case reported at Seeranaickenpalayam on November 26. Police identified the arrested as P Manikandan alias Auto Manikandan, 29, from New Thillai Nagar in Vadavalli. “He is an autorickshaw driver and has defaulted on a vehicle loan he has taken from a finance firm, and the firm impounded his autorickshaw. After which he has been searching for job,” a police officer said.The victim, a 16-year-old girl who was celebrating her birthday with her boyfriend,was raped by a gang in an isolated place near Seernaickenpalayam on November 26. The gang attacked her friend and gang leader Manikandan threatened the girl of dire consequences by telling her that he was a cop. The gang members recorded the incident using a mobile phone. The all-women police (west), RS Puram, registered a case and arrested R Prakash, 22, S Karthikeyan, 28 and S Narayanamurthy, 30 and Rahul, all hailing from Seeranaickenpalayam. Later, gang leader Manikandan of Seeranaickenpalayam surrendered before the district mahila court and another accused Karthi alias Puffs Karthik from Vadavalli was arrested by police.During interrogation, Puffs Karthik told police that another Manikandan from Vadavalli was also present during the incident. Following the confession, the all-women police arrested Manikandan on Friday evening and he was produced before the district mahila court. The court remanded him in judicial custody and he is sent to Coimbatore central prison.Six arrested were detained under Goondas Act and they were also housed at the Coimbatore central prison.Before the arrest, Manikandan of Seeranaickenpalayam in a video, which went viral on Friday, claimed that police had planned to stage an encounter and he requested the human rights commission to intervene in the issue.
