Why justice still eludes many rape survivors in Delhi

On December 1, a 15-year-old was abducted from Southeast Delhi’s Jasola village and held captive in a room where she was drugged. When the minor became conscious, she found herself naked with a group of men surrounding her.

Next morning, the victim reached the nearest police station but had to struggle for two days to get an FIR lodged. Her family also struggled to have her medically examined at a government hospital. There was no police protection. For a rape survivor, seeking justice is a trauma of another level, the victim told Mail Today.

The country witnessed unprecedented protests in December 2012 when a 23-year-old physiotherapy intern was brutally gang-raped and killed on a moving bus in a South Delhi neighbourhood. The government was forced to enact new laws and announce systemic changes to ensure perpetrators get swifter and more stringent punishment, thereby creating a strong deterrence against such heinous crimes.

A committee, formed by the Union government and led by former Delhi High Court judge Usha Mehra, had then recommended, among other measures, a One-Stop Crisis Centre in each district of the country.

This was to facilitate all medical, legal, psychological and counselling facilities under one roof to women who have been subjected to violence. Accordingly, the National Capital was supposed to have 14 of these centres in its 14 districts.

A REALITY CHECK

But all these years only six have been set up. The locations are Lal Bahadur Shastri Hospital, Safdarjung Hospital, Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Hospital, Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital and Deen Dayal Upadhyay Hospital.

And even they are near-defunct, though they receive 250 cases a month, leaving many survivors in the lurch, a Mail Today ground report has revealed.

When this reporter visited the centre at Lal Bahadur Shastri Hospital, there was no official to provide the promised integrated support and assistance. A security guard said that officials are called in when rape victims arrive at the centre.

Dr Rubi Kumari, in-charge of the centre, said: The centre has two rooms one for medical investigation and the other for counselling. As soon as cops bring a rape victim, we take her to the counselling room. Women cops are not available at the hospital round the clock. We call the police for security.

A Similar scene was seen at Safdarjung Hospital as well.

The centre is run round the clock all 7 days of the week. Patients are attended to immediately by trained female doctors and nurses with strict confidentiality, Dr Sunil Gupta, the hospital’s medical superintendent, however, said.

At Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Hospital, a rape victim was seen undergoing counselling. As the area is densely populated, crime against women was high, an official said. A team sits there from 9 am to 4 pm on weekdays. On Saturday, it works till 2 pm. During the rest of Saturday and the whole of Sunday, victims are taken care of by the gynaecology department’s medical staff.

We have a dedicated team of two specialist female doctors followed by a team of nurses to attend to rape victims. In case rape victims come directly to the centre, we provide assistance including clothes, food, magazines and toys if the victim is a child. It is our responsibility to call the police. There are 16 police stations we can call up, said Dr Kishore Rajurkar, HoD, gynaecology.

On an average, 40 to 45 rape and sexual assault victims come in a month. After medical examination, cops take them to the judicial magistrate for the rest of proceedings, he said.

WHAT EXPERTS SAY

Experts said there was not enough awareness about these centres. The words - One Stop Crisis Centre - written on the board outside don’t not explain what the centre is meant to do, said Thakur Grover, a lawyer.

As people are not aware, a rape victim immediately goes to the nearest police station. She is then sent to a women’s police station, adding to her pain and trauma. Then cops take her to the nearest government hospital for medical examination followed by her statement before the judicial magistrate. This is a time-taking process and the concept of providing speedy and integrated assistance under one roof is defeated, he said.

Senior Bar office bearer Dheer Singh Kasana said the old processes should be done away with. If we have such centres, cops should take victims there and police stations should advertise these centres, he said.

NATIONAL SCENE

These One-Stop Crisis Centres come under the Ministry of Women and Child Development (MWCD) whose data shows very few states have set up the required infrastructure. Four, including Maharashtra and Bihar, have shown zero expenditure to set up crisis centers.

Andhra Pradesh, which has been allocated Rs 11 crore since 2015, has spent just Rs 6.28 crore as of July 2019. Uttar Pradesh, allocated over Rs 40.15 crore since 2015, has spent just Rs 3.8 crore.

OTHER ISSUES

As it is thousands of cases await trial and the numbers are spiralling by the day because of gaping loopholes in India’s criminal justice system like massive shortages of forensic labs, fasttrack courts and investigators, despite tall promises made by the government, a Mail Today deep-dive exposed early this month.

Conviction rates remain low across the country due to the huge pendency of cases and delays in investigation and prosecution.

It came soon after a 23-year-old, set afire by a group of men including her alleged rapists in UP’s Unnao, died in a Delhi hospital. There already was massive public outrage after a Telangana veterinarian was raped, burnt and killed on November 27 by four lorry drivers.
