Ex-defence officer in a road rage incident at FASTag lane

Nelamangala

Plaza

Peenya

Bangalore

Well-built man tried to cut lane, attacked my car, he allegesIt’s meant to make travelling and passing through toll plazas a breeze but impatient and ego-fuelled motorists can puncture the best laid plans. A motorist driving an MG Hector has alleged that a man driving a Maruti Swift smashed his car’s window as he was trying to muscle his way into the FASTag lane and he did not yield.The incident took place on December 20 at thetoll plaza. Subroto Chakraborty, a resident of Sena Vihar in Kammanahalli and a 64-year-old retired defence personnel, was in his MG Hector heading for an official meeting in Nelamangala. Around 6.55 am when he reached the Navayuga Tollno. 1 from Bengaluru, the Swift driver tried to edge past Chakraborty's car; the latter was just 20 m from the toll gate and he alleged that the Swift driver was trying to drive him off the lane."I have FASTag but I don't know if the other car had it too. A well-built man got down from the Swift, charged towards me and smashed my car's window with some kind of a weapon. He then assaulted and threatened me with dire consequences," Chakraborty told Mirror.“If I had stopped the car there for some more time, he would have killed me. The entire incident has been captured on the CCTV cameras installed at the toll plaza,” Chakraborty told Mirror. He said the man looked to be in his late 30s or early 40s and worked for an MNC computer company from the US.He said that the man was driving the company’s car (he checked the ministry of road transport highways’ database).Chakraborty said that as he was getting late for the meeting, he left the plaza without creating a ruckus. He went to Banaswadi police station after Christmas to lodge a complaint. The police have taken up his case and booked the unknown assailant under IPC sections 323 (assault), 341 (wrongful restraint), 506 (criminal intimidation) and 427 (mischief causing damage).The police requested the toll plaza for the footage but the staff said that due to FASTag implementation, some CCTV footage is getting deleted automatically."We have written to the toll plaza to provide us with the footage from 6.30 am to 7.30 am that morning, and the case will be transferred topolice station as the toll gate comes under their jurisdiction," an official from Banaswadi police station said. However, the police official toldMirror that Chakraborty wouldn’t say what he said or did to provoke the man.
