Doctor kidnapped, thrashed after woman dies during childbirth in Ahmedabad

The patient died on Wednesday night after delivering a baby. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Woman dies during childbirth at Ahmedabad's Navkari Hospital Relatives of the patient thrashed doctor alleging medical negligence Police have filed a case of assault and kidnapping against the unknown accused

Ahmedabad: In a shocking incident, a doctor of a private hospital was thrashed and later abducted after a woman died during childbirth in Ahmedabad district of Gujarat on Wednesday. The incident took place around 9 PM at Navkari Hospital located near Shreyas overbridge in the city.

The victim has been identified as Dr Kalpesh Nakum anaesthesiologist. Nakum was part of the medical team who was attending to the victim identified as Ruksar Pathan.

According to a report in Indian Express, the victim has alleged that a group of around seven men first thrashed him and then took a deserted spot near Danilimda. The accused also allegedly forced the doctor to confess to medical negligence during the surgery of Ruksar, a resident of Ahmedabad.

Ruksar died on Wednesday night after delivering a baby. An FIR has been filed against the accused at the Ellis Bridge Police station.

The doctor has been identified as Dr Kalpesh Nakum, an anesthesiologist, who was part of a medical team attending to Ruksar Pathan, a resident of Ahmedabad, who died after delivering a baby.

In his police complaint, Nakum stated, " I injected the anesthesia in the spinal cord of the patient as a practice in caesarian section. After this, the surgeon started the surgery and the woman gave birth to a baby girl. After the surgery, the patient started bleeding excessively. We called an ambulance and shifted the woman to VS Hospital. I stayed back at the hospital to complete some paperwork. Later, around 9 pm I witnessed a ruckus at the reception desk and saw three unidentified men indulging in the argument."

The doctor further added in the complaint, "When the men saw me, they dragged me to a car parked outside the hospital gate. After this, the accused took me to a deserted place near Jamalpur bridge and told me that they are the relatives of the patient, who died during the operation. The men forced me to accept negligence during the surgery that led to her death."

Meanwhile, police have filed a case of assault and kidnapping against the unknown accused.
