Abducted as minor, sold four times, gangraped by seven: Chilling details of human trafficking in Haryana

Yamunanagar police sources told India Today TV that the victim was brought from Fatehabad in Haryana 9 months ago by the accused. (Photo: Bandeep Singh)

The Haryana Police has booked 10 people for gangraping a woman from Maharashtra who was abducted and sold when she was a minor. The shocking case of human trafficking has been reported eight years after she was abducted from Maharashtra and sold four times in Haryana. The woman is now 21 and a mother of two.

The matter came to the light after the landlord of the kingpin, Sunita Shooter alias Yunita alias Sapna Shooter, found her activities suspicious. The accused, who hails from Nahan town of Himachal Pradesh, was about to sell the victim to another man when the landlord heard her telephonic conversation. He spoke to the victim and later informed a local NGO called 'I Am a Blood Donor'.

NGO volunteers Sanjiv and Sunil met the victim and it was when the shocking details of the case were revealed. An FIR has been registered in the Haryana human trafficking case.

Yamunanagar Police sources told India Today TV that the victim was brought to Yamunanagar from Fatehabad town of Haryana nine months ago by the accused.

During the counseling, the victim revealed that she was abducted eight years ago from a local temple in Chandrapur, Maharashtra when she was only 13 years old. She was allegedly abducted by one Jahanvi who later sold her to the prime accused, Yunita for RS 1 lakh.

The FIR said the victim was handed to four in Haryana's Karnal for Rs 1 lakh. She was gangraped by the four men and was later sold to a 42-year-old Haryana resident for the same price. The 42-year-old raped the woman for 20 days.

The torture did not stop here. The accused, Sapna then sold the victim to a man in Gadhi village in Narayangarh, Haryana for Rs 20,000. The woman was raped again for seven days. The victim was then sold to one Dharamvir for Rs 1.5 lakh. Sapna could not sell her further as she was jailed in a criminal case for seven years.

"I was tortured by Dharamvir and repeatedly raped by him and two of his brothers, Krishan Sheoran and Rakesh Kumar, on the directions of their mother, Kamla Devi. I was also sexually exploited by Dharamvir's friends, Jay Singh and Sunil alias Sonu," the victim told the police.

The FIR registered by the Yamunanagar women police station also states that Dharamvir's brother Krishan Sheoran raped her when she was pregnant.

A blackmailing case against Dharamvir and his family was filed by one of his neighbours. In the FIR against Dharamvir, the victim was mentioned as his wife.

The victim had attempted to end her life by consuming floor cleaner. The woman, however, survived and gave birth to a daughter and a son.

The victim along with Dharamvir and his family members were summoned by a court in connection with the case.

They were supposed to appear before the court on April 29, 2019. Since the victim failed to appear before the court as she had no information about the case, she was issued a bailable warrant. The NGO volunteers approached the Punjab and Haryana High Court which has granted her bail.

The matter was first reported the matter to the Maharashtra Police. The victim has sought police protection as the accused have allegedly been threatening her of dire consequences if she pursues the case.

Meanwhile, the Yamunanagar Police has transferred the case to the Maharashtra Police. The victim's parents have been contacted.

The victim lived with her parents and a brother when she was abducted. Her mother works as a domestic help who did not change her mobile number hoping that one day she would receive some news about her daughter.

The police has booked 10 people in the human trafficking case: Sapna Shooter, her son Vikki, daughter Nikki, Dharamvir, Krishna Sheoran, Rakesh Kumar, Kamla Devi, Jay Singh, Sunil alias Sonu and Jahnvi under section 323, 328, 354, 365, 366A, 367, 376D, 370 and Section 4 of the POCSO Act.
