A decade of apathy! Times when people in power were insensitive to women safety

Every time a sexual abuse or a rape occurred, our political leaders didn't waste time in trivialising the issue, making misogynist remarks | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Mulayam Singh Yadav: Boys will be boys, they commit mistakes Mohan Bhagwat: Rapes do not occur in rural India Botcha Satyanarayana: Women should not roam free on the streets during late hours

New Delhi: After the 2012 Nirbhaya gang-rape, a flood of outrage erupted across the country against our system and some politicians as well. Post that, people thought that there would be some positive change in the attitude of the people in power towards the safety of the women.

Every time a sexual abuse or a rape occurred, some political leaders didn't waste time in trivialising the issue, making misogynistic remarks and mocking the victims, thanks to their lack of understanding and insensitivity towards the issue. And sometimes they ended up blaming the victims and justifying the sexual assault.

Despite formulating strong laws like POCSO and incorporating the death penalty in cases of rapes, we don't see a deterrence in sexual predators. And in such times, we expect our political leaders to be more sensitive towards the cause of women's safety. Not only this, but we also expect them to speak more responsibly in such cases.

Let's take a look at some of the insensitive comments made by people in power in the last decade.

Mulayam Singh Yadav: In 2014 while talking about a gangrape case, former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Mulayam Singh Yadav had said that "boys will be boys, they commit mistakes". The former Samajwadi Party had said that if his party comes to power, the law of giving the death penalty to rape accused will be reversed. He had also said that girls first make friendship with the boys and then allege rape when they have a fight with their partner.

Mohan Bhagwat: Chief of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) in 2013 blamed the western lifestyle for growing incidents of rapes in urban India. He had said that rapes do not occur in rural India due to its rich culture and traditions. He maintained that rapes are just an urban crime that is caused by westernisation.

Abu Asim Azmi: Maharashtra state president of the Samajwadi Party, Abu Asim Azmi, sparked outrage in 2014 when he said that both the culprits and the victims should be punished in rape cases. "In India, there is a death penalty for rape, but when there is consensual sex outside marriage, there is no death penalty against women," he was quoted as saying.

Botcha Satyanarayana: Speaking in the wake of the 2012 Delhi gang-rape, former Andhra Pradesh Congress Committee (APCC) president and now YSRCP leader, Satyanarayana, caused anger among the public when he said women should not roam free on the streets during late hours just because India achieved freedom at midnight.

Om Prakash Chautala: In 2012, former Haryana chief minister Om Prakash Chautala backed khap panchayat saying boys and girls should go for early marriages so that they could avoid going astray. Chautala had made the remarks in the wake of alleged abduction and gang-rape of a 19-year-old Dalit girl by two men in Kaithal district of Haryana.
