Bikeborne gang gives cops, victims a headache

police

Bengaluru

CCTV footage

Student among latest to be hit on the head with a bamboo stick by bike-borne men on an isolated stretch;unable to identify motive so farPlease watch your heads everyone, for a gang with a strange tic is on the prowl in the city. These bike-borne men hit their victims on the head with a wooden log, for no apparent reason. Some such incidents in Easthave left the police baffled as they have no clue about this gang’s motive. While they suspect these could be foiled robbery attempts or a result of past rivalries, investigation shows otherwise. These incidents happen on isolated stretches of road where there is no CCTV surveillance keeping police further in the dark.An 18-year-old B-tech student will have to miss his first semester exams as he was attacked by two unidentified men on a bike on Tuesday. Harsh Dharmesh Rathod is a first semester student with the School of Engineering and Technology - Jain University and a resident of VBHC Serene Apartments in Kannamangala. Harsh had come from Mumbai five months ago. He was attacked around 7.15 pm when Harsh was returning home from college on his scooter.“He had taken a short-cut from a road in the back near Kannamangala Circle off Hoskote Main Road,” said Harsh’s uncle Dhiren Rathod. Harsh realised that his scooter had a flat tyre and stopped by on the isolated stretch. He had removed his helmet to check on the puncture, when a duo on a bike stopped close to him. “One of the riders hit him on the back of his head with what sounded like a bamboo stick to Harsh,” Rathod said.The assailants hit him twice on his head, but by then another motorist passed by. The motorist had observed what was happening to Harsh and went ahead and informed a couple of policemen who were deployed at the outpost near Kannamangala circle. The police rushed to the spot, but by then the two assailants and sped away abandoning the injured Harsh.The policemen rushed Harsh to a private hospital and he was later shifted to another hospital in Whitefield where the doctors had to put six stitches on his head.“My nephew is suffering from headaches. He is staying with me and won’t be able to write his exams,” Rathod said. The Kadugodi police have taken up a case of assault and are analysingto identify the culprits. The police also suspect the miscreants could have put nails on the mud road to get their potential victims’ vehicles punctured.In a similar incident, a 35-year-old woman was assaulted by three bike-borne men on December 12. The incident occurred around 6 pm on the Divya Unnathi Layout Road in Prakruthi Township in Hennur where she lives. Asha and her partners run a daycare centre and pre-school. She was returning home from her sister’s house when she was attacked. Her husband Thomas Varghese told Mirror, “My wife was riding the bike slow and noticed that she was being followed by three men on a bike. When she slowed down to let them pass, one of them hit her with what she says is a bamboo stick.”Asha raised an alarm and the trio fled the spot after which she called her husband. He rushed to the spot and shifted Asha to a hospital and she had to get six stitches on her head. She suspects the trio was attempting to rob her, but it got foiled as she raised an alarm. Varghese filed a complaint with the Hennur police when the police apprised him of two similar such separate incidents in Ramamurthy Nagar and KR Puram.
