Karnataka: Man accused of attempting to rape minor stabbed to death in Dharwad

The man was attacked by a mob after he allegedly tried to rape the minor girl at Basaveshwar Nagar in Navalgund area. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Man stabbed to death at government hospital in Karnataka's Dharwad Victim is killed after an alleged rape attempt on minor girl The victim is identified as 52-year-old Fakruddeensab Nadaf

Hubbali: In a shocking incident, a relative of a minor girl on whom a rape attempt was made, was stabbed to death in Navalgund town of Dharwad district of Karnataka on Sunday.

The killing took place at a government hospital where the victim was admitted for treatment following a mob attack after the rape attempt on Saturday.

According to a report in Times of India, the victim has been identified as 52-year-old Fakruddeensab Nadaf. The man was attacked by a mob after he allegedly tried to rape the minor girl at Basaveshwar Nagar in Navalgund area.

According to Navalgund Police Inspector, Ranganath Neelammanavar, the alleged rape attempt was made when the girl was alone at her home. Nadaf lured the girl and took her to his home.

"Some of the neighbours who saw Nadaf taking the girl thrashed him and handed him over to police. He was later admitted to a government hospital," said Neelammanavar.

On December 6, four men accused of raping and killing a veterinary doctor in Cyberabad district of Telangana were killed in a so-called police shootout in the Chatanpally area. Police claimed that the accused tried to attack police personnel when they took them to the crime scene for scene reconstruction.

The accused allegedly raped and killed the 27-year-old doctor when she returned from work to go home on her scooter from Shamsabad toll plaza on November 27. It is alleged the accused forced the victim to drink alcohol before raping her. The woman's body was found burnt the next day.

The rape and murder sparked a nationwide hue and cry forcing police to act fast. Activists have alleged that the four men were bumped off due to avoid pressure from the public. The activists also termed the death of the accused in police shootout as extra-judicial killing. Later several inquiries were set up to probe the killings.
