Coal India initiates recruitment of 1326 management trainees

KOLKATA: Coal India has initiated a recruitment drive for hiring 1,326 management trainees and has invited online application from eligible candidates on its website.The company intends to recruit trainees in disciplines including mining, electrical, mechanical, civil, coal preparation, systems, materials management, finance & accounts, personnel & HR, marketing & sales and community development.Online registration process of Coal India Recruitment 2020 begun from December 21 and the last date to apply is January 19, 2020.will conduct an all India level test to shortlist candidates.This is part of the company’s plan to appoint 9,000 people this year, including 4,000 executives. Executives are recruited by the holding company -- Coal India, while workmen are recruited directly by its eight subsidiaries.A senior Coal India executive said: “Coal India is recruiting this many executives in a single year in almost a decade in an effort to fill up all its vacancies that have been pending for several years now. Last year, it was about 1,200 people”.The world’s largest coal producer is also India’s largest public-sector employer after railways with a manpower strength of around 2.8 lakh of which close to 18,000 are executives and the rest workmen.“Of the 4,000 executive Coal India plans to recruit, 900 would be through advertisements and interview-based in the junior category, another 400 would be recruited from campuses and some 100 would be miscellaneous like medical officers etc. We have already recruited 400 executives most of which are doctors. Another 75 have been recruited and would be joining soon. The company will recruit around 2,200 additional executives through competitive examinations” he said.It's seven coal producing subsidiaries will be recruiting another 5000 workmen and technical staff including doctors. Of this 2,300 workmen will be recruited as part of the company’s policy to offer a job to family members of project land losers. Coal India subsidiaries need to acquire land to set up mines which result in a number of families losing their land. They get compensation and a job for a family member.Another, 2350 workmen will be offered jobs as part of the company’s policy for employees dying in harness. If an employee dies before retirement, a family member is offered a job.Coal India was set up in 1975 and a large number of people have already reached retirement age. In fact, over the last three years, about 12,300 employees have been retiring from the company every year. This created a number of vacancies in the company. While not all will be filled up, the company needs large scale recruitments over the next few years to make sure its manpower position adequate.The company has also decided to clear all backlogs of promotions for non-executives which was pending for the last five years since 2013. It cleared all backlogs till 2017 and has already promoted some 3,000 workmen, another 3000 will be promoted in due course.
