Labourer's house set ablaze in Chennai as family sleeps inside

Kannabiran's family was sleeping inside their house when the incident allegedly took place (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A house in Chennai was allegedly set ablaze by a group of persons on Sunday Four persons were inside the house when the incident took place None of the accused has been identified yet

Chennai: A house in Chennai was allegedly set on fire by unidentified persons on Sunday. The incident is said to have taken place at around 1.30 am on Sunday. The family of four lived in Pozhichalur area. The accused persons have not been identified yet.

The head of the family has been identified as Kannabiran. Kannabiran was a construction labourer. He used to live with his wife Kasthuri and two sons Manivannan and Sanjay.

Kannabiran's family was sleeping inside their house when the incident allegedly took place. Allegedly, a group of people threw firecrackers inside the family's house, poured kerosene and set them ablaze.

When smoke filled the house, Kannabarim and his family tried to rush out of the house. However, the family could not run out of the house as it was locked from the outside. The family cried for help as flames engulfed the house, the Times of India reported.

The family's neighbours went to the house when they heard their screams. The neighbours broke open the door and rescued the family. The vehicles parked outside the house were also set ablaze by the unidentified accused.

The police registered a case in relation to the incident. Kannabiran told the police that he suspects Senthil, his brother to have a role in the incident. He said that Senthil might have attacked the family over a property dispute.

A 20-year-old woman set ablaze by boyfriend's family in Chhattisgarh

In December this year, a 20-year-old woman from Chhattisgarh was allegedly set ablaze by her boyfriend's family. The victim suffered 80 per cent burn injuries during the incident. The victim's boyfriend was identified as Lal Satnami.

On the day of the incident, Satnami asked the victim to come to his house as he wanted to discuss something. However, when the victim reached the house, Satnami was not home. His family members allegedly thrashed the victim, poured kerosene on her and set her ablaze.
