Kolkata: Retired army officer found dead in mysterious condition after party

Police say no complaint was filed in connection with the death of the officer. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Retired army officer was found dead in mysterious circumstances in Kolkata Retired officer is identified as 54-year-old Tamal Ghosh Parnasree police have registered a case of unnatural death

Kolkata: A retired Indian Army officer was found dead in mysterious circumstances after a night party at his flat in Kolkata, West Bengal on Saturday.

The retired officer identified as 54-year-old Tamal Ghosh reportedly died after falling from the staircase at Behala apartment. He is survived by his wife and a daughter.

According to a report in Times of India, the incident took place after the victim drank liquor at a pre-New Year party hosted at the terrace of his flat in Dolly apartment in Parnasree Pally.

Ghosh was declared brought dead at Vidyasagar Hospital. Police said that the victim was a habitual drinker.

"The deceased officer joined the party with his neighbours at around 8.30 pm at the terrace of his 5-story building. After the party, when he was going down from the terrace, his neighbours say they heard a loud thud. Ghosh's family members, who also heard him hitting something, rushed to the scene with neighbours. The victim was found lying unconscious on the staircase," said Behala Deputy Commissioner Nilanjan Biswas.

Police say no complaint was filed in connection with the death of the officer. According to police, the retired army officer's body will be sent for postmortem and a probe will be opened into the case to ascertain the actual cause behind the death.

Parnasree police have registered a case of unnatural death in connection with Tamal Ghosh's death. Cops say they will be contacting the family members of the victim to know whether he was suffering from any illness.

The residents of the apartment have expressed sadness over the death of the officer. They say the retired officer was a regular at such parties organised by the apartment residents to boost social bonding.
