Local court in Maharashtra awards 10 years jail time to rape-accused teacher

The special POCSO court convicted the accused after six witnesses deposed against him (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A POCSO court in Raigad, Maharashtra sentenced a man to 10 years of jail The convict, Akshay Rangarao Patil raped his minor student on several occasions The convicted teacher has also been asked to pay a fine of Rs 5,000 by the special POCSO court which heard six witnesses who deposed against him

Mumbai: A teacher from Raigad's Panvel in Maharashtra has been sentenced to jail for 10 years. The convict allegedly raped one of his students on multiple occasions from January to June 2015. He has been identified as Akshay Rangarao Patil.

A fine worth Rs 5,000 has also been levied on Patil. The sentence was given by Special POCSO Judge Varsha Mohite. Patil allegedly gave tuitions to the minor survivor.

Additional Public Prosecutor Ashwini Bandivadekar told the Times of India that the survivor was raped on multiple occasions from January 2015 to June 2015 by the accused. She was 15-year-old at the time of the incident.

After the minor girl narrated her ordeal, a case was registered at the Khandeshwar police station in Navi Mumbai in relation to the incident. The special POCSO court convicted the accused after six witnesses deposed against him.

Court in Odisha sentences man to death for rape, murder of 3-year-old girl in Keonjhar

A similar incident came to light from Odisha's Keonjhar district in December this year where the death penalty was awarded to a man who raped and murdered a three-year-old girl. The judgement was given by Additional District Court-cum Special Court Judge Loknath Sahu. The convict was identified as Sunil Kumar Naik.

The incident took place on January 13, 2017. Naik was booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and section 6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The death penalty was awarded to the convict after the court took statements of 28 witnesses. Naik allegedly visited the girl's house regularly and she was well-acquainted with him. On the day of the incident, Naik went to the girl's house, took her to an isolated spot and raped her. He then strangled the girl to death as he wanted to get away with the crime.
