Dawood Ibrahim, aide Chhota Shakeel trying to kill Chhota Rajan inside Delhi's high-security Tihar Prison

A file photo of Chhota Shakeel | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: Security has been tightened at the Tihar Jail in the national capital as the intelligence agencies have uncovered a plot to kill Chhota Rajan, by his arch-rival Chhota Shakeel. Shakeel, who operates from Karachi along with his boss and D-Company leader Dawood Ibrahim, has reportedly tasked a D-Company module in India to eliminate Chhota Rajan, currently lodged in Tihar.

"I can only speak about security. He (Rajan) is lodged in a super high-security jail and all efforts are been taken by us to ensure foolproof security. But, I cannot comment on threat given to him," Director General of Delhi Prisons (Tihar), Sandeep Goyal, was quoted as saying by news agency IANS.

Citing sources, the agency reported that Rajan has been lodged in super high-security jail no 2 of the prison, which is guarded round-the-clock by Tamil Nadu Special Police.

"After the threat, Rajan's three cooks have been changed. Besides, cooked food served to Rajan, and his ration (including grain, edible oil and raw vegetables) is also been checked. A distance of at least 10 metres between him and others is being strictly maintained inside the jail," an official told IANS.

The security was beefed up after the intelligence agencies intercepted a telephonic conversation involving Chhota Shakeel in which he was hatching a plot to kill Rajan. According to intelligence agency insiders, Rajan has been providing information to the police about the activities of the D-Company, specifically about the drug and fake currency smuggling.

In 2015, following a tip-off by the Australian police, Rajan was captured in Bali by the Interpol and deported to India.

"It is the same ward where a few decades back, notorious criminal Charles Sobhraj was lodged. This ward is assigned to most hardened criminals," a Deputy Superintendent level officer of Tihar told the agency.
