Bar waitress found dead at rented accommodation in Mumbai

Shaikh's live-in partner was in Hyderabad when she died (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The dead body of a bar waitress was found at her residence in Dahisar, Mumbai The incident came to light when the deceased's maid reached the house for work The police are yet to confirm the cause of death

Mumbai: A bar waitress was found dead at her rented home in Dahisar East area of Mumbai on Sunday. The deceased has been identified as Rosina Shaikh. The police said that they did not find any injury marks on Rosina's body and the post-mortem report did not make any major revelations about the cause of death.

Initially, Shaikh lived in Sanpada, Navi Mumbai with her husband. However, the waitress shifted to an SRA building in Dahisar after separating from her husband. The 32-year-old woman had allegedly been in a live-in relationship.

Shaikh's live-in partner was in Hyderabad when she died, a report by the Times of India stated. Shaikh did not have children. At around 11 pm on Saturday, Shaikh came home and went off to sleep. When a maid came to the house the next morning, no one answered the door.

The maid thought that Shaikh was not at home and went back. The maid returned at 3 pm in the afternoon but no one answered the door again. Worried about Shaikh, the maid informed her landlord. The landlord came to the flat with the spare keys and opened the door.

When they entered the house, the landlord and the maid saw Shaikh's body lying on her bed. They called a doctor who declared Shaikh dead. Following this, the landlord and maid informed the police and Shaikh's body was sent for an autopsy. A police officer familiar with the case said that they found a drink in the house during the investigation.

The police officer said that the drink might have been laced with a substance which led to Shaikh's death. The drink has been sent to a forensic science laboratory in Kalina. The police have also started interrogating Shaikh's live-in partner. A case of accidental death has been registered.
