Madhya Pradesh: 27-year-old rape survivor molested, threatened by accused to withdraw case

The accused offered the survivor Rs 10,000 to withdraw the case | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The complaint was registered following directions of a local court Initially when the woman reported the matter to the police, no case was registered The survivor was raped by the same man, who runs a shop in MP Nagar

Bhopal: Madhya Pradesh police registered the complaint of a 27-year-old rape survivor after she was waylaid, molested and threatened by the accused on December 12. The complaint was registered following directions of a local court.

According to a report by The Times of India, when the woman reported the matter to the police, no case was registered. The survivor then reached the court, which directed the police officials to register a case in the matter. Investigation officer Renu Murab told a media person that the survivor was raped by a man, who runs a shop in MP Nagar and a case in the matter was registered in 2017 under the TT Nagar police station. The case is underway in court.

Meanwhile, on December 12, when the survivor was on her way to Eintkheri, the accused along with his friend blocked her way and began threatening her to withdraw the case. Reportedly, they even offered her Rs 10,000 to do the same. When the woman rebuffed they molested her and fled the spot.

However, the police have now registered another case against the accused and further probe in the matter is underway.

In a similar case reported West Bengal, five youths were arrested in connection with the gang rape of a 17-year-old minor girl in Kalua Muchirampur village in Debra Police Station area. A police official told a media person that on Sunday, the minor went to her maternal uncle's house, where was allegedly raped by some youths while she was returning from there at around 2:30 pm.

Reportedly, she was dropped home in an unconscious state by someone on a bike. The minor's father has lodged a complaint in Debra Police Station and the police have arrested five youths in this connection and produced them before the court.

All five have been sent to seven days police custody.
