Pulwama terror attack: China condemns attack, expresses sympathy to bereaved family

New Delhi [India], Feb 15 (ANI): Chinese State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi wrote to External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj on Friday to condemn the Pulwama terror attack.

He also expressed deep sympathy to families of the victims and injured.

"#Chinese State Councilor & FM #WangYi wrote to EAM @SushmaSwaraj, condemned the #Pulwama suicide attack, expressed deep sympathy to families of the victims & injured, and stressed that the #Chinese side resolutely opposes and strongly condemns all forms of terrorism," tweeted Chinese ambassador to India Luo Zhaohui.

Speaking on the dreaded terror attack, Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokesperson said: "The Chinese side firmly opposes and strongly condemns terrorism in any form, hoping the regional countries join hand together to confront the threat of terrorism so as to maintain regional peace and security."

As many as 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed on Thursday after a suicide bomber attacked a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district with a vehicle laden with explosives.

The convoy comprised of 78 buses in which around 2,500 personnel were travelling from Jammu to Srinagar - the slain personnel were in a bus which had 42 CRPF men on board.

Jaish-e-Mohammed, a Pakistan-based terrorist group, claimed responsibility for the attack which left the bus extensively damaged in the blast and ensuing gunfire on the vehicle.

Earlier in the day, Prime Minister Narendra Modi reiterated the nation’s resolve to take on terrorists decisively in Jammu and Kashmir, saying that security forces have been given full freedom to carry out anti-terror operations to retaliate Pulwama terror attack.

“We have given full authority to the security forces to decide the time, place, and nature of any further operations that need to be carried out in response to Pulwama terror attack,” the Prime Minister said.

India has revoked Pakistan's status as the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) as investigations are underway. (ANI)
