Letting police enter AMU campus led to ‘unforeseen’ events, says AMU VC in open letter

AGRA: Vice chancellor (VC) of Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) on Tuesday shot off an open letter to students and stopped short of apologizing for allowing police inside the campus on December 15, which he said led to “unforeseen” events. Several students and security personnel were injured in clashes on the night of December 15 when police entered the AMU campus to nab “troublemakers”.One student lost his arm as a tear gas shell exploded in his hand. Allegations of police excesses were also levelled as security personnel allegedly entered a hostel and thrashed students. The varsity was shut till January 5 after the violence. On Tuesday, VC Tariq Mansoor admitted that criticism that he is facing for allowing police in the campus was “fair”.Mansoor advised students against “rushing to judgment or believing in every narrative that is being spread by people who are unaware of the exact circumstances under which the administration was operating”.The VC said in the letter, “I am deeply pained by the turn of events that occurred on December 15, especially the injuries caused by police action and the mental trauma some have suffered. To them and the families, I say that I regret what happened. The decision taken on the night of December 15 was in good faith and with clear conscience. Primarily it was aimed to disperse the charged up students who got carried away with rumours of the death of two students on Jamia Millia Islamia . When we saw the situation going out of hand, it was imperative to act appropriately.”VC Mansoor also said that he was aware that many students had questioned AMU administration’s role in this regard despite the steps taken with the best intent. “Certain outcomes of our decisions at times are affected by many unforeseen circumstances and criticism at times is fair. We derive wisdom from such decisions, with humility, and for improved responses in the future,” he wrote.The VC also regretted inconvenience caused to students for vacating hostels.“The decision to vacate hostels was taken with much deliberation due to the prevailing situation in the country, and efforts were made to vacate them with minimum inconvenience to the students. However, some students were inconvenienced which is deeply regretted,” he said.The VC urged the students to identify troublemakers, who are bent on creating a rift between the students and the administration. Prof Mansoor said in the letter: “With love and respect, I seek your support in completing the academic year smoothly. Creating an atmosphere of anarchy will hurt our credibility as peaceful citizens and validate the lies that are being spread about our beloved university.”
