Pulwama terror attack: Ajmer Sharif Dargah chief asks Centre to not allow Pakistanis to visit the shrine

File Image of Ajmer Sharif Dargah chief | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Ajmer: The spiritual head of the Ajmer Sharif Dargah, on Friday, condemned the Pulwama terror attack and urged the government to not allow devotees from Pakistan to visit the shrine in Rajasthan’s Ajmer.

Syed Zainul Abedin Ali Khan, the dewan of the shrine and the descendant of Sufi saint Khawaja Moinuddin Chishti, described the attack as “non-Islamic” and asked the government to bar the Pakistani devotees from visiting the shrine during festivals, including Urs, according to PTI.

On Thursday, at least 40 security personnel lost their lives and several others were injured after a Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terrorist rammed an explosive-laden car into a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy in Awantipora of South Kashmir’s Pulwama district. The convoy comprised 78 buses in which around 2500 personnel were travelling from Jammu to Srinagar. The Intelligence sources highlighted that the terrorists have been lying low after the attack.

Calling for a boycott of Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad by all countries, Ali Khan said that harming innocent people by attacking them cowardly is against the fundamental principles of the religion.

He further demanded compensation of Rs 1 crore and government job for kin of slain jawans.

The terror attack, which is being touted as the dastardly terror attack in the state so far, has drawn huge flak from various quarters. While key leaders across the globe stood in support of India in the wake of the ghastly attack, India vowed to avenge the deaths of its jawans.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi earlier today expressed his rage over the attack and pledged that perpetrators of the cowardly attack will "pay a heavy price for it."

The international community, including the US, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Russia, and Bangladesh also condemned the attack.

“The United States calls on Pakistan to end immediately the support and safe haven provided to all terrorist groups operating on its soil, whose only goal is to sow chaos, violence, and terror in the region. This attack only strengthens our resolve to bolster counterterrorism cooperation and coordination between the United States and India,” White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said in a statement.
