Complete shutdown in Jammu, curfew imposed after sporadic violence

JAMMU: Jammu observed a total shutdown on Friday, a day after more than 40 CRPF personnel were killed in a terror attack in Pulwama . Curfew was imposed on the entire city following reports of sporadic violence in some areas and torching of over a dozen vehicles.Clashes erupted in Gujjar Nagar area between the protestors and residents after the former allegedly set ablaze parked vehicles. In the feud, five people, including the in-charge of Gujjar Nagar police chowki, one constable and three civilians were wounded. Cops had to lathi-charge and fire smoke shells to disperse the agitators. The Army was summoned for flag-march, said police.Jammu defence spokesperson Lt Col Devender Anand said, “Violence broke out in some parts of the city which included stone pelting between different factions and torching of vehicles. Curfew was imposed and the Army was requisitioned by civil authorities to bring the situation under control.”“Nine Internal Security columns of the Army from Tiger Division along with air support from White Knight Corps were deployed in Gujjar Nagar, Janipur, Shahidi Chowk, Talab Khatika and other areas. Flag marches were also conducted by the columns. Helicopters and UAVs of Army were also put into operation to monitor the situation,” Anand added.Hundreds of people on Friday morning took to the streets against Thursday’s attack, chanting pro-India slogans and waving the tricolour. They even torched more than a dozen vehicles, further fuelling the unrest. In Jewel area, protestors pelted stones and burnt tyres. About a dozen people were injured in the clashes across Jammu on Friday, said police.Life has come to a standstill with vehicular traffic off the roads and the closure of business establishments. Internet service has been partially suspended in some regions in a bid to curb fake news. Vaishno Devi pilgrims were seen walking to their destination.In view of the security situation, Jammu administration imposed curfew in the entire city to maintain law and order and to protect life and property, said a J&K Police officer. Jammu deputy commissioner Ramesh Kumar said additional forces were deployed in sensitive areas to avoid any untoward situation. “The Army flag marched around 2pm,” he said, adding the night curfew will continue and the administration will assess the situation in the morning before taking any further step.The shutdown call was given by the Chamber of Commerce and Industries and was supported by transporters, small-scale businessmen, Jammu Bar Association and several other political and non-political outfits.
