Absence of lesbian voice queers the pitch

At the release of his autobiography Straight to Normal by my friend and former ET colleague Sharif D Rangnekar last month, a lady in the audience asked why the LGBTQI (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer or Questioning, and Intersex) movement uses the word ‘queer’ as its preferred collective noun. “You are normal, as your book title emphasises, so why use a word that implies something strange or odd?” Many in the audience nodded in agreement.

Much like the word ‘gay’, the answer lay in the changing perception of the meaning of queer. For my parents, gay meant happy; none of us would use the word in such a context now as it unequivocally denotes homosexual men. Similarly, queer to my age-group means weird; for the generation after us, it non-judgementally and unmistakeably connotes the entire LGBTQI ‘rainbow’. Society is changing.

Indeed, the packed venue of Sharif’s book launch was indicative of that as it had people of all age groups. Only one thing seemed queer—in the old definition!—to me: the absence of a lesbian ‘voice’. And that is what has struck me as odd(!) about the entire discourse in the run-up to and the aftermath of the 2018 Supreme Court judgement reading down the notorious Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code too.

Whereas the historic verdict has brought gay couples ‘out’ like never before, and also led to the publishing of Sharif’s deeply personal story of his journey of self-discovery, queer women remain strangely and rather inexplicably out of the limelight.

Only one woman, my old friend Ritu Dalmia, was among the petitioners who went to Supreme Court though several of the lawyers, in that case, were lesbians.

One person at the launch, himself a gay lawyer and activist, gave me the most plausible and yet depressing reason for this missing lesbian voice. He contended that two cause celebres (so to speak) brought the gay community together in recent times—the fight for equal rights for HIV positive people and the battle to decriminalise Section 377 that defined sex between two men as unnatural.

Both these issues did not directly affect lesbians, or at least not as much as it did gay men, he said, and hence there was no real reason for such women to bond countrywide— even worldwide— and come out, even if only to fight the good fight as gay men did. But broader issues the gay community faces, are relevant to lesbians too especially those that arose during the courts’ unfortunate flip-flop on Sec77.

While both the HIV judgement in 2017 and the 377 verdict in 2018 have been huge leaps forward, the second reason he offered was truly depressing. He averred that while Indian society has come a long way from the conservative stand fostered by transferred Victorian values—heteronormative views, as they say in activist speak— women are still judged differently from men, particularly in rural areas.

It seems while rural India now grudgingly accept the idea of two men as a couple or at least not protest vociferously, two women in a similar relationship is still patently unacceptable there. Lesbians in villages are harassed, assaulted and driven out. Such is the opprobrium that very few dare to disclose their orientation at all. That age-old patriarchy can even discriminate on this issue was a real eye-opener for me.

Of course, our society’s patriarchal and misogynistic bias is apparent even in the differing connotations the two same-sex orientations evoke. Think about it—gay men are thought to be creative, witty, funny, artistic, empathetic et al. The same adjectives are not automatically associated with lesbians. And while being effeminate is now regarded with a degree of indulgence, being ‘butch’ is not.

This gender bias strikes me as being truly queer—in the old sense. And I wonder whether enough has been done within the community and outside to counter it and bring about an equality of perception to begin with. Only their orientation is different from heterosexuals, not their DNA, which is what passes on creative and other characteristics, after all. They have pluses and minuses just like everyone else.

Sharif’s autobiography is a path-breaker in India when it comes to LGBTQI literature— there is even no separate classification for it in Amazon’s review section here! But I find myself wondering when a lesbian will also come forward to tell her story as he has. And I look forward to the time when LGBTQI will no longer need a separate acronym as they will become part of the rainbow of normal!

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
