Bangladesh condemns Thursday’s attack on Indian troops

Activists of Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM) burn a symbolic effigy of Pakistan and shout slogans against Thursday's attack on a paramilitary convoy in Kashmir, in Hyderabad, India, Friday, Feb. 15, 2019. Photo: AP

Activists of Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM) burn a symbolic effigy of Pakistan and shout slogans against Thursday's attack on a paramilitary convoy in Kashmir, in Hyderabad, India, Friday, Feb. 15, 2019. Photo: AP

Dhaka, Feb 15 (UNB) - Bangladesh has strongly condemned the dastardly terrorist attack on an Indian paramilitary convoy in Pulwana District of Jammu and Kashmir.

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, in a message addressed to her Indian counterpart Narendra Modi said, “On behalf of the people and the government of Bangladesh, and on my own behalf, let me convey our heartfelt condolences for the loss of lives of more than 37 CRPE troops......"

Bangladesh strongly condemn dastardly terrorist attack on Army personnel in the district of Jammu n Kashmir. pic.twitter.com/I1sJyhUQY1 — Md. Shahriar Alam (@MdShahriarAlam) February 15, 2019

State Minister for Foreign Affairs M Shahriar Alam, who is now in Geneva, tweeted the message that was sent from Bangladesh High Commission in New Delhi.

“We stand by the people and the government of India. We offer our condolences to the members of the families who lost their dear ones. Our thoughts and prayers are for speedy recovery of those who got injured," reads the message.

Bangladesh, according to the message, remains steadfast in its commitment against terrorism of all forms and manifestations and maintains a zero tolerance policy against all kinds of terrorist activities.

“Bangladesh would continue to work and cooperate with international community including India to eradicate menace of terrorism," the message reads.

The message, dated February 14, was sent through Indian Ministry of External Affairs.

On Thursday, suicide bombers carried out attacks on a paramilitary convoy in Kashmir leaving 41 people dead.
