Chennai: Missing teen girl was gang-raped for 5 days and murdered, five arrested

Chennai: The case of the missing schoolgirl and the discovery of her skeleton inside the school uniform buried in a canal in Venkatapuram village near Tiruttani on February 11 has unfolded into a gory tale of gang rape and brutal rape.

It has been found that the fifteen-year-old girl was abducted and kept captive at a motor pump room in a mango farm where she was raped by five men over five days before being killed. The five rapists have been arrested.

The girl had gone missing five months back and the police closed the family's complaint saying she could have eloped with a lover.

Tiruvallur district SP Ponni ordered the reopening of the case and constituted special investigation teams after a few persons working in a sugarcane field found the skeleton.

When police officials took the main accused in the case Shankaraya to recreate the crime scene, he told the police how they gagged her, tied her up and plastered her mouth as she raised noise during her confinement. Police sources said the youth was angry with the girl after she did not respond to his overtures. When on her way to school on September 7, she went to mango grove to deliver milk to one Baskar inside the grove.

Shankaraya allegedly threatened and sexually assaulted her. The owner of farm Nathamuni (50) and his friend Krishnamurthy, who witnessed the incident, instead of trying to rescue the victim, they also assaulted her. They took her to a nearby motor pump room where the girl was confined for five days.

During the course of five days, Shankaraya also brought two of his friends to rape her, police said.

After the prolonged sexual assault, the culprits, apprehending that she would inform police and her family, murdered her using a blunt object.

Shankaraya’s accomplices gave Rs 4,000 each to him to not to disclose the crime. Fearing the police, the accused dug up the body again and buried it on the banks of a canal.

But, skeleton remains of the girl surfaced in the canal. Shankaraya and four others were apprehended by the police.
