Surat trade organizations begin to collect donations for CRPF martyrs

SURAT: People from all walks of life in the city joined the nation in condemning the cowardly attack by a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist on a convoy of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) in Pulwama of Jammu & Kashmir on Thursday, which resulted in the death of over 40 personnel.Saurashtra Patel Seva Samaj (SPSS) will donate the gifts received in a mass marriage being organized by it for 261 couples on February 17 to the families of the martyrs. Federation of Surat Textile Traders Association (FOSTTA) has announced that the 165 textile markets in the city will remain closed on Saturday as a tribute to the CRPF personnel. Southern Gujarat Chamber of Commerce and Industry (SGCCI) held a meeting on Friday to pay tributes to the martyrs and will collect donations for their families. Many organizations , including political parties, and NGOs took out candlelight marches and rallies to pay tributes to the CRPF personnel who attained martyrdom in the service of the nation. FOSTTA office-bearers and members of textile traders community too took out a candlelight march on Friday evening in the memory of the CRPF soldiers.SPSS convener Kanji Bhalala said, “We will start the mass marriage function with two minute silence as a mark of respect to the martyrs. We have decided to donate all the money and gifts received by the couples to the families of the martyrs. We celebrate Kargil Vijay Diwas every year. The gifts will be given to the families of the martyrs by the newly married couples on Kargil Vijay Diwas.”Maruti Veer Jawan Trust of diamond barons will meet on Saturday to chalk out a plan to help the families of CRPF martyrs. The trust is likely to make an announcement of financial aid for their families.SGCCI has pledged over Rs5 lakh for the families of the martyrs whereas different trade organizations have already collected over Rs6 lakh for them. SGCCI president Hetal Mehta said, “We strongly condemn the terrorist attack on the convoy of CRPF and believe it to be an attack on 130 crore people of the country. We stand firmly with the bereaved families and will help them with financial aid.”
