Pulwama attackers, backers should be held accountable: US

Washington: The United States of America (USA) has asked Pakistan to immediately stop the support and safe haven provided to all terrorist groups operating from its soil, while asserting that “the attackers and backers should be held accountable.”

Condemning the dastardly Pulwama terror attack, the US National Security Agency (NSA) called up India and extended its support. “The attackers and backers should be held accountable,” said the NSA.

“The United States condemns in the strongest terms the heinous terrorist attack by a Pakistan-based terrorist group that killed over 40 Indian paramilitary forces and wounded at least 44 others. We express our deep condolences to the victim’s families, the Indian government and the Indian people for the loss of life in this brutal attack,” the Press Secretary’s statement outlined.

The dastardly terror attack on a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district on Thursday afternoon claimed the lives of 40 security personnel. The convoy comprised of 78 buses in which around 2,500 personnel were travelling from Jammu to Srinagar. Around 42 martyred jawans were in a bus, into which the terrorist rammed his vehicle with over 100-kg explosives.

Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Muhammad has claimed the responsibility for the deadly attack which left the bus extensively damaged in a blast.

US had previously issued a travel advisory to its citizens, urging them to “reconsider” travelling to Pakistan due to terrorism. Washington has further restricted the travel of its diplomats in the country and has explicitly asked its citizens to refrain from visiting Balochistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, including the erstwhile FATA province, and Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK).

After the attack, India on Friday withdrew the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status to Pakistan. The international community too has expressed support to India in the wake of the heinous Pulwama terrorist assault.

[source_without_link]ANI[/source_without_link]
