Modi appears to have benefited from Pulwama attack, says Fawad Chaudhry

ISLAMABAD: Information Minister Fawad Chaudhry on Thursday said Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi benefited from the Pulwama attack in which 44 Indian paramilitary soldiers were killed.



Speaking on Geo News programme, Aaj Shahzeb Khanzada Kay Saath, the information minister rejected Indian government's allegations that Pakistan was behind the attack.

"The attack took place 130 kilometres inside the city, the car was obviously not transported from Pakistan and neither was the 360 kilogrammes of explosive material used," Chaudhry asserted. "Those who attacked are also locals and not from Pakistan."

The information minister continued, "There is a trend in India, that their government instead of looking inwards, adopts an easy approach and blames Pakistan."

"We want to create a business-friendly environment in Pakistan and such incidents are not favourable for that," he upheld.

"If this [attack] is orchestrated, then we need to see who benefited from it and that appears to be Modi who is contesting elections and losing. It seems that he is desperate to create a conflict," the information minister added.

Stating that the government is "trying to normalise the situation", Chaudhry lamented, "But the Indian government misses no opportunity to worsen relations with Pakistan."

"A challenge has been created for Pakistan at a time when a meeting of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and Taliban peace talks are scheduled to take place in the country. The region is moving towards stability and Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman's visit is to attract major investment in Pakistan," the information minister said.

"Such incidents are created and this is not the first time. Whenever the situation improves in Pakistan, conspiracies are hatched and this is one such conspiracy," he maintained.

Chaudhry, however, said, "We will keep talking about peace because we believe Indo-Pak peace is necessary for the entire region."
