Modi: Pulwama militant attack perpetrators to be punished

Modi: Pulwama militant attack perpetrators to be punished

NEW DELHI, Feb 15 (Agencies) Prime Minister Narendra Modi assured people that the perpetrators of the militant attack would be punished. He said it was important that the country spoke in one voice after the militant attack in Pulwama district of south Kashmir in which almost 49 CRPF men were killed and many more injured.

PM Modi said, "We will give a befitting reply, our neighbour will not be allowed to de-stabilize us," Modi said in a speech soon after he called his security advisers to consider a response to the attack that has provoked an outpouring of anger on social media and demands for retribution.

The Pakistan-based Islamist militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) claimed responsibility soon after a suicide bomber rammed his car laden with explosives into a bus carrying Central Reserve Police Force personnel on Thursday.

Modi govt said it had incontrovertible evidence of Pakistan's involvement in the attack. Islamabad rejected the suggestion it was linked to the attack. “When all the nations will fight together against militancy, it will be eliminated. The jawans have sacrificed their lives for the country. I assure everyone that we will take every step to bring the perpetrators of the crime to book,” said PM.

Modi added “I want to urge those who are criticising is that it is an emotional time, stay away from political one-upmanship”.

I thank all the nations who have supported us and condemned this incident in the strongest of terms. A strong reply will be given to this attack,” said PM Modi.

India will take all possible diplomatic steps to ensure the "complete isolation" of Pakistan, cabinet minister Arun Jaitley told reporters soon after the cabinet committee met at Modi's residence. As a first step, this would include India removing most favoured nation (MFN) trade privileges given to Pakistan, Jaitley said.

"The ministry of external affairs will initiate all possible steps, and I am here referring to all possible diplomatic steps which have to be taken to ensure the complete isolation from the international community of Pakistan," he said. But bilateral trade between India and Pakistan is barely $2 billion per year and Modi facing a tough election is likely to come under pressure for a more muscular response.

BSP chief Mayawati said, “Our party strongly condemns this terrorist attack and offers deepest condolences to the families of the soldiers who lost their lives. We appeal to the central government to find a lasting solution to this problem”.
