Widow alleges police inaction in assault case

Ludhiana: Five days after Dakha police station ASI Vidya Ratan was suspended for negligence in the Issewal gang-rape case, a woman has accused Dugri police of ignoring her assault complaints.

The 33-year-old widow said the police did not lodge an FIR on her complaint of five persons, including three women, barging into her house and thrashing her. The complainant also presented as a proof the CCTV footage in which the group was captured on the night of February 12. She said even after three days, Dugri police have failed to lodge a complaint.

Harmeet Kaur of CRPF Colony, Dugri, said she approached the police, saying she lives with her in-laws in a joint family. She added that on February 12, when her family members had gone out, she was at home with her 65-year-old father-in-law and three children. Around 8pm, the group rang her bell and her father-in-law answered the door. The accused barged in, darted to her room and started thrashing her. She said her seven-year-old son and father-in-law tried to intervene, but the accused overpowered them.

She said, “The accused are from one family and live in our locality. The woman, who is the main accused, suspected that her husband was having an affair with me. So, she, along with her father-in-law, mother-in-law, sister-in-law and two uncles, attacked me. They escaped within 10 minutes after which I called on 100 helpline. A PCR reached the spot in half-an-hour. My injuries were visible on the face. The PCR cops asked me to get a medical examination conducted and report to the police station. After getting the examination at civil hospital, I reached the police station to lodge a complaint and gave the CCTV footage. However, till today no FIR has been lodged. Cops visit our house and check CCTV footage, but are yet to file a complaint. They are deliberately delaying action.”

Harmeet said a finger of her right hand was fractured and there were injuries marks on her face and bruises on body. She said her son also received an internal ear injury.

Bhupinder Singh, brother-in-law of Harmeet, said, “Every time we visit police station, the cops evade a satisfactory reply. This matter should be dealt with strictness.”

Dugri SHO inspector Gurbachan Singh said, “The allegations of inaction are wrong. We are investigating the case and an FIR will be lodged on Friday.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
