Youth booked for raping minor girl

Ludhiana: Police on Thursday evening booked a youth for rape of a minor girl in a village, after entering her house on the pretext of giving out a wedding invitation card to her family. The accused is around 19 years old and lives in the girl’s neighbourhood.

In her police complaint, the 15-year-old girl of the village said that on February 4, her parents had gone to their relative’s place to attend a wedding, while her two brothers had gone to school. She added that the accused came to her house at around 1pm on the pretext of giving a wedding invitation card. The complainant said the accused then did indecent acts with her before pushing her into a room and closing the door, after which he raped her.

The complainant, who is a class 8 student at a senior secondary school in the same village, said as she raised an alarm, the accused fled from the spot after neighbours reached there. She added that before running away, the accused threatened her of dire consequences, after which she informed the police. Cops reached the spot and started a probe.

Police have booked the accused under sections 376 (rape) and 506 (criminal intimidation), and his mother under Section 120-B (criminal conspiracy) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Investigating officer (IO) of the case, inspector Charanjit Kaur, said the boy’s mother was booked, as the complainant had told police he did wrong with her, as she had asked him to do it. She added that raids were being conducted to arrest the accused.

The IO further said they had done a medical examination of the complainant, and the medical examination of the accused would be done after he is arrested. Police officials said the complainant, in her police statement, had said the accused would visit her house previously as well. They added that fearing a bad name in society, the girl’s parents engaged her to the accused in February last year, but the engagement broke up after just two months in April the same year, as the girl’s family got to know the accused was hooked to drugs.

The IO said because the complainant was not of a marriageable age, the alleged acts of the accused qualified for rape, even though both were engaged once. She added that the accused studied in class 12, and was unemployed.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
