Majority students, teachers unaware about women’s helpline number

Ludhiana: After the recent gang-rape reported in Issewal village of Ludhiana district, questions are being raised about women’s security in the city. TOI visited different colleges and schools to know if young girls were aware of the women’s helpline number 1091, and the findings were quite disappointing.

More than 60 students of different schools and colleges were approached, out of which only about 20 students were aware of the women’s helpline number. Surprisingly, a majority of the teachers too were unaware about the number. BA-I student of Government College for Girls, Tejinder Kaur, said: “I have not heard about any women’s helpline. If there is some helpline, the administration should make everyone aware of it. The administration should take the help of social media in spreading awareness.”

Another under-graduate student from Government College for Girls, Manpreet Kaur, said: “What is the use of a helpline if nobody remembers it? The administration should come up with important tips and conduct seminars in schools and colleges. There should be signboards across the city about these helpline numbers.”

A college professor from Model Town said: “I know there is some helpline number, but I could not remember it. Actually, we never thought we could land in such a situation that we would need to call a helpline number, which is why we never bother about it. However, it is time to spread awareness about it, and the police administration also needs to be pro-active.”

Manjit Kaur Ghuman, principal of Guru Nanak Khalsa College for Women, Gujjarkhan Campus, Model Town, said: “After the recent horrifying incident, we have become more conscious about the safety of our students. We will definitely display the helpline numbers in our campus.”

Savita Sharma, principal of Government College for Girls, said: “Teachers and parents should start talking to their young children on such topics to make them aware of the situation. Moreover, self-defence programmes for girls should be made compulsory in schools and colleges.”

The additional deputy commissioner of police (Headquarters) Deepak Pareek said: “We are concerned about the security of women. We have recently installed a complaint box at the Government College for Girls. Moreover, we have been conducting seminars on women’s safety, under which students are made aware of the helpline numbers. Besides, with the help of CII (Confederation of Indian Industry), we have prepared some posters to be installed in the city. We will also ask educational institutes to display helpline numbers in the campus.”

Cops collaborate with CII on awareness posters

Additional deputy commissioner of police (Headquarters) Deepak Pareek: “We are concerned about the security of women, and have recently installed a complaint box at the Government College for Girls. Moreover, we have been conducting seminars on women’s safety, under which students are made aware of the helpline numbers. Besides, with the help of CII (Confederation of Indian Industry), we have prepared some posters to be installed in the city. We will also ask educational institutes to display helpline numbers in the campus.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
