India united in solidarity with forces in fighting terror: All-party meet on Pulwama attack

New Delhi, Feb 16 (UNI/IBNS) Strongly condemning the ‘dastadly terror act in Pulwama on February 14’, in which 40 CRPF jawans lost their lives, an all-party meeting here on Saturday said the country stands united in solidarity with the security forces in fighting terror and defending the unity and integrity of India.

A unanimous resolution passed at the meeting in Parliament, chaired by Home Minister Rajnath Singh, also condemned the support given to acts of terrorism from across the border.

''We strongly condemn the dastardly terror act of February 14, 2019 at Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir in which lives of 40 jawans of CRPF were lost.

''We, along with our countrymen, stand with their families in this hour of grief. We condemn terrorism in all its forms and the support given to it from across the border.’’

''Today, we stand united in solidarity with our security forces in fighting terrorism and defending the unity and integrity of India,’’ the resolution said.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday continued his attack on Pakistan for his complicity on the issue of terror and said the western neighbour is on the verge of bankruptcy and is now known all over as an 'alternative name for terrorism'.

"The other name of terrorism is Pakistan today," Prime Minister said assuring the nation that a befitting reply will be given to the perpetrators of the February 14 dastardly act at Pulwama.

In one of the worst terror attacks on security personnel in recent times, at least 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were martyred and 14 others injured when a Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) militant (suicide bomber) rammed an IED laden vehicle into the forces' convoy at Awantipora in south Kashmir district of Pulwama on Srinagar-Jammu national highway on Thursday afternoon.

JeM has claimed responsibility for the Fidayeen (suicide) attack even as India slammed Pakistan for giving full freedom to the militant group in its territory to prepare for attacking Indian securitymen.

"This terror group is led by the international terrorist Masood Azhar, who has been given full freedom by Government of Pakistan to operate and expand his terror infrastructure in territories under the control of Pakistan and to carry out attacks in India and elsewhere with impunity," said India in a statement.
