Pulwama terror attack: India salutes its bravehearts, proud families bid teary goodbyes

A child, dressed in army fatigue, came to pay his last respects to martyred CRPF jawan Bablu Santra whose body was brought back to his home in Howrah in West Bengal. (Photo: Indrojit Kundu)

PM Narendra Modi and his ministers along with opposition leaders have paid their tributes to Pulwama martyrs in New Delhi on Friday evening. Now, the bodies of slain soldiers are being sent to their respective families.



While many chief ministers have announced ex-gratia and jobs to martyrs' kin, the scars from Pulwama's afternoon of terror that left 40 CRPF jawans dead are too deep to be healed.

"I am ready to sacrifice my other son for the nation, but Pakistan must be given a befitting reply," father of Bihar's martyr Ratan Thakur had said.



As the country stands united in protests against Pakistan's dastardly act and candle-light marches in memory of martyrs, the bereaved families are left with a huge void.



Far away from the media glare in the national capital, a child, dressed in army fatigue, came to pay his last respects to martyred CRPF jawan Bablu Santra whose body was brought back to his home in Howrah in West Bengal.

Uttarkhand's martyr ASI Mohan Lal's body reached Dehradun today where Chief Minister Trivendra Singh Rawat paid his tribute. His daughter stood before the tri-colour draped coffin and saluted the braveheart.

In Bihar, after CRPF Head Constable Sanjay Kumar Sinha's mortal remains reached his home, Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and opposition Rashtriya Janata Dal leader Tejashwi Yadav paid their tributes to the martyr.

From Uttar Pradesh, 12 bravehearts have been martyred in the Pulwama attack. In Varanasi, hundreds came to pay tributes to CRPF jawan Ramesh Yadav at his native village Tofapur.

Rajasthan CRPF jawan Rohitash Lamba's body was also brought back to his hometown in Govindpura in Jaipur to teary eyes and broken hearts.

On Thursday at around 3:30 pm, an explosive-laden SUV rammed into one of the buses out of a 70-vehicle CRPF convoy at Awantipora town in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district. Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed, which claimed responsibility for the attack, released a video of suicide bomber Adil Ahmed Dar soon after the attack. Dar was reportedly part of the Pakistan-based terror group since 2018.

Follow | Pulwama terror attack Live updates: Rajnath Singh calls all party meeting to discuss India's move

Also read | Don't know if I'll return, take care of the kids: Slain CRPF jawan told wife before Pulwama attack

Also watch | PM Modi pays his final respects to slain CRPF jawans
