Pune police rescues abducted youth within 12 hours, kidnappers evade arrest

Pune police have launched an investigation into the matter to locate the culprits (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Pune: Officials with the Pune police department in Maharashtra proved their mettle when they rescued a kidnapped youngster on Friday, barely 12 hours after he was abducted. Identified as 21-year-old Varad Shailesh Chine, the boy was believed to have been kidnapped on Thursday afternoon from the city's Hinjewadi area.

A resident of Bavdhan, Chine's 52-year-old father received a call from the kidnappers later that day. During the duration of the call, the men who abducted his son demanded a ransom of Rs 20 lakh in return for the boy's safe return. Fortunately, the Pune police got to the miscreants before they could cause the boy any harm.

Pune Police presents

Police in Action

Photography Contest



Theme: Police in Action … for Service & Security of People



Entry Free! Submit up to 5 photos

Last Date: 25 February 2019

To participate & know more, go to https://t.co/wWgSxlNfmV pic.twitter.com/4vdhjevUsR — PUNE POLICE (@PuneCityPolice) February 6, 2019

Deputy commissioner of police (DCP), Zone-2 of Pimpri-Chinchwad police, Vinayak Dhakane told Hindustan Times that the boy was rescued from an undisclosed location at 12.30 am on Friday. He added that the boy's father works in the private sector. Dhakane also said that the kidnappers managed to evade arrest. A police official familiar with the incident said that the kidnapping is likely to have occurred between 11.30 am on Wednesday and 1.20 am on Thursday from an area between Bavdhan and Warje Malwadi.

However, a case in this regard has been registered against the kidnappers under Section 364(a) and 365 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) at the Hinjewadi police station where it is being investigated by senior inspector Shivaji Gaware. Officials familiar with the matter also said that the boy who was kidnapped is an engineering graduate working with a private company in Pune.

Must Read: Thane: Man kidnaps three-year-old, blackmails aunt to 'love' him
