Newsmakers of The Week: Kangana Ranaut's remark on Pulwama Attack to Navjot Singh Sidhu ousted from TKSS

This week has been quite an eventful one, more in an unfortunate way than fortunate. A terrorist suicide bombing in Pulwama, Jammu and Kashmir, shocked the country recently claiming more than 40 lives of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel and leaving many injured. Following this, Shabana Azmi and Javed Akhtar who were to visit Pakistan for the Karachi Lit Fest cancelled their tour and Shabana even asked for a halt on cultural exchange between the two countries in the wake of the Attack. However, Kangana in her statement attacked Shabana and called her anti-national for even considering to go to Pakistan for the Festival. Shabana too reacted to it in a subtle statement.

Coming to TV, Navjot Singh Sidhu was ousted from The Kapil Sharma Show over his comment on the Attack. On the other hand, Amol Palekar's speech was interrupted during an event in Mumbai for criticising the Government. Moving over, Grammys decision to announce the winners for Best Editing, Cinematography during the commercial ads created an uproar forcing them to take back their decision.

Let's look at all of the top newsmakers in detail:

1. Kangana Ranaut's scathing attack on Shabana Azmi over the cultural exchange ban remark following Pulwama Attack:

Kangana Ranaut in an exclusive statement to us said, "People like Shabana Azmi calling for halt on cultural exchange, they are the ones who promote Bharat tere Tukade honge gangs.... why did they organize an event in Karachi in the first place when Pakistani artists have been banned after Uri attacks and now they are trying to save face. Film industry is full of such antinationals who boost enemies morals in many ways but right now is the time to focus on decisive actions.... Pakistan ban is not the focus, Pakistan destruction is.”

2. Shabana Azmi reacts to the 'anti-national' remark

Shabana Azmi reacted to the statement to a leading portal and said, "“You really think at a time like this a personal attack on me can be of any significance when the entire country stands as one in our grief and in condemning this dastardly Pulwama attack? May God bless her.”

3. Navjot Singh Sidhu ousted from The Kapil Sharma Show

Navjot Singh Sidhu has reportedly been ousted from The Kapil Sharma Show after his statement on Pulwama Attack created an uproar on social media. “For a handful of people, can you blame the entire nation and can you blame an individual? It (the attack) is a cowardly act and I condemn it firmly. Violence is always condemnable and those who did it must be punished," he told media persons in Punjab.

4. Amol Palekar's speech disrupted

Actor and director Amol Palekar was stopped midway through his speech by the director of NGMA on Friday. Not once, but Amol Palekar was interrupted multiple times during his speech when he criticised the Ministry of Culture for their decision of disbanding the advisory committees of the art gallery at their various centres.

5. Grammy Awards:

The 61st Grammy Awards took place in Los Angeles with Girl on Fire crooner Alicia Keys as the host. Lady Gaga and Bradley Cooper won the Grammy for the Best Pop Duo/Group Performance for Shallow from their movie A Star Is Born. On the other hand, Arianda Grande won her first ever Grammy Award.
