Bangladesh stands with India in fight against terror: Minister Hasan Mahmud

Bangladesh Saturday condemned the Pulwama attack and said it stands with India in its fight against terror.

Forty CRPF personnel were killed and five injured in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir on Thursday, when a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed an explosives-laden vehicle into their bus in Pulwama district.

"We condemn the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir which led to the death of 40 CRPF troopers. We stand by India in its fight against terror," Bangladesh Information Minister Hasan Mahmud told reporters at Kolkata Press Club after paying floral tributes to the photograph of those killed in the attack.

When asked if Pakistan should be isolated in the international fora for orchestrating the attack on security forces, Mahmud said "We condemn whoever is involved in this terror attack. We strongly criticize them".

The minister also said Bangladesh has been fighting against terror and its security agencies have been cooperating and exchanging inputs with their Indian counterparts.

"Bangladesh, too, has been fighting against terror and in this fight we have always cooperated with India.In Bangladesh, too, there have been terror attacks and we have taken steps to curb the terror activities on our soil," Mahmud said.

When asked about Bangladesh-based terror outfit Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB) crossing over to India, he said Bangladesh has taken several steps to curb terror activities on its soil.

"We have taken several steps to curb terror activities on our soil. They no longer have a fertile ground for breeding in Bangladesh, that may be the reason they are trying to cross over to India. But our security agencies have been cooperating and exchanging inputs with Indian agencies in order to track down those terrorists," Mahmud said.

He added that there was a pressing need to fight against terrorist attacks regionally and globally.

"The Bangladesh government under the leadership of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina is working with India and other countries as well. Whoever is linked or patronising this kind of attacks, we condemn everyone," he said.

The minister added that all the terrorist groups have their own regional and global networks.

A 22-year-old man was arrested Saturday for alleged links to the terror outfit JMB, which was involved in the Bodh Gaya blast case last year.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
