Pulwama terror attack: A Timeline of Terror

CRPF Jawans with their family members paying tribute to Martyrs of Pulwama Terror Attack in Bhopal on Saturday | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The recent attack on a convoy of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) on the Jammu-Srinagar Highway has shaken the country. Both public and private spaces can be seen wearing a sense of gloom as the bodies of 40 CRPF jawans who lost their lives in the attack reach their families.

According to reports, the 78-vehicle convoy of CRPF was attacked by an explosive-laden SUV near Awantipora in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on Thursday. The SUV, identified as a Scorpio, was being driven by a 20-year-old suicide bomber named Adil Ahmad Dar with links to terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed.

Following the attack, the sentiment is running high across the length and breadth of the country with citizens demanding that the government deliver a strong response to the forces found reprehensible for the deadly attack. However, the centre has urged Indians to practice restraint as it takes a call on a befitting course of action. The attack in Pulwama has brought back memories of terror attacks on Indian soil in recent years which can help us establish a timeline of terror.

Assam Violence (2014)

In December of 2014, a series of attacks carried out by militants in the Chirang, Sonitpur and Kokrajhar districts of Assam led to the deaths of over 80 citizens.

Manipur Ambush (2015)

As many as 18 soldiers of the Indian Army lost their lives after insurgents ambushed a military convoy in Manipur's Chandel district on 4 June 2015. The battle that followed resulted in the death of 156 terrorists.

(Army Personals, relatives and friends carry the body of Sepoy Manoj Kumar, who was killed in Manipur ambush, near Drang in Mandi district)

Gurdaspur Attack (2015)

On 27 July 2015, three terrorists opened fire on a bus and attacked the Dina Nagar police station in Gurdaspur district of Punjab. Dressed in army uniforms, the militants killed seven people including four policemen.

Pathankot Air Force Assault (2016)

Seven security personnel lost their lives after a highly-armed group of militants infiltrated the Pathankot Air Force Station in Punjab.

(Youths in Patna paying tributes to slain security personnel who were killed in a terrorists attack at IAF base near the Punjab border town of Pathankot)

Kokrajhar Attack (2016)

On 5 August 2016, a group of militants opened fire at a market in Balajan Tinali near the Assamese town of Kokrajhar. The attack resulted in the death of fourteen innocent civilians.

Uri Attack (2016)

On 18 September 2016, four highly-armed militants associated with terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed attacked an Indian Army brigade headquarters in Jammu and Kasmir's Uri. The deadly attack resulted in the deaths of 18 soldiers from the Dogra and Bihar regiments.

(Army soldiers guard near the army Brigade HQs which was attacked by militants in the border town of Uri, North Kashmir)

Nagrota Army Base Attack (2016)

Three militants dressed in police uniforms attacked the Indian Army's 166 Field Regiment unit in the town of Nagrota, Jammu and Kashmir, on the morning of 29 November 2016. The dastardly attack resulted in the deaths of seven Indian soldiers.

Sukma Attack (2017)

On 24 April 2017, a 99-member troop of the CRPF was ambushed by Naxalites between Burkapal and Chintagufa of Sukma district in Chhattisgarh. The ambush resulted in the death of 25 CRPF personnel.

(Security personnel paying tribute to martyred CRPF jawans at Patna airport following the Naxal attack in Chhattisgarh's Sukma district)

Amarnath Yatra Attack (2017)

Seven pilgrims were killed during a deadly attack by militants in the Anantnag district of Jammu and Kashmir. The perpetrators were believed to have links with terror outfit Lashkar-e-Taiba.

Must Read: 5 ways a common citizen can help in combating terrorism
