Madhya Pradesh court directs FIR against veterinary university V-C after woman accuses him of rape-India News , Firstpost

A woman in Jabalpur has accused Nanaji Deshmukh Veterinary Science University V-C Professor PD Juyal of rape as well as threatening to upload her photographs on the net.

Jabalpur: A court in Madhya Pradesh's Jabalpur district has directed police to register an FIR after a woman accused Nanaji Deshmukh Veterinary Science University Vice Chancellor Professor PD Juyal of rape as well as threatening to upload her photographs on the net.

Judicial Magistrate First Class Nidhi Jain issued the order on a complaint filed by a forty-year-old woman seeking that the police register an FIR and probe the matter, the woman's counsel Aman Sharma said.

Sharma said the woman moved the court after getting no response from the police and the Madhya Pradesh State Women Commission.

The woman came in contact with VC Juyal when she went to complain about the death of her dog allegedly for want of proper treatment at the veterinary college hospital, the counsel said.

The VC allegedly raped the complainant on the pretext of offering her a job, Sharma said.

Later, on 17 March, 2018, the VC called her to Rewa and allegedly raped her in a hotel room, Sharma said.

The woman sought police action against the VC under Sections 376 (2)(N) of IPC (commits rape repeatedly on the same woman) and 67 (punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form), 67 (A) (punishment for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act, etc.in electronic form) of IT Act, he said.

When contacted, VC PD Juyal said, "It is an attempt to malign the image of the university and mine. There is a conspiracy going on against me in the varsity and the woman is acting at the behest of such persons. The police investigation will reveal the truth."

The order was pronounced on 29 December, 2018 but the counsel received the certified copy of the order on 3 January, 2019.

Nanaji Deshmukh Veterinary Science University is a state government-run university.
