Extremists torch dozens of vehicles of Muslims in Occupied Kashmir

SRINAGAR (Web Desk) - In Indian Occupied Kashmir, fanatics affiliated with Bharatiya Janata Party, Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, Bajrang Dal, Shiv Sena, Vishwa Hindu Parishad and other extremist organizations torched dozens of vehicles of Muslims in Jammu city, today (Friday).

Hundreds of members of extremist Hindu organizations took to the streets of Jammu city, today, and protested against the killing of Indian troops in an explosion at Lethpora in Pulwama, yesterday. At least 49 troops were killed in the blast.

The extremists set afire at least fifty vehicles of Muslims in Gujjar Nagar and Prem Nagar areas of the city. Eyewitnesses said that the protesters raised anti-Kashmir, anti-Pakistan and other provocative slogans. Following the violence by the Hindu fanatics, the occupation authorities imposed curfew and suspended internet service in the city.

Thousands of people attended the funeral prayers in absentia for a youth, Aadil Ahmed Dar, in Gandi Bagh area of Pulwama, today. Aadil got martyred in Lethpora blast, yesterday.

Indian police and troops, today, barred journalists from performing their professional duty by disallowing them to visit the site of Lethpora explosion.

The Joint Resistance Leadership comprising Syed Ali Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Muhammad Yasin Malik in a statement in Srinagar said, the people and leadership of Kashmir regret every killing that happens in the territory. It strongly condemned the incidents of arson in Jammu in which communal elements torched the vehicles of Muslims and injured many people.

The Chairman of Hurriyat forum, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, in a statement in Srinagar strongly condemned the assault on Kashmiri students in India. He said that not only students but Kashmiri businessmen and traders staying in various places were also targeted and harassed.

The Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, Muhammad Yasin Malik, in a statement denounced the slapping of draconian law, Public Safety Act, on illegally detained a leader of his party, Zahoor Ahmad Butt, for the second time by the occupation authorities.

Senior Hurriyat leader, Ghulam Muhammad Khan Sopori, addressing a gathering in Sopore and the Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League, Muhammad Farooq Rehmani, in a statement issued in Islamabad paid rich tributes to noted freedom leader, Ghulam Muhammad Bulla, on his martyrdom anniversary, today. Ghulam Muhammad Bulla was arrested by Indian police and killed in custody on this day in 1975 for leading a protest rally in Sopore against Indra-Abdullah Accord.

Paris-based media watchdog, Reporters Without Borders in a statement reiterated its demand for immediate and unconditional release of illegally detained Kashmiri journalist, Aasif Sultan.
