Public taking law into own hands raises concern in GH

TURA: The mob lynching of two men suspected to be members of a dacoit gang in Chanangpara village of Phulbari on Friday morning has raised concerns in the security establishment about public taking the law into their own hands.

Villagers had seized three men in a maruti alto car late Thursday night and kept them captive inside the house of the village nokma at Chanangpara, 20 kms from Phulbari town, but police were not informed about the incident until the next day.

There are conflicting reports about the incident with villagers on one side branding the three men as criminals, while, on the other, some reports mention two of them to be engaged in the lucrative arecanut trade.

Family members of one of the victims have told police that they were returning from an interior village in connection with the arecanut business.

This is the peak season for the harvest of the arecanut plantations and dozens of traders visit villages to purchase the raw produce in bulk from plantation owners which they later process into supari or dried betelnuts that are packaged and sold for a very lucrative price in Assam and mainland India.

The villagers claim that in view of rising dacoity cases at night, the most recent being days before at nearby Rongchandalgre village, they were on night vigil when they spotted the three men in the vehicle and ordered them to stop. Villagers claim that the three tried to flee and were caught.

They reportedly found daos (daggers) and alcohol inside the vehicle used by the three men and suspecting them to be members of the gang that has been raiding homes in different villages in the past few weeks, the three were taken captive.

Police have since recovered two daggers from the half burnt vehicle.

The three men, namely Mokibul Islam (35) of Pushkarnipara village in Chibinang, Bita Rabha (34) and Mikseng Marak (24), both hailing from Dawagittimgre locality of Williamnagar town in East Garo Hills, were attacked by hundreds of villagers leading to the death of Islam and Marak, while Rabha is battling for his life in a hospital in Tura.

The angry mob had even threatened to attack the Nokma when he tried to calm tempers and suggested the three men be handed over to police.

Meanwhile, preliminary investigations by police reveal that neither the nokma nor any villager had informed police or the Village Defense Party secretary about the capture of three men during the night.

Police were informed only in the morning, a full nine hours later, when the mob became uncontrollable and began assaulting the three men.

The presence of a history-sheeter among the three, deceased Mokibul Islam has raised doubts about the intentions of the men. Islam is a prime accused in the abduction of a child from a marriage hall, last year.

The boy was released near Gaptuli after ransom was reportedly paid. He was earlier arrested in another abduction case.
