Pulwama terror attack: Bharat Ke Veer gets 'unprecedented' Rs 7 crore funds; 'grateful' MHA warns against fake portals

Follow us on Image Source : MHA/TWITTER State Bank of India has created a UPI for the Bharat Ke Veer initiative to help people make their monetary contributions easily

Home Ministry on Saturday said that government was grateful for a tremendous response from people wanting to contribute through the website 'Bharat Ke Veer', however, it also warned people against 'unscrupulous elements are soliciting contributions from people through other accounts.'

"It is also reported that some unscrupulous elements are soliciting contributions from people through other accounts. It is advised that people desirous of supporting families of martyrs of CAPFs should only contribute through the website - http://bharatkeveer.gov.in," the ministry said on Twitter on Saturday.

In a series of tweets, MHA thanked the nation for contributions for the families of slain soldiers. "During the last few days there has been a tremendous response from people wanting to contribute through the website: http://bharatkeveer.gov.in MHA is grateful for this support," he said, adding that the website has slow down a bit due to heavy traffic.

The 'Bharat Ke Veer' contribution platform, that collects public funds for Central Armed Paramilitary Forces personnel killed in action. CAPF includes BSF, CRPF, CISF, ITBP, NDRF, NSG, Sashastra Seema Bal and Assam Rifles.

In the days since Pulwama terror attack, the site has got "unprecedented" donations of over Rs 7 crore, officials said Saturday.

Officials manning the online portal of the Union Home Ministry have also asked citizens to "desist" from donating money for the slain men in uniform at any other platform except the 'Bharat Ke Veer'.

"We have received unprecedented donations at the online portal in the last 36 hours and the amount is over Rs 7 crore," BSF Inspector General (IG) Amit Lodha told PTI.

He said, "Never in the two-year history of this benevolent public fund for CAPF martyrs, such a huge contribution has come in such a short time. We are grateful to the people of the country for expressing their solidarity with the martyrs."

The IG, who supervises the activity of the portal, said it was getting as many as "20,000 hits per second" post the Pulwama attack which claimed the lives of 40 CRPF jawans.

The CRPF personnel were killed and five injured in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir on Thursday, when a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 100 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district.

The State Bank of India has also created a UPI for the Bharat Ke Veer initiative to help people make their monetary contributions easily, the BSF IG said.

Bharat Ke Veer, the fund-raising initiative, was launched in April 2017 by the Union Home Ministry in collaboration with actor Akshay Kumar.

Till last month, an amount of Rs 45.32 crore was received in the corpus of this fund, a senior official said.

Anyone can contribute to the fund through the BKV mobile app or the website. All contributions are exempt from income tax as per government rules.

(With inputs from PTI)

Latest India News
