Kashmiris have right to live free from fear in any part of India, says Owaisi; condemns xenophobic attacks

AIMIM President Asaduddin Owaisi. | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: After multiple incidents of violence and alleged harassment were reported against Kashmiri students and traders from different parts of the country after the dastardly Pulwama terror attack, AIMIM president Asaduddin Owaisi said every Kashmiri has a right to live free from fear and to reside in any part of India. Taking to his twitter handle Owaisi condemned these xenophobic attacks against Kashmiris and said India cannot let the rule of law be replaced by a rule of mobs.

Every Kashmiri has a right to live free from fear, to reside in any part of India. These xenophobic attacks against Kashmiris are deplorable & must be condemned.



We cannot let our rule of law be replaced by a rule of mobs — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) February 16, 2019

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Omar Abdullah also met Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh yesterday and urged him to intervene to ensure the safety of Kashmiri students and traders.

Reports of Kashmiris being were booked for posting derogatory posts on social media platforms and few institutes took action against students by suspending them for celebrating the attack on the CRPF jawans.

“I took the opportunity to inform @rajnathsingh Sb of the reports I had received of Kashmiri students & others being threatened/harassed and requested him to appoint a modal officer in @HMOIndia to ensure the directive issued to states is followed in letter & spirit,” Omar tweeted.

I took the opportunity to inform @rajnathsingh Sb of the reports I had received of Kashmiri students & others being threatened/harassed and requested him to appoint a modal officer in @HMOIndia to ensure the directive issued to states is followed in letter & spirit. — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) February 16, 2019

Forty CRPF personnel were killed in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir when a suicide bomber rammed explosive-laden SUV into the bus carrying the jawans in South Kashmir's Pulwama district.

Expressing solidarity with New Delhi more than 50 countries condemned the dastardly attack and massive protests, demonstrations and candlelight marches were organised in different parts of the country.

The curfew which was imposed in Jammu continued for the second day on Saturday and the additional security forces were also deployed.
