#MeToo: Alok Nath granted anticipatory bail in rape case filed by Vinta Nanda

Veteran actor Alok Nath has been granted anticipatory bail on Saturday in regard to rape case filed against him by writer-producer Vinta Nanda.

According to reports, Nath has been granted anticipatory bail by the Dindoshi Sessions Court with a surety of Rs 5 lakh to not leave the country without permission.

In the wake of the #MeToo movement in India, Nath was accused by Vinta of raping and sexually harassing her two decades back. She had made the allegations on a Facebook post, following which she had filed case against the popular actor.

"I loved my life, I was a successful woman, I smoked and I drank. I was a liberated person. I was invited to a party to this mans house, his wife, my best friend was out of town. It was usual for our group of friends from theatre to meet regularly so there was nothing unusual about my going to the party. As the evening flowed, my drinks were mixed and I began to feel strange. Then at around 2am I left his house. Nobody followed me or offered to drop me home, which was what was rather unusual. All I knew at the time was that I had to get home. I could sense it wouldn't be right for me to stay there any longer. I started to walk home on the empty streets although the distance to my own house was long. Midway I was accosted by this man who was driving his own car and he asked me to sit in it and said he would drop me home. I trusted him and sat in his car. I have faint memory after that. I can remember more liquor being poured into my mouth and I remember being violated endlessly. When I woke up the next afternoon, I was in pain. I hadn't just been raped, I was taken to my own house and had been brutalised. I couldn't get up for my bed. I told some of my friends but everybody advised me to forget about it and move on," Vinta had said in the post.

In response to the allegations, Nath had neither denied the accusations nor admitted them. "Neither I am denying this nor do I would agree with it. It must have happened, but someone else would have done it," he had said.
