Case of 4 ‘missing’ accused: Rape survivor sticks to her guns, cops baffled

Ludhiana: At a time when the Issewal rape survivor and her friend, who was accompanying her on that fateful night, have stuck to their guns, claiming that there were at least 10 men involved in the crime, cops are baffled over the four missing men.

Cops have so far maintained that interrogation of the six accused and investigation have not pointed out involvement of others in the sensational case.

Based on the statement of the rape survivor and her friend, the Dakha police had booked 10 unidentified men under Sections 376-D (Gang rape), 384 (Punishment for extortion), 342 (Punishment for wrongful confinement).

Now with the girl and her friend are sticking to their claims, cops have decided to get police remand of three arrested men to question them on ‘missing’ accused.

A man, who had been contacted by the accused for ransom to ensure release of the duo, said, “Today I along with my friend visited the police station where he identified the accused who were present at the crime spot.”

Asked about the number of accused, he said, “We have talked about it and my friend is sure that there were 10 accused.”

Jagraon SSP Varinder Singh Brar said, “Role of six accused have been confirmed after interrogation and investigation, that included call details.”

SSP Brar said, “After the arrest of six accused, the complainants have reiterated that there were 10 men. Therefore, we are still interrogating the accused. We will also bring three accused on police remand again for questioning. But, so far we have no clue of the involvement of more than six persons in this case.”

The friend of rape survivor said, “We have no idea why police are saying this. For us, there were at least 10 men who were involved in the crime.”

On February 9, a 20-year-old college student and her friend were driving towards Issewal village in their car when three bike-borne men intercepted them and threw a brick on the car. Later, they took the duo hostage. Afterwards, the accused took them to an isolated place at Issewal and called up their aides. The accused then thrashed the student’s friend and gang raped the girl. The accused also called up a friend of boy, demanding ransom of Rs 1 Lakh. However, they escape when nobody turned up with the ransom.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
