Pulwama suicide bomber's father says not rejoicing CRPF deaths even as visitors congratulate him

A photo of Adil Ahmad Dar identifying him as a Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) recruit posing with an AK-47 hangs in his house, where hundreds assembled to pay condolences to his family in Kakapora village in South Kashmir's Pulwama district.

This is not too far away from the place where Dar, the suicide bomber responsible for Thursday's attack, rammed an SUV vehicle loaded with explosives into a CRPF bus killing 40 paramilitary troopers.

A gathering of men clad in Kashmiri firans sat on the carpeted floor in the courtyard covered with a tent to escape the biting cold.

His father Ghulam Hasan Dar sat in a corner quietly as people came, shook hands and greeted him with "Mubarak" or a congratulatory note in the village that has been a hotbed of terror activities.

This is the same place where Abu Dujana, a dangerous Lashkar-e-Taiba terrorist, operated from before he was killed in a shootout.

India Today TV travelled to the sensitive village to gauge the mood and spoke to the fidayeen's father and other family members.

"We are not rejoicing the death of the CRPF men. We understand the pain of the families since in Kashmir we have been facing violence for years," said Ghulam Dar in Kashmiri, as Adil's cousin Umar translated it to English.

Umar who had been working in the UAE till two years back now lives in Srinagar and says he's jobless.

In between the mourning meet where a Maulvi recited prayers, kids ran around the house oblivious to the proceedings.

'Stop youngsters from joining path of terror'

The youth in the in Kakapora and adjoining villages are said to be extremely radicalised and operations by security forces to flush out terrorists here are a routine affair.

Commenting on the issue, Ghulam Dar said: "I don't want to give any message to the youth but can only appeal to the government to find a solution to end this violence and stop youngsters from taking this path."

Ghulam Dar recalled how his son had disappeared all of a sudden on March 18 last year. He said the family made desperate attempts to trace him but in vain. He never returned.

While the family waited for a month in hope, they soon realised that their 20-year-old son had joined a terror outfit.



"We made all efforts, also made appeals on social media but there was no response," says Umar, Adil's cousin.

Adil was only a category 'C' terrorist- the lowest rung in terror hierarchy. His involvement in galvanising stone pelting mobs was known but he was considered a low profile terrorist who was recruited only a year back.

He was not under intense scrutiny allowing him to plot and carry out one of the deadliest terror attacks in Kashmir.

Umar says Adil couldn't have joined a terror outfit for money as the family is well off and he too was educated and wanted to pursue higher studies.

On February 14 (Thursday), at least 40 soldiers were killed in the deadliest terror attack in three decades of Kashmir's insurgency. 20-year-old Dar was identified as the attack after Pakistan-based terror outfit JeM shared a picture of him.

As of now, security forces in the Valley are on high alert in the wake of violence witnessed in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack. A decision on whether the curfew can be relaxed is expected later in the day while internet services continue to remain blocked.
