Two cases of rapes of minors reported in Pimpri Chinchwad

Pune: Two cases of rapes of minor were witnessed in Pimpri Chinchwad area where a 10-year-old girl was allegedly raped while a 17-year-old girl was repeatedly raped and her child was also allegedly aborted by the accused.



In the first case, a minor was allegedly raped in Wakad area of the city by a youth who had come to stay at her home for a few days. The family of the girl lodged a complaint with police on Sunday.



The Wakad police said the victim is 10 years old. The accused was identified as Pratap Bhaurao Shinde (18) of Solapur.



The police said Pratap had come to Pune from Solapur on February 13 reportedly to give an exam in Pimpri. He was staying at the victim’s home in Wakad.



The police added that on February 14, when the victim’s parents went out for work, he allegedly locked the home form inside and tricked the victim to eat something. He then allegedly raped her. The victim reported the matter to her mother after two days who lodged a complaint with Wakad police.



The accused however fled from the victim’s home after the incident citing that his exam was over. The Wakad police suspect he fled back to Solapur and are hunting for the accused in the neighbouring district.



The accused has been booked under POCSO (Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act).



In another case, a 17-year-old girl was allegedly raped repeatedly for a year.



The Bhosari MIDC police probing the case identified the accused as Someshwar Gavan (25) of Parbhani district.



The police said the victim’s mother lodged a complaint with police citing that her daughter was repeatedly raped by the accused who often took her out for sitghtseeing and allegedly used to rape her at his accommodation in the city.



The police stated that the victim had also got pregnant a few months back and the accused had allegedly given her abortion pills.



The Bhosari MIDC police have arrested the accused and booked him under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code and the POCSO Act.


