Police intensify manhunt for former Imam

The Kerala police have intensified its manhunt for a former Muslim cleric, accused of child rape, by expanding the scope of investigation to Bengaluru.

Following information gathered by the investigation team, led by Nedumangad Deputy Superintendent of Police (DySP) D. Ashokan, a shadow police team has been deployed to apprehend Shafeeq Al Qassimi, the former Imam of Tholicode Jamaath, who has been accused of sexually assaulting a minor. One of his brothers, Al Ameen, who was under police custody, is also being taken to Bengaluru in a bid to locate the prime accused.

The investigating team suspected that another brother of the accused, Noushad of Perumbavoor, has taken flight along with him to Bengaluru. Another police team has been deployed to Kochi as part of the ongoing probe. The duo is believed to have fled to Bengaluru after spending a few days in Kochi, official sources said.

The police have also obtained information regarding the alleged role played by two Tholicode natives in harbouring the accused.

“Two people, Ashkar and Ashraf, who are activists of the Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI), were suspected to have visited the accused in Kochi, a day after the case had been registered by the Vithura police. They are believed to have been entrusted with handing over cash to a lawyer,” Mr. Ashokan said. Both were absconding, he added.

Lookout notice

Meanwhile, a lookout notice had been issued two days ago to prevent the accused from fleeing the country through any transit points. The police also claimed to be monitoring the financial transactions of the prime accused.

The police are also likely to record the arrests of the accused’s three brothers, Al Ameen, Ansari and Shaji, who were all under police custody, for allegedly providing safe refuge to the accused and facilitating his escape.

While the case had been registered on the basis of a complaint submitted by the president of the mosque, the victim and her family had initially shown reluctance in submitting statements against the accused. The victim’s statement was later recorded by a woman circle inspector.
