Ludhiana gang rape: ASI sacked from service for negligence

LUDHIANA: Six days after he was suspended for dereliction of duty in Issewal gang-rape case, Dakha police station ASI Vidya Rattan was dismissed from service on Sunday. Action has also been initiated against two other ‘negligent’ cops. While Dakha SHO inspector Rajan Parminder Singh has been sent to police lines, Dakha additional SHO sub-inspector Jarnail Singh has been placed under suspension.ASI Vidya Rattan — who was duty officer at Dakha police station on the day of the incident — was suspended on February 11 after he failed to file a report and inform his seniors about Issewal gang-rape case. Six men had gang-raped a 20-year-old student after holding her friend captive near Sidhwan Canal bridge in Changna village, close to Issewal, on February 9.Deputy inspector general (DIG) Ranbir Singh Khatra said, “The orders for the dismissal of the ASI have been issued. Besides, inspector Rajan Parminder Singh has been sent to police lines and sub-inspector Jarnail Singh suspended. All three are facing dereliction of duty charge. Inspector Jagdish Kumar Sharma — SHO Sadar, Jagraon — has been given the charge of Dakha SHO.”Sources in police said, “Inspector general of police, Ropar Range, V Neerja led the probe into allegations of laxity against the cops.”IG V Neerja said, “I visited the Dakha police station on Saturday as I am supervising the probe into lapses on part of police. I am yet to complete the report and will submit it in a week.”The DIG said the ASI had gone to the spot with a friend — who had received a ransom call from the six — of the complainant, but failed to locate the accused and the victims. “Even after returning from there, the ASI didn’t inform his seniors about the incident,” he added.All six accused have been arrested. They include Jagroop Singh, a driver and resident of Jaspal Bangar, Ajay, also a driver and resident of Tibba, a juvenile of Jammu and Kashmir and three of his relatives (two of them are from Ludhiana and one from Nawanshahr).
