Congress' workers murder: personal and political rivalry behind killings, say Police

Probe expands to Kozhikode and Kannur

A toxic mix of personal and political rivalry might have motivated the mafia-style hit-and-run killings of two Congress workers near Bekal in Kasargode district on Sunday night, according to police.

Police investigators said the murdered Congressmen, Kripesh, 24, and Sarath Lal, 21, were accused in a case relating to an attempt to assassinate a local leader of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) last year. They said they were expanding their investigation to Kozhikode and Kannur.

Officers said the assailants, possibly travelling by car, had ambushed the youth, who were going on a motorbike, on a remote segment of the road not covered by surveillance cameras. They said Kripesh was possibly the primary target and the assailants could have killed Lal to eliminate him as an incriminating witness.

Investigating traffic camera footage

Investigators said they were grappling with lack of eyewitnesses. They recovered two damaged mobile phones, possibly belonging to the victims and the broken hilt of a sharp-edged weapon from the crime scene. Forensic teams are scouring the locality for more evidence. Investigators said they were sifting through hours of traffic camera footage in an attempt to identify the vehicles that could have passed through the area when the crime occurred.

Also Read Situation tense in Kasaragod after Congress’ workers murder

They said they would also rely on mobile phone metadata to identify any other devices that might have remained switched on in the vicinity of the crime scene when the murders unfolded.

Officers said they believed that a set of spotters could have tailed the Congress workers who were returning home after attending a meeting held in connection with an upcoming local temple festival. They could have helped the hit team target the victims accurately.

State Police Chief Loknath Behera has formed a Special Investigation Team (SIT) under Inspector General of Police, Kannur Range, Balaram Kumar Upadhyaya, to solve the crime. District Police Chief, Kasargode, A. Sreenivas, is heading the probe.

The Congress president Rahul Gandhi has condemned the murders.

The brutal murder of two members of our Youth Congress family in Kasargod, Kerala is shocking. The Congress Party stands in solidarity with the families of these two young men & I send them my deepest condolences. We will not rest till the murderers are brought to justice. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) February 18, 2019

Meanwhile, the Opposition Leader Ramesh Chennithala has blamed the district CPM leadership for the murder of his party workers. Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee president Mullapally Ramachandran has echoed similar sentiments.
