Intelligence in the time of hybrid warfare

By R K Arora and Vinay Kaura

It has become abundantly clear that the devastating suicide attack in on the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convey in Pulwama district in Jammu and Kashmir could happen due to certain security lapses. One of them relates to quality of intelligence. Reports have already emerged and being widely debated that an intelligence input warned of the possibility of terror attack two days before Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) struck with a suicide attack. The intelligence input is reported to have said that “Chatter inputs reveal that JeM outfit has hinted to carry out IED attacks along the routes of security forces across Jammu and Kashmir. A video uploaded by the outfit has also been shared with all concerned.” The video of a truck carrying troops in Somalia being blown up in an improvised explosive device (IED) blast by terrorists was also shared with a warning of its replication in Kashmir.

Can this bit of information be labelled as intelligence? Not exactly. This seems to be a general message sent to all stakeholders in Kashmir so that they could remain alert about the IEDs. But this is hardly a specific intelligence input which could have helped the security and intelligence agencies to anticipate where and when the attack was being planned. Unless it is of a specific nature, it is not possible for security agencies to follow up on every intelligence lead. Specific leads come either through a communications intercept or when intelligence agencies are able to penetrate the enemy camp.

The governor of Jammu and Kashmir has admitted of an intelligence failure about any local militant being trained as a suicide bomber. He has disclosed “that we did not know that there was a fidayeen among them is also part of the intelligence failure,” while adding that since the suicide bomber was under pressure from all sides, “he must have escaped to the jungles or the hills and got lost. We knew about him but could not trace him. This was just a chance thing and he was the rare one who got away.” Instead of answering questions, his reply raises more questions. How the suicide bomber managed to secure huge quantity of explosives which was ultimately used for the deadly attack? How his presence on various social media platforms was missed by the agencies?

One should also not forget that assembly of such as a huge quantity of explosives and planning for such a meticulously executed terrorist operation would have involved a lot of people as a single operative could not undertake this job. How the intelligence agencies failed to notice that? Why the terror footprints could not be identified when planning was taking place? How the intelligence agencies could not a get a whiff of something colossal that was about to happen? Was there nobody who could convincingly ‘join the dots’? This is not what the intelligence agencies do in a conflict zone such as Kashmir which has been facing terrorism-backed insurgency.

Two reasons that intelligence agencies could not get actionable intelligence: one, due to excessively strained relationship between local Kashmiri people and the security agencies; and second, lack of sufficient capacity to collect and analyze intelligence in the cyber domain. The government urgently needs to take decisive initiatives in cyber warfare and start recruiting people for intelligence agencies who have technology background.

We need to ask these and many more such questions in order to avoid terrorist attacks of such scale and magnitude in future. Despite the significant transformation of threats coming from hybrid warfare, Pakistan and China, Indian security planners unfortunately persist in carrying over outmoded ways of addressing them. These threats are covert, decentralized, and fluid, with threat sources relatively difficult to identify, target and destroy. And most important, cyber domain has made the task extremely difficult for the intelligence agencies.

Heated controversies will continue to surround how India identifies security challenges, prioritizes them, and responds to them. Widespread sentiment persists that regardless of the government in power, these critical decisions have been arbitrary. We were made to believe that these past practices would not guide security policy after 2014. However, in the absence of the government’s explicit successes in the eyes of domestic onlookers, serious flaws in both threat assessment and threat management strategies are challenging India’s approach to counter the threat from terrorism and insurgency.

(R K Arora is a Professor at the department of International Affairs and Security Studies, Sardar Patel University of Police, Security and Criminal Justice, Rajasthan. As border security professional, he has two decades of counter insurgency experience in Kashmir.)

(Vinay Kaura, is an Assistant Professor at the Department of International Affairs and Security Studies, Sardar Patel University of Police, Security and Criminal Justice, Rajasthan.)

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
