Artist pays tribute to Pulwama martyrs by preparing their sketches

Braving the cold and compromising his sleep, an artist in Lucknow is preparing sketches of the brave CRPF jawans who sacrificed their lives in the Pulwama terror attack in order to pay tributes to them.

Aman Singh Gulati, a young sketch artist from Lakhimpur Kheri came to Lucknow on Saturday to prepare sketches of all the 40 martyrs.

He wants to complete his task by end of Monday and has been working overnight near the Gandhi statue in Hazratganj braving the cold and cutting down his sleep.

Speaking to India Today TV, Gulati said, "I have dedicated an hour to prepare sketch of each jawan. It is very important for all of us to value their sacrifice and empathise with the bereaved families who will go through an unbearable pain for the rest of their life. Till now I have prepared more than 20 sketches. The remaining work will complete soon."

"I will be sending the sketches to the martyr families through courier and will also try to hand over them personally to some of the families who are in UP. The Pulwama incident is highly disturbing and sketches are being prepared to offer them tributes and express love for our brave jawans," said the artist.

Speaking about national outrage against the attack, he said, "People have become highly emotional and they want the government to take stern action against those responsible for this incident. It has become very important to teach Pakistan and terror outfits a lesson. The sacrifice made by our jawans should be avenged so that there is no repition of such a grisly incident."

Meanwhile hundreds of people protested at multiple places in Lucknow condemning the incident and expressing anger against Pakistan for its fresh provocation. Several candle marches were also organised in all prominent locations of the state capital to offer tributes to martyrs.

The UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath also met the family of deceased CRPF jawan in Maharajganj district on Sunday afternoon to offer his condolences.
