Kerala hartal today: Youth Congress observes bandh over activists' murder; roads blocked, KSRTC buses stoned

@nsui | Photo Credit: Twitter

Thiruvananthapuram: The Youth Congress in Kerala on Monday began a state-wide dawn-to-dusk bandh in protest of murder of two of its activists in northern Kasaragod district on Sunday night. The Kerala Congress has alleged that the Communist Party of India (Marxist) workers were behind the killing of Sarath Lal and Kripesh.

As per news agency PTI, Kerala State Road Transport Corporation-owned buses were stoned, and roads and national highways were blocked in various places across the state. At a few places, protesters forcefully shut down shops.

The activists belonging to the Youth Congress blocked vehicles in districts like Kollam, Kozhikode, Idukki and Ernakulam. University and school model examinations were also postponed.

Private vehicles were, however, found plying smoothly. No protest was being observed in Thiruvananthapuram in view of the famous temple festival, Attukal Pongala, on February 20.

The brutal murder of two young @IYC members, Kripeesh and Sharath, at the hands of CPM members has shocked the nation. NSUI strongly condemns the heinous act, and demands that the Kerala Govt. brings the perpetrators to book immediately. pic.twitter.com/b7wgcNxQF9 — NSUI (@nsui) February 18, 2019

Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan reportedly cancelled his programmes because of the hartal. Meanwhile, Congress president Rahul Gandhi tweeted that the party would not rest till the murderers were brought to justice.

“The brutal murder of two members of our Youth Congress family in Kasargod, Kerala is shocking. The Congress Party stands in solidarity with the families of these two young men & I send them my deepest condolences. We will not rest till the murderers are brought to justice,” tweeted Gandhi.

Congress workers told the Kerala Police that three bike-borne assailants had had seriously injured Krupesh, 19, and Joshy, 24. While Krupesh died at the Kasargode district hospital, Joshy died en route to a hospital in Mangaluru (in neighbouring Karnataka).

Top Congress leaders have reached Kannur, where the two bodies were taken for autopsy.
