Baramati: CRPF jawan, who went to invite policemen for homage meeting, alleges being beaten up by them

Baramati Police Beaten a CRPF Jawan,

Baramati: A CRPF jawan, who had gone to invite police personnel at the Baramati police station to a homage meeting, being conducted as a tribute to the 40 CRPF jawans who were killed in a terrorist attack in Pulwama on February 14, has alleged that the police "manhandled" him and beat him up.

In the incident, that took place in Baramati, the jawan's clothes were allegedly torn up and his mobile phone was broken as well.

Ashok Ingwale, who is working in the 118 battalions of CRPF, is a resident of Songaon, near Baramati. He had approached the Baramati taluka police to invite them at a homage meeting for the martyrs. But the police in return assaulted the jawan.

Pune: A CRPF soldier alleges he was assaulted by police at Baramati police station today after he was stopped for riding bike with 3 people. Police say there was no assault & instead the CRPF soldier had vandalised police property in anger, all of which has been recorded in CCTV — ANI (@ANI) February 17, 2019

According to Ingwale, he, along with his cousin and one more youth went to invite senior officers at Baramati police station. However, they were stopped by a couple of rowdy policemen who used foul language and intimidated them.

Ingwale offered to pay a fine for riding triple on a two-seater vehicle and offered to show them his identity card but they did not listen.

According to NDTV, Ingwale further alleged that he was taken to a room with no CCTV cameras and was beaten up by 10-15 policemen.

SI Sandip Pakhale denied the allegations and said he indulged in triple riding and when the policemen stopped him, he abused them.

After the Pulwama attack, several organisations and groups of citizens took out candlelight march as well in Maharashtra, Patna, Hyderabad, Ladakh, New Delhi, etc.

The terror attack in which at least 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawans were martyred happened on 14 February when a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) bomber, identified as Adil Ahmed Dar, rammed his explosives-laden SUV into the CRPF convoy.
