Multiple Reports Of People Being Assaulted For Condemning Pulwama Terror Attack

Even as the world condemns the terrorist attack in Pulwama and expresses solidarity with India, people are reportedly being attacked for doing the same across India.

In Uttar Pradesh’s Ghaziabad, a man was reportedly seriously injured when he was attacked at his shop for objecting to a group allegedly raising ‘Pakistan Zindabad’ slogans and abusing Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Hindustan reported .



As per the report, the man, named Susheel Kumar, got into an argument over the Pulwama attack with a group, which was broken by the intervention of nearby people. It didn’t end there though. The group later attacked Kumar at his shop. The attackers, the report says, have been identified as Shahzaad, Nafeem, and Mufeem, who belong to the same locality as Kumar. A case has been filed with the police.

In Gujarat’s Ahmedabad, two groups reportedly clashed at a candle light march for those martyred at Pulwama. The Deputy Commissioner of Police (Zone II) Panna Momaya was quoted by Zee News as saying, ‘A candlelight march was passing through a communally sensitive locality in Shahpur area when a clash broke out between members of two communities.’ The official further said, ‘Primarily, it appears some misunderstanding about stones being pelted by members of a procession passing from the same locality led to the clash. We are still investigating what started the clash.’

NDTV and Navbharat Times have also reported the incident.

In West Bengal’s Nadia, the house of an Indian Army veteran was vandalised after he lit candles in the memory of Pulwama martyrs, The Times of India reported . Retired Warrant Officer Gour Sekhar Dey’s name on the plaque was defaced with tar after he lit three candles as per an appeal from ex-servicemen's associations and posted the photographs on social media.

‘[..] It came as a shock when we found my father's plaque defaced with tar. There were also markings on the walls. It seems that some people were unhappy with us lighting the candles,’ Dey's son, Arunava, told ToI.

In Karnataka’s Bengaluru, three Kashmiri nursing students have been arrested for assaulting a collegemate who posted against the Pulwama suicide bomber on social media, Deccan Herald has reported. The three have been identified as Gowhar Mushtaq, 21, Haris Manzoor, 19, and Zakir Maqbool, 23. Manzoor and Maqbool had secured admission through the Prime Minister’s Scholarship Scheme.

The students have been booked and arrested under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and other laws.

In Uttar Pradesh, a man named Naveen Sharma was assaulted when he protested a group’s celebrating the Pulwama attack in front of his home in Firozabad's Tundla, reported Amar Ujala.

‘40 have died in Pulwama, but 80 will die in Tundla,’ the attackers threatened Sharma, as reported by Amar Ujala and Dainik Jagran. They also reportedly waved a gun at his mother.

Sharma has named the attackers as Munna, Nadeem, Altaaf, and Aalishan, and has filed a case with the police. The police, however, have denied that the threatening lines were said and called the scuffle a result of personal dispute.

In a village in Bihar’s Gaya district, some people reportedly threw firecrackers at a crowd that was paying homage to Pulwama martyrs on Sunday evening. As per reports by Danik Jagran and Dainik Bhaskar, two communities then got into a scuffle which led to stone-pelting and violence. The reports said that a religious place was desecrated but didn’t specify of which community.

This is a developing story.
