Bengaluru father-son duo arrested with 6kg of sandalwood following raid

Bengaluru father-son duo arrested with 6kg of sandalwood following raid

Rs 35 lakh in cash, gold ornaments and few cars were seized.

news Crime

A father and son were arrested for smuggling six kg sandalwood in Bengaluru following a largescale raid carried out by 200 police personnel, police said on Saturday.

"Syed Riyaz, 49, and Syed Sher Ali, 28, were arrested after 6kg of sandalwood was recovered from their residence in Kattigenahalli on the city outskirts during a raid," Inspector at central Bengaluru's Cubbon Park Police Station B Iyyanna Reddy told IANS.

The police have booked the two under the Indian Penal Code (IPC) section 379 (punishment for theft) and under various provisions of the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963.

"We have also recovered a few stolen automobiles and unaccounted cash of Rs 35 lakh from them," the police officer said.

Under the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963, possession and storage of sandalwood and its related products is an offence.

As one of the most expensive woods in the world, sandalwood, which grows in Mysuru region, is used in fragrances, handicrafts and for health benefits. According to police, the duo was supported by a number of villagers who have protected them in the past from police action. They had cases registered against them not only in Cubbon Park Police Station but also in Vidhana Soudha and High Grounds PS.

Speaking to The Times of India, DCP Central D Devaraja, said, “We knew the two were in their house in Kattigenahalli. But it was difficult to go there as miscreants hid behind trees and pelted stones at police vehicles.”

Whitefield DCP Abdul Ahad added, “We decided to conduct a surprise raid and stormed their house around midnight. The team was split into three groups. We surrounded the house from all sides. While two groups walked into the house, the third kept a watch for attack by villagers.”

Police said the father-son team had interstate connections involved in the sandalwood smuggling racket.

(With IANS inputs)
