Mumbai: Woman raped at her own birthday party by friend's boyfriend

A complaint was filed by the victim with the Waliv police on Sunday (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A shocking incident took place in Palghar, a district in Maharashtra. A woman was allegedly raped at her own birthday party which was organised by a friend of hers. The incident took place in Waliv, which is situated in the Palghar district. The birthday party of the victim was organised by a friend and the friend's boyfriend was also attending the party of the victim.

The woman was allegedly raped at her birthday party. The birthday party of the victim was organised by a friend. The friend's boyfriend was also attending the party of the victim. According to the report by News18, the birthday party was held on February 13 by the victim's friend. The friend who threw the party spiked the victim's drink and her boyfriend raped her.

Also Read: Man ‘befriends’ woman, rapes her; films obscene act for further blackmail

While talking to News18, a Waliv police station official stated that after spiking her drink, the accused forced the victim down and pinned her. Following this, her boyfriend raped her. The official added that the two accused had also warned the victim against informing anyone about the incident.

A complaint was filed by the victim with the Waliv police on Sunday. The 27-year-old is a resident of Kandivali which is situated in the northern part of Mumbai and was raped at her own birthday party. After the accused filed a complaint, the police booked the friend and her boyfriend for rape and criminal intimidation.

In a similar incident, a man raped a woman in Ghaziabad after spiking her drink at his birthday party. The two had met each other while sharing the same autorickshaw and had become friends. Following their friendship, the accused invited the victim to a hotel to celebrate his birthday party.

Allegedly, the accused spiked the drink of the victim and raped her. Not only this, he also taped the obscene act and blackmailed the victim. An FIR was lodged against the accused and his family members but no arrest was made.
