Protests in Kashmir against attacks on Kashmiris outside

Protests in Kashmir against attacks on Kashmiris outside

SRINAGAR, Feb 18: Protests against growing violence against Kashmiris in Jammu and other parts of mainland India continued today with students and employees hit streets in several parts of the valley including Srinagar demanding end to “hooliganism”.

While government employees under the banner of Employees Joint Consultative Committee (EJCC) protested at Lal Chowk against a reign of terror unleashed by right wing activists throughout India against Kashmiri people, students clashed with government forces at Parray Pora in uptown Srinagar against ill treatment meted out to Kashmiri's everywhere in India.

Protests were also held by the students of Sheri Kashmir University of Agricultural Science (SKUAST) north campus at Wadoora area in SoporeTownship against attacks on Kashmiri people.

The employees led by their President, Ajaz Ahmad Khan condemned the assault on Kashmiri people outside valley and demanded government to ensure safety of life and property of troubled Kashmiri’s.

“We demand immediate end to the attacks on innocent Kashmiris. Kashmiri Students, businessmen and employees feels threat to their life in the wake of growing incidents of violence by communal forces across India,” said EJCC President, Ajaz Khan.

He also appealed the Governor administration to act tough against the culprits involved in acts of arson which left dozens of people injured and around hundred vehicles damaged.

Khan also demanded adequate compensation to the drivers and businessmen who suffered losses during the break out.

Clashes broke out at Parray Pora area in uptown Srinagar after students from many tuition centers hit streets to protest attacks on Kashmiri people in Jammu and other parts of India.

The protesting students blocked the main road following which swung into action to disperse agitating youth triggering clashes which lasts for few minutes.

Fearing repetition of similar act, authorities deployed additional company of police in the area.

Meanwhile, students at SKUAST, Sopore assembled in varsity premises to protest incidents of violence against Kashmiri people in Jammu.

Students also demanded immediate release of a B.Tech student Tahseen Gul of Kashmir of Chitkara University in Baddi, who was booked on the charges of allegedly glorifying suicide bomber Adil Ahmed Dar the man behind Pulwama attack.

“Violence always leads to destruction; hence we appeal the government to ensure no fresh incident of violence takes place anywhere which puts innocent Kashmiri people in trouble,” said the students.

Meanwhile, the Darbar Move employees in Jammu have appealed the government to ensure their early departure back to the valley till situation restores back to normalcy in Jammu.

They alleged that Secretariat employee’s leadership has been busy appeasing the government thus leaving helpless employees in lurch.

“Our children are hungry ever since violence erupted in Jammu. We have nothing to eat as we have been confined within four walls of our quarters. We appeal the government to take pity on our milk sucking children and ensure our early departure back to valley,” a move employee said.
