The Shillong Times

HC reserves verdict in National Herald eviction case

New Delhi: The Delhi High Court on Monday reserved verdict on a plea by National Herald publisher Associated Journals Ltd’s (AJL) challenging a single judge direction to vacate its premises here. A bench of Chief Justice Rajendra Menon and Justice V K Rao reserved the decision after AJL concluded its arguments. The court also asked AJL and the Centre’s lawyers to file their written submissions in three days. (PTI)

SC dismisses PIL seeking probe into Mirage crash

New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Monday dismissed a Public Interest Litigation (PIL) filed by lawyer Alakh Alok Srivastava seeking a court-monitored inquiry into Mirage aircraft crash in Bengaluru which claimed the lives of two pilots. “We dismiss the petition. The petition has no merit,” said an apex court bench headed by Chief Justice of India (CJI) Ranjan Gogoi. “We are using mirage of 3 or 3.5 generation. It’s bound to crash. Is it the Supreme Court’s job to order judicial inquiry into mirage crash?” CJI Gogoi asked and dismissed the PIL. Srivastava had moved the apex court seeking a direction to the Centre to take appropriate steps and effective measures to ensure that unfortunate incidents like the Mirage crash don’t happen in future. Indian Air Force (IAF) pilots Squadron Leaders Siddhartha Negi and Samir Abrol lost their lives when Mirage 2000 crashed at the HAL airport earlier this month after the aircraft allegedly experienced a technical snag immediately after takeoff. IAF sources said India is sending to France the black box of the ill-fated aircraft to ascertain the reasons for the mishap. (ANI)

Calcutta HC grants Nalini Chidambaram interim protection

Kolkata: The Calcutta High Court on Monday provided Nalini Chidambaram, wife of former Finance Minister P Chidambaram, interim protection from arrest by CBI for six week in the Saradha chit fund case. The order was passed by a division bench comprising justices Joymalya Bagchi and Monojit Mandal while hearing an anticipatory bail application filed by Nalini. The court has will hear the matter again after six weeks. On January 11, CBI filed a charge sheet against Nalini in a competent court in connection with the ponzi scam. The agency filed the sixth supplementary charge sheet in line with the Supreme Court’s 2014 order, naming Nalini and one company. CBI has accused Nalini of entering into a criminal conspiracy with Sudipta Sen, the proprietor of Saradha Group of companies, and other accused and committing the offences of cheating and misappropriation , which was an umbrella company of 200 private of funds. In September 2016, the Enforcement Directorate (ED) had first summoned Nalini to appear in its Kolkata office as a witness in the scam. Nalini, who is a senior lawyer, was allegedly paid a legal fee of Rs 1 crore by the Saradha Group for her appearances in court and the Company Law Board. (ANI)

Two in police custody for murders of Kerala Youth Cong workers

Thiruvananthapuram: The Kerala Police on Monday took two persons into custody in connection with the murders of two Youth Congress workers at Kasargode on Sunday. The activists – Krupesh, 19, and Joshy, 24 – were hacked to death by three assailants who came on motorcycles. While Krupesh breathed his last at the Kasargode district hospital, Joshy died en route to a medical facility in Mangaluru, Karnataka. The police have been put on high alert in Kannur and Kasargode districts, where the atmosphere is still tense. The last rites of the deceased will be held later on Monday near Kasargode. (IANS)

Rahul Gandhi likely to address rallies in Maharashtra on Mar 1

Mumbai: Congress president Rahul Gandhi is likely to launch the party’s Lok Sabha poll campaign in Maharashtra from Dhule on March 1 and also address a rally in Mumbai the same day, sources said on Monday. The Congress is also planning a rally of recently- appointed party general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra in the state next month, they said. Rahul Gandhi’s rally will follow two joint public meetings of the Congress and NCP on February 20 and February 23, to be held in Nanded and Beed respectively. The joint rallies will be attended by NCP supremo Sharad Pawar and All India Congress Committee (AICC) in-charge for Maharashtra Mallikarjun Kharge along with other leaders of the two parties and their allies. The Congress president is also likely to address a public gathering in Mumbai on March 1. (PTI)

Bihar cabinet approves 10 pc reservation for weaker sections

Patna: Bihar Legislative Assembly on Monday passed the Bill providing 10 per cent reservation for the economically weaker section in the general category. The Supreme Court on February 8 declined a stay on the implementation of the constitutional amendment providing 10 per cent reservation in jobs and education to the economically weaker sections of the general category. Maharashtra cabinet on February 4 had approved the Centre’s scheme of 10 per cent reservation in government jobs and educational institutions across the state. Parliament recently passed the Constitution (124th Amendment) Bill, 2019, approving 10 per cent reservation for the economically weaker section in general category. (ANI)

332 killed, 6,310 women faced atrocities in MP in last 73 days

Bhopal: In the past 73 days, Madhya Pradesh has witnessed 332 murders and 6,310 women faced various atrocities, Home Minister Bala Bachchan stated in the Assembly on Monday. In a written reply to a query raised by Leader of Opposition Gopal Bhargav in the Assembly, Bachchan said during the period, 332 cases of murder and 6,310 cases of atrocities against women were registered in various parts of the state. Bhargav in his query had asked the number of killings, robberies, atrocities against women and theft registered in the state between November 11 and January 22 — 73 days. Thus, on an average, over four killings and 86 cases of atrocities against women took place a day during the period. During these 73 days, caretaker government of Shivraj Singh Chouhan was in the saddle during the first 31 days and in the remaining 42 days Kamal Nath-led Congress government was in power. (IANS)
