Five Indian troops, including major, killed in IHK clash

SRINAGAR: Indian troops suffered a heavy loss on Monday in a battle with Kashmiri militants as five troops, including a major identified as DS Dondial, were killed, officials said.

Five people, including Deputy Inspector General of Police Amit Kumar, a Lt Colonel and three soldiers were injured in an attack in the same area of Pulwama district.

The confrontation piled more pressure on the Indian government, which blamed Pakistan for last Thursday’s suicide attack on a convoy that killed at least 41 paramilitaries. Several hours of shooting rocked the Pulwama district, south of Kashmir’s main city of Srinagar, after officials said four soldiers, a policeman, three militants and a civilian were killed in the latest clash.

An army major was among the dead, along with three militants. Six senior army men including a brigadier and a lieutenant colonel were injured in the hours-long gunbattle, a police official said.

“A police deputy inspector general has also suffered injuries,” the official said. Hundreds of soldiers raided villages and fired warning shots at a suspected militant hideout, unleashing the firefight in the village of Pinglan late Sunday.

Images showed flames and smoke billowing out of one of the residential houses in the area. Government forces launched a massive hunt since an explosives-packed van struck the convoy transporting 2,500 security men close to Pinglan on Thursday.

A video on social media purportedly shows a pre-recorded message by the 20-year-old Kashmiri suicide bomber warning of more attacks. Thursday’s attack sparked anger and outrage across India. Thousands of demonstrators staged angry rallies in several Indian cities over the weekend, with attacks on Kashmiris reported in several towns.

In the capital, a Kashmiri man was beaten by a mob that accused him of chanting anti-India slogans. He was later detained by police. A curfew remained in force for a fourth day in Jammu city, in the Hindu-majority part of Kashmir, where mobs attacked and set fire to properties belonging to Kashmiri Muslims.

Thousands of residents in the city have fled to Muslim-majority areas. The government faces increased pressure because of an upcoming national election.

Meanwhile, Indian troops in their fresh act of state terrorism martyred three Kashmiris in Pulwama district, on Monday. According to Kashmir Media Service (KMS), the martyrs including one 46-year-old Mushtaq Ahmad Butt, were killed during a cordon and search operation by the troops in Pinglena area of the district. The killings led to clashes between the protesters and the troops in the area.

Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir Chairman, Mohammad Ashraf Sehrai and other Hurriyat leaders in their statements paid tributes to the martyrs.

The Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Gilani in a statement issued in Srinagar strongly condemned the rampage and brutalities unleashed by India against the Muslims in Jammu.

He said the Pulwama blast has put all the so-called secular and Hindutwa faces in the same basket, as no eye in India got moist when 55 innocent Kashmiris were roasted alive in Sopore and no all-party meet was called on all such massacres.

Meanwhile, the global rights watchdog, Amnesty International has urged Indian government to ensure that Kashmiri men and women do not face targeted attacks, harassment and arbitrary arrests in the aftermath of Pulwama blast.

Aakar Patel, head of Amnesty India in a statement said Kashmiri university students and traders in northern Indian states, primarily Uttarakhand, Haryana and Bihar, have been beaten, threatened and intimidated by Hindu nationalist groups.

Meanwhile, Pakistan recalled its High Commissioner in India for consultations. “We have called back our High Commissioner in India for consultations,” Foreign Ministry Spokesman Mohammad Faisal said in a post on Twitter. The High Commissioner left New Delhi Monday morning, he said.

The development ensued form the Pulwama incident in Indian Held Kashmir, as tension grew between Pakistan and India. Meanwhile, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi said, “cruel” attack in Pulwama shows that the “time for talks has passed.” He reiterated that terrorism is a serious danger to the world’s “peace and stability.”

“Now, it is required that the world unites against terrorism and those who support it. Hesitation to take action against terrorism and those who support it is akin to encouraging terrorism," Mr Modi said, addressing a joint press conference with visiting Argentine President Mauricio Macri. Mr Marci condoled the death of the CRPF personnel in the February 14 terror attack and said that India and Argentina must work together to fight the menace of terrorism.
