Beggars from Tamil Nadu arrested for rape-murder of 4-year-old

After a month of investigations, the couple has been arrested on charges of kidnap, rape, and murder under the stringent POCSO Act. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: A beggar-couple from Tamil Nadu was arrested by the police in Palakkad, Kerala under the POCSO Act for kidnapping a 4-year-old girl, raping and then killing her. The incident is said to have occurred one month ago and the criminals have been identified now.

As per a Deccan Chronicle report, it was in January last that a decomposed body of a 4-year-old baby was found in a bag in the Olavakkode railway station. During post mortem, it was determined that the girl had been sexually assaulted before being killed. Based on the investigations undertaken by the Palakkad police, Suresh and his wife have now been arrested.

They belong to Tiruvallur in Tamil Nadu. The child died due to loss of breath when being raped, Suresh has informed the police. The beggar-couple have an 11-month-old baby and the wife is three months pregnant.

Also Read: Delhi: US national found dead in IGI airport's lounge, further investigation underway

The arrested man, Suresh, is in the habit of taking drugs and there is already one case against him. Last month, on January 2, a gang, comprising Suresh, three women, with the 4-year-old girl came to the Palakkad railway station to indulge in begging. They formed a tent near a bridge and were residing there.

On January 12, Suresh and his friend in the gang tried to sexually assault the girl and in the process, the girl lost her breath and died. The gang split into two groups and escaped from there after they packed the victim’s body in a bag and threw it in a bush near the Olavakkode railway station.

After a month of investigations, the couple has been arrested on charges of kidnap, rape, and murder under the stringent POCSO Act. The search is on for the remaining members of the gang. They had kidnapped the girl from Trichy. Since there is no official report so far on that girl missing, it is still not known who the girl is and the investigation is going on.
