Bengaluru: Pilot Killed As 2 Jets Of The Indian Air Force Aerobatic Team Collide and Crash

2 Indian Air Force Aerobatic Team Jets collided which led them to clash near the Yelahanka airbase that is in the northern part of Bengaluru. One pilot died in the crash, and 2 others are safe as they ejected, they are currently in the Command Hospital recovering from the injuries they attained.

This collision and crash happened around 11:50 am today as the pilots were rehearsing for the Aero India Show that was about to take place tomorrow. MN Reddi the Director General of Police and Fire Services said: “There were three pilots, one has died. Two are safe with injuries.”

A video that was captured by a civilian showed the 2 jets lose control after they collided in the air, you can also see 2 pilots eject out the jet. It is still not clear if how the third pilot died.

#WATCH Two aircraft of Surya Kiran Aerobatics Team crashed today at Yelahanka airbase in Bengaluru, during rehearsal for #AeroIndia2019. One civilian hurt. Both pilots ejected, the debris has fallen near ISRO layout, Yelahanka new town area. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/gJHWx6OtSm — ANI (@ANI) February 19, 2019

The person who took the video can be heard in the video, he said “Oh my god, oh my god” as he saw the jets falling in the residential area of the Yelahanka ISRO layout. The area where the jets crashed has been sealed by the police.

Nirmala Sitharaman the Defence Minister rushed to the airbase, she is currently in Bengaluru. She said, “I’m aware of it (incident)”.

The Aero India 2019 is going to be held from February 20 to February 24. The stunts that are performed by the Suryakirans (the dare-devil squad of the Indian Air Force) is the most anticipated part of the show.

The Indian Air Force expected that there will be thousands of visitors who are going to watch the event. The city of Bengaluru has been hosting the show since 1996.

The event is going to be flooded with business delegates that are from around the world and official delegates from more than 12 countries, they will also watch the aerobatic show that is going to be held on an inaugural day. Last year, the show had 72 aircrafts, this year 61 aircrafts have been registered to be used for flying and for show in the airbase.

The event for this year will also show the F/A-18 Super Hornet, this is being done to show the strengthening defense cooperation’s that are being conducted by India and The USA.

On the first day of the event, a fly-by is going to be performed by the B-52 Stratofortress Bombers that are assigned from the 23rd Expeditionary Bomb Squadron of the Anderson Air Force Base that is located in Guam.
