Pakistani Teacher arrested for Trying to Rape Girl aged 8

He then attempted to sexually assault her but stopped

Akhtar Hussain, from Wah Cantonment, Punjab in Pakistan, was arrested on Monday, February 18, 2019, for attempting to rape a young girl.

It was also reported that he had sexually abused boys and girls in the past.

Hussain, who is a teacher, attempted to sexually assault his eight-year-old student at his home within the city.

The victim’s father made a complaint to the police and it was later registered.

According to the complaint, the girl had gone to Hussain’s house for lessons.

At the house, Hussain began giving lessons to the victim. He then attempted to sexually assault her but stopped after the girl started to scream.

Hussain threatened the young girl with dire consequences if she told anyone about the incident.

When the victim returned home, she told her family about what happened.

After learning about what Hussain tried to do to her daughter, the victim’s mother went to his house.

As she arrived at the suspect’s house, other women from the area were there as well.

They had claimed that Hussain had sexually assaulted their sons and daughter in the past. They previously kept quiet as he had threatened them not to speak about it.

Hussain was arrested and police have registered a case against the suspect. An investigation is underway to find out how many potential victims are there.

In another case that took place in India, a dance teacher was arrested for sexually assaulting two of his students.

He had shown the girls explicit videos on his phone and touched them inappropriately on the pretext of teaching them to dance.

A police official said: “The suspect is the class teacher of the student. He, on the pretext of teaching dance to the teenagers, showed them obscene videos on his mobile phone and molested them.”

The girls were reluctant to tell someone as they were threatened by the teacher.

The police official added: “He threatened the girls not to disclose the incident to anyone or else he would visit their residence.

“The incident came to light when one of the students disclosed it to her mother following which she lodged a complaint.”

The victim’s mother spoke to a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) who then filed a case of molestation against the dance teacher.

Police arrested the dance teacher and he was remanded in custody while police continued with their investigation.
