Nirbhaya Fund Current Affairs, GK & News

Nirbhaya Fund Current Affairs, GK & News

The Indian Railways has enhanced security in major railway hubs by installing IP based video surveillance system. The surveillance has been installed in parking areas, entrance and exit platforms, waiting hall and over bridges. Highlights The surveillance system is to be installed in 983 stations at a budget of Rs 250 crores. The budget is ..

Month: Current Affairs - January, 2020

Topics: e-Surveillance Mechanism: • Internet • Nirbhaya Fund • Nirbhaya Fund Scheme • Railway Modernisation • Women Empowerment • Women Safety

With a motive to strengthen security at Railway Stations, Indian Railways is in the urge of installing Internet Protocol (IP) based Video Surveillance System (VSS) at stations i.e At waiting halls, reservation counters, parking areas, main entrance/ exit, platforms, etc. The recording of the video from CCTV cameras will be stored for 30 days for ..

Month: Current Affairs - January, 2020

Topics: Indian Railway • Ministry of Railways • Nirbhaya Fund • Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) • RailTel Corporation of India • Surveillance • Western Railway zone

Union Home Ministry has sanctioned Rs.100 crore from Nirbhaya fund for setting up and strengthening of women help desks in police stations across country. The move came a fortnight after a young veterinarian was gang-raped and murdered near Hyderabad, leading to protests in different parts of country. Key Highlights The scheme would be implemented by ..

Month: Current Affairs - December, 2019

Topics: Department of Economic Affairs • Ministry of Finance • Ministry of Home Affairs • Ministry of Women & Child Development • Nirbhaya Fund • women help desks

The government has announced a sanction of 100 crore INR to set up and strengthen Women’s Help Desks at police stations. The amount is sanctioned from the Nirbhaya Funds. The project is to be implemented by the governments of the state and union territories. The desks are to be the first and single point of ..

Topics: Delhi gang rape • Government of India • India • Nirbhaya • Nirbhaya Fund • Violence against women in India • Women's rights in India

Union Ministry of Women and Child Development will be setting up anti-human trafficking units in all districts of the country with the help of Nirbhaya Fund. The announcement in this regard was made by Minister of Women and Child Development Smriti Irani. Key Highlights Besides these anti-human trafficking units, women help desks will also be ..

Month: Current Affairs - November, 2019

Category: Government Schemes Current Affairs

Topics: anti-human trafficking units • Ministry of Women and Child Development • Nirbhaya Fund • Smriti Irani • women help desks
