Minor turning hostile won’t take Pocso accused off hook

MUMBAI: Even if a minor survivor in a sexual assault case turns hostile, under Pocso the onus is on the accused to establish innocence, Bombay high court has ruled. Justice Sadhna Jadhav upheld a 10-year jail term given to Govandi youth for aggravated sexual assault in 2013 of a nine-year-old girl. The survivor and her grandmother, who had lodged the case, had turned hostile at the time of trial, refusing to support the prosecution case, which the youth’s lawyers cited, seeking his acquittal. Justice Jadhav relied on the survivor’s statement to the magistrate, medical and other evidence to convict the youth.“The offence is not only against the individual child, but is against society. In Pocso Act, there is a rising trend of the victim turning hostile. It is apparent that before the trial, elder members of the family are won over by the accused, and hence minors would turn hostile. It appears that the accused happens to be a close relative, and therefore, family members wanted to suppress the said act,” said the judge.The court pointed to the survivor’s conduct at the time of trial. “The nature of answers by the victim at the time of cross-examination needs to be taken into consideration. The answers are not in denial. She chooses to forget the incident as she was coerced by relatives and the accused, and she was pained that she has to forget the incident to protect the accused. Therefore, answers to all questions are that she doesn’t recollect. It is for the court to decide if she does not really recollect or is being fo-rced to forget,” the judge said.The HC said Pocso was a special law, where presumption of guilt was on the accused; it is presumed the accused has committed the crime unless he can prove his innocence beyond doubt.As per the prosecution case, the case came to light in 2013 after the survivor, a Class III student, refused to go to her mother’s house and told her grandmother that the youth had sexually assaulted her twice. She said though she had complained to her mother about the abuse, she was told to ignore it. A medical examination confirmed the assault and statements of the survivor and grandmother were recorded before a magistrate. At the time of trial they declined to support their statements and were declared hostile.The prosecution examined the doctors and magistrate who had examined the survivor. “It is easy to say the prosecution failed to prove the guilt of the accused. But in a case like this the judicial approach has to see justice is imparted to the victim too,” the HC said.
