Tamil actress Yashika's mother files complaint against daughter's ex-boyfriend; accuses him of murder

Tamil actress Yashika passed away | Photo Credit: Facebook

It was earlier reported that Tamil actress Yashika, who has worked in Mannar Vagaiyara, was found dead in her residence in Chennai. While reports suggested that the actor committed suicide, her mother Esther Beula Rani has now filed an official complaint with the Commissioner of Police accusing her boyfriend Aravind of murder.

In the complaint, Yashika's mother has reportedly said that her daughter didn't commit suicide but was murdered by her lover. Moreover, she has said that the handwriting in the letter, found by the police, is not of her daughter's. She also added that 50 souvenirs of gold were found missing from Yashika's flat. She suspects Aravind might have murdered her daughter with his friends for the gold and later staged the drama to make it all look like a suicide. She also alleged that Aravind's friend Ajith had forced her to sign, agreeing to burn Yashika’s body. “The final rites of my daughter were performed even before I reached”, she added.

As per reports, the mother also revealed that Yashika was pregnant with Aravind's child and went on to share that three days before her death, she was forced to have her pregnancy terminated adding that it is possible the disputes arising out of these had led to her daughter being killed.

Yashika, whose real name was Mary Sheela Jebarani hailed from Tiruppur. She had acted in a Tamil film Vagaiyara in which actor Vimal played the lead role. In addition, she had done a number of roles in popular television serials.

Her body was found hanging in her flat in GKM Colony, Peravallur, Chennai. It was informed that Yashika had an affair with Aravind alias Mohan Babu of Vadapalani. It was reported that the two often had differences in opinion which led to frequent quarrels. Based on a diary and other evidence recovered from the room in which her body was found, the police have arrested Aravind and remanded him to custody.
