Mohammad bin Salman visit: Congress targets PM Modi over Pulwama, rakes up Saudi investment in Pakistan

The Congress has sharply criticised Prime Minister Narendra Modi for breaking protocol to personally welcome Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman to India, pointing to investment agreements worth $20 billion announced during the Saudi leader's recent trip to Pakistan.

Mohammed bin Salman visited Pakistan days after a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber attacked a CRPF convoy on February 14, killing 40 paramilitary soldiers. An enraged India vowed to take revenge, and has since killed three terrorists, including the mastermind of the bombing in Pulwama district. Pakistan has threatened to retaliate in the event of an Indian attack.

"Breaking protocol, grand welcome to those who pledged $20 billion to Pakistan and praised Pakistan's 'anti-terror' efforts. Is it your way of remembering [the] martyrs of Pulwama?" Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala tweeted on Wednesday.

National Interests

V/S

Modiji’s 'hugplomacy'



Breaking protocol, Grand welcome to those who pledged $20 Billion to Pak & praised Pak’s anti-terror’ efforts.



Is it ur way of remembering martyrs of Pulwama?

1/2 pic.twitter.com/81LIwYuo1b Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) February 20, 2019

"By breaking protocol and welcoming Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman with such abundance -- only hours after he promised billions to Pakistan -- PM Modi has shown the country, the martyrs and every soldier in India what he thinks of their service & sacrifice," the Congress party said on its official Twitter account.

By breaking protocol and welcoming Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman with such abundance - only hours after he promised billions to Pakistan - PM Modi has shown the country, the martyrs and every soldier in India what he thinks of their service & sacrifice. pic.twitter.com/YPJa2Q1cFT Congress (@INCIndia) February 20, 2019

Randeep Singh Surjewala also tweeted a statement by Pakistan and Saudi Arabia and said it "virtually" rejected India's demand that Masood Azhar, the leader of Jaish-e-Mohammed, be designated a global terrorist by the United Nations.

Randeep Surjewala asked Prime Minister Narendra Modi if he would "show courage" to ask Saudi Arabia to undo the statement.

Modiji,



Is asking for a terrorist to be designated as such politicisation of UN listings?



Would you show courage to ask Saudi Arabia to undo their 'Joint Statement' with Pak virtually rejecting India’s demand for designating Masood Azhar as a 'global terrorist’?

2/2 pic.twitter.com/9hQBoOkLhu Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) February 20, 2019

Adding insult to injury, the Joint Statement between @ImranKhanPTI & Mohammad Bin Salman failed to condemn the violence & instead praised Pakistan's 'anti-terror' efforts, thus undermining our demand for naming Masood Azhar a global terrorist. pic.twitter.com/rNU3w4XoGW Congress (@INCIndia) February 20, 2019

Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman's visits to India and Pakistan are part of a larger tour of the region.

Saudi Arabia is India's top supplier of crude oil, but the two countries have expanded ties beyond energy and their governments have agreed to build a strategic partnership, India's Ministry of External Affairs has said.

India is expecting Mohammed bin Salman to announce an initial investment in its National Investment and Infrastructure Fund to help accelerate the building of ports and highways, an Indian official and Saudi state media have said.

Crown Prince Salman and PM Modi will hold extensive talks on Wednesday, during which India is likely to strongly raise the issue of Pakistan-sponsored terrorism.

Inputs from agencies
