Role-playing robbers: They posed as cops to abduct, assault, mug riders

culprits

Bilishivale Lake

Kothanur police have detained the members of a gang who would pose as policemen to rob valuables from people. Recently, the gang had attacked a 20-year-old and two of his friends. The miscreants stopped the trio, who were on their bike, claiming to be crime policemen under the pretext of verifying documents of the bike. When they stopped, the gang abducted them, took them to an isolated place and robbed them after attacking them.Salim Pasha, a resident of Venkatapura in Kadugondanahalli had filed the complaint with Kothanur police after which a team was formed to nab the. Pasha was riding on his scooter along with his friends Yasin Sharif and Sidiq on December 30, and they were on their way to the dargah in Bidarahalli when the incident occurred.Around 4 pm, when they were near Quick Earth,Main Road, two persons claiming to be policemen in plain clothes stopped the scooter. They introduced themselves as the crime police staff and asked Pasha to show the documents of the scooter. Pasha did not have all the documents related to scooter, so the duo claiming to be policemen asked Pasha and his friends to come to police station along with them.They took the duo to Horamavu on their scooter, after which the duo called someone over phone and soon around six-seven persons reached the spot claiming to be policemen. The trio was then taken to Rampura near a tea stall. A car came to the spot and the gang made the trio to sit in the car and drove them to a mango farm. According to Pasha, by then it was dark, and they did not know why the gang claiming to be policemen were taking them to such places.When they questioned the gang, the gang attacked the trio with PVC pipes, demanding that they part with their valuables. When the trio requested to be left unharmed, they were again assaulted. The gang took four mobile phones, four silver rings, a bracelet and a gold chain from the trio. The gang demanded for more valuables or money from the trio, but when they learnt they didn’t have anything more, they brought the trio to Bidarahalli Gate in the same car and threw them out of the car and escaped.The injured trio went to the hospital for treatment and filed a complaint with the police after three days. Pasha thought the attackers were real policemen so they did not have enough courage to file the complaints, but their family members and friends suspected that the attackers were not cops and persuaded him to go ahead with the complaint. Kothanur police had taken a case of robbery, or dacoity with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt. Police have detained the miscreants and are recovering the robbed valuables and are also checking the gang’s involvement in other cases.
