After Sidhu, KTS Tulsi bats for dialogue with Pakistan, says 'talks should be uninterrupted'

File Image of Congress Rajya Sabha MP KTS Tulsi | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Joining the chorus of leaders calling for dialogue with Pakistan after Pulwama attack, Congress MP KTS Tulsi, on Wednesday, said that talks between two countries should not be interrupted if terrorism is to be tackled. The Rajya Sabha MP added that terrorism should not be allowed to affect ties between two countries.

“I think talks should be uninterrupted and uninterruptible, whatever may happen we can’t allow terrorist to take the upper hand on relations between two countries. If we want to control terrorism relationship should be improved. It should never be snapped,” Tulsi told Times Now.

Besides Tulsi, there are several other political leaders who have openly advocated for talks with Pakistan.

On Tuesday, Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy said a befitting reply is not going to take away the sorrow of the Pulwama incident. “A befitting reply is not going to take away the sorrow of the incident, the government has to take steps to ensure such an atmosphere doesn't arise,” he told reporters in Bengaluru.

Earlier, Punjab cabinet minister Navjot Singh Sidhu had said that entire Pakistan or an individual cannot be held responsible for the Pulwama attack. "For a handful of people, can you blame the entire nation and can you blame an individual? It is a cowardly act and I condemn it firmly. Violence is always condemnable and those who did it must be punished,” he had said.

National Conference chief Farooq Abdullah has also, time and again, opposed the ‘tit for tat’ policy and asked the governments of both Indian and Pakistan to find an amicable solution to restore peace in Kashmir.

On February 18, 40 security personnel lost their lives and several others were injured after a Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terrorist rammed an explosive-laden car into a CRPF convoy in Awantipora of South Kashmir’s Pulwama district.

Following the dastardly attack, Prime Minister Narendra Modi promised “stern action” against the perpetrators of the terror strike while saying that “time for dialogue with Pakistan is over”.
