Ex-J&K CM Mehbooba Mufti insults martyrs' kin, says those seeking revenge are illiterate

File image of PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti | Photo Credit: ANI

Srinagar: A day after Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) chief Mehbooba Mufti drew flak by saying that Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan should be given a chance to prove that Islamabad was not involved in Pulwama attack, the former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister, on Wednesday, again made a shocking statement, saying that "those seeking revenge are illiterate".

"In today’s world, only illiterate people will talk about war. Both countries have nuclear arms. When there is an option of dialogue then there is no point talking about war. If there is no war there would be no retaliation. Those talking about war are just bluffing, those who are sincere will never lead their country into war," Mehbooba told reporters here.

Earlier today, the PDP chief once again called for talks with Pakistan, asserting that Khan should be given a chance to prove that Islamabad has no link with the Pulwama attack. Mehbooba’s remark came a day after Khan sought “actionable evidence” to prove India's charge that Islamabad was behind the Pulwama suicide bombing.

“It's true that whether it was Pathankot attack or Mumbai attack they (Pakistan) were given proof but they didn't take action. But because Imran Khan is a new Prime Minister he is talking about a new start, he should be given a chance. We should give proof and see what they do,” she said.

Mehbooba had earlier said that Imran deserves a chance as he has recently taken over as Pakistan PM. “Disagree. Pathankot dossier was given to them but no action was taken to punish the perpetrators. Time to walk the talk. But Pak PM deserves a chance since he’s recently taken over. Of course the war rhetoric has more to do with the impending elections than anything else,” she had tweeted.

On Tuesday, Khan, in an address to the nation on Radio Pakistan, said that it will take “action” against the perpetrators of the Pulwama attack if India provides “actionable proof” against his country.

On February 18, 40 security personnel lost their lives and several others were injured after a Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terrorist rammed an explosive-laden car into a CRPF convoy in Awantipora of South Kashmir’s Pulwama district.

Following the dastardly attack, Prime Minister Narendra Modi promised “stern action” against the perpetrators of the terror strike while saying that “time for dialogue with Pakistan is over”.
