Kolkata woman gets rape threats on Facebook for social media post on Kashmir

The Kolkata woman claimed that most of the threats have come from the right wing and VHP/RSS activists. (Photo: Facebook screenshots)

A woman from Kolkata on Wednesday alleged that she received non-stop death and rape threats over her Facebook post that criticised the Narendra Modi-led government after the Pulwama terror attack. She claimed that most of the threats have come from the right wing and VHP/RSS activists.

In her February 15 Facebook post, she had asked if those who are crying over the deaths of the Army jawans also feel the pain for ordinary Kashmiri citizens.

"Do those who are weeping for the Army jawans feel a similar pain for ordinary Kashmiri citizens? Will they remain left out? Just because they are Kashmiris? Kashmiri shawls and Kashmiri corpse, both are in demand," the woman's Facebook post read.

Speaking to India Today, the mother of a seven-year-old said that she was subjected to a barrage of hate messages on social media ever since she put up the post.

"I have been getting non-stop rape threats. Mostly form right wing trolls and VHP/RSS activists online. They are circulating my images in various groups calling people to target me. They are stalking me, trying to search and hunt me down. I have filed an FIR against those profiles but police is yet to take any action. I am scared."

This is second such case from Kolkata.

A teenage girl from Kolkata was allegedly threatened with rape on Facebook for a post on the plight of Kashmiris in the wake of the Pulwama attack, she said on Wednesday. In her February 15 post, the Class 12 girl condemned the deadly terror strike in Jammu and Kashmir that killed 40 CRPF jawans, while highlighting the daily hardships of Kashmiris.

She said some people asked her to leave the country and go to Pakistan in reply to her post, and others threatened rape and dire consequences.

A local shopkeeper also told her that a few men were trying to locate her house through her Facebook pictures, she claimed.

"Initially, after receiving the threats, I had deleted my post. But after I came to know that some youths were looking for me, I decided to delete my Facebook account. I did not go to school for the last two days," she told PTI.
