‘Sangh Parivar’s strategy in north India will not work in Kerala’: CM slams BJP, RSS

‘Sangh Parivar’s strategy in north India will not work in Kerala’: CM slams BJP, RSS

In a statement on Facebook, Pinarayi said that the RSS and BJP were trying to create communal riots in the state over Sabarimala, but they will not succeed.

news Sabarimala

Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan has come down heavily on the Sangh Parivar saying the same strategy which it successfully implemented in north India will not work in Kerala. "The government will mercilessly deal with the attempts to create communal riots and violence. The Sangh Parivar’s attempt is to strengthen its base in the state by creating riots; but it will not work in Kerala. It’s better for the BJP leadership to realise that it will not work in Kerala," the CM said in a Facebook post on Sunday.

It's in the wake of the violence that the state witnessed after two women prayed at the Sabarimala shrine and the attempts by certain groups to foment communal violence in the state that the CM has come out with the strongly worded statement.

Most of the protests organised by the opposing groups ended in violence with even media persons not being spared. "If the BJP has any respect for the constitution or semblance of respect for the people, the BJP leadership should ask its workers to stop violence. The BJP is trying to distort peace in the state by unleashing violence. It's the BJP and the RSS that are projecting a law and order situation in the state. There is no law and order situation in the state; other than the violence created by the BJP and the RSS,” the post reads.

Reiterating his stand, Pinarayi said, “The government is delivering its constitutional duty by implementing the Supreme Court verdict on equality of women. It’s strange that the very same people who were trying to subvert the court verdict are now threatening that the government will face constitutional consequences. What is unconstitutional is to threaten a government that has adhered to the Constitution.”

The post further says, “In the hartal organised on January 3, there was sporadic violence in the state. More than 100 KSRTC buses were vandalised. There were attacks on media persons to the extent that they were forced to boycott the press conference of the BJP leaders. It was the first time in the state that a press conference of the state president of a political party was boycotted by the media. As many as 1,800 cases have been registered in the incidents of violence. Media has published the image of the RSS leader who hurled a bomb at the Nedumangad police station. There was also a conspiracy to create communal riots in many parts of the state including Kozhikode city.”

Also Read:

Angered over attack on media persons, Kerala journalists boycott BJP pressers

Sabarimala violence: 1286 cases registered in Kerala, 3187 people arrested
