29 incidents of atrocities against Christians in the first 31 days of the year

Help India!

TCN News

Atrocities against Christians seem to rising this year with 29 incidents of atrocities being committed against Christians in 13 states of India in the month of January 2019 by the Hindutva mobs.

Support TwoCircles



The details of the incidents as shared by ADF ( Alliance defending freedom) to TwoCircles.net are:

9 incidents have been reported in Uttar Pradesh alone in which the pattern of attacks have been the same wherein a mob accompanied by the police arrive at the prayer service, shout slogans and beat up the congregations including women and children. The pastors are then arrested or detained by the police under the false allegation of conversions.

In Kondagaon village in Chattisgarh the mob barged into a prayer meeting and disturbed the prayer service tearing the bibles and damaging other materials at the same beating up the Christians gathered for the prayer meet.

A similar incident took place in a church in Mumbai where the pastor was brutally assaulted by around 20 extremists.

In Chikmangalore the Hindutva extremists set afire to a church that was under construction and also set fire to a car parked there and the pastor who was sleeping outside to keep a watch suffered burn injuries.

In Pratapgarh, a mob of around 200 Hindutva extremists disturbed prayer service of 30 members beating up the men and locking up the women in a room while in Rajasthan the mob there threw stones at the houses of the Christians shouting anti-Christian slogans.

A Christian lady in Goa was not allowed to decorate her house with the star and forced to remove the same.

The pastors in Ghazipur and Shahajahanpur are being stopped from conducting prayers in the church frequently by the mobs who bring the police along with them under the false complaint of religious conversions taking place.

In some places in Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu Christians were forcefully dragged to Hindu Temples and ashes were smeared on their forehead and they were made to worship Hindu Gods by the mob.

In all of these 29 attacks the victims have reported to the UCF( United Christian Forum for Human Rights) Helpline No. 1800-208-4545 at the same time complained to the police.

But not one FIR has been registered in these incidents. In their press release the directors of ADF say that the perpetrators seem to be enjoying the patronage of political leaders of officials which is why till date no FIR has been registered.

Tehmina Arora, Director of ADF India said: “It is worrying to see these horrendous acts of mobocracy still continuing even after slew of directions to the government from the Supreme Court Bench led by the then CJI Dipak Misra. It is high time special laws are enacted to instil a sense of fear for law amongst those who involve themselves in mob violence”

There are 26 women and 25 children who have been injured in these 29 incidents. The ADF calls upon all religious and political leaders, Human Rights activists and the civil society to condemn these atrocious acts and demand for justice.
