Sandalwood smuggling: Karnataka police deploys 200 policemen to catch 2 smugglers in Hosakote

Representative Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Bengaluru: The Karnataka police sent a contingent of about 200 policemen to nab a father-son duo who were smuggling sandalwood in Hosakote. The policemen reached Kattigenahalli village near Hosakote at 1:30 am on January 5.

Syed Riyaz (49) and his son Syed Sher Ali (28) were caught red-handed with 9 kg sandalwood pieces and approximately Rs 35 lakh in cash. The police also seized gold ornaments from the house.

The Central Division police had sent a 200-strong force comprising its personnel and some platoons from the Karnataka State Reserve Police to arrest the duo reports New Indian Express.

Deputy Commissioner of Police Devaraj D said that a special team was formed to nab the accused once and for all. In the past, the police were unsuccessful in doing so because Syed Riyaz and Syed Sher Ali reportedly had the support of an entire village. The locals had pelted stones at the policemen to protect the smugglers from getting arrested.

The massive police presence was called in after several sandalwood theft cases were reported, particularly when the accused brazenly targeted the residence of a judge and another official who works in the secretariat.

Devaraj added that the accused were smuggling red sandalwood across India to various states including Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. Their strategy apparently was to change the number plates of vehicles they used each time they targeted a location. The police seized several vehicle number plates which included ones from Haryana and Delhi.

Meanwhile, Syed Riyaz's wife told the reporters that the police searched their house for close to an hour. She claimed that the gold and cash that had been seized was brought from selling the property and that she had saved for their daughter's wedding.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
