Delhi shocker! Dog owner shoots man dead for hurting his pet

When the dog allegedly tried to bite him, Aafaq picked up a stone and threw it at the animal. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: A 30-year-old man was shot dead for allegedly a throwing stone at a pet dog on Sunday. The incident happened on a road in northeast Delhi's Welcome Colony. The deceased who was identified as Aafaq Ali was a tailor by profession.

According to a report in Hindustan Times, when Aafaq was passing by the accused's house on Sunday evening, the dog started barking at him. When the dog allegedly tried to bite him, Aafaq picked up a stone and threw it at the animal. On seeing his pet being hit at, the dog's owner, Mehtab, ran into his house to bring a gun. After a short argument with Aafaq, Mehtab shot him.

Also Read: Assam: IIT-Guwahati mathematics dept. professor accused of rape attempt, arrested

Reportedly, Aafaq's father-in-law called the police control room at around 7 pm to report that his son-in-law had been shot by someone. Aafaq had been rushed to Guru Teg Bahadur hospital before the police reached the crime scene. At the hospital, Aafaq was declared brought dead.

Atul Kumar Thakur, deputy commissioner of police (northeast), confirmed that the crime took place after an argument took place between the two men over throwing a stone at the pet dog.

The police have registered a murder case against the dog's owner. Mehtab, who is known to be a habitual criminal, is absconding after the crime.

In another incident, a 35-year-old man was shot dead by unidentified miscreants in Delhi's Shahdara. The deceased, who was a resident of Gokulpuri, was identified as Hariom Sharma. The police have registered a case and are investigating the matter.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
