All CAPF ranks deployed in J&K can avail flights

All ranks of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) deployed in the Kashmir Valley will be entitled to commercial flight services to either join duty or while proceeding on leave, an order by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) said.

Only officers in the rank of inspectors and above were given this facility, but from now on all personnel in the ranks of constable, head constable and assistant sub-inspectors will be eligible.

The order comes in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack, in which 40 CRPF personnel died when a car-borne suicide bomber rammed into a bus, part of a 78-vehicle convoy, on way to Srinagar from Jammu on February 14.

Extensive plan

The Hindu reported on Monday that the MHA had approved an extensive plan to provide air transport for the CAPF personnel from Srinagar-Delhi-Srinagar and Srinagar-Jammu-Srinagar. The MHA order said it “has approved the entitlement of air travel on Delhi-Srinagar, Srinagar-Delhi, Jammu-Srinagar and Srinagar-Jammu sectors to all the personnel of the Central Armed Police Forces.”

This includes their journey for joining duty, transfer, tour or going on leave.

As many as 65,000 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel are deployed in the State as part of 65 battalions apart from units of the Border Security Force, Indo-Tibetan Border Police, Central Industrial Security Force, Sashastra Seema Bal and the National Security Guard.

The MHA said the new facility is in addition to the existing air courier services for CAPFs where an entire aircraft is booked for the force personnel from either Delhi or Jammu to Srinagar and back. A statement on Home Minister Rajnath Singh’s official Twitter handle said the decision will “immediately benefit approximately 7.8 lakh paramilitary personnel of the ranks of constable, head constable and assistant sub-inspector who were otherwise not eligible earlier.”

The Ministry said that for the Jammu and Kashmir sector, an air courier service was already available for CAPF jawans and this was extended in December, 2017 to cover more routes: Delhi-Jammu, Jammu-Srinagar, Srinagar-Jammu and Jammu-Delhi.
