Chennai Horror! Three railway employees try to gang-rape college student; arrested

The cops immediately came inside the station and upon interrogation, found out that the three accused had tried to abuse her sexually. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: In an appalling incident of crime against women, three railway employees in Tharamani tried to gang-rape a college student while she was waiting along with her boyfriend to board a local train. The victim was a college student and a native of Kerala and she was targeted for sitting with her boyfriend at the railway station in the night.

The area around Perungudi and Tharamani is well known for the IT companies and industries present there and hence, the local train station is busy in the daytime. However, the station wears a deserted look in the night. A girl from Kerala, who is perusing her graduation in Chennai, stayed along with her friends near Mylapore. She used to meet her boyfriend outside the campus.

Yesterday night, while they both where sitting at the platform of Thramani railway station, they indulged in some affectionate actions and within a few minutes, the ticket booking clerk, identified as Lokesh, and lift operators Lukas and Sriram arrived at the spot.

Also Read: Teen kidnaps child due to her ‘inability’ to conceive; arrested

They started threatening the pair and asked them to leave in opposite directions. Soon after, they started following the girl and called her to the first floor of the railway station for further ‘enquiry’. It was then that the victim was threatened again and they said that a case against them would be filed and they would need to pay a fine of Rs 5,000 as well.

Subsequently, they took her to a separate room over and started sexually abusing her. The girl started screaming but they threatened her and shoved clothes in her mouth to gag her. The accused men then started removing her clothes too. The victim somehow managed to push them off and ran away from the place and came out of the station where she met police at Tharamani station.

The cops immediately came inside the station and upon interrogation, found out that the three accused had tried to abuse her sexually. Since the incident happened at the railway station, they asked Thiruvanmiyur Railway police to file the case and the accused where booked immediately under PIC sections 392, 354(A).

Moreover, it was found that the accused had done similar crimes in the past as well. The victim’s boyfriend, Mithlaj, was also called for enquiry regarding the incident.
