CPI(M) rejects demand for CBI probe into twin murders

Police probe progressing in right direction: Kodiyeri

If all cases are referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), it is better to dissolve the Kerala Police, Communist Party of India (Marxist) [CPI(M)] State secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan has said.

Mr. Balakrishnan was responding to the demand of the father of Kripesh, Youth Congress worker who was murdered in Kasaragod, for a CBI probe into the brutal killing of his son.

Mr. Balakrishnan, who is leading the Kerala Samrakshana Yatra in the district on Thursday, said the ongoing probe by the Kerala Police was progressing well and in the right direction.

He said the investigation officials were not supposed to reveal any aspect of the case to mediapersons. If someone wanted to give any more valid evidence, they should hand over the same to the investigating team, he said.

Mr. Balakrishnan said Revenue Minister E. Chandrashekharan had visited the houses of the deceased Youth Congress workers in Kasaragod as a government representative.

Sabarimala issue

He said neither the government nor the CPI(M) had taken any woman to Sabarimala temple against the backdrop of the Supreme Court verdict permitting entry for women of all age groups.

Though the CPI(M) had got enough organisational strength to reach hundreds of women to the temple, the party had not made any attempt to that effect, Mr. Balakrishnan said.

Whatever be the Supreme Court verdict, the government policy was to execute the same, he said.

The CPI(M) leader said the Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee should clarify as to what it had done with the huge funds mobilised in the name of constructing houses for those who had lost their homes in the deluge of August last.

No animosity with NSS

The CPI(M) leader said the party did not nurse any hostility against the Nair Service Society (NSS) and was very much willing to hold talks with the NSS leadership.

Mr. Balakrishnan also said the NSS stand was unlikely to reflect in the elections.
