Pulwama attack: NIA to question suicide bomber Adil Ahmed Dar's relative

The National Investigative Agency (NIA) is all set to question a relative of suicide bomber Adil Ahmed Dar in connection with the February 14 terror attack that killed 40 CRPF personnel in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district.

Sources in the agency told India Today that they will soon grill Adil Ahmed Dar's relative Tawseef, who was earlier a member of terrorist outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) that claimed responsibility for the attack.

India Today has learnt that Tawseef left JeM recently after being convinced by his family members. He is currently lodged in a Jammu jail. NIA sources say Tawseef had an important role in JeM as both Adil and Tawseef had joined the terrorist outfit together. They were also trained by the terrorist outfit together.

When interrogated by NIA, Adil's family members said that after he joined JeM, Adil refused to entertain any of their requests to return.

The central probe agency is also questioning Pulwama locals and recording statements of jawans in its bid to map the route taken by Adil for the terror attack.

The NIA has also completed social media profiling of Adil and other JeM members. The agency has also collected their DNA samples.

The NIA is now looking at how such large a quantity of RDX was brought for the blast.

In December, over 100 kg RDX was recovered by the law enforcement agencies after a JeM module of overground workers was busted.

The NIA believes that it appears that the terrorists had been stocking the RDX for a while. The scale of the Pulwama attack, according to sources, indicates that it had been planned over a long-term as the RDX was possibly brought in small quantities over a period of several months.

Also read | Pulwama bomber Adil Ahmad Dar became terrorist after he was beaten by troops, say parents

Also read | Suicide bomber Adil Dar was appearing for Class 12 exams, never returned from Jammu, says father Ghulam Dar

Watch | Had no clue about son's terror activity: Father of Pulwama bomber Adil Ahmad Dar
