Sexual abuse case: action sought against Archbishop

Victim’s father submits petition in court

The father of a minor boy, who was allegedly sexually assaulted by a priest in Govandi, submitted an application in court on Thursday seeking action against Cardinal Oswald Gracias, the Archbishop of Bombay.

The boy’s father said, “The Cardinal neither took any action nor did he report the matter to the police as required under Section 19 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences [POCSO] Act.” The Shivaji Nagar police arrested Fr. Lawrence Johnson in 2015 after the 13-year-old boy accused him of sexual assault. The priest was charged under Section 377 of the India Penal Code and relevant sections of the POCSO Act.

Charmaine Bocaro, the victim’s lawyer, said, “So far, three witnesses have been examined in the case. The new application has been accepted by the court and will be heard on March 8.”

Fr. Nigel Barrett, the spokesperson of the Archdiocese of Bombay, said, “We will study their application and respond to it in the appropriate legal forum.”

The Cardinal is away in Rome attending the summit on ‘Protection of minors and vulnerable adults’ convened by the Pope. However, members of the Catholic community are upset with his response to such cases back home.

The Cardinal has been in a spot following the Jalandhar case in which a nun from Kerala has accused a bishop of rape. She had also sent numerous letters to the Church authorities, including the Pope, seeking justice. Many community members and activists have appealed to the Cardinal, who is also the president of the Catholic Bishops Conference of India, to reach out to the victims of sexual abuse in India and acknowledge the truth.

In a letter sent to him last month, activists demanded that he reach out to the nun from Jalandhar and hear her out. The letter read, “The Church should hold out a hand to all those who are hurting and struggling under the weight of the silence and evasion of action that surrounds clergy sexual abuse.”
