Trump Speaks About Pulwama, Says India "Looking At Something Very Strong"

Donald Trump had earlier referred to the Pulwama attack as "a horrible situation". (Reuters)

Highlights Very dangerous situation between the two countries: Donald Trump

40 CRPF soldiers were killed in the terror attack in Pulwama

The attack has also been condemned by UNSC in a statement

US President Donald Trump on Friday said that the situation between India and Pakistan is "very dangerous" after the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama in which over 40 CRPF soldiers were killed. The attack, claimed by Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed, is the deadliest attack on security forces in the state.

"Right now between Pakistan and India, there is a very, very bad situation. A very dangerous situation. We would like to see it (hostilities) stop. A lot of people were just killed. We want to see it just stop. We are very much involved in that (process)," Donald Trump told reporters in the Oval Office, according to news agency PTI.

"India is looking at something very strong. India just lost almost 50 people in the attack. I can understand that too," Donald Trump said, adding that his administration was talking to authorities in both countries. "We're talking. A lot of people are. It's going to be a very, very delicate balance. There is a lot of problems between India and Pakistan because of what just happened," he said.

The terror attack, the worst on security forces in the Kashmir valley this decade, has led to an escalation of tensions between India and Pakistan. Pakistan army on Friday warned India against any "misadventure", saying it was capable of responding.

The suicide attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama last week killed 40 CRPF soldiers

India has launched a diplomatic offensive to isolate Pakistan in the international community for its support to terror groups and cross border terrorism. It has also scrapped the Most Favoured Nation status granted to Pakistan and imposed a 200 per cent customs duty on its goods.

India has said it had "incontrovertible evidence" of Pakistan's involvement in the Pulwama attack. The Pakistan government, however, has denied involvement, calling the attack a matter of "grave concern."

Donald Trump also said the US has improved ties with Pakistan and works are on for meetings with Pakistan leaders and officials. "I stopped paying Pakistan the $ 1.3 billion that we used to pay them. In the meantime, we may set up some meetings with Pakistan. Pakistan was taking very strong advantage of the United States under other presidents. We were paying Pakistan $1.3 billion a year. I ended that payment, because they were not helping us in the way they should have," Mr Trump said.

The United Nations Security Council too condemned "in the strongest terms the heinous and cowardly suicide bombing in Jammu and Kashmir," and named Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed, which had claimed responsibility for the attack.

On February 14, a suicide bomber detonated a car-load of explosives next to a large convoy of 78 CRPF buses with over 2,500 personnel travelling on the highway from Jammu to Srinagar. At Pulwama, the car with 60 kg of explosives blew up, killing 40 personnel reporting to duty after leave.

(With inputs from PTI and AFP)
