Security removal can’t change stance on Kashmir: Mirwaiz

Security removal can’t change stance on Kashmir: Mirwaiz

SRINAGAR, Feb 22: Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, chairman Hurriyat Conference ( M), today said that removing security cover of separatists cannot force them to change their stance on Kashmir issue.

He was addressing people at Jamia Masjid here.

"I want to tell New Delhi that by removing security cover, booking resistance leaders by NIA and ED, incarcerating and caging and harassing them, leadership will not change its stance as our stand is based on principles and truth that people of Kashmir have to be given their legitimate right, the right to resolution of dispute," Mirwaiz said.

He stated that he will continue to speak the same thing and advocate the same ideology that he told to the then prime ministers, Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Dr Manmohan Singh.

Mirwaiz said that he would continue to advocate the stand of his late father Mirwaiz Mohammad Farooq on resolution of Kashmir either through right to self-determination or through tripartite dialogue, and good will and friendship between the nuclear neighbours for the prosperity of their people

Hurriyat (M) chairman said Kashmir is a political issue and time and again he has said Kashmir has no military solution instead it needs political handling solution.

Mirwaiz said, “did not Hurriyat talk to Atal Bihari Vajpayee, but the new dispensation never revisited his approach and instead resorted to use of sheer force. This ‘force’ has forced our young generation towards arms."

Mirwaiz said people of India are being misled by a state narrative on Kashmir that obfuscates the fact of it being a dispute. He said J&K is not Bihar, Himachal or any other state but an internationally accepted disputed territory divided between India and Pakistan. He said the state narrative to blame Hurriyat for all the troubles is sheer propaganda as the fact remains that Kashmir movement is not associated to any individual or organisation but it a mass peoples’ movement for the realization of their genuine political aspirations.

He said war is no solution and dialogue is the only way forward.

He said people of Kashmir have been watching with dismay the treatment meted out to Kashmiri students, traders, shawl sellers and businessmen in a systematic manner. In Jammu itself Kashmiri employees and families were targeted and dozens of vehicles torched by anti Kashmir anti Muslim fanatics.

He said the anti-Kashmir hatred later spread to other states of India where Kashmiri students, were beaten harassed and in some cases rusticated from their respective colleges and Universities, while the goons targeting them were given a free hand. Mirwaiz said even the governor of Mizoram called for boycotting of Kashmiri products and Kashmiris.

Mirwaiz demanded that authorities ensure safe passage of every single Kashmiri back to their home land.

Mirwaiz reminded the people of India how Kashmiri youth first saved non-state residents including forces personnel in the deadly deluge of 2014 while in 2008 Amarnath land agitation, not a single Yatri or non-state resident was ever attacked despite provocation. He said that despite the fact that we are at the receiving end of repression and Kashmiri’s are killed brutally yet not even a single non-local has ever been harmed here or forced to flee. He said it is because Kashmiri people do not believe in communal hatred or victimization and every non-local will always be as safe in Kashmir as the common Kashmiri.

Mirwaiz said that when the incident happened last week at Pulwama, Kashmiris regretted it as "we believe that every human life is precious and every human has a right to live, yet our lives and human rights are not trampled and we are killed with impunity and incarcerated under draconian PSA".
