Teachers, ST employees protest in Gandhinagar, strike continues

The government school teachers and employees of the transport department on Friday staged a statewide protest against Gujarat government over implementation of the seventh pay commission. Nearly one thousand teachers and employees had reached Gandhinagar to stage a protest outside assembly when the budget session was underway.

The police had made all efforts to prevent the teachers and employees from reaching the Capital city by sealing the borders but a huge crowd managed to reach near the assembly premises. They were about to crash the gates of the complex but police detained them. Around 1000 employees in Gandhinagar and 2000 employees in Ahmedabad were detained during the day.

The opposition leader Paresh Dhanani, Gujarat Congress chief Amit Chavda and independent MLA Jignesh Mevani reached outside the assembly and secretariat complex where the protesters camped a protest.

The chief minister Vijay Rupani immediately announced the formation of a special high powered committee of ministers for negotiation with the employees. The teachers had called for a mass leave for the day while the transport employees are on strike since Thursday.

Raising the issue in assembly, Dhanani said, "The teachers and transport service employees were mercilessly beaten up by police. The police closed all the gates of the assembly and secretariat complex, making it difficult for the visitors to enter. The government is showing apathy towards the common people and their demands should be accepted soon."

The chief minister said, "We have formed the special committee comprising deputy CM Nitin Patel and senior ministers Bhupendrasinh Chudasama and RC Faldu. We are trying to fulfil their demands."

Deputy CM Nitin Patel criticised the employees on strike and said that common people were badly affected. The students had to return back home and many people could not get buses to travel to work.

The committee held a meeting with the teachers association and the association called off the strike but teachers did not agree to the decision.
