Tiger and tigress found poisoned to death near Nagpur, rangers suspect 'revenge killing' by locals

Tourists spotted the first body on Sunday, said forest rangers (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Nagpur: As 2018 drew to a close, two tigers were reportedly poisoned in the Pauni range in the periphery of the Umred-Karhandla-Paoni Wildlife Sanctuary in Maharashtra's Nagpur. Forest rangers suspect that the majestic cats may have been targeted with poisoned bait between Sunday and Monday since the half-eaten carcass of a wild pig was found near one of the tigers.

Situated amidst dense forests spreading across 189.30 sqkm, the Umred-Karhandla Wildlife Sanctuary houses about 15 tigers. Officials said that the carcass of T16, a dominant male tiger aged seven years was found in compartment no. 226, Chichgaon beat. Local tourists informed forest officials about the carcass on Sunday, he added. On Monday, rangers surveying compartment no. 226 found the carcass of seven-year-old tigress T4 less than a kilometre away from where they found T16.

Committee constituted by National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) to inquire death of tigress Avni in Yavatmal, Maharashtra: Drugs used for tranquilizing tiger were handled by non-professionals and unauthorised personnel who are not supposed to handle or use the same. pic.twitter.com/BaCDLmfAec — ANI (@ANI) December 7, 2018

Speaking to Hindustan Times, Pench Tiger Reserve's Field Director Ravikiran Govekar said that the half-eaten carcass of a wild pig found near the tiger's body indicates that locals living near the sanctuary may have killed the big cats as revenge. "There are farmlands in close vicinity to the spot and revenge killing is not new here," he added.

The series of events increased the number of tiger-deaths in Maharashtra in 2018 to 21, equal to that of the previous year. Data released by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) revealed that 92 tigers died in India in 2018 with the maximum number of deaths being reported from Madhya Pradesh at 23 followed by Maharashtra at number two.

Must Read: Meghalaya man arrested for cooking and eating rhesus monkey, posting pictures of it on social media
