Karachi Bakery in Bengaluru forced to cover signboard after protests over its name

The Karachi Bakery outlet in Bengaluru has covered half of its signboard.

An outlet of the Karachi Bakery in Bengaluru on Friday covered up the 'Karachi' part of its signboard after a group of people assembled outside the shop in protest against its name.

The incident came amid reports of Kashmiris being targeted across India after the deadly Pulwama terror attack where 40 CRPF jawans were killed by Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM).

The bakery staff, meanwhile, covered the 'Karachi' part of the signboard.

Police confirmed that they received a distress call from the bakery late Friday night. No damage of property was reported, police added.

The protesters claimed that they believed Karachi Bakery was a Pakistan-based outlet.

In the aftermath of the Pulwama attack, several reports of threat and harassment against Kashmiri students and traders had emerged from across India.

Several Kashmiri students were also been slapped with sedition charges for allegedly supporting the attack.

A journalist from Jammu and Kashmir was assaulted in Maharashtra's Pune. Jibran Nazir, who works with a newspaper in Pune, was allegedly thrashed by two men on Thursday following an argument at a traffic signal.

The two alleged attackers told Nazir that they would "send him back to Kashmir"

The local police, who earlier dubbed it as an incident of road rage, registered a case against the two suspected assailants Friday evening and arrested one of them.

On February 22, the Supreme Court had also asked the Centre and 10 states to respond to a plea seeking its intervention to prevent alleged attacks on Kashmiri students.

The SC heard the petition which highlighted the alleged targeting of Kashmiri students in the country following the Pulwama terror attack on February 14.

ALSO READ | Pulwama martyr's last video to wife from CRPF bus before attack

ALSO READ | India wants permanent solution after Pulwama terror attack
