Indian security forces arrest Kashmiri leaders in occupied Kashmir

Indian security forces arrest Kashmiri leaders in occupied Kashmir

In occupied Kashmir, Indian police and troops have launched a massive crackdown arresting over 200 pro-freedom people including the JKLF Chairman, Muhammad Yasin Malik, and the Ameer of Jamaat-e-Islami of the territory, Dr Abdul Hameed Fayaz.

Indian police took Muhammad Yasin Malik into custody after raiding his Maisuma residence in Srinagar and lodged him at Kothibagh police station. Indian troops and police arrested scores of leaders and activists of Jamaat-e-Islami from their residences during nocturnal raids across the occupied territory.

Complete shutdown was observed in parts of Srinagar and in Bandipora town, today, against the arrest and killing spree in the territory.

Meanwhile, the Joint Resistance Leadership in a statement in Srinagar, today, called for a protest strike in occupied Kashmir, tomorrow, against India’s arbitrary measures including mass arrests, nocturnal raids, killings and attempts to repeal hereditary laws.

The Chairman All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Gilani, in a statement in Srinagar said that the unrealistic attitude of Indian leadership had created death and destruction in the territory. Illegally detained senior APHC leader, Shabbir Ahmed Shah, in a message from New Delhi’s Tihar Jail said that implementation of the UN resolutions was the only democratic solution of the Kashmir dispute. A Delhi court, today, deferred the hearing on the bail plea of Shabbir Shah, till 2nd of April.

Meanwhile, Indian Ministry of Home Affairs has ordered urgent airlifting of 100 additional companies of paramilitary forces to the Kashmir Valley.

Speakers at a seminar organized by the APHC–AJK chapter at its office in Islamabad appealed to the international community to take serious note of molestation and rape of Kashmiri women by Indian troops in occupied Kashmir.

Senior Hurriyet Leader Mirwaiz Umar Farooq has strongly condemned the night crackdown on Jamat e Islami leadership and cadres and the arrest of Yasin Malik.

In a Tweet today, Mirwaiz said such illegal and coercive measures against Kashmiri’s are futile and will not change realities on ground.

He said force and intimidation will only worsen the situation.
