Cop accuses another of sexual assault

PCR call made from Tilak Bridge; complaint withdrawn later

A Delhi police constable has accused another policeman of sexual assault at Barakhamba police station on Monday.

‘Assaulted for 10 years’

The police said that around 7.05 a.m. on Monday, the police control room received a call from Tilak Bridge and that the caller was accusing his friend of sexually assaulting him for the past 10 years.

The victim and the accused are posted in separate units of the Delhi Police.

“After receiving the call, the police rushed to the bus stop from where the call was made and brought both the men to Barakhamba police station for further inquiry. The caller and the other person were found to be Delhi Police personnel,” said a police officer.

The officer also said that the two hail from Meerut. On Monday morning, the two de-boarded a local train at Tilak Bridge, after which a quarrel broke out between them over some issue. One of them then informed the police regarding the alleged sexual assault.

The caller claimed that he had been subjected to assault for the past 10 years, the police said.

“After the matter was brought to the notice of senior police officers, further investigation was ordered into the matter. The victim and the accused have given their statements in written. They said they do not want any action to be taken in the case and left the police station,” the police officer also said.

Madhur Verma, Deputy Commissioner of Police (New Delhi) said that the police are investigating the matter. If the call received by the police control room on Monday was fake, then appropriate action will be taken against the caller, he said.

“We are writing to the respective units of the Delhi Police for departmental action against both the policemen who were involved in quarrel on road. One of them called the police alleging sexual assault and later withdrew the complaint. Their conduct will be reported to their respective units where they are currently posted,” said Mr. Verma.
