Pune: Kashmiri Journalist Beaten Up and was threatened to go back to Kashmir

A journalist from Jammu and Kashmir was assaulted by two of men in Pune, Maharashtra. Incidents like this have increased since the Terrorist Attack that happened in Pulwama which killed over 40 CRPF men.

The local police called the incidents as a road rage and they have registered an FIR against 2 suspected attackers, the incident happened on thursday evening and they have arrested one of the attackers.

The 24-year-old journalist was beaten up by 2 men on Thursday evening after a fight broke up at the traffic signal.

24-year-old Jibran Nazir works in a newspaper company that is based in Pune, he said that the 2 men threatened him and said they would “send him back to Kashmir”.

24-year-old Jibran Nazi said that this attack was not an organized one. The attackers did apologize to 24-year-old Jibran Nazi in the local police station.

A police official from the police station said that this incident is not linked with the Pulwama attack and said that this was a road rage.

This road rage incident happened after one day of the 4 students who were studying in Maharashtra and were attacked by a group of men that were members of the Yuva Sena a youth group of the Shiv Sena.

24-year-old Jibran Nazir said that he was attacked on 10:45 PM on the Tilak Road, Pune while he was returning to his house by riding his motorcycle. After he stopped at the traffic signal, 2 men that were behind him who were riding a motorcycle started to honk at him continuously and asked him to move away, this incident started the flare which led to a fight that broke out in the middle of the road.

The 2 men noticed that his motorcycle had a plate number that started with HP (Himachal Pradesh), they said that they would send the journalist back to Himachal Pradesh.

24-year-old Jibran Nazir corrected the 2 men and said that he was actually from Jammu and Kashmir, which led them to beat him and said “we will send you back to Kashmir, do your journalism there.”

The 2 men stole his mobile phone and damaged his motorcycle before running away.

On Friday night the Pune Police registered a FIR against 2 men which were identified as 32-year-old Azharuddin Shaikh and 35-year-old Dattatray Lavate.

The police have arrested Azharuddin Shaik and are still looking for Dattatray Lavate.
