Our fight is against terrorism, not against Kashmiris: PM Modi decries violence against Kashmiri students

Our fight is against terrorism, not against Kashmiris: PM Modi decries violence against Kashmiri students

On Saturday, speaking at public rally in Tonk, Rajasthan, PM Modi said that India’s fight was for Kashmir, not against Kashmiris.

His comments came in the backdrop of incidents of assault against residents of Jammu and Kashmir in various parts of India.

PM Modi said: “Our fight is against terrorism & enemies of humanity. Our fight is for Kashmir not against Kashmir, not against Kashmiris. What happened to Kashmiri students in last few days, such things should not happen in this country.”

PM Narendra Modi at a public rally in Tonk, Rajasthan: Our fight is against terrorism & enemies of humanity. Our fight is for Kashmir not against Kashmir, not against Kashmiris. What happened to Kashmiri students in last few days, such things should not happen in this country. pic.twitter.com/4pmLVhh4H5 — ANI (@ANI) February 23, 2019



Reacting, Omar Abdullah said: "Thank you @narendramodi Sahib. Aaj aap ne hamaray dil ki baat keh di. It’s been a more than a week since the terrible attack in Pulwama & more than a week that Kashmiris have been bearing the brunt of the public anger. Perhaps finally after PM @narendramodi Sb has spoken these forces targeting Kashmiris will stop in their tracks."

It’s been a more than a week since the terrible attack in Pulwama & more than a week that Kashmiris have been bearing the brunt of the public anger. Perhaps finally after PM @narendramodi Sb has spoken these forces targeting Kashmiris will stop in their tracks. — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) February 23, 2019

Raising concerns over incidents of assault and harassment against residents of Jammu and Kashmir, especially students, the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has directed state governments and Union Territories to ensure safety and security of these individuals in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack.

In a letter written to Chief Secretaries of all states and Union Territories by MHA’s Department of Jammu and Kashmir Affairs, Director Beena Yadav said, “The Government is concerned at the reports of incidents of assaults and harassment against residents of Jammu and Kashmir, especially students in some parts of the country, in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack of 14th February 2019. In this regard, an Advisory dated February, 16 was issued to all State Governments and Union Territory Administration to take necessary steps to ensure safety and security of the persons belonging to Jammu and Kashmir.”
