Rajiv Gandhi assassination case: Nalini Sriharan appeals to Tamil Nadu CM for early release of all 7 convicts

Nalini Sriharan, one of the convicts in Rajiv Gandhi assassination case, is seeking early release under Article 161 of the Constitution. | Photo Credit: BCCL | Photo Credit: BCCL

Chennai: Nalini Sriharan, one of the convicts serving a life sentence in former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi assassination case has written a letter to Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami. In her letter she appealed for "release all seven life convicts at an early date," reported the news agency ANI.

In February, Sriharan, sat on a hunger strike in the Vellore prison on Saturday demanding the release of all seven convicts in the case. She began a fast in solidarity with her husband Murugan who was then an indefinite hunger strike (the present status of the hunger strike by Murugan and Nalini remains unknown).

In her letter, Sriharan evoked the recommendation by Tamil Nadu's cabinet on for an early release of all seven convicts. The recommendation to the Governor in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case was made under Article 161 of the Constitution.

Former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's murder convict Nalini Sriharan writes to Tamil Nadu Chief Minister, Edappadi K Palaniswami appealing to "release all the seven life convicts at an early date," pic.twitter.com/fxWPdlT3jj — ANI (@ANI) February 23, 2019

The Supreme Court in a recent order asked the administration to take a decision on the mercy petition of one of the convicts - A G Perarivalan. The seven convicts lodged in prison since 1991 include- Nalini Sriharan, Murugan aka Sriharan, Jayakumar, Santhan, Robert Payas, Ravichandaran and Perarivalan aka Arivu.

Nalini submitted a petition to Tamil Nadu Governor Banwarilal Purohit expressing disappointment over delay in making a decision to release the prisoners in the case.

"I humbly take leave from the earth by going on fast from 9.02.2019, Saturday morning until I attain eternal bliss. Thank You and Good Bye", she wrote in the letter.

In her letter, Nalini said the Governor had not taken a decision on release of the convicts even after the state government recommended a premature release. She stated that they were forced to this situation due to delay in the Governor's decision.




