Our fight is for Kashmir, not Kashmiris: Modi

Our fight is for Kashmir, not Kashmiris: Modi

NEW DELHI, FEB 23: Prime Minister Narendra Modi today said that our fight is for Kashmir, not against Kashmir, Kashmiri.

Modi said “Our fight is for Kashmir, it is not against Kashmir, not against Kashmiris. We have given the forces a free hand to hit back. Our fight is against militancy. We won’t keep quiet, we know how to crush militancy,” said Narendra Modi.

“No peace can prevail in the world till the time the factory of terror is running. If it is in my fate to end this factory of terror, so be it. This is above party politics. After the Pulwama attack, you must have seen how we are avenging. Because of our new policies, Pakistan is going through a hard time. This is a new India, we will not tolerate the pain and stay quiet,” Modi said.

He added that “militants are just militants. Kashmiri is also suffering from the pain due to these terrorists. They also want freedom from them. But earlier governments sowed such seeds that the dreams of Kashmiris were not fulfilled but the government will now fulfill their dreams”.

“I had told the sarpanchs in the Kashmir Valley, to please make sure that no schools are burnt in the acts of terrorism in Kashmir and they promised me they would not let any schools be burnt, even if that comes at the cost of sacrificing their lives.

Now, I am proud to say that no school in the Kashmir Valley has been destroyed in the past two years,” said Modi.

Modi further added that “It upsets me that some people living in the country speak the language of Pakistan. These are the people who went to Pakistan and said “do anything, but remove Modi from power,” these are the people who could not answer the public after Mumbai attacks.”

Meanwhile, Omar Abdullah react Modi statement said: "Thank you @narendramodi Sahib. Aaj aap ne hamaray dil ki baat keh di. It’s been a more than a week since the terrible attack in Pulwama & more than a week that Kashmiris have been bearing the brunt of the public anger. Perhaps finally after PM @narendramodi Sb has spoken these forces targeting Kashmiris will stop in their tracks."

Raising concerns over incidents of assault and harassment against residents of Jammu and Kashmir, especially students, the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has directed state governments and Union Territories to ensure safety and security of these individuals in the wake of the Pulwama attack.

In a letter written to Chief Secretaries of all states and Union Territories by MHA’s Department of Jammu and Kashmir Affairs, Director Beena Yadav said, “The Government is concerned at the reports of incidents of assaults and harassment against residents of Jammu and Kashmir, especially students in some parts of the country, in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack of 14th February 2019. In this regard, an Advisory dated February, 16 was issued to all State Governments and Union Territory Administration to take necessary steps to ensure safety and security of the persons belonging to Jammu and Kashmir.”
