Gurugram: Woman delivers baby in auto; nurse gives wrong advice

Nilam, the accused told her that she was not due for at least a week (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Gurugram: A nurse's wrong advice led to the birth of a child in an autorickshaw. A nurse at the Civil Hospital allegedly gave the wrong advice to a pregnant woman. On her way back home, the woman gave birth to her child in an auto. The incident allegedly happened on Friday.

The pregnant woman, Kavita, is a 23-year-old lives in Laxman Vihar, Gurugram but hails from Mahendragarh district. Kavita allegedly gave birth to her child while she was in an autorickshaw. The Times of India reported that the 23-year-old had encountered labour pain on Thursday. Following this, she was taken to the Civil Hospital and was admitted there. A gynaecologist checked her and then told the family that her delivery was due Friday morning.

Also Read: Uttar Pradesh: Minor thrown off terrace for resisting rape, victim sustains severe injuries

Contrary to the doctor's advice, a nurse named Nilam alledely told Kavita and her sister-in-law that she was not due till atleast a week. Taking the nurse's advice into consideration, Kavita was discharged from the hospital on Friday at around 10.20 am.

Kavita and her sister-in-law were going back home in an auto. At around 11.15 am, Kavita gave birth to a boy near the Daultabad railway bridge. After this, the auto driver took the two women and the newborn to a private hospital in Bajghera. According to the family, the hospital charged them Rs 20,000 whereas delivery at the Civil Hospital would have bee free of cost.

When Sangeeta went to the Civil Hospital, the accused, Nilam, told her that they will not issue a birth certificate to the boy because he was not born in the hospital. While talking to the TOI, Dr Pankaj Agarwal, principal medical officer (Gurugram) stated that the patient had left the hospital without informing the officials and that a nurse had apparently asked them to go to a private hospital. He added that the woman was crowning on her way to the hospital and the delivery happened in the hospital.
