PM Narendra Modi Pays Tribute To Late Tamil Naidu CM Jayalalitha Jayaram On Her Birthday

PM Narendra Modi paid tribute to late Tamil Naidu Chief Minister and AIADMK leader Jayalalitha on February 24. Jayalalitha Jayaram commonly referred to "Amma" was born on February 24, 1948, near Mysore, India.

Narendra Modi took to Twitter

Tributes to Jayalalithaa Ji on her birth anniversary. Her contribution towards the development of Tamil Nadu will be remembered for generations. A fine administrator and compassionate leader, her welfare measures benefitted countless poor people. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) February 24, 2019

Looking on to Jayalalitha’s journey she was one of India's most powerful politicians and government official who long served as the leader of the All India Dravidian Progressive Federation (All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam; AIADMK), in Tamil Nadu state.

Jayalalitha had served three terms (1991–96, 2002–06, and 2011–14) as Chief Minister (head of government) of Tamil Nadu.

Lalitha was born into a Brahman family near the southern Indian city of Mysore (now in Karnataka state). Her father died when she was young, and her mother, a film actress, moved the family first to Bangalore (Bengaluru) and then to Madras (now Chennai).

However, Her family’s poor financial conditions forced her to quit her studies after completing secondary school. Although she had acted in a film while still in school, she now pursued that vocation full-time, becoming a highly successful star and acting in some 130 films between 1964 and 1980.

Lalitha joined the AIADMK in 1982 and quickly rose through the party ranks. In 1983 she was made the propaganda secretary of the party, and a year later she won a seat in the Rajya Sabha (upper chamber of the Indian parliament).

Following the death of M G Ramachandran in late 1987, the AIADMK underwent a split, with MGR’s wife, Janaki Ramachandran, and Jayalalitha each heading competing factions of the party. The rift was healed in a few years, however, after the two groups had merged back together and Janaki Ramachandran had left politics. Jayalalitha became the leader of the party.

In Tamil Nadu Jayalalitha’s AIADMK faced a bitter rival in the Dravidian Progressive Federation (Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam; DMK). On March 25, 1989, Jayalalithaa, the Leader of the Opposition and the first woman in the state to occupy that post, was assaulted in the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly.

Her close aide Natarajan's (Sasikala's husband) house had been raided after a case of cheating was filed on him. An 'unidentified messenger' submitted Jayalalithaa's letter of resignation to the Speaker M Tamilkudimagan who accepted it against the rules. Further, the letter was leaked to the press.

Though Jayalalithaa was making her way out of the House surrounded by members of the Opposition who'd formed a human shield around her, DMK Minister Durai Murugan rushed towards her to hit her. Reportedly, he pulled her saree deliberately and Jayalalithaa's saree was torn.

Incensed and humiliated, she left the Assembly, vowing that she would come back as the Chief Minister.

In the 1991 state assembly elections, the party won an overwhelming victory, and Jayalalitha began her first term as chief minister, heading a coalition government with the Indian National Congress (Congress Party).

ALSO READ: President Donald Trump Speaks About Pulwama Attack , Says India 'Looking At Something Very Strong'

However, Jayalalithaa was admitted to Chennai's Apollo Hospitals on September 22 after 'fever and dehydration' and had been under doctors' watch since then. In the time Jayalalithaa had spent in hospital, her party and medical bulletins claimed that she was recovering but a sudden cardiac arrest on December 4 sent her supporters in shock.
