Gurugram: Auto driver assaults and stabs love interest after suspecting her of cheating

The accused, Madan Kumar, is a resident of Panipat and lives on rent in Gurugram (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Gurugram: After suspecting her of cheating on him, an autorickshaw driver allegedly assaulted and stabbed his female love interest. The couple were in a live-in relationship and the autorickshaw driver was suspecting that his live-in partner was cheating on him. The alleged incident took place at IFFCO Chowk in Gurugram on Thursday.

The accused, who has been identified as Madan Kumar, is a resident of Panipat and lives on rent in Gurugram. The police arrested the accused from his house where he was living on rent. The accused allegedly assaulted and stabbed his love interest.

Also Read: Uttar Pradesh: Minor thrown off terrace for resisting rape, victim sustains severe injuries

According to the Hindustan Times' report, the victim is employed as a dancer at a club on MG Rod. A Delhi resident, the victim had recently taken a room on rent in Sukhrali, which is situated near IFFCO Chowk. The victim was in a live-in relationship with the accused.

Assistant sub-inspector, Devi Charan told HT that the accused had started doubting his partner and used to assault her because she had not told him that she was shifting to Gurugram. The victim allegedly told the police that she had come to Gurugram to meet a friend but had lied to the accused that she was in Delhi.

Kumar allegedly stabbed the victim with a knife and even hit her on the head with a brick. The accused was allegedly told by one of his friends that his partner was in town and that he had seen her with another man near a petrol pump. Agitated, Kumar reached there and attacked the victim.

Though the victim's friend tried to help her, the accused allegedly warned him against the same. The victim is still recovering from her injuries and her statement is yet to be recorded. The accused has been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code.
