Prakash Raj's defamation case against Pratap Simha: Court issues warrant on BJP MP

It may be recalled that taking exception to Simha’s comments on him, Prakash Raj had sent a legal notice in November, 2017. Referring to a tweet by Simha, Prakash Raj had filed a case in a Mysuru lower court after the MP did not reply or apologise, seeking a compensation of Re 1. The case was however transferred to the special court, based on a Supreme Court directive.

On October 2, 2017 Simha had tweeted, “Being sad due to son’s death, having left your wife and ran behind a dancer, do you Mr. Raj have any right/legitimacy/worthiness to say anything to Yogi-Modi.” The tweet was a response to Prakash’s criticism on the Prime Minister’s silence over the murder of noted journalist-activist Gauri Lankesh.

Pratap Simha however told TNM that he did not appear in court as his office had failed to inform him about the summons.

“When the court sent summons to my office, the staff refused the summons without bringing it to my notice. Just because it was not in my knowledge, I was not able to appear yesterday. The court took it seriously just because i have not employed any advocate for the case and had not appeared. Otherwise it is a trivial case. I will approach the court before March 19 and get the case recalled. I will personally explain in the court,” the MP told TNM.

Claiming that this was a publicity stunt by the actor-politician, Simha added, “I haven't made any derogatory comments against him. I had shared an article by Postcard News. If he really wanted justice in court, he should have filed a case against Postcard.”



The legal notice had further objected to Pratap Simha’s comment on a regional TV channel where he said, “Your name in Kannada is Prakash Rai and Prakash Raj in Tamil Nadu. You change your name and identity according to your convenience and necessity in different states.”



Addressing reporters on the legal notice, the actor had said in November 2017, “I sent a legal notice not because he represents a party, but because he trolled. But today people who are voted are shamelessly trolling others. If he does not answer legally I will be taking action. This is not against any party.”
