Indians in Uganda mourn Pulwama terror attack victims

The Indian Community in Uganda has held special prayers for 40 Indian Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) officers that were killed in the Pulwama terror attack on February 14 in India.

Led by the Indian High Commissioner to Uganda, Shri Ravi Shankar, about 200 members of the Indian community turned up for prayers held at the D'Mello Indian Restaurant - Indian Association of Uganda grounds in Kampala on Saturday.

Speaking to the mourners, Shankar condemned the gruesome terror attack and called upon the world to unite against terrorism.

Some of the members of the Indian community that turned up for the prayers. Photo by Denis Dibele Some of the members of the Indian community that turned up for the prayers. Photo by Denis Dibele

"Terrorism does not have a face, religion or colour. It is one of the worst things to happen to this world and it is something we should condemn strongly," Shankar said.

He commended the Indian Association of Uganda for coming together in such a bad incident which has left so many lives lost.

"There is a lot of emotion pouring and anger back home and a lot of support for those who passed on. I'm glad that our community in Uganda is feeling the same about this cowardly act," Shankar said.

After his remarks, Shankar led the mourners through candle lighting and laying of flowers below a photo collage of all the 40 fallen officers.

Mourners stand in front of the banner with names and photographs of the fallen soldiers. Photo by Denis Dibele Mourners stand in front of the banner with names and photographs of the fallen soldiers. Photo by Denis Dibele

Prayers were led by various religious sections from the Catholic, Muslims, Hindu and Sikh religions.

Sanjiv Patel, the vice chairperson, Indian Association Uganda said extremism should not have a place in today's world and needs to be fought boldly.

"We need to fight this kind of extremism together. We need to make the world safe. This is not only affecting India or Uganda but the rest of the world," Patel said.

He commended Uganda's efforts in fighting terrorism through its intervention in Somalia and said terrorists should not be given a chance to survive.

Indian High Commissioner to Uganda Ravi Shankar (right) chats with his second secretary Durga Dass. Photo by Denis Dibele Indian High Commissioner to Uganda Ravi Shankar (right) chats with his second secretary Durga Dass. Photo by Denis Dibele

"Terrorists are killing people in Somalia, Kenya and all over the world. They are inhumane. We have lit candles today to give light to those souls and that Uganda, India and the world live in harmony," Patel said.

Pakistan-based Islamist group Jaish-e-Mohammad claimed responsibility for the deadly attack.

The attack on the CRPF convoy took place on Thursday when a suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying explosives into their bus killing 40.

The blast took place on the heavily guarded Srinagar-Jammu highway about 20km (12 miles) from the main city in Indian-administered Kashmir, Srinagar.
