HIGHLIGHTS-EASTERN REGION 4.30PM

Kolkata, Feb 24 (PTI) Following are PTI's top stories from the

eastern region at 4.30 pm.

STORIES ON THE WIRE:

CAL1

TR-SEDITION-ARREST

Tripura man arrested on sedition charge for social

media post

Agartala: A 23-year-old man hailing from Tripura's

Khowai district has been arrested on sedition charge from

Karnataka for allegedly uploading an anti-national video on

social media on the Pulwama terror attack, police said Sunday.

CAL2

AS-LIQUOR-TOLL

Assam hooch tragedy toll rises to 124, over 330 taken

ill

Guwahati: The death toll in Assam's hooch tragedy has

shot up to 124, while 331 people are undergoing treatment in

hospitals, officials said on Sunday.

CAL3

WB-MINISTER-BLAST

WB minister question law and order in UP, hands over

cheques to kin of blast victims

Malda (WB): West Bengal minister Firhad Hakim on

Sunday criticised the law and order situation in Uttar

Pradesh, a day after an explosion at Bhadohi killed 13

persons, including nine from here.

CAL4

AR-PRC-VIOLENCE

Protesters set ablaze Dy CM's private residence in

Arunachal Pradesh

Itanagar: Defying curfew, agitators allegedly set

ablaze the private residence of Arunachal Pradesh Deputy Chief

Minister Chowna Mein and ransacked the office of the deputy

commissioner here on Sunday to protest against recommendations

to grant permanent resident certificates to six communities,

police said.

CES1

JH-ENCOUNTER

3 PLFI ultras killed in encounter with security forces

Ranchi: Three ultras of the banned Peoples Liberation

Front of India (PLFI) were killed in an encounter with

security forces in Gumla district on Sunday, a senior police

officer said.

CES2

OD-BOAT AMBULANCE

Odisha launches boat ambulance service for remote

areas

Bhubaneswar: The Odisha government has launched a boat

ambulance service to ferry patients to hospitals in remote

areas at a cost of Rs 5.40 crore, officials said.

ERG1

JH-DAS

50 lakh families in Jharkhand now have gas connection:

CM

Ranchi: Jharkhand Chief Minister Raghubar Das has said

that more than 33 lakh lakh families in the state received gas

connection in the last four and half years.

ERG2

TR-CIPET

Gowda inaugurates CIPET centre in Tripura

Agartala: Union Minister D V Sadananda has inaugurated

a centre of the Central Institute of Plastic Engineering and

Technology (CIPET) in Tripura.

ERG3

BH-BUSINESSMAN-SHOT

Businessman shot dead in Patna

Patna: A businessman was shot dead by unidentified

persons here, a senior police officer said Sunday. PTI

SBN SBN
