Protests Rock Arunachal Pradesh; Vehicles, Deputy CM's House Set On Fire

Twitter Arunachal Deputy CM Chowna Mein

ITANAGAR — Defying curfew, agitators allegedly set ablaze the private residence of Arunachal Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Chowna Mein and ransacked the office of the deputy commissioner here on Sunday to protest against recommendations to grant permanent resident certificates to six communities, police said.

A large number of people marched through streets here damaging public property and vehicles after a person who was injured in police firing on Friday succumbed to injuries at a hospital, police said.

Advertisement

The protesters set ablaze the private residence of the deputy chief minister at Niti Vihar here and ransacked the office of the deputy commissioner of Itanagar.

#WATCH Permanent residence certificate row: Violence broke out in Itanagar during protests against state’s decision to grant permanent resident certificates to non-#ArunachalPradesh Scheduled Tribes of Namsai & Chanaglang; Deputy CM Chowna Mein's private house also vandalised. pic.twitter.com/FrcmqWbL8c — ANI (@ANI) February 24, 2019

They also set on fire a large number of vehicles parked in the compound of the DC’s office.

The protesters also attacked the Itanagar Police station and several public properties in the state capital, police said.The agitators also blocked the road leading to the Naharlagun railway station as a result many passengers, including patients, were held up at the station since Sunday morning.

An indefinite curfew was clamped in Itanagar and Naharlagun on Saturday as protesters resorted to stone pelting in which 35 people, including 24 police personnel, were injured.The Army had also conducted flag marches in Itanagar and Naharlagun on Saturday.

Advertisement

Violence in Arunachal Pradesh on Permanent residence certificate row:Home Minister Rajnath Singh spoke to Chief Minister & Governor. Mob in front of CM's house has dispersed. Necessary instructions have been given.Ministry of Home Affairs is keeping a close watch on the situation pic.twitter.com/dr7QupUBrC — ANI (@ANI) February 24, 2019

Internet services remained suspended in Itanagar and Naharlagun. All markets, petrol pumps and shops were closed and most of the ATMs in the state capital were out of cash, police said.

Over 60 vehicles, including many police vehicles, were set ablaze and over 150 vehicles were damaged by the protesters since Friday, they said.

On Saturday, the agitators damaged the stage of the Itanagar International Film Festival at the Indira Gandhi Park here. The organisers later called off the film festival.

Arunachal Pradesh: #Visuals from Itanagar after violence broke outduring protests against state’s decision to grant Permanent Resident Certificates to non-Arunachal Pradesh Scheduled Tribes of Namsai & Chanaglang. 6 companies of ITBP have been deployed in Itanagar pic.twitter.com/iKeHX9sG7r — ANI (@ANI) February 24, 2019

The Joint High Power Committee (JHPC), after holding parleys with the stakeholders, recommended granting permanent resident certificates (PRCs) to six communities, who are not natives of Arunachal Pradesh but has been living in Namsai and Changlang districts for decades.

Advertisement

The proposals evoked resentment among several community-based groups and students’ organisations, who claimed that the rights and the interests of indigenous people will be compromised if the state government accepts them.

The recommendation of the JHPC was supposed to be tabled in the Assembly on Saturday but was not tabled as the Speaker adjourned the House sine die.

On Saturday, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh appealed to the people of Arunachal Pradesh to remain calm and maintain peace.
