The beginning of the second jihad in Kashmir

Sunil Sharan is the author of three books: (i) Lockdown: India Under Siege from Corona (RosettaBooks), (ii) Modi 2.0: Beyond the Ordinary (Bloomsbury), and (iii) How I Came to Christ (Wipf and Stock). LESS ... MORE

The Soviet exit from Afghanistan marked the beginning of the first jihad in Kashmir instigated by Pakistan beginning in 1989. Indian forces were rocked to their heels but slowly got a grip over the situation. By slowly I mean, over a matter of three decades.

Now the Americans are exiting Afghanistan just as the Soviets once were. Pakistan is exultant. It has bested two superpowers in a row without even one of its soldiers being lost. Without Pakistan playing footsie, the Americans cannot get access to the Taliban with whom they are desperate to strike an accord.

Pakistan wants its pound of flesh, which is Kashmir. Frankly, the Americans couldn’t care less if Pakistan gets Kashmir or not as long they themselves get out of Afghanistan in one piece. Pulwama was the launch of the second jihad in Kashmir by Pakistan.

Make no mistake, Pakistan is testing our every nerve and sinew. If we let Pulwama slide, Pakistan will only become more emboldened to wrest Kashmir. A strong, united nation is the crying need of the hour.

But what spectacle are we seeing now? After initially expressing faith in the PM’s leadership and decision-making, Rahul Gandhi is back to mocking the PM taking pleasure boat rides. George W. Bush was reading aloud to a bunch of toddlers in Florida when he was informed of 9/11. In a famous moment captured on YouTube, he listens to his aide and then continues reading to the children.

Real leaders don’t have to panic at every news. The PM has aides to whom he can give orders. And everyone knows he is hard working. If he wants to take a boat ride to clear his head at the exact moment Pulwama happened, so be it.

After endlessly mocking the surgical strikes of 2016, Rahul has hired one of the generals who oversaw the strikes to craft a national security policy for the country. At this dire stage, the country is not in any need of a five-year plan. At this moment, the country must pose a united front to tackle the evil neighbour to the west.

Imran Khan and his army chief, Gen Bajwa, are worried. So much so that they are issuing daily warnings to India. They are proscribing Hafiz Saeed and taking over the headquarters of the Jaish-e-Mohammed. But these are useless steps. They must hand over either Saeed (for 26/11) or Masood Azhar (for the Parliament attack, Pulwama, and numerous other atrocities in Kashmir) to India.

But this won’t happen. Saeed and Azhar are treasured icons of the Pakistani army. What the ghazi Pakistani army doesn’t do, they do for it. Then the ghazi army engages in plausible deniability.

Saeed has a $10 million bounty on his head for years now. But since he’s a Punjabi Pakistani, no one dare rat on him, leave alone touch him. Bin Laden was an Arabic guest of the Pakistani army. The $25 million bounty on his head was enough lucre for a Pakistani army officer to reveal his whereabouts to the Americans.

Already you can see the blood pressure lowering in India. India has engaged in meaningless exercises such as getting a UN resolution against the Jaish-e-Mohammed. But all this is a way out for Pakistan. India has to strike, and the more India delays, the more the world will turn away from an Indian strike, believing that India is a soft state.

For two Israeli soldiers captured by the Hezbollah in 2007, Israel launched an all-out war against Hezbollah. The war didn’t turn out exactly as Israel had planned, but at least it has deterred the Hezbollah from terrorizing Israel all these years.

International isolation of Pakistan is impossible. In fact, it is India that is getting isolated. With Afghanistan as an ace in its pocket, Pakistan is getting closer to the US. China is already its all-weather friend. By sending its former army chief, Raheel Sharif, to head the Sunni anti-Iranian military coalition, Pakistan has signalled its readiness to do Saudi Arabia’s bidding.

Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman has showered billions over Pakistan, but these billions come at a price. The Saudi nuclear bomb is now resting firmly and securely in Pakistan’s basement, to be ordered up at will by the Saudis and delivered by Pakistani missiles or Pakistani pilots flying Saudi fighter aircraft.

Even Russia has come closer to Pakistan as we have slowly but surely spurned it for the US.

Each day that passes, each day that Rahul mocks the PM, is like a ticking bomb that will actually refuse to blow up. India can only cause damage to Pakistan by land or by air. A crack commando squad of Gurkha and Garhwali soldiers should be sufficient to cause enough damage to Pakistan.

Right now, the US is indicating its willingness for India to take limited revenge against Pakistan. Read between the lines of Donald Trump’s and US National Security Advisor John Bolton’s statements in this regard. But each passing day that India doesn’t act means that the US will harden its stance against an Indian counter-strike.

So, Rahul, please stop the silly chatter and unite behind the PM. Whether one likes it or not, Pulwama has become an election issue. If the PM is able to pull off a daring strike, well then Priyanka Gandhi too cannot help the Congress. But if the PM fails to act, he is quite possibly doomed, and Rahul, you might get your chance. But would you want such a victory, a victory it might be for you but pyrrhic that it will prove for India.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
