Rajiv Rai returns after 15 years with an action-thriller

Bollywood

Vishwatma

Gulshan Rai

I was working on an idea that had the potential to be a Gupt sequel, but somewhere, I wasn’t satisfied with the way it was shaping up –Rajiv Rai

Manisha Koirala

Salman Khan

Rajiv Rai is all set to return to, 15 years after the release of his action thriller, Asambhav. “It’s been a long time but I’m looking forward to directing another Hindi film. I have been working on several ideas over the last few years and have finally zeroed in on the script of my next,” states the writer director-editor of films like Gupt, Tridev,and Mohra.The son of producer-distributor, Rajiv made his directorial debut in 1985 with the Anil Kapoor-Tina Munim-Jackie Shroff starrer Yudh. He married actress Sonam, whom he had directed in Tridev and Vishwatma, in 1991 and two years later, their son, Gaurav, was born. He fled India to live in the UK after a failed assassination attempt in 1997, returning after four years with the romantic drama, Pyaar Ishq Aur Mohabbat. It bombed, but in 2004, Rajiv was back at the marquee with Asambhav featuring Arjun Rampal and Priyanka Chopra. Shortly after its release, his father passed away after a prolonged illness, and Rajiv disappeared again. He only made news three years ago with the news of his divorce. There have been speculations about his return since 2015 which he rubbishes but admits he is ready to roll with a film soon.“I have been working on this film for over a year, it’s the best script of my career so far,” he asserts. Prod him for details and he adds, “It’s essentially an action thriller, but there is a lot of drama and emotion too. I’m in the process of locking the final draft.”According to a source, the film in question will go on the floors by September, but Rajiv will not be drawn into a confirmation. “It’s too early to discuss the shooting schedule,” he says shortly.Buzz is, the film in question is the sequel to his 1997 thriller, Gupt, which featured Kajol and Bobby Deol and. The director refutes the rumours, saying, “I was working on an idea that had the potential to be a Gupt sequel, but somewhere, I wasn’t satisfied with the way it was shaping up and shelved the idea. There is no point making a sequel just for the heck of it. My upcoming film is definitely not a remake or sequel to Gupt, Mohra or Tridev. It is a completely fresh subject and different from what is being made in today’s time. It is more significant than anything I have made in the past.”Rajiv was recently spotted on the sets of Ali Abbas Zafar’s Bharat, featuring, with his producer-friend Shabbir Boxwala. Ask him if a film with the actor is on the cards, the director smiles, “No, I have not approached him for any film. Salman is an old and dear friend, I have known him since long before he became an actor. It was just a social visit.”
