Protestors Set Arunachal Pradesh Deputy CM's House on Fire

New Delhi: Large-scale protests have continued for the third day in Arunachal Pradesh, with protestors storming the deputy chief minister’s house in Itanagar and setting it ablaze. Reports from the state said that two protestors had been killed in police firing, one on Saturday and one on Sunday.

The protestors were seeking changes in recommendations by a government-appointed panel for granting permanent residence certificates to certain groups living in the state’s Namsai and Changlang districts.

The PRC recommendations were set to be discussed by the state assembly, and the government was preparing to table a report prepared by state minister Nabam Rebia that recommended granting the groups permanent residence certificates. However, after protestors attacked a film festival, the government decided on February 24 not to take up the issue.

On Saturday, the agitators had damaged the stage of the Itanagar International Film Festival at the Indira Gandhi Park here. The organisers later called off the film festival.

Latest reports from Itanagar say that the protestors defied curfew and set ablaze the private residence of Arunachal Pradesh deputy chief minister Chowna Mein and ransacked the office of the deputy commissioner on Sunday.

From there, they were seen marching towards the chief minister’s residence. Local reporters told The Wire that gun shots were heard. Initial reports said that a second protestor was killed in police firing on Sunday.

An indefinite curfew was clamped in Itanagar and Naharlagun on Saturday as protesters resorted to stone pelting in which 35 people, including 24 police personnel, were injured.

The Indian Army had also conducted flag marches in Itanagar and Naharlagun on Saturday.

Internet services remained suspended in Itanagar and Naharlagun.

All markets, petrol pumps and shops were closed and most of the ATMs in the state capital were out of cash, police said.

Over 60 vehicles, including many police vehicles, were set ablaze and over 150 vehicles were damaged by the protesters since Friday, they said.

The Joint High Power Committee (JHPC), after holding parleys with the stakeholders, recommended granting permanent resident certificates to six communities, who are not natives of Arunachal Pradesh but has been living in Namsai and Changlang districts for decades.

The proposals evoked resentment among several community-based groups and students’ organisations, who claimed that the rights and the interests of indigenous people will be compromised if the state government accepts them.

On Saturday, Union home minister Rajnath Singh appealed to the people of Arunachal Pradesh to remain calm and maintain peace.

He also spoke to Arunachal Pradesh chief minister Pema Khandu, who briefed him about the prevailing situation in the border state.

On Sunday morning, Khandu told reporters that the incidents of Saturday were “unfortunate” and that people had created a “law and order problem”.

“The PRC matter is an old matter, and several earlier governments too tried to solve it,” he continues, referring to multiple JHPCs that had been instated. “It is important to discuss it in the assembly, so that all representatives can put forth their voice. That is what we wanted – wider discussion. It was not in Bill form. But given the hue and cry, we have cancelled the discussions.”

A state government order dated February 24 said that “no further action” will be taken on the PRC discussions.

(With PTI inputs)
