Sack CM, Rijiju, impose President's Rule in Arunachal: Congress

New Delhi, Feb 25 : Blaming the ruling BJP of trying to turn Arunchal Pradesh into "another Kashmir", the Congress on Monday sought the dismissal of Pema Khandu-led state government for violence over the controversial permanent residence certificate (PRC) issue and demanded a judicial probe into the police firing on protestors killing three.

A Congress delegation led by party General Secretary Luizinho Faleiro submitted a memorandum to the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) seeking immediate sacking of Khandu, Deputy Chief Minister Chowna Mein and Union Minister of State for Home Affairs Kiren Rijiju for their failure to discharge their constitutional obligations.

It also demanded a probe into the police firing on unarmed protestors that led to the killing of three persons by a high court judge or a retired Chief Justice.

Addressing the media later, Faleiro said the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government through the PRC and Citizenship Amendment Bill has "let loose hell" in Arunachal and turning it into another Kashmir.

"Don't try to make Arunachal into another Jammu and Kashmir. We have got enough problems in the country and under this regime the problems are only multiplying. Be it industries and the economy or agriculture, problems are only growing under the BJP.

"Whatever the Congress has done steadfastly over the years to maintain the identity and culture of North East, this government has undone all. This government through the National Register of Citizens (NRC), through the Citizenship Amendment Bill and now the PRC has destabilised the North East. This government is destroying the North East and palying with sentiments of the people," said Faleiro.

"Through the PRC the present BJP government has let hell lose in Arunachal," said Felerio, adding that the Centre must immediately sack Khandu, Rijiju and Chowna Mein for "plunging the peaceful state into anarchy".

"There is no government machinery whatsoever in Arunachal and the Chief minister, his deputy and Rijiju in whose constituency three innocent people were killed and many others injured in police firing have disappeared into thin air. They must be immediately sacked," he added.

Countering Rijiju's allegation of the Congress instigating violence in the state, Arunachal Congress President Takom Sanjoy said a judicial inquiry into the police action is essential to find out the real culprits.

"Let there be a judicial probe to find as to who instigated the violence. If we are found to be guilty, then arrest us and put us in jail. But for that a judical probe is a must," said Sanjoy.

In the memorandum to Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh, the Congress blamed the Khandu government's "gross mismanagement" in handling the peaceful protest against the issue of PRC and claimed that law and order machinery in the state has "completely collapsed".
