He raped her, then extorted gold, money

rapist blackmailed

repeatedly raped

FIR

When she requested him to return her gold ornaments, the accused is alleged to have blackmailed her again and extorted money from her ­ –An investigating officer

Neighbour blackmailed 26-year-old woman, raped her over 20 months; also took 110g jewellery, Rs 5 lakhA rape survivor had to relive her ordeal time and again as the 28-year-oldher by saying he would tell her husband andher since June 2017. He also extorted money, to the tune of Rs five lakh, and gold ornaments weighing about 110 gram in total. He was finally arrested on Saturday after the woman’s husband came to know the truth and made her file a first information report () on Friday at Nandini Layout police station.The accused has been identified as Vinodh Kumar, a resident of Muneshwara Layout in Laggere. He is alleged to have raped his 26-year-old neighbour in June 2017, when she was alone at home. He threatened to kill her if she told anybody. He then started preying on her fears by threatening to tell her husband.Not only did he repeatedly rape her, the accused also took most of her gold ornaments and a substantial amount of cash. He had taken at least five gold chains, including her mangalsutra. He had also taken Rs five lakh, initially taking Rs 50,000 and then mounting his demands to extort more.“When she requested him to return her gold ornaments, the accused is alleged to have blackmailed her again and extorted money from her. After her mangalsutra went missing, her husband became suspicious. He also found out that apart from the gold chains, five rings and three pairs of earrings had also gone missing. When he asked his wife, the victim initially remained silent and then revealed the actual reason why the gold ornaments and cash went missing,” said an investigating officer.Once the victim’s husband came to know of his wife’s plight, he insisted that she files a police complaint against the accused. She did so on Friday and the day after, the accused was arrested. Nandini Layout police has registered a case of rape (IPC 376), extortion (IPC 384) and criminal intimidation (IPC 506) against the accused.Further investigations are on.
