TV newsmakers: Rohit Suchanti confesses his love for Srishty Rode, Shilpa Shinde gets rape threats for supporting Navjot

From Rohit Suchanti's candid confession about love for Sristy Rode, Sasural Simar Ka actress Kajol Srivastava's dreamy wedding, Benafsha Soonawalla's old video of kissing a girl going viral to Shilpa Shinde getting rape threats, this week saw a mix of happy and shocking news.

Shilpa Shinde gets trolled brutally for supporting Navjot Singh Sidhu



Bigg Boss 11 winner and television actress Shilpa Shinde was mercilessly trolled recently after she came out in Navjot Singh Sidhu over Pulawama attack comment. Sadly, trolls even threatened to rape her.

Shilpa, who joined the Congress party earlier this month, spoke to IWMBuzz and said that she is planning to take legal action against these faceless people. She said, "I am going to take legal action. It is high time the authorities stepped in and cracked down on such elements who have also attacked several women journalists like Barkha Dutt and others. I call such people terrorists as well, for their actions are as bad as the LeT and JM guys. What wrong did Paji say? People just want to twist his lines. Where did he support terrorism? Agreed, he might have been politically correct by not criticizing his friend, Imran Khan, but you need to understand that they have played together for years. Also, why was everyone after him to say something bad about Pakistan. He hit the nail on the head by saying that, at the end of the day, issues can only be threshed out on the peace table."

Navjot Singh Sidhu found himself in the middle of a raging controversy after his comments on Pulwama terror attack received a severe backlash on social media. Post his comments, the netizens demanded his ouster from The Kapil Sharma Show and many of them claimed to have unsubscribed Sony TV.

Finally, Rohit Suchanti confesses his love for Srishty Rode

Television actor Rohit Suchanti gave a lot of fodder to gossipmongers this week. Recently, while talking to a Bombay Times he confessed his feelings for Srishty Rode and also said that he plans to propose to her soon.

He said, "There were issues in their relationship even before she entered the house. They split owing to their differences and I have no role to play in that. It's easy for people to assume otherwise. No one ends a relationship of four years for a guy she has known for a month. Yes, my feelings for her were evident inside the house, but she never reciprocated. She told me about the split when I called her soon after my eviction from the show. She was extremely sad, and I tried to calm her as a true friend. She is still hurting and trying to come to terms with it."

"I don't want to keep my feelings to myself and I don't care what people have to say about us. It will be between us. I am excited about confessing my feelings to her, but I don't know what her reply will be."

During his BB 12 stint, social media went buzzing about brewing romance between the two, as Rohit was often found flirting with Srishty on the show. Soon after the show, Srishty and her fiance Manish Naggdev announced their breakup. And people started to speculate that Rohit was the reason behind their breakup.

Benafsha Soonawalla's old video kissing a girl goes viral



Benafsha Soonawalla, the Bigg Boss 11 star who made news for her link-up rumour with Priyank Sharma that also resulted in his much-publicised breakup on national television? She has also participated in Splitsvilla and Roadies in the past, but it was Bigg Boss 11 that made her a household name.

Benafsha's old video shot by Being Indian has surfaced online where she is seen taking a wild challenge of kissing a girl for a shot of tequila. The video has now gone viral. Benafasha is a social media star with 634K followers and often gets trolled for wearing skimpy clothes. The reality TV star is known to give hard-hitting replies to the haters.

Sasural Simar Ka actress Kajol Srivastava ties the knot in Khajuraho

Television actress Kajol Srivastava, who played the role of Vaidehi in Sasural Simar Ka, tied the knot with boyfriend Ankit Khare on February 23. The couple got married amidst their close friends and family in attendance. The lovebirds had sealed their relationship with a ring in November last year.

The big-fat wedding took place in Khajuraho (Chhatarpur, Madhya Pradesh). Kajol looked beautiful in green lehenga while Ankit rocked the ivory sherwani. Their pre-wedding celebrations took place over a span of two days, mehendi function on February 21, and haldi and sangeet on February 22, which will be followed by a pool party on February 23.

Saumya Tandon's house catches fire

Television actress Saumya Tandon received minor burns after her room caught fire because of a mosquito repellent. The actress woke up in the middle of the night to discover the fire but managed to douse it just in the nick of time along with her child's nanny. The actress received minor burns on her palms.

"It was fire in the plug where mosquito repellent was put in the middle of the night, probably the liquid was over and it overheated. All of us are safe. MA got slight burn on her cheek as it was next to her bed. I and my nanny were trying to put the fire off so got minor burns in the palms. All safe. Thanks," she told Spotboye.com. The actress took to social media to share the fire incident at her home.
