Man fakes own 'abduction', tracked down and arrested by police in Mumbai

On being questioned, an alarmed Gautam told them that he made the call just for fun. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Mumbai: A 36-year-old man was caught by the police for making a fake call about his own kidnapping. The accused, Shivkumar Gautam, called up the police from his cell phone to inform them about his own abduction near Tungareshwar Phata on Mumbai-Ahmedabad National Highway in Vasai (East).

According to a report in The Times of India, Gautam told assistant police inspector Vinod Jadhav that some men had abducted him and he was being taken to an unknown destination. After making the call from his cell phone, he switched it off.

Also Read: Neighbours abduct 16-year-old, gang-rape her in a parked car in Gurugram's Badshahpur

A team of police officials reached Tungareshwar Phata to carry out the search operation. The team tried to trace the location of the cell phone from which the call was made. Shopkeeper and local residents were interrogated. However, the police did not get any leads.

The police decided to trace the man's residential address to get a clue from his family. The police team reached Gautam's home in Vasai Phata in the early hours of January 4 to find him fast asleep. On being questioned, an alarmed Gautam told them that he made the call just for fun. He had not expected the police to take his prank call seriously.

The police arrested Gautam under section 182 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) for providing false information, with an intention to make a public servant use his lawful power to the injury of another. Gautam was sentenced to punishment till rising of the court and a fine of Rs 1,000.



Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
