Didn't murder Youth Congress workers, CPI (M) leader Peethambaran tells court

Didn't murder Youth Congress workers, CPI (M) leader Peethambaran tells court

Later, Peethambaran was sent to two weeks judicial custody by the court.

news Crime

CPI (M) leader A Peethambaran, who is accused of murdering two Youth Congress workers in Kerala's Kasargode district last week, on Monday denied committing the crime when he was produced in a court in Kasargode. Soon after his arrest for the murders, Peethambaran reportedly admitted to the police that he committed the crime when he was on a high after smoking ganja.

However, produced before the Hosdurg court after his police custody ended, the Communist Party of India-Marxist leader told the judge that he has no role in the murder but was forced to admit his involvement after he was threatened by police.

The judge asked him if he was beaten up by police and he said "no" .

Later, he was sent to two weeks judicial custody by the court.

Youth Congress workers Kripesh, 22, and Sharath Lal, 24, were hacked to death on Sunday, February 17 by three motorcycle-borne men. While Kripesh died at the Kasargode district hospital, Sharath Lal succumbed to injuries on his way to a medical facility in Karnataka's Mangaluru.

Police have so far arrested five people in the case.

Meanwhile on Monday ,angry Youth Congress workers marched to the office of the Superintendent of Police here, demanding a Central Bureau of Investigation probe into the twin murder.

The families of both victims on Monday wrote to Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan demanding a CBI probe, a demand that has already been raised by the Congress.

The murder case has been handed over to the Kerala Police's Crime Branch.

Earlier, the family members of Peethambaran told the media he was innocent. "There was plaster on my son's hand. How is it possible for him to commit the crime," asked his mother.

"Peethambaran is a party worker and now the party has washed its hands off him. He has been framed," said his wife Manju.

"I don't think my father will ever do such a thing. But if he has done it, he will have to face the consequences," said his daughter.

Read: Kasargode double murder: Was CPI (M) aware of accused Peethambaran’s motive?
