5}: Chaubey’s period thriller makes for a riveting watch

Sonchiriya Story: Set in the ravines of 1970’s Chambal, the film follows a bunch of dacoits led by Man Singh (Manoj Bajpayee) as they battle with the cops and their own conscience.



Sonchiriya Review: You can run away from people but how do you escape yourself? You can silence the detractors but how do you silence your conscience? Under its rugged exterior, Sonchiriya is a spiritual puzzle on redemption, remorse and salvation, backed by stellar performances, captivating cinematography and provocative dialogue.



Staying true to his style, Abhishek Chaubey gets into the heartlands of India to take a closer, gritty look at those who think they have sinned. What lies beyond their rebellious deeds and what goes on in their minds as they stare death in the face, forms the story.



Outlaws can have morals and principles, while the so called righteous people can be devils in disguise. Whom do you trust?



Spectacularly shot across the barren valleys of Madhya Pradesh, Chaubey tries to get a perspective on what defines good and bad through his protagonists — Man Singh and his men, Vakil (Ranvir Shorey) and Lakhna (Sushant Singh Rajput). They are God fearing bandits, who question their sense of purpose and existence.



Though centred around dacoits, cops, gun battle, ambush and dangerous confrontations in the dark of the night, the film isn’t really about crime but the aftermath of it and the curse that follows the perpetrators of violence. Can they silence their inner demons or do they get consumed by it?



The provocative film addresses the laws of nature… snakes prey on mice and vultures prey on snakes. Those who kill, will be killed eventually. What’s also hard-hitting is its social commentary. Caste divide, gender discrimination, toxic patriarchy, deep rooted superstitions and why revenge shouldn’t be confused with justice.



Vishal Bhardwaj’s music and Rekha Bhardwaj’s vocals signify the characters’ inner turmoil and the empathy you feel for their need to fight a losing battle against Gujjar (Ashutosh Rana as an unforgiving cop).



Even in a special appearance, Manoj Bajpayee proves once again what a terrific actor he is. Sushant Singh Rajput brings a certain honesty to the characters he portrays and he plays Lakhna with a lot of heart. Ranvir Shorey immerses himself in his role beautifully and Bhumi Pednekar plays a courageous female character effectively. Ashutosh Rana makes for a strong anti-hero who is actually in the right.



Do note, the Bundelkhand dialect is not everyone’s cup of tea so you will be forced to look at the English subtitles and that can be a tad distracting. However, the language gets easier to comprehend with time.



Gripping, tense and unpredictable, despite being a slow-burn western, Chaubey’s period thriller makes for a riveting watch. It manages to engage, suspect, shock and transport you to a world where people yearn for salvation over survival.




