All about Mirage 2000 fighter jets used in the IAF air strikes in Balakot across LoC, Pakistan

Today, the country woke up to the news of a massive retaliatory attack by the Indian Air Force on Pakistan. Twelve days after 40 CRPF soldiers were killed in a terrorist attack in Jammu Kashmir's Pulwama, Indian Air Force struck Pakistan across the Line of Control, destroying JeM training camps in Balakot.

Calling it a preemptive action, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale released a statement at a press briefing in New Delhi saying that the strike was necessary as the JeM was planning to attempt another suicide terror attack in various other parts in India. The minister stated, "India has been repeatedly urging Pakistan to take action against the JeM to prevent jihadis from being trained and armed inside Pakistan. Pakistan has taken no concrete actions to dismantle the infrastructure of terrorism on its soil. In an intelligence-led operation in the early hours of today, India struck the biggest training camp of JeM in Balakot. In this operation, a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and groups of jihadis who were being trained for fidayeen action were eliminated."

Here's everything you might wanna know about the strike and the fighter jets that dropped the payload of bombs on terror camps in PoK.

IAF's aerial strike on Balakot in Pakistan

According to the reports, IAF dropped 1,000 kg bombs on launch pads of the Pakistan based terrorist organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed. 12 Mirage 2000 aircraft, armed with 500/1000lb laser-guided bombs, entered Pakistan territory and carried out the attacks. The IAF fighter jets dropped payload near Balakot, a town in Mansehra District in the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan. The attack happened at 3:30 am IST. The JeM facility in Balakot was headed by Maulana Yousuf Azhar who was the brother-in-law of Masood Azhar, Chief of JeM. As per the reports, terrorist launchpads in Balakot, Chakothi, and Muzaffarabad were completely destroyed in the aerial strike, along with Jaish-e-Mohammed control rooms.

When did India buy Mirage 2000?

When the US sold its F-16s to Pakistan, it propelled India to bulk up its air defence artillery. It was back in 1982 that India placed an order for 36 single-seat Mirage 2000Hs and 4 twin-seat Mirage 2000THs with Dassault - the French aircraft manufacturer. Presently, 41 multirole Mirage 2000 fighter jets are in service in the Indian Air Force.

Mirage 2000 jets were also used in 1999 Kargil war

Despite the fact that the aircraft bought by India had limited air interdiction ability and had to be modified to drop laser-guided bombs and unguided bombs, during the 1999 Kargil war with Pakistan, Mirage 2000 exhibited excellent performance in the lofty Himalayan mountains, making it India's first preference.

Mirage 2000 specifications

Mirage 2000 comes as a single-seat or two-seat multi-role fighter. The fighter jet has hands-on throttle and stick (HOTAS) control, which facilitates the pilots to access crucial cockpit functions and fly the aircraft without letting go of the control. The instrument panel has a radar screen located centrally below it and is equipped with Sextant VE-130 head-up display which shows data relating to flight control, navigation, target engagement and weapon firing. With a range of 1,550 km, the maximum speed of Mirage goes up to 2,336 km/h at high altitude and 1,110 km/h at low altitude. Mirage 2000 can carry laser-guided bombs, air-to-surface and air-to-air missiles and has a Thomson-CSF RDY (Radar Doppler Multi-target) radar on board.

Dassault had built around 600 Mirage aircraft that form a part of the air force of nine nations. Apart from India, France, Egypt, Peru, UAE, Greece, Taiwan, Qatar and Brazil have inducted Mirage 2000 in their Air Force.

NOW READ

The real story of 'Uri: The Surgical Strike' Movie: What happened in the Uri attack and how did India respond?

Uri How's the Josh dialogue: The real story behind Uri's Hows's the Josh high sir!

Five things you should know about Train 18 aka the Vande Bharat Express

> More on Get Smart
