IAF strikes in Pakistan Balakot: Masood Azhar’s brother-in-law killed in Balakot

IAF strikes in Pakistan Balakot, IAF strike Pakistan, POK beyond LOC, Balakot Sector, Air Fighter Mirage 2000 planes: India's pre-emptive air strike by IAF (Indian Air Force) in Jash camp, Balakot, in which Maulana Yusuf Azhar alias Ustad Ghauri, brother in law of JeM Chief Masood Azhar been eliminated, according to reports. Get more news and updates on Surgical strike by Indian army 2019, Air Strike on JeM camps.

File photo of key Jaish e Mohammed operatives Maulana Ammar (in pic 1, associated with Afghanistan and Kashmir ops) and Maulana Talha Saif (pic 2), brother of Maulana Masood Azhar and head of preparation wing.

IAF strikes in Pakistan Balakot: Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar’s brother-in-law Yousuf Azhar alias Ustad Ghauri has been killed in a pre-dawn air strike carried out by the Indian Air Force (IAF) on Tuesday, reports said. Twelve Mirage 2000 fighter jets of the air force carried out the attack at 3,30 am on Tuesday. The attack lasted for 37 minutes.

Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale also confirmed this in a press conference in New Delhi.

Addressing the press conference, Gokhale said the steps were taken to thwart future terrorist attacks in the country after security forces got credible information that Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed was hatching a plot to carry out another suicide attack in India and jihadis were being trained for this purpose.

So, India launched the counter-attack which the Western Air Command coordinated today.

According to sources, Modi government is reportedly satisfied with the operation that happened today and termed the operation 100 per cent successful.

#WATCH Foreign Secy says,"This facility in Balakot was headed by Maulana Yusuf Azhar alias Ustad Ghauri, brother in law of JeM Chief Masood Azhar…The selection of the target was also conditioned by our desire to avoid civilian casualty. It's located in deep forest on a hilltop" pic.twitter.com/QENnnkU5Rh — ANI (@ANI) February 26, 2019

Foreign Secretary: India is firmly&resolutely committed to taking all measures to fight the menace of terrorism.This non-military pre-emptive action was targeted specifically at JeM camp. The selection of the target was also conditioned by our desire to avoid civilian casualties. pic.twitter.com/IKoK9G2NS5 — ANI (@ANI) February 26, 2019

Vijay Gokhale: Large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders were eliminated in largest JeM camp in Balakot. Camp was led by Maulana Yusuf Azhar alias Ustad Ghauri, brother in law of JeM Chief Masood Azhar pic.twitter.com/l76nGMF0zV — ANI (@ANI) February 26, 2019

Vijay Gokhale: In an intelligence lead operation in the early hours today, India struck the biggest training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot. In this operation, a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commander & Jihadis were eliminated pic.twitter.com/bdHGdZLhdU — ANI (@ANI) February 26, 2019

Twelve days after a Jaish-e-Muhammed suicide bomber Adil Ahmed Dar attacked a convoy of the CRPF jawans in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama, the airstrike was conducted to avenge the death of our security personnel.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
