India vs Pakistan: Could World War 3 break out between India and Pakistan after bombing?

India carries out airstrike on Pakistan following Pulwama attack

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Tensions have been elevating between India and Pakistan since a suicide car bombing by Pakistan-based militants in Indian-controlled Kashmir. India retaliated by conducting an air strike on what it said was a militant training base. Pakistan on Wednesday carried out air strikes and shot down two Indian jets in India-occupied Kashmir, Major General Asif Ghafoor, a spokesman for the Pakistan armed forces said.

He told a news conference: “This was not a retaliation in true sense, but to tell Pakistan has capability, we can do it, but we want to be responsible, we don’t want an escalation, we don’t want a war.” Indian jets have targeted and bombed a militant camp in Pakistani territory, India’s foreign secretary said on Tuesday. The airstrikes hit a training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed, the group which claimed credit for a suicide car bomb attack that killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police in Kashmir on February 14. The retaliation will increase tensions between the two nuclear armed neighbours.

India vs Pakistan: Indians celebrated the airstrikes on a militant camp in Pakistan

Indian minister Rajendra Sing Shekhawat said: “Air Force carried out aerial strike early morning today at terror camps and completely destroyed it.” Vijay Gokhale, India’s top diplomat, said a “very large number” of militants were killed in the airstrike in Balakot, a town in a remote valley in Pakistan’s Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, but did not provide a precise figure for the casualties. He told reporters in New Delhi: “Acting on intelligence, India early today stuck the biggest training camp of Jaish e-Mohammed in Ballot. “In this operation a very large number of Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and Jehadis being trained were eliminated.”

A senior Indian government source said 300 militants had been killed in the strikes but no details were provided. However, Pakistan has downplayed the attack, saying the aircraft did not cause any damage as the payload was released prematurely when repulsed by forces. Balakot police chief Saghir Hussain Shah said: “There are no casualties, there are no damages on the ground because of the dropping of the bombs.” Pakistan military spokesman Major General Asif Ghafoor said on Twitter: “Indian aircrafts intruded from Muzaffarabad sector.”

India vs Pakistan: The airstrikes hit a training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed

He said the Indian aircraft “released payload in haste, while escaping, which fell near Balakot. No casualties or damage.” There has been no immediate explanation for the different accounts but India and Pakistan routinely contradict the other. The February 14 attack in Indian-ruled Kashmire was the worst attack on Indian forces since the start of the 1989 insurgency in Kashmir and came as Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi is in the middle of a re-election campaign. Modi has vowed a strong response to the deadly single assault.

India vs Pakistan: Vijay Gokhale said a large number of militants were killed in the attack
