India ERUPTS: Kashmiri protesters clash with police as Modi supporters BURN Pakistan flag

Indian demonstrators burn a Pakistan flag

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Indian newspaper The Statesman reported Mr Malik had been arrested by National Investigation Agency (NIA) officers and taken to Kothibagh Police Station, triggering violent protests from Kashmiri Muslims. Security forces fired pellets in the air and teargas shells to disperse stone-throwing youths. Several leaders from another separate organisation, Jamaat-e-Islami were arrested during the raid, including its chief, Abdul Hamid Fayaz, a Jamaat spokesman said.



One hundred additional companies of paramilitary soldiers were airlifted to Srinagar to support the Jammu and Kashmir Police and the existing security forces in handling the situation as violence flared on the streets. Meanwhile, pictures showed people near the international border with Pakistan in Amritsar, India, waving an Indian national flag as they lit fireworks and burned an effigy wrapped in a Pakistan flag representing Pakistan in celebration of the air raids. The Indian Air Force said it had carried out air strikes with 12 Mirage jets, which dropped 1,000 kilogram bombs on the camp. The air strikes occurred two weeks after a suicide bomber from the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed group detonated a car bomb next to a security convoy traveling in Pulwama.

Indian nationals celebrate today's air strikes

There has been a state of emergency in the region after the attack on February 14, which claimed the lives of 44 paramilitary policemen. A suicide bomber detonated an vehicle laden with explosives near their bus, with militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed.

subsequently claiming responsibility.



The air strikes were launched today, India claiming they had killed at training camp “known to Pakistan authorities” as tensions between the two nuclear powers threatened to boil over. India’s Foreign Minister Vijay Gokhale said: ”In the face of imminent danger, a pre-emptive strike became absolutely necessary.

Police in Kashmir clash with stone-throwing youths

A policeman fires of a teargas canister

I assure you, the country is in safe hands Narendra Modi

“The existence of such training facilities, capable of training hundreds of jihadis could not have functioned without the knowledge of the Pakistani authorities.” Speaking at a rally hours later, the country’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi said: "I assure you, the country is in safe hands." "I pledge on this soil, I will not let the country die, I will not let the country stop, I will not let the country bend. “It is my promise to Mother India, I will protect your honour."

Imran Khan reaches out to Narendra Modi for peace talks
