Shilpa Shinde Reacts To Online Hatred And Rape Threats For Supporting Navjot Sidhu

The internet is a horrible place at times and sometimes trolling transcends every boundary of sanity and normalcy. Navjot Singh Sidhu landed himself amidst a big controversy after his comments on Pulwama terror attack. Expressing his opinion, Navjot had earlier said,

“For a handful of people, can you blame the entire nation and can you blame an individual? It is a cowardly act and I condemn it firmly. Violence is always condemn-able and those who did it must be punished,”.

Sidhu’s remarks were not just trolled but he was also sacked and replaced from the show. Extending her support to Sidhu, Shilpa Shinde told media,

“I am totally against the new phenomenon of banning anyone whose views you don’t concur with. Sadly, CINTAA and other industry bodies are equally complicit in this. Everyone has the right to occupation; you can’t deny me the right to earn my livelihood. In the same vein, I also bat for the rights of Pakistani artists to work in Bollywood, purely on the basis of talent. I have been a victim of this ban culture, so know what’s wrong with it.”

These remarks didn't go down too well with people and the actress started getting heavily trolled. The backlash on social media was so severe that she even received rape threats.

Shinde spoke to TOI and commented,

"I don't care at all. You really think I will be scared and keep myself secured in the four walls of my house, No that's not happening.These people will say anything but I don't care about it. I have been facing such online harassment since ages now for anything that I say or do which is not in their favour, so it doesn't bother me anymore. Also, I heard some reports stating that I will be taking legal action against these threats. But it's false news, I don't pay heed and don't want to take any action. Let them say whatever they want to. We talk about safety and look where is the safety for women in our own country?"

It was very recent that she took a decision of entering politics and she joined the Indian National Congress Party.
