France recognises India's need to ensure security, asks Pakistan to end terror activities

Five nuclear-weapon states issue first joint statement: N-war cannot be won, must never be fought

Move over Omicron, 'IHU' is the new Covid-19 variant with '46 mutations' detected in France

France recognises India's need to ensure security, asks Pakistan to end terror activities

International

oi-Madhuri Adnal

Paris, Feb 26: France too joined the European Union and China to call for restraint from India and Pakistan after Indian warplanes bombed a terrorist camp deep across the Line of Control, but also supported India's need to ensure security.

[How the IAF strike at Balakot unfolded: All the updates here]

A spokesperson of the French Foreign Ministry said Paris recognises India's legitimacy to ensure its security against cross-border terrorism and asked Pakistan to put an end to the operations of terrorist groups established on its territory.

"France recognises India's legitimacy to ensure its security against cross-border terrorism and asks Pakistan to put an end to the operations of terrorist groups established on its territory": Acting spokesperson of France's Ministry of Europe & Foreign Affairs, according to ANI.

"France,which stands by India in the fight against terrorism in all its forms, is fully engaged in mobilising int'l community to sanction terrorists responsible for this attack (Pulwama) and freezing their financing networks": France's Ministry of Europe & Foreign Affairs.

[This viral video claiming IAF strike on Balakot is from a video game]

France also called upon India and Pakistan to exercise restraint to avert any risk of military escalation and preserve strategic stability in region.

"France calls on India&Pak to exercise restraint to avert any risk of military escalation & preserve strategic stability in region. Resumption of dialogue b/w Islamabad-New Delhi necessary to initiate peaceful settlement of differences," ANI further quoted the spokesperson of France's Ministry of Europe&Foreign Affairs.

Indian Air Force jets had targeted a terror camp where Pakistan-backed Jaish terrorists were preparing suicide attacks on its cities, India's Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said earlier in the day. He said a "very very large number" of terrorists from the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) group were killed in the strike.

Pakistan Prime Minister has vowed retaliation and asked his fellow countrymen to brace for "anything" that can happen.
