Surgical Strike 2 on Pakistan: Akshay Kumar says andar ghus ke maaro on Pulwama revenge attack

Akshay Kumar hails Indian Air Force for striking down terrorist camps in Pakistan.

Two weeks after the deadly terrorist attack in Pulwama in Kashmir, Indian Air Force's fighter jets crossed the Line of Control to destroy major terrorist camps near Balakot with bombs in the wee hours of Tuesday.

IAF sources revealed that 10 Air Force Mirage jets dropped 1000 kg bombs on terror camps across the LoC. The targets were terror camps and launch pads of Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) among other terrorist groups, the source said.

The airstrikes were in retaliation to the dastardly attack by a JeM suicide bomber on a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy in the Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir earlier this month, which claimed the lives of at least 40 soldiers.

And like like aam junta, Bollywood, too, is hailing India Air Force's surgical strike on Pakistan.

After Ajay Devgn, Abhishek Bachchan and Vivek Oberoi praised the Indian Air Force for giving a befitting reply to the terrorists, Akshay Kumar is the latest to join the bandwagon.

Akshay said that he is proud of India Air Force fighters for destroying the terrorist camps.

He wrote, "Proud of our #IndianAirForce fighters for destroying terror camps! Andar ghus ke maaro! Quiet no more! #IndiaStrikesBack."

Proud of our #IndianAirForce fighters for destroying terror camps. ???? ??? ?? ???? ! Quiet no more! #IndiaStrikesBack February 26, 2019

Akshay recently donated Rs 5 crore to the CRPF soldiers who lost their lives in Pulwama attack.

Akshay's Holiday co-star Sonakshi Sinha wrote, "Jai Hind."

Jai Hind! ???? Sonakshi Sinha (@sonakshisinha) February 26, 2019

Ajay Devgn also tweeted, ""Mess with the best, die like the rest. Salute #IndianAirForce. @narendramodi"

Mess with the best, die like the rest. Salute #IndianAirForce.@narendramodi. Ajay Devgn (@ajaydevgn) February 26, 2019

India strikes back after Pulwama LIVE: IAF destroys terror camps across LoC, Rahul Gandhi salutes pilots

ALSO READ | 1000 kg bombs, Mirage 2000 jets: India attacks Pakistan, what we know so far

ALSO WATCH | Indian air strike across LoC: Pakistan journo tweets video
