India’s fractured past

Invoking India’s past generally sets off three kinds of reactions, – ‘Glorious! inspirational’, ‘Right- wing, revivalist stuff!’, or ‘Delusional, regressive’, depending on which past is invoked or who is reacting. As always, our past is very much present and causing complications.

The past (Hindu in the present context) has two sides; the inspirational ‘legacy’ of art, culture, literature, philosophy etc. and ‘orthodoxy’ of past customs and beliefs which, to many, provide rhythm and sense of accomplishment to life. Legacy part is valuable and belongs to all, whereas orthodoxy can be problematic when misused by community leaders and politicians. The two sides of the past are often taken together, and the regressive parts of ‘orthodoxy’ are highlighted to show Hinduism in bad light. It annoys many Hindus who are proud of their legacy and protective of their core beliefs.

Being proud of the legacy of the past is no sin, nor necessarily an obstacle to progress as some believe. For instance, the rediscovered values of Classical Greco-Roman period inspired Europe to lift itself out of Dark Age into a renaissance and the founding fathers of the United States to fight for independence and write a great constitution enshrining liberal values. Past-glory becomes a drag on progress only if, instead of being inspiration for betterment, it becomes a matter for sterile pride.

How not to be inspired by the past is exemplified by the rampaging ISIS. It has committed unspeakable crimes stirred by some cranky notion of Islamic valour of the past, instead of emulating the legacy of tolerance and great learning during the notable periods of Islamic rule. So, pride in the past can be progressive, regressive or outright dangerous depending on which aspect of it is taken as the ideal.

India’s past, being badly fractured along sectarian lines, has many ‘pasts’, often mutually exclusive, to emulate, like perhaps -‘Sangam’ for most Tamilians, the Caliphates for some Muslims, ‘Vedic’ for some Hindus (not for Dalits) and ‘Ramarajya’ for many, and so on. So much so, mindful liberals prudently exhort the nation to just march forward and forget the past.

India’s past is a prisoner of politics and groups. But world over, countries take pride in their past without any dissent, – like the West of its classical Graeco-Roman period or Islam of its Caliphates- because their populations are far more homogenous than India’s.

For a true patriot like Nehru, India’s past was of only INDIA, not of any religion, region or group. So, his ‘Discovery of India’ became the finest summary of our past: to remember, be proud of and get inspired by. Our past, marked by individualism, enquiring minds and scholarship, is rich with mythologies, architectural and artistic achievements, literature and great philosophies. It has inspired and continues to inspire our thinkers, artists and writers, while the music, dance, Ayurveda and Yoga of the past are much in vogue in some or the other form. An example of our past shaping the present is – how Gandhiji, an ardent follower of Bhagavad Gita, developed satyagraha based on ‘Civil Disobedience’ by Thoreau, who too was influenced by Bhagavad-Gita, the ‘stupendous and cosmological philosophy’ – as he put it. The legacy of our past is very much with us and will continue to inspire us in many ways.

But the same is not true of the many Hindu customs and beliefs. While some are quaint and add colour and cheer to life, others are misused by some Hindus for anti-social acts such as lynching in the name of cow, aggressively opposing supposed ‘Un-Indian’ behaviour or promoting irrationality with preposterous theories about ancient ‘scientific achievements’ based on events in mythologies which admittedly have ‘science-fiction’ touches remarkably clever for that time.

While past Hindu customs like ‘Sati’ or untouchability are unequivocally condemnable, some like ‘caste system’ and ‘cow protection’ are tricky to handle. For instance, caste is apparently fair for reservations, evil as a social-system, and game for elections, even as most Indians are comfy in its fold.

‘Cow protection’ issue arises due to certain Hindu sensibilities shaped by the bonding many rural and semi-urban people have with the cows in their cowsheds, as also Krishna-legends and the tradition of cow-worship. So, no wonder, illicit and cruel cow-slaughter causes outrage, just as cruelty to pet dogs or stray dogs might cause to pet-owners and animal-activists. If culling of unproductive cows had been humane and well-regulated, the present flareup perhaps could have been avoided. But appalling lynching incidents have now vitiated ‘cow-protection’ issue. However, generalizing it as the sign of an ‘intolerant society’ (read Hindu) has upset the tolerant Hindu-majority, who feel they are being framed. Nothing good can come out of such allegation.

Ideally, lynching-accused should be promptly punished, and illicit cow-slaughter eradicated. Unfortunately, people are also lynched rather routinely on mere suspicion of committing crimes like child-lifting or stealing, and such mobocracy in general can only be due to the poor quality of human development over the years.

Lynching by cow vigilantes, though rare and isolated considering our vast population, are unfortunately used by some individuals to give a shine to their liberal credentials. Their narrative of an intolerant (Hindus, obviously) society heading towards doom only creates a sense of despondency while being an affront to the majority Hindus who are tolerant. If the multiple, premeditated terrorist acts by radicalized Muslims with hundreds of lives lost were rightly treated as crimes without generalizing them to imply Muslims society as ‘intolerant’, certainly the lynching by the ‘cow- fanatics’ need not be generalized to imply Hindus society as intolerant.

Those who extrapolate lynching incidents to doomsday scenario should remember the decades of hate-mongering that led to Partition and horrendous carnage which neither the national leaders nor the British could stop. While the current situation appears ‘tranquil’ in comparison, some of that poison is still in the soil. But despite that, despite being riven by caste, creed, language and ethnicity like no other nation, and despite the socio-political mischiefs being played, India continues to prosper. It proves the overall resilience and tolerance of the people; we should be proud of them- not run them

down.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
