Mukesh Ambani joins global rich list with $54 bn net worth

03 Jun 2019, 12:46 PM

Mukesh Ambani joins global rich list with $54 billion net worth

Reliance Industries chairman Mukesh Ambani has broken into the top 10 richest list globally with a networth of $54 billion, while his younger brother Anil has paled into the oblivion having lost over 65 percent of his net worth, according to a report. The Hurun Global Rich List 2019 is topped by Amazon chief Jeff Bezos for the second year in a row, while the senior Ambani is placed 10th with a net worth of Rs 3.83 lakh crore

Pakistan to boycott Indian movies after IAF strikes Jaish camps in Balakot

Bollywood has been a bridge between India and Pakistan through several tense years. But the latest escalation in tension between the two embittered neighbours is set to burn this bridge. In the wake of the Pulwama terror attack, which claimed the lives of 44 CRPF troopers, All India Cine Workers Association had announced a blanket ban on Pakistani artists from working in Indian films earlier this month. Now, after Indian Air Force's surgical strike on its soil, Pakistan is planning to boycott Indian movies.The Cinema Exhibitors Association in Pakistan has decided to boycott all content originating from India

India again extends deadline for imposition of higher import duties on 29 US products till April 1

The Narendra Modi-led government on Tuesday extended the deadline to impose retaliatory customs duties on 29 US products, including almond, walnut and pulses, till April 1. As discussions are going on between India and the US for a proposed trade package, the commerce ministry had asked its finance counterpart to again defer the implementation of a notification to impose high duties on US products.

Pakistan Army doesn't think Indian Air Force carried out a strike, but promises to retaliate

After the Indian Air Force's air strikes on the terrorist camps of Jaish-e-Mohammed in the early hours of February 26, the countries have continued to engage in a war of words. While India said that around 350 terrorists were killed, Pakistan refuted the claims. The Director General (DG) of Inter Services Public Relations (ISPR), Major General Asif Ghafoor refuted details of the air strike altogether but added that Pakistan would retaliate and that India should brace for a surprise.

Rahul Gandhi, Kejriwal laud IAF pilots for air strikes on Pakistan

Congress president Rahul Gandhi Tuesday lauded the pilots of the Indian Air Force after air strikes on Pakistan. Gandhi also put out the Indian flag along with his tweet. The Congress also tweeted, lauding the role of the Indian Air Force in keeping Indians safe with its consistent and determined effort.
