Chennai: 27-year-old woman complains of boyfriend's torture to police, says he made her a drug addict

young woman complains Torture | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: In a sensational complaint registered with the police, a woman engineer has accused her boyfriend of seducing her and spoiling her life by turning her into a drug addict.

The police control room received an emergency call some days back. The woman complainant said that she was beaten up by a person and her mobile phone was broken by him too. Later, the control room passed on this complaint to the Teynampet police. Police reached the spot and made enquiries. They found a woman in a stoned condition unable to even make conversation. Immediately, police took the help of her friends and obtained a statement, in writing, about the incident. They then sent the girl with her friends.

On making enquiries, the police identified the complainant as one Radha (27), (name changed) who belongs to Coimbatore. She is a Diploma Engineer and had been working in Chennai for the last three years. She has also been conducting some minor events in hotels. At that time, through her friends, she befriended one Aasan Feroze Khan, who runs an ice-cream outlet in Perambur.

Aasan kept promising her that he would get her a job in an organisation he is familiar with. The friendship between them quickly escalated into a relationship. The two had moved in together. It was later revealed that Aasan was a drug addict and made Radha consume drugs too. During this, Radha learnt that Aasan was married and had children, which led to a strain in their relationship.

Meanwhile, Radha developed a relationship with another man which made Aasan angry. On February 24, during the birthday party of one of Radha’s friends in a hotel in Adyar, Aasan is said to have been enraged on seeing Radha being intimate with her friend. He called her to the hotel toilet, attacked her viciously, broke her mobile phone and left the place.

Radha has filed a complaint with the Teynampet police station that Aasan had made her an addict and had tortured her. Based on this complaint the police are conducting the investigations.
