Indian troops martyr two Kashmiri youth in IOK

SRINAGAR (Web Desk) – In occupied Kashmir, Indian troops in their fresh act of state terrorism martyred two Kashmiri youth in Shopian district, today (Wednesday), Kashmir Media Service reported.



The troops martyred the youth during a cordon and search operation in Memender area of the district. The operation continued till last reports came in.



Indian notorious National Investigation Agency also conducted widespread raids on the residences of senior resistance leaders including Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, Muhammad Yasin Malik and Shabbir Ahmed Shah in Srinagar.



The NIA sleuths broke into the Nigeen residence of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and carried out searches. They also conducted similar raids on the residences of Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, Muhammad Yasin Malik, Shabbir Ahmed Shah, Zafar Akbar Butt and Dr Nayeem Gilani, the son of APHC Chairman, Syed Ali Gilani.



The Joint Resistance Leadership has called for a two-day complete shutdown from tomorrow against the NIA crackdown on the entire resistance leadership and extensive spree of arrests in the Kashmir valley. The leadership comprising Syed Ali Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Muhammad Yasin Malik in a statement issued in Srinagar, today, said the arrest of thousands of Kashmiri people and threat to the state subject law, Article 35-A, are all acts on the part of India, which are aimed at suppressing the voice of the Kashmiri people by the dint of military might.



Forceful anti-India protests were held in Maisuma area of Srinagar, today, against the NIA raids and arrests of pro-freedom leaders and activists by the Indian forces. The troops used brute force and fired teargas shells on the protesters, who raised pro-freedom, pro-Pakistan and anti-India slogans.



The Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Gilani, in a statement issued in Srinagar reacted sharply to the invitation extended to the Indian External Affairs Minister Shushma Swaraj by the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation to attend its upcoming session. He said, the Muslims in Kashmir are bruised by the continued repression and torture at the hands of Indian forces. He said India is occupying Jammu and Kashmir against all moral, ethical, democratic and human norms, leading to unending bloodshed and widespread devastation in the territory.



The Grand Mufti of Kashmir, Mufti Nasirul Islam, while addressing a meeting of the Muslim Personal Law Board and civil society members in Srinagar, sought intervention by the international community for settlement of the Kashmir dispute in the interest of peace in South Asia.



There is no let-up in the crackdown on Jamaat-e-Islami leaders and activists, as more than 400 activists have been detained since Friday. Deputy Inspector General of Police, Atul Kumar Goel, confirmed the arrest of 200 JI members in South Kashmir alone. The detainees include the elderly and ailing activists. Indian troops launched cordon and search operations in Kulgam and Shopian districts.
