Cross-Border Shelling at LoC Continues, Reports Say 4 Civilians Killed in PoK

New Delhi: The Indian Army destroyed five Pakistani posts along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir on Tuesday night to retaliate against firing from across the border, resulting in a “number of casualties” to Pak troops, a defence official said.

“The Indian Army retaliated for effect and our focused fire resulted in severe destruction to five posts and number of casualties to Pak army (along LoC in Rajouri and Poonch districts),” the defence PRO said.

From 6:30 pm onwards, the Pakistani army initiated a ceasefire violation by shelling with heavy calibre weaponry along the LoC out of frustration, he said.

The Pak troops were also seen firing mortars and missiles from civilian houses, using villagers as human shields, he said.

While the Indian Army PRO said the targeted Pak posts were away from civilian areas, Al Jazeera reported that at least four civilians, including children, were killed in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

“So far, four people have been killed in the shelling,” Nasrullah Khan, a senior hospital official, told the channel.

“An Indian mortar shell hit a house in Nakyal sector along the Line of Control that killed a mother, daughter and son,” AFP quoted local disaster management authority official Shariq Tariq as saying. The fourth death was reportedly in Khuiratta town.

Cross-border shelling reportedly continued on Wednesday, with PTI saying that Pakistani troops shelled Indian posts in the Uri sector of Jammu and Kashmir. A police official said that there were no reports of any casualties so far.

The official said the Indian Army retaliated to the Pakistani action in an equal measure.

Heavy shelling from Pakistan after IAF airstrikes

Five Army soldiers were injured and two houses damaged as Pakistani army resorted to heavy mortar shelling on 55 forward areas in Jammu, Rajouri and Poonch districts on Tuesday, officials said, hours after Indian Air Force jets struck a Jaish-e-Mohamamd terror camp across the LoC.

The Pakistani army used heavy weaponry, firing 120-mm mortar targeting civilian hamlets and forward posts since 5:30 pm on Tuesday, they said.

Also read | ‘No Further Escalation Desired’: India Holds Diplomatic Briefings on Air Strikes

They fired from small, automatic and heavy weaponry in Krishna Gati, Balakote, Khari Karmara, Mankote, Tarkundi areas in Poonch district; Kalal, Baba Khori, Kalsian, Laam and Jhangar areas in Rajouri; and Pallanwala and Laleali sub sectors in Jammu, officials said.

In Akhnoor sector, five soldiers were injured and have been hospitalised, they said.

In Mankote sector of Poonch, two houses were damaged, they said.

The officials said Indian troops gave a “befitting reply” to the firing.

According to officials, more than a dozen ceasefire violations took place on Tuesday the fourth consecutive day of Pakistan shelling and firing on Indian posts.

Earlier on Tuesday, Pakistan violated ceasefire in Nowshera sector along the LoC, an officer said, adding that locals in the border areas have been asked to not venture out.

Panic gripped the border areas and some locals have left their homes and moved to safer areas, multiple reports said.

Authorities have ordered a temporary closure of educational institutions in a 5-km radius along the LoC in Rajouri and Poonch districts on Wednesday.

Since last Wednesday, Pakistan has violated ceasefire everyday, barring Friday, the officer said.

The year 2018 had witnessed the highest number of ceasefire violations numbering 2,936 by Pakistani troops in the last 15 years along the Indo-Pak border.

Also read | Balakot Villagers Claim Only One Injury But Jaish-linked Madrasa May Have Been Hit

Pakistan continues to violate the 2003 ceasefire agreement with India, despite repeated calls for restraint and adherence to the pact during flag meetings between the two sides.

Amid mounting tensions between the two countries, following the Pulwama terror attack on Feb 14 and an Indian airstrike on Jaish-e-Mohammed camp inside Pakistan Tuesday, people along the LoC and the International Border are living in fear.

(With PTI inputs)
