Imran Khan offers to hold talks with India

Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan on Wednesday afternoon addressed the nation after Pakistan Air Force (PAF) jets successfully targeted non-military targets across the LoC earlier in the day and later shot down two Indian Air Force jets that had trespassed into Pakistani territory.

Two pilots were also captured by Pakistan’s armed forces following the aerial combat. One was identified as Wing Commander Abhi Nandan. The other as yet unidentified pilot is receiving medical care at a military hospital, agency reported.

“I wanted to take the nation into confidence over the developments since yesterday morning,” the premier began.

“We offered peace to India after what happened in Pulwama. I understand the pain of the families [who lost family members in Pulwama]. I have visited hospitals and seen the pain of people affected by violence.

“We offered India that we would investigate. We wanted to cooperate and were ready to do so. I feared that India would still take action, and I had therefore warned India against aggression.”

“When India stuck yesterday morning, we spoke to our army command and waited to take action till we assessed the damage caused.

“Our action was only intended to convey that if you can come into our country, we can do the same. Two of their MiGs were shot down (in the ensuing action). From here, it is imperative that we use our heads and act with wisdom,” he said.

“All wars are miscalculated, and no one knows where they lead to. World War I was supposed to end in weeks, it took six years. Similarly, the war on terrorism was not supposed to last 17 years.

“I ask India: with the weapons you have and the weapons we have, can we really afford a miscalculation? If this escalates, it will no longer be in my control or in Modi’s.

“We understand the grief that you have suffered in Pulwama and are ready for a probe and dialogue.

“Let’s sit together and settle this with talks,” the prime minister concluded.
