Student abducted by 'brother's friend' and gang raped by six men for two days

The woman - who is now in critical condition - was dumped in a forest after being held captive and subjected to a horrific ordeal in Jharkhand, India

Student abducted by 'brother's friend' and gang raped by six men for two days

A 20-year-old engineering student is alleged to have been abducted by a man posing as her brother's friend before being gang raped by six men for two days.

The woman is in a critical condition after being dumped in a forest after her ordeal.

Police are investigating the incident which happened on New Year's Eve in Jharsuguda, Odisha, India.

The student told police she was waiting for a train at Rourkela Junction railway station when she met a young man claiming to be friends with her brother.

She says he convinced her to board a different train to reach her destination, claiming due to track repair works, services were being diverted.

When she realised she was not travelling in the right direction, the suspect continued with his charade, advising her to alight with him at Lotapahar railway station, in Jharkhand, and take a bus to reach Jharsuguda.

But instead he dragged her to a house and held her captive.

Later, five more men arrived and the group raped her repeatedly in turn for two days.

On the evening of January 1, the woman was driven to a dark forest and dumped in critical condition. Her attackers fled.

She was discovered by locals who took her to Chakradharpur police station.

The woman is now in critical condition at a hospital in Rourkela.

Image: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Superintendent Ajay Pratap Swain said no one has been arrested so far but officers are investigating.

Two days ago, Prime Minister Narendra Modi accused the Naveen Patnaik-led BJD government in Odisha of being negligent towards the safety and security of women in the state.

Official data shows there have been 5,422 cases of rapes of minor and 671 cases of gang rape between 2014 and 2017.

Only 135 people have been convicted during this period.
