Mahira Khan breaks silence on IAF strike on JeM camp: 'Nothing more ignorant than cheering for war, Pakistan Zindabad'

On February 14, 2019, India witnessed one of the most disastrous terrorist attacks held in Pulwama. The attack led to the death of around 40 CRPF jawans. India avenged the dastardly attack by a swift air strike by Indian Air Force (IAF) on Tuesday which reportedly led to the killings of about 350 terrorists and trainers. Pakistan 'strongly rejected India's claim' of targeting terrorist camp near Balakot and causing heavy casualties.

Soon after the air strike by IAF, many Bollywood celebrities hailed India's military for their prompt action and it evoked patriotism in everyone's hearts. Netizens, on the other hand, wished Pakistani celebrities to break their silence on the recent state of events between the two countries, beginning from Pulwama attack to IAF's air strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed's biggest training camp in Pakistan.

Pakistan's former Ministry of Planning, Development and Reform, Hussain Nadim tweeted on Tuesday, "Not gonna lie but in this entire #India - #Pakistan fiasco in recent days I’ve found a new respect for Pakistani journalists, analysts, celebrities & twitter folks. No calls for war, jingoism or hate-mongering with India. That tells a lot where we are headed." Raees actor Mahira Khan finally broke her silence and quote tweeted Hussain's tweet and wrote, "Same"

Moreover, Fatima Bhutto, granddaughter of former Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto tweeted, "There is nothing uglier than people cheering for war. I pray for peace for India and Pakistan." Mahira agreed to Fatima's tweet and wrote, "Nothing uglier. Nothing more ignorant than cheering for war. May sense prevail.. Pakistan zindabad."

Take a look at her tweets below:

Nothing uglier. Nothing more ignorant than cheering for war. May sense prevail.. Pakistan zindabad. https://t.co/sH0VGGAERC — Mahira Khan (@TheMahiraKhan) February 26, 2019

Mahira had made her debut in Bollywood, in the year 2017 with the film, Raees opposite Shah Rukh Khan. The actor couldn't promote the film as she was banned from India in the wake of Uri Attacks of 2016.
