India-Pakistan crisis: a visual guide to the Kashmir tensions

The disputed region of Kashmir has been at the centre of tensions between India and Pakistan since both states came into being in 1947. Both claim it in full, and each controls a section of the territory. These sections are separated by one of the most heavily militarised borders in the world, known as the line of control, where there are frequent exchanges of artillery and small arms fire. The two countries have gone to war three times over Kashmir, most recently in 1999.

The roots of the current escalation lie in a bomb attack by Pakistan-based militants, Jaish-e-Mohammad, on an Indian army convoy in the Indian-controlled portion of Kashmir on 14 February, which killed 40 troops.

26 February

India blamed Pakistan for the bombing, and in the early hours of Tuesday it launched attacks from the furthest inside Pakistani territory since 1971, targeting with airstrikes what it claimed was a terrorist training camp. Pakistan said the Indian jets dropped bombs on a hilltop near the town of Balakot but there were no casualties, and it produced photographs to back up its claims. Pakistan’s military spokesman told India’s leaders to prepare for a “surprise”.

A view of damage caused to trees in hilly terrain after Indian jets dropped bombs in the Balakot area. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images

27 February

Pakistan launched strikes on the Indian side of the line of control and a dogfight ensued when Indian jets retaliated. Pakistan said two Indian jets were shot down and India said it hit one Pakistani warplane, which fell on the Pakistani side of the border. Pakistan captured an Indian pilot, identified as Wing Commander Abhi Nandan.

Pakistan said it kept a safe distance from military and civilian sites and stayed on its side of the line of control when it launched its airstrikes, but India claimed Pakistan targeted a military installation. Pakistan denied losing a jet.

The incidents have raised concerns of a greater escalation. Tens of thousands of Indian and Pakistani soldiers face off along the Kashmir boundary and the sides both possess nuclear weapons.

Pakistan’s prime minister, Imran Khan, has appealed for talks with India, making reference to both countries’ nuclear arsenals: “With the weapons you have and the weapons we have, can we afford miscalculation? Shouldn’t we think that if this escalates, what will it lead to?”

India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, has yet to comment publicly. India has called for the pilot’s immediate return.
