Not to attend OIC meeting if Sushma attends, says Qureshi

ISLAMABAD: Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi on Wednesday said he will not attend a meeting of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) scheduled for next month if Indian External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj participates in it.

The Indian minister has been invited as a "guest of honour" at the inaugural session of the foreign ministers' conclave in Abu Dhabi next month.

Speaking to Geo Pakistan, Qureshi said, "I have no reservations with OIC or any other Islamic country. My reservations are with Indian Foreign Minister Sushma Swaraj's attendance at the OIC meeting."

"If Swaraj attends the meeting, I will not participate in it," the foreign minister asserted. Qureshi shared that UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlut Cavusoglu telephoned him. "The Turkish foreign minister telephoned me himself and sought to be briefed on the current situation."

"Cavusoglu clarified that Turkey is fully standing behind Pakistani people and government," he added. "The Turkish foreign minister said the prayers and cooperation of Turks are with their Pakistani brothers and sisters."

Cavusoglu in his telephonic conversation with Foreign Minister Qureshin assured him that Turkey also declared to oppose the move for the Indian external affairs minister to speak at the upcoming Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) meeting in Abu Dhabi.

Turkey has offered mediation to ease the tensions between Islamabad and New Delhi on Wednesday after Pakistan Air Force (PAF) struck down two Indian Air Force planes and captured one pilot.

Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlut Cavusoglu said that he has told Pakistan that “Turkey is willing to mediate between India and Pakistan”. According to Turkish media, the minister said that he had a phone contact with his Pakistani counterpart Shah Mehmood Qureshi, but not with any Indian official yet.

Expressing concerns over the prevailing tensions, Mavlut said: “We are concerned over this tension. We want to call for common sense and calm between the parties. Steps that will escalate the tension should be avoided.”

He also said the main issue between the two neighbouring countries was “Kashmir issue” and this issue must be solved “as soon as possible” within the framework of the international law.

“This is also important for people of (occupied) Kashmir,” he added. “Turkey is always willing to contribute to easing tension and to resolving these issues, including Kashmir,” Mavlut said. He said, “We are open to dialogue and of course we want to discuss this issue with India.”

Later Qureshi said that the UN Secretary General had also telephoned him and while expressing concern over the current situation in Pakistan, assured to play his role in whatever way and manner he could.

India was told in no uncertain terms on Wednesday that its continuous ceasefire violations are a threat to regional peace and security and may lead to a strategic miscalculation.

It has been asked to respect the 2003 Ceasefire arrangement, investigate incident of February 26 along the Line of Control and other incidents of ceasefire violations, instruct the Indian forces to respect the ceasefire, in letter and spirit and maintain peace on the LoC and the Working Boundary.

This message was given by Director General (SA & SAARC), when he summoned the Indian Acting High Commissioner Gaurav Ahluwalia and condemned the unprovoked ceasefire violations by the Indian occupation forces along the Line of Control on 26 February in Nikial and Khuiratta Sectors.

This resulted in the shahadats of four innocent civilians named Mottia Bibi, Zarina, Gulfaraz and Shehnaz, while injuring six others.

“The Indian forces along the Line of Control and the Working Boundary are continuously targeting civilian populated areas with heavy weapons. This unprecedented escalation in ceasefire violations by India is continuing from the year 2017 when the Indian forces committed 1970 ceasefire violations”, says the Foreign Office.

The Indian diplomat was told that the deliberate targeting of civilian populated areas is indeed deplorable and contrary to human dignity, international human rights and humanitarian laws.

India has also been told that it should permit UNMOGIP to play its mandated role as per the UN Security Council resolutions. Meanwhile, India also summoned Pakistan’s Deputy High Commissioner to lodge a strong protest over what it said were Pakistan Air Force’s bid to attack Indian military installations. Pakistan Deputy High Commissioner Syed Haider Shah was also told about an Indian pilot captured by Pakistan.
