Wing Commander Varthaman displays dignity in captivity

NEW DELHI: Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, captured by the Pakistan army after his fighter jet was shot down, followed his father footsteps to join the Indian Air Force . His father, Simhakutty Varthaman, retired as Air Marshal and was C-in-C of the Eastern Command. Varthaman senior served in the 1999 Kargil war too.Abhinandan joined the National Defence Academy in 2000 and was commissioned as a fighter pilot in 2004. He was a Su30MKI pilot before he started flying MiG21s. On Wednesday morning, his MiG21 Bison was shot down after he intercepted and engaged in an aerial dogfight with intruding Pakistani jets in the Naushera sector of Jammu & Kashmir.In a television documentary on the IAF’s Su30MKI aired in May 2011, Abhinandan was asked what it took to be a Su30 pilot. Then a Flight Lieutenant, he smiled before replying: “Bad attitude! What makes us really good at this is the training we have gone through.” The videos released by Pakistan on Wednesday show him answering questions in a dignified manner and refusing to answer queries on his aircraft-make or his mission.Varthaman senior was commissioned as a fighter pilot in 1973, and has more than 4,000 flying hours, piloting 40 types of aircraft.He was IAF’s chief test pilot at the Aircraft Systems Testing Establishment and coordinated the upgrade of the Mirage 2000 fighter jets. He commanded an airbase in the western sector during Operation Parakram, the military build-up along the border after the 2001 terrorist attack on Parliament.After retirement, he led an expert committee in 2017 to examine whether an Indo-Russian project to develop a fifth-generation fighters would hinder the indigenous Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft programme. He lives in Chennai and hails from nearby Kancheepuram. His wife Shobha Varthaman has visited some of the worst-affected conflict zones across the world for providing medical treatment such as ensuring mothers and newborn survive post-delivery complications in Haiti. She is a specialist in anaesthesia, intensive care and pain management. Conflict zones she has worked in include Ivory Coast, Nigeria and Iraq, during the second Gulf war.
