Organized crime in India behind CRA phone scam: RCMP

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Organized crime in India behind CRA phone scam: RCMP

Article content The RCMP has worked with police in India to take down about 40 call centres and arrest 60 people allegedly behind a scam that targets Canadians with claims they owe the Canadian tax folks.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content But the force’s Toronto-based financial crime section and the Canadian Anti-Fraud Centre is still warning the public to be on the alert for the scam and asking for help to bring more fraudsters to justice. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Organized crime in India behind CRA phone scam: RCMP Back to video International efforts to against the illegal call centre network in India between September 2018 and January 2019 led to the takedowns and arrests of people now facing prosecution there, the RCMP said. “The scam is being committed by organized crime groups operating out of multiple locations throughout India,” police said. In 2018 alone these scams cost Canadians a reported $6 million and police believe the true dollar figure is much higher with many victims not reporting their losses. To shut down the call centres, the RCMP said that it and its international partner rely heavily on tips from the public both in Canada and abroad. Tips can help Indian police and an RCMP liaison officer assess the credibility of information they’re receiving and lead to call centres being shut down.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content The scammers use voice over Internet protocol (VOIP) technology and auto-dial multiple Canadian telephone numbers. When someone picks up, they deploy “threats, intimidation and persuasion” to get the mark to pay, purportedly to the CRA. “The threat of immediate arrest (by the CRA) if failing to do so was a powerful motivator for the victim to blindly follow the scammer,” the RCMP said Wednesday. “The RCMP are continuing to develop leads and information on the locations of these illegal call centres for enforcement purposes, in an effort to dismantle and disrupt these types of mass marketing schemes.” The RCMP is still asking for tips and information on the locations of the illegal call centres in India and on who is responsible, both in Canada and India, in perpetrating the scam. Anyone with information “you believe will lead to the arrests of those involved” is asked to contact the Canadian Anti-Fraud Centre at www.antifraudcentre.ca or 1-888-495-8501. The RCMP warned yet again that the Canada Revenue Agency won’t call, leave a voice message, text or e-mail warning of an arrest warrant or threaten deportation and won’t ask that taxes be paid in Bitcoin or gift cards. ALSO IN THE NEWS Sober up (from drink and/or drugs) before commuting, police warn after 6 a.m. crash Woman starts her week at casino, and it pays off Clark Davey, 1928-2019: ‘The true journalist of journalists’

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Vancouver Sun Headline News Sign up to receive daily headline news from the Vancouver Sun, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Vancouver Sun Headline News will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
