Gang-rape case: Court permits cops to secure kingpin’s voice sample

Ludhiana: Ludhiana Rural police may produce a challan in the Ludhiana gang-rape case as early as March 10. Besides, the local court has granted permission to the police for getting a voice sample of the ‘kingpin’ of the case.

On February 9, a group of miscreants had allegedly gang-raped a 20-year-old student after holding her and her friend hostage, as they had gone to Issewal to celebrate Chocolate Day. Police had booked 10 unidentified accused in the case, and arrested six, including Jagroop Singh (a private vehicle driver of Jaspal Bangar), Ajay of Tibba (from Gonda in UP, who worked as a driver at a petrol pump) and four nomads (two from Ludhiana, one from Nawanshahar, and a minor from J&K).

DIG Ludhiana range Ranbir Singh Khatra said they had got an identification parade of the accused done, apart from recovering articles used by them in the crime. He added they would try to present the challan in the court within the next 10 to 15 days. The police officer said they felt it necessary to present the challan as early as possible, so that the trial of the accused starts at the earliest. He added that the government was also requesting for the trial in a fast track court.

Meanwhile, police produced Ajay and a nomad in the court of judicial magistrate Ankit Airi, which sent them to judicial custody. Police also moved an application in the court for collecting kingpin Jagroop’s voice sample. The DIG said the court had given them permission to collect the voice sample, and added they would get it and send it to the Central Forensic Laboratory (CFL) in Chandigarh with the recording they had, to confirm that the two voices were of the same person.

Police sources said matching of the two voice samples would make the case against the accused stronger. They added that since Jagroop had spoken on the mobile that night, so a request was made by the police for his sample alone.

Meanwhile, legal experts said if the police managed to present a challan in the case within a month, it suggested they were moving very fast. “Normally, they have to present a challan in the case within 90 days, but if they present the challan within a month, it is appreciable. Also, it shows the police have taken the case seriously,” said legal expert Amit Tandon.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
