US, UK, France ask UNSC to ban Azhar, move fresh proposal

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

United Nations, February 28

The US, the UK and France have moved a fresh proposal in the UN Security Council to designate JeM chief Masood Azhar as a global terrorist — a listing that will subject him to global travel ban, asset freeze and arms embargo.

The proposal was moved on Wednesday by the three permanent veto-wielding members of the 15-nation Security Council. The Security Council Sanctions Committee will have 10 working days to consider the fresh proposal. It is the fourth such bid at the UN in the last 10 years to list Azhar as a global terrorist.

An assets freeze under the Sanctions Committee requires that all states freeze without delay the funds and other financial assets or economic resources of designated individuals and entities.

The travel ban entails preventing the entry into or transit by all states through their territories by designated individuals.

Under the arms embargo, all states are required to prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale and transfer from their territories or by their nationals outside their territories, or using their flag vessels or aircraft, of arms and related material of all types, spare parts, and technical advice, assistance, or training related to military activities, to designated individuals and entities.

In 2009, India moved a proposal to designate Azhar, whose UN-proscribed Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) claimed responsibility for the suicide attack against Indian security forces in Pulwama on February 14 in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

In 2016 again, India moved the proposal with the P3 — the US, the UK and France in the UN’s 1267 Sanctions Committee to ban Azhar, also the mastermind of the attack on the air base in Pathankot in January 2016.

In 2017, the P3 nations moved a similar proposal again. However, on all occasions, China, a veto-wielding permanent member of the Security Council, blocked India’s proposal from being adopted by the Sanctions Committee. It remains to be seen how China will vote on the proposal this time. — PTI

If declared global ultra, he faces...
