Pakistan set to release captured Indian pilot as cross-border attacks continue over Kashmir

P akistan are set to release a captured Indian Air Force pilot as a “peace gesture” today while cross-border attacks across the disputed region of Kashmir continue for a fourth day.

Thousands of Indian and Pakistani soldiers face off along the Kashmir boundary known as the Line of Control, in one of the world's most volatile regions.

Tensions have been runnning high since Indian aircraft crossed into Pakistan on Tuesday carrying out what India called a pre-emptive strike against militants blamed for a February 14 suicide bombing in Indian-controlled Kashmir that killed 40 Indian troops.

Pakistan retaliated, shooting down two Indian aircraft Wednesday and capturing a pilot.

Footage circulated by Pakistan military shows a man who identified himself as the pilot of the Indian aircraft shot down on Wednesday / AP

Residents of the Pakistani border town of Chikhoti reported heavy shelling overnight on Thursday and more than 200 people fled to a military organised camp about 16 miles away from the border.

Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan said yesterday that the Indian pilot would be released as a "goodwill gesture" on Friday.

AP

Pakistani airspace remained closed amid the tension, stranding over 5,000 passengers in the region, although some domestic flights were allowed on Thursday.

The country's civil aviation agency said authorities would announce on Friday afternoon whether they are reopening or keeping the airspace closed.

Since the escalation, world leaders have scrambled to head off an all-out war on the Asian subcontinent.

President Donald Trump said during a press conference in Hanoi on Thursday that he had been involved in seeking to de-escalate the conflict.

He said: "I think hopefully that's going to be coming to an end.

"It's been going on for a long time - decades and decades. There's a lot of dislike, unfortunately, so we've been in the middle trying to help them both out, see if we can get some organisation and some peace, and I think probably that's going to be happening."

Relations between the countries have been fraught since February 14, when a suicide car bombing killed more than 40 Indian paramilitary personnel.

India responded with an air strike on Tuesday inside Pakistan, the first such raid since the two nations' 1971 war over territory that later became Bangladesh.

The violence on Wednesday marked the most serious escalation of the long-simmering conflict since 1999, when Pakistan's military sent a ground force into Indian-controlled Kashmir at Kargil.

That year also saw an Indian fighter jet shoot down a Pakistani naval aircraft, killing all 16 on board.
