Aurangabad: Court awards 10 year jail term to 3 people who set a man on fire

The public prosecutor, Avinash Deshpande, recorded statements of nine witnesses during the hearing. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Aurangabad: Three people, including a woman, were convicted and sentenced to ten years of rigorous imprisonment and fined Rs 1,000 each for setting ablaze a man. The accused have been identified as 29-year-old Kanchan alias Hirabai Sanjay Sarode, 32-year-old Sanjay Damodar Sathe and 35-year-old Ashok Damodar Sathe. The trio had set ablaze Kanchan's husband over an old dispute. The incident took place on October 4, 2015.

The man had sustained 50% burn injuries but was saved due to timely treatment by Dr Avinash Yelikar. According to information received, the trio had set ablaze the victim, 33-year-old Sanjay Ramesh Sarode, resident of N-9, Pawan Nagar, CIDCO and fled the scene.

The people nearby rushed to his rescue and doused the fire. After that, Sanjay was taken to CIDCO police station, where he lodged a complaint. He told the police that his wife Kanchan had invited her brothers and parents to celebrate the birthday of her nephew, son of Ashok Sathe.

On the invitation, Kanchan's parents, Damodar Maribha Sathe, 65, mohter Kantabai, 55, brothers Sanjay and Ashok, all residents of Ambedkar Nagar, reached Kanchan's house at around 4 PM on October 4, 2015.

Sajnay was sleeping in the room on third floor of building. Kanchan took the accused to Sanjay's room where Ashok kicked him to wake him up. He started beating Sanjay for allegedly harassing Kanchan.

In a fit of anger, Ashok and his mother pinned Sanjay to the ground while Kanchan poured kerosene and set him ablaze. The accused fled the scene as Sanjay started shouting for help. The neighbours rushed to his rescue and doused the fire. They took Sanjay to CIDCO police station to lodge the complaint.

Conviction under three sections

The public prosecutor, Avinash Deshpande, recorded statements of nine witnesses during the hearing. The statement by Dr Avinash Yelikar proved to be crucial. After hearing both the sides and considering the evidences and witnesses, District and Sessions Judge SD Digraskar sentenced the accused to ten years rigorous imprisonment.

They have also been told that six months of additional rigorous imprisonment would be levied if failed to pay the fine. They have been charged under section 307 of the IPC, six months rigorous imprisonment under sections 323 and 504 of the IPC. Damodhar and Kantabai were acquitted on benefit of doubt. Adv Siddharth Wagh assisted public prosecutor Avinash Deshpande in the matter.


