Modi attacks rivals over surgical strikes

Kanyakumari : , March 1 (IANS) Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday made a no-holds-barred attack on some opposition parties, accusing them of questioning and doubting the armed forces and making statements that favour Pakistan.

"Some parties are converting their hate for Modi into hate against the nation. They are doubting the armed forces and are issuing statements favouring Pakistan. They are suspecting the fight against terrorism. These are the same people whose statements are being happily quoted in the Parliament of Pakistan and Radio Pakistan," he told a public meeting here after laying the foundation stone of a railway line between Rameshwaram and Dhanushkodi.

Modi did not take the name of any party in his attack at the meeting which was also attended among others by Tamil Nadu Chief Minister K. Palaniswamy, whose AIADMK has sealed a pact with the BJP for contesting the Lok Sabha polls.

The Prime Minister began his speech with the statement that every Indian was "proud that the brave" Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, taken captive by Pakistan, hailed from Tamil Nadu. He added: "I am proud that India's first woman Defence Minister is from Tamil Nadu."

Then Modi referred to the surgical strikes carried out by the Army after the Uri terror attack and the aerial attack on the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) training camp last month and quoted media reports to say that when the 26/11 terror attack happened in Mumbai, the armed forces sought permission to conduct surgical strikes on terror camps in Pakistan.

"But the UPA government blocked it. Today we are living in an era when the armed forces have full freedom. Terrorists and terrorism will be curtailed even more. This is the new India. The terrorists will be paid back with capital and interest.

"The armed forces are protecting the nation. I thank the armed forces. Well, the entire nation is proud of the armed forces as does the entire world. I salute all those who are serving the nation. It is their vigilance that keeps our nation secure," he said.

Attacking the opposition parties, Modi said: "I want to ask them (parties) -- do you want to support our armed forces or raise doubts about them? Do they want to back our armed forces or support those forces which are helping foment terrorism on our soil?

"Modi will come and go but India remains. Please don't weaken the country in trying to strengthen yourselves politically. Don't play with the defence and security of the country. We are Indians first. Your politics can wait," he said.

Modi then turned his attack on the Congress over corruption.

Referring to a late Prime Minister's talk of only 15 paise out of a Rupee going to the poor and an "arrogant" Minister claiming 'zero loss' in the spectrum case, he said: "Some talk of corruption as a way to life. It may be acceptable to them but not to me."

He said the NDA government had taken historic steps against corruption.

"The corrupt have to now give answers. The famous recounting Minister, who had insulted the middle class, now has to go to courts for bail for 'family pack' like the first family of the Congress party.

"People have to answer. We have come down heavily on corruption. But we have also rewarded the honest tax payer... Did the governments of the past ever think of providing relief to the middle class?"

The Congress' economic culture benefited only the ruling family and those close to them, he alleged.

"If there was anyone who spoke against the Congress economic culture, it was Rajaji who hailed from Tamil Nadu. We are implementing his policies and India is rising on the ease of doing business from the position of 77 five years ago to 142 now in the global index."

He said for the Congress social justice was just a slogan and during its regime there were innumerable atrocities against Dalits. He also accused the Congress of having defeated B.R. Ambedkar twice in elections.

Modi said the choice for the people in the 2019 elections was between two sides.

"On the one side strength and stability and the other stands weakness and vulnerability. Our leadership work culture is known across India; they are confused and have no leadership. They have no interest in the nation or people and are shamelessly indulging in corruption."

The Prime Minister also came down heavily on the DMK for politicking over portfolios after the 2004 elections which brought the UPA to power.

"The Ministers were not decided by the Prime Minister but by people who had nothing to do with public service. There was telephonic bargaining for Ministers' posts.

"The 'mahamilawat' (adulteration) government will be held hostage to individual ambitions and family politics. My family is the 130 crore people of India. I will live for them and fall for them. I am in public life to further their destiny. I am here only for India's development."
