Peace ultimate objective of Pakistan: Lawmakers

Peace ultimate objective of Pakistan: Lawmakers

Lawmakers in the Senate have said that peace is the ultimate objective of Pakistan and the country is fully capable of defending its boundaries.

Speaking in Upper House of the Parliament on Friday evening, Sherry Rehman said the release of Indian pilot captured by Pakistan will send a good message.

She said it is unfortunate that Indian media is taking Pakistan’s humanitarian gesture of releasing their pilot negatively.

She said India committed aggression against Pakistan. However, New Delhi should realize that Pakistan has rendered unprecedented sacrifices in the war against terrorism and how can it allow anyone to use its soil for terrorist activities against others.

Kabeer Muhammad Shahi said return of Indian pilot is a good gesture. He said the entire nation, political parties, and armed forces are united under one flag to defend the motherland.

He said Kashmir is the real issue between Pakistan and India, which needs resolution through talks. He said peace will remain a dream without resolution of Kashmir issue as per aspiration of Kashmiris.

Senator Muhammad Akram said peace is imperative for development, progress, and prosperity of any country. He said both Pakistan and India should take steps to bring their people out of poverty.

Ashok Kumar said minorities of Pakistan are standing shoulder to shoulder with the armed forces of the country against Indian aggression.

Rehman Malik said Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi should know that the Pakistani nation is united having the capability to respond to any misadventure from India.

He said Narendra Modi is whipping up anti-Pakistan emotions under political compulsions in the wake of upcoming general election there.

Azam Swati congratulated all political parties sitting either on treasury or the opposition benches for standing united in defence of Pakistan.

He said Pakistan has taken a good decision to release the captive pilot of India on human grounds under the teachings of Islam.

He said India is committing brutalities in Occupied Kashmir to suppress indigenous movement to achieve their birth right to self-determination.

He urged the world powers to play their due role in ensuring peace in the region and defuse tension between Pakistan and India.

He said India will have to come to the dialogue table to sort out issues peacefully. He said both Pakistan and India should join hands in fighting a war against poverty, illiteracy, and extremism.

Kalsoom Parveen said that 220 million people of Pakistan are standing behind their valiant forces in defending the motherland. She, however, said efforts should be made for regional stability. She said peace in the region will remain elusive without resolving the core issue of Kashmir.

The House also approved a motion authorizing chairman of the Upper House to nominate seven members of the Senate for Parliamentary Committee on China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.

It also approved the motion authorizing the Chairman Senate to nominate the names of Parliamentary parties’ leaders for the Parliamentary Committee on National Security.

The Committees will present their reports to both the Senate and the National Assembly.

Besides, nine different reports were also laid before the House.

The House will now meet on Monday at 3.p.m.
