Woman killed, 2 hurt as Pak shells Poonch, Rajouri villages, posts

Woman killed, 2 hurt as Pak shells Poonch, Rajouri villages, posts

# Schools in border areas to remain closed # Rajouri police issues advisory against fake calls

POONCH/RAJOURI, Feb 28: A woman was killed and two persons including an army jawan, who was on leave, were injured as the Pakistani army shelled civilian areas and forward posts in six sectors along the LoC in Poonch and Rajouri districts Thursday, drawing heavy retaliation from the Indian side.

This was the seventh consecutive day that Pakistan targeted forward posts along the Line of Control (LoC).

“The Pakistan army continuously resorted to unprovoked ceasefire violations along the LoC at about 1500 hours with heavy mortar shelling and small arms fire in Sunderbani, Mankote, Khari Karmara, Degwar sectors in Rajouri and Poonch,” a defence spokesperson said. The firing had started around 6 AM, he added. “At about 1415 hours, Pakistani troops initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by shelling with mortars and firing of small arms along the LoC at Nowshera sector in Rajouri,” the official said. There was another round of firing from across the border around 1 PM along the LoC in Krishna Ghati sector, he said, adding, “The Indian army retaliated strongly and effectively.”

Earlier at about 6 am, the Pakistan army had resorted to shelling and small arms fire in the Krishna Ghati sector, the spokesperson said.

In view of the prevailing situation, authorities have ordered a temporary closure of educational institutions located within five kilometres of the LoC in Rajouri and Poonch. People living close to the border have also been asked to stay indoors.

As per an order issued by Deputy Commissioner Jammu Ramesh Kumar, all government and private schools upto 10+2 level falling within 0-5 kms of International Border and LoC in district Jammu will remain closed tomorrow.

Intense Pak shelling in Poonch district claimed life of a woman in Chajjala area of Mendhar, who died after sustaining critical injuries from a mortar shell, local officials said. The woman was identified as Amina Akhtar, 27, wife of Mohammed Younis, resident of village Nar Mankote. Dr Pervaiz Ahmed khan BMO Mendhar confirmed the death*

In another incident, an army jawan, who was on leave, and a youth were also injured in the shelling in Mankote and Balnoi sectors, they added.

An army jawan, who had come home on leave, was injured in Pak shelling along the Line of Control in Krishna Ghati sector at Mankote in Mendhar sub division of Poonch.

A senior police official told that a shell fired by Pakistan army, landed in premises of the house of the soldier— Zakir Hussian (Lance Naik of 3 JAKLI) son of Abdul Aziz, resident of Mankote as a result of which he suffered serious injuries and was shifted to Sub District Hospital Mendhar.

BMO Mendhar Dr Pervaiz Ahmad Khan told that after initially admitting Zakir to Sub District Hospital Mendhar, he was referred to district hospital in “critical” condition. Zakir is posted in Kupwara district of north Kashmir and had returned home recently on leave, officials said.

Earlier the firing started at 6.00 AM in Balnoi Sagra and continued till 7.00 AM. In Mendhar, it continued from 6.30 AM to 7.30 PM. Then from 11.00 AM to 6.00 PM, intense shelling was witnessed in Mendhar, Mankote and Balakote sectors. After 2 PM, firing again started in Chajjla area which claimed life of a woman.

Another man of Balnoi also suffered injuries during shelling and he was shifted to Mendhar hospital and later was referred to District Hospital Rajouri.

Later Deputy Commissioner Rajouri Mohammad Aijaz Asad visited forward areas of LoC in Manjakote sector to take the first-hand appraisal of the measures being put in place to provide necessary help to the affected people. The DC was accompanied by SSP, Yougal Manhas, SDPO, Manjakote, Tehsildar Manjakotr, Block Development officer Manjakote and other concerned officers.

During the visit, the Deputy Commissioner interacted with the affected people of the areas. He was apprised of several issues like immediate constructions of new individual and community bunkers, proper rehabilitation of border people etc. He also directed the officers to station themselves at headquarters to redress the problems of the people and ensure provision of all the basic amenities so that the people do not face any hardship.

Deputy Commissioner also inquired about the contingency plan for setting up of the Safe shelters if required in an emergent situation. Meanwhile, he also visited the construction sites of bunkers along LoC being executed by the PWD in the areas. The concerned executing agency was directed to speed up the work for early completion of bunkers.

Amidst escalating tension after strike by Pakistani aircrafts in Poonch- Rajouri sectors and heavy shelling along the Line of Control (LoC) in these twin border districts, many families have migrated to the safer zones. Though the senior officials in these districts were denying any migration or such orders issued to the border villagers but villagers stated that about 80 families from Pathri-Chhajla area of Mendhar were migrated to a Ziarat and were taking refuge there. Not only in Mendhar, Balakote, Krishna Ghati, many people also along the LoC in Salotari, Jullas, Degwar, Khari Karmara, Qasba, Shahpur, Gali Pindi and Sawjian area in Poonch have either shifted to the houses of the relatives on their own or sent their children and women there amidst panic. In Nowshera, Jhangar, Kalsian, Pukhrni, Sher Makri, Lam, Ladoka and parts of Sunderbani, some family members have shifted to the safer locations after heavy shelling and Pakistan air raid today.

Ditto reports are pouring in from Khour and Palllanwalla areas of Akhnoor sector.

In the meanwhile, Rajouri police have issued an advisory after receiving several reports from civilians and even security officials of getting fake phone calls by people “impersonating” as army officers and trying to “fetch vital information.”

This comes just a day after India and Pakistan shot down each other’s fighter jets on Wednesday following India’s air strike on Jaish-e-Mohammad training camp in Balakot on Tuesday. Pakistan has also captured an IAF pilot after his fighter jet was downed. The Rajouri police said that random calls were made to security officials and civil administration by unknown people impersonating as someone from the Army or the police asking questions about security issues.

“We have received over ten such reports for the last few days wherein few police officers, administration officials and some civilians were called from suspicious numbers. Callers claimed to be senior army officers, police officers and administrative officers who were only trying to enquire about the security of the region,” said the Police in the advisory. However, sources in the police didn’t name Pakistan for such attempts.

“During an investigation by experts, it has been found that these calls were made from a foreign country through a specialised software due to which some other phone numbers, mostly starting with +91 code were displaying on the mobile screen,” the advisory said.

The police further said that after investigation it has been ascertained that calls are made by miscreants, “anti-national elements” and anti-social elements are trying to “befool people by pretending as senior officers and try to fetch vital information.” The police have directed the people “not to share any kind of details with such dubious callers and rather disconnect the call as soon as you come to know that the caller is not known to you.”

They have also requested the people to “immediately bring the matter in the notice of concerned police or directly to the office of Senior Superintendent of Police Rajouri” in case they receive any such calls.

The police have clarified that no civil, police or army officers directly call people or officials at field level to ask about security scenario and other allied information.
