Pain of Pulwama to saying Abhinandan to Varthaman: A quick recap of last 15 days

INDIA AWAITS THE RETURN OF THE HERO!

February 14 has traditionally been a day of love, but this year, India saw one of the worst attacks on its forces.

A suicide bomber crashed into a CRPF convoy and killed over 40 personnel in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama. This exponentially escalated into the capture of an Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot and his subsequent release today by Pakistan.

As the entire nation waits with bated breath the arrival of IAF braveheart Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, we take you through a quick recap of how it all happened.

February 14 - around 4 pm: Over 40 CRPF personnel were killed in a suicide attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14 orchestrated by Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM).

February 14-15: India and Pakistan exchanged charges and barbs over who was responsible for the attack. India accused Pakistan and it denied.

February 15: Air Chief Marshal Birender Singh Dhanoa presented the airstrike as a retaliatory reponse after the bombing in Pulwama, sources told India Today. The government cleared the proposal.

February 16-20: The Indian Air Force and Army conducted airborne surveillance along the Line of Control (LoC) with Heron drones, sources told India Today.

February 20-22: The IAF and intelligence agencies drew up 'target tables' for possible sites to strike, sources told India Today.

February 21: National Security Advisor Ajit Doval was presented with target options for an airstrike, sources told India Today.

February 22: The IAF's 1 Squadron 'Tigers' and 7 Squadron 'Battle Axes' were activated for the strike mission, sources told India Today. Two Mirage squadrons designated 12 jets for the mission.

February 24: A trial run was conducted over central India with an early warning jet Bhatinda and a mid-air refueller from Agra, sources told India Today.

February 26 - 3:30 am: Twelve days after the Pulwama attack, the Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out an airstrike on the camps of JeM. India bombed and destroyed JeM's largest training camp in Balakot in Pakistan's restive Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, about 80-km from the Line of Control (LoC).

Twelve Mirage 2000s took off from Gwalior in batches; they were armed with laser-guided bombs.

India had still not woken up to this news.

February 26 - 10 am: During a briefing, India's Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said the "non-military pre-emptive action" was targetted specifically at JeM camp. The training camp was led by Maulana Yusuf Azhar alias Ustad Ghauri, who is Jaish chief Masood Azhar's brother-in-law.

February 26 - around 12 pm: While Indian authorities confirmed the airstrike in Pakistan's Balakot, Muzafarrabad and Chakoti, no pictures or videos were released.

February 26: Pakistan remained in denial; said there was no airstrike and nothing on their soil was damaged.

February 27 - early morning: Pakistan tried to target Indian military installations, in which they managed to shoot down an Indian aircraft. IAF pilot Abhinandan Varthaman fells on the other side of the LoC and was taken hostage.

The IAF pilot, before being captured, had downed a Pakistani F-16.

February 27 - throughout the day: Tension mounted between India and Pakistan. World leaders urged both countries to step back and de-escalate military action.

February 27 - late evening: India demanded Abhinandan's safe return; issued a demarche to Pakistan. Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan called for truce and peace in a televised address.

February 28 - around 5.30 pm: Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan gave in to the pressure and announced Abhinandan would be released as a "peace gesture".

February 28 - late evening: India - civilians and politicos - cheer, celebrate and exchange sweets.

March 1 - since morning: INDIA AWAITS THE RETURN OF THE HERO!
