Top news of the day: Wg Cmdr Abhinandan set to cross Wagah border, Sushma Swaraj addresses OIC plenary, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

Pakistan on Friday released Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was captured on February 27 after the Pakistan Air Force violated the Indian airspace and downed his MiG 21 'Bison' aircraft in an engagement.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday hailed Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman saying every Indian was proud of him and lashed out at political rivals for suspecting the armed forces which, he said, helped Pakistan.

Minister for External Affairs Sushma Swaraj on Friday said the fight against terrorism is not and cannot be a confrontation against any religion.

Speaking at the inaugural plenary of the two-day foreign ministers’ meet of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in Abu Dhabi, she said, “Just as Islam literally means peace, none of the 99 names of Allah mean violence. Similarly, every religion in the world stands for peace, compassion and brotherhood.”

The Pakistan Army on Friday shelled heavily areas along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir’s Poonch district, leaving a woman injured, officials said.

This is the eight consecutive day Pakistan is violating the ceasefire.

An alleged bedsheet seller was apprehended on Thursday by the Border Security Force (BSF) in along the Pakistan border in Punjab's Ferozepur on the basis of suspicion.

Pakistan plans to lodge a complaint against India at the United Nations, accusing it of “eco-terrorism” over air strikes that damaged pine trees, a Minister said on March 1.

Further to the recent tensions between India and Pakistan, an appeal was released on Friday on behalf of more than 600 Indian signatories from different walks of life - students, teachers, economists, journalists, lawyers, industrialists, writers, actors, choreographers, photographers, physicists, homemakers, retired bureaucrats, diplomats, judges, the armed forces. The endorsements were received within 24 hours of the appeal being circulated by email by an initial group of 28 signatories.

Union minister Nitin Gadkari on Friday said he is not in the race for the post of Prime Minister and termed himself as a “pure RSS” man for whom the nation is supreme.

The only confirmed victim of India's air strike against Pakistan is still unsure why he was shaken awake in the early hours of Tuesday by an explosion that rocked his mud brick house and left him with a cut above his right eye.

The Jonas Brothers on Thursday announced that the band is now back together, and released their first single in six years. “We're baaaccckkkk...” the band tweeted.
