Highlights: Nirmala Sitharaman meets IAF pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman

India logs over 3.17 lakh new Covid cases in last 24 hours; daily positivity rate up at 16.41 per cent

India reports 3,33,533 new COVID cases in last 24 hours, recovery rate at 93.18 per cent

Highlights: Nirmala Sitharaman meets IAF pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman

India

oi-Oneindia Staff

By Anuj Cariappa

New Delhi, Mar 02: Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Saturday met IAF Pilot Wing Commander, Abhinandan Varthaman in Delhi and conveyed to him that the entire nation is proud of his courage and determination, officials said.

During the meeting at a medical facility of the Indian Air Force, Varthaman is understood to have explained to Sitharaman details about his nearly 60 hour stay in Pakistan.

After a tense wait, IAF Pilot Wing Commander, Abhinandan Varthaman was finally handed over to India by Pakistan. He returned home via the Wagah border after spending nearly 60 hours in captivity.

There are several procedures that would have to be followed, which includes a medical test to gauge his fitnesses levels and also a de-briefing session.

The IAF pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman spent nearly 60 hours in captivity. Abhinandan, dressed in a suit, walked across the Zero Line at the Attari-Wagah border at 9.20 pm, about four hours later he was reportedly scheduled to return. He was accompanied by Group Captain J T Kurien, Air Advisor in the Indian High Commission, and Fareeha Bugti, Director (India) in the Pakistan Foreign Office.

The release came a day after Pakistan PM Imran Khan, addressing a joint session of parliament, in a "gesture of peace" aimed at de-escalating tensions between the two nations announced the Indian pilot's return.

Here are the Highlights:

Newest First Oldest First J&K: General Bipin Rawat, Chief of Army Staff (COAS) and Lt Gen Ranbir Singh, Army Commander, Northern Command visited White Knight Corps to review the operational preparedness of the forces in the Corps Zone in view of the current situation along LoC and International Border. pic.twitter.com/WCwbyAnFI7 — ANI (@ANI) March 2, 2019 Meanwhile, in Jammu and Kashmir, General Bipin Rawat, Chief of Army Staff (COAS) and Lt Gen Ranbir Singh, Army Commander, Northern Command visited White Knight Corps to review the operational preparedness of the forces in the Corps Zone in view of the current situation along LoC and International Border. The government on Saturday issued an "alert" for all airports and airlines in the country, asking them to "enhance the existing security measures", as it has received intelligence inputs in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack and subsequent developments. Pakistan will not allow its soil to be used for terrorism against any state, including India, Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said on Saturday as claimed that the "nerve centre" of the Jaish-e-Mohammad terror group has been taken over by the government. ANI quoted Sources saysing that after returning from Pakistan, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman has informed that though he was not physically tortured by the Pakistanis but went through a lot of mental harassment. Pakistan was not under "pressure" or "any compulsion" to release Indian pilot Abhinandan Varthaman, Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said today. The Wing Commander will stay at Air Force Officer's Mess. India will keep up the pressure on Pakistan to crack down on terrorism infrastructure and the masterminds of terrorist attacks despite the release of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman following backchannel diplomacy and public messaging by global powers. Acoording to reports, Pakistan said Abhinandan Varthman was handed over along with his belongings, however, all that he came back in civilian clothes, without his service pistol. In the taking over certificate, Pakistan has mentioned returning his watch, ring and spectacles. It was earlier learnt that upon ejecting out of his crashed MiG 21 Bison, Abhinandan still had his pistol with him, which he used to allegedly fire on locals in Pakistani territory who were chasing him. Meanwhile, the chiefs of the Indian Air Force and Navy will get Z-plus security cover after a fresh assessment of their threat perception by the security agencies, officials said. Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman met Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthman in a hospital today. Courtesy: ANI Samjhauta Express services to resume from India from March 3. Congress President Rahul Gandhi at a rally in Ranchi, Jharkhand: Indian Air Force protects the country, Air force pilots sacrifice their lives but our Prime Minister steals money from the Air Force, and puts it in Anil Ambani's pockets, it is a shame. According to IAF officials, Wing Cdr Abhinandan Varthaman met IAF Chief BS Dhanoa today morning and explained his detention in Pakistan. The Wing Commander will stay at Air Force Officer's Mess. Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh: Entire world stands together against terrorism. No representative of India used to be invited to Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) but India's image has become such, that OIC invited India for the first time. It is a diplomatic victory. Asaduddin Owaisi, AIMIM, says, "Pak PM talked of Tipu Sultan and Bahadur Shah Zafar in his assembly,Tipu Sultan wasn't enemy of Hindus but adversary of the enemies of his sultanate.He talks about atom bomb, it's weird..we've it too.Handle your Lashkar-e-Shaitaan & Jaish-e-Shaitaan. Pakistan violated ceasefire in Nowshera sector of Rajouri district at 12:30 pm today. Indian Army is retaliating. When our Air Force reached Balakot in KPK before we could get any information some people started saying Balakot is along LoC.Some people whom I call compulsive contrarians found a new Balakot and didn't check that, that Bala Kote is in our Poonch.Why'd our forces attack our territory?: Arun Jaitley Mehbooba Mufti and PDP workers protest in Srinagar against the ban on Jamaat-e-Islami (Jammu & Kashmir) by the Central Government. BSP Chief Mayawati said, " Hearty welcome safe return of IAF pilot Abhinandan from Pak custody. Big relief and ease of tension is natural but sensing a sea change in security scenario around, India must have a long, lasting & credible policy for its security-honour besides a good policy to deal with neighbours." Referring to IAF Pilot's bravery, PM Modi said, " India has the ability to change the meaning of words. Abhinandan was till now ' Congratulations' in English, now the meaning will change." Addressing a meet at Construction Technology India in Delhi, Prime Minister Modi said, " The world will notice whatever India does." IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman is at the central medical establishment, he spent the night there, underwent a medical test, met his family briefly, according to News 18. Three members of family killed due to heavy shelling by Pakistan troops in Solatri village of border district of Poonch. Meanwhile, shelling by Pakistan forces across LoC in Jammu continues, People in border areas of Rajouri, Poonch districts move to safer places; Schools closed, according to All India Radio News. India has dug up contract details between the USA and Pakistan on the AMRAAM missile fired from an F-16 aircraft and is learnt to have shared the information with American interlocutors to bolster its case about misuse of the fighter aircraft against India, according to Indian Express report. Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was released by Pakistan after Prime Minister Narendra Modi warned the neighbouring country of dire consequences, former Karnataka chief minister and state BJP president B S Yeddyurappa said on Friday. He would also have to undergo several phycological tests as he had been captured by the enemy and underwent a traumatic situation. The IAF Pilot will be subject to a medical test today. He will be taken for a detained medical checkup. The officer had to eject from a plane, which would have put his body under immense strain, AVM RGK Kapoor said following the release. Indian Air Force pilot Abhinandan Varthaman landed in Delhi on Friday night, hours after he was handed over to India by Pakistan after being in captivity for nearly three days. Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweets, "Welcome Home Wing Commander #Abhinandan! The nation is proud of your exemplary courage. Our armed forces are an inspiration for 130 crore Indians. Vande Mataram!" The SSP of Budgam said that some aircraft has fallen. As of now were are ascertaining the situation. We have found two bodies and have evacuated them. The technical team is here and is currently assessing the situation, he also added. Meanwhile a high level meeting has been convened to assess the situation. National Security Advisor Ajit Doval has arrived at the meeting at the Home Ministry and is assessing the situation. India however rubbished the claim. Sources tell Oneindia that no aircraft has been shot by Pakistan. The claim of a pilot being arrested os also not true. All our pilots have been accounted for the source also added. The Pakistan Foreign Office in a statement said that this was not a retaliation to continued Indian belligerence. Pakistan has therefore taken strikes at non-military targets avoiding human loss and collateral damage. The statement further read, “ sole purpose being to demonstrate our right, will and capability for self defence. We have no intention of escalation, but are fully prepared to do so if forced into that paradigm. That is why we took the action with clear warning and in broad daylight.” Sources say that the PAF dropped bombs at Laam, Kerri and Nadian in Rajouri district at around 10 am. The Indian jets are still flying in the area. Locals have said that they saw a Pakistani ket in flames across the Line of Control. Meanwhile officials confirm that they have seen the F-16 pilot paradropping. Pakistani jets violated Indian air space, but were pushed back by Indian aircaft, the report said while quoting top officials. The jets entered into Indian air space over Nowshera sector this morning, but were immediately pushed back by Indian jets on air patrol. This comes in the wake of Pakistan claiming that it had shot down two Indian aircraft. Indian officials however said that the jets violated Indian air space by entering the border areas of Nowshera sector in Jammu and Kashmir;s Rajouri district. A Sukhoi 30 MKI was seen chasing the Pakistan F-16 fighter on the Line of Control at the Nowshera sector. Maj General Ghafoor while addressing a press conference said that two pilots have been taken into custody. He had earlier said in a tweet that the PAF shot down two Indian aircrafts inside Pakistan airspace. He had also said that one Indian pilot had been arrested. India should not carry any further violence in Pakistan because its continuation will affect regional security. Also the continuation of such conflict will cost a lot to India, he also said. Meanwhile the Taliban has warned India and said that the ongoing tension would affect the Afghanistan peace process. In a statement, Taliban spokesman Zabiullah Mujahid said, “the continuation of such conflict will affect the Afghanistan peace process.” DG ISPR, Pakistan Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor has said that there are reports of a crash of an Indian aircraft on the Indian side. We had no engagement with that aircraft, he also added. Pakistan has released a video showing a blindfolded man saying that he is Wing Commander, Abhinandan. He says that his service number is 27981. He asks if he is with the Pakistan Army as he has a right to know. India is yet to officially respond to the video. Ghafoor also said that the ground forces arrested two pilots, once of them was injured and has been shifted to the Combined Military Hospital. God willing, he will be taken care of, he also said. Today’s action was in self defence. We dont want to claim any victory, he further said. A high level meeting of the civil and police officials has been called in Jammu and Kashmir. The meeting was called to discuss the measures to be taken in the backdrop of the tensions with Pakistan. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been briefed about the situation. Amidst the claims made by Pakistan that it had shot down two IAF jets, India has said that it shot down a F-16 jet. Entire airspace of North Delhi vacated amidst escalated tensions with Pakistan. After Pakistan released a video of an Indian pilot being captured, India says it is verifying further details. A joint media briefing of the Indian Air Force and Ministry for External Affairs is underway at New Delhi. MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar says India shot down by Pakistan F-16 jet. In the engagement we have lost one pilot. The whereabouts are unknown. We are ascertaining more details he added. Pakistan targeted military installations. We lost one MIG-21. Pilot missing in action says MEA spokesperson. Pakistan is yet to formally inform India about the missing IAF pilot. Pakistan claimed that it has captured an Indian pilot Abhinandan. We were able to foil Pakistan’s efforts due our high state of alertness says MEA. Pakistan responded to out counter terror operation by targeting our military installations says MEA. Imran Khan in a televised address warns against escalation. He says Pakistan is ready for dialogue. He also said that better sense should prevail. Read the full MEA statement here: India had informed about counter-terrorism (CT) action it took yesterday against a training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) in Pakistan based on credible evidence that JeM intended to launch more attacks. Against this counter-trrorism action, Pakistan has responded this morning by using its Air Force to target military installations on the Indian side. Due to our high state of readiness and alertness, Pakistan’s attempts were foiled successfully. The Pakistan Air Force was detected and the Indian Air Force responded instantly. In that aerial engagement, one Pakistan Air Force fighter aircraft was shot down by a MiG 21 Bison of the Indian Air Force. The Pakistani aircraft was seen by ground forces falling from the sky on the Pakistan side. In this engagement, we have unfortunately lost one MiG 21. The pilot is missing in action. Pakistan has claimed that he is in their custody. We are ascertaining the facts." The weapons that you and we have, can we afford miscalculation. If it escalates from where, where will it go. Neither will it be in my control nor Modi’s control. Better sense should prevail, let us sit and resolve issues, Imran Khan also said. Hours after Pakistan claimed that it had an IAF pilot in its custody, sources said that India has not been informed officially about the same. The whereabouts of IAF Wing Commander, Abhinandan is not known as yet. Pakistan claimed that it had arrested two pilots. While one is in custody, the other is at hospital, Pakistan also said. After Pakistan claimed that it had one IAF pilot in its custody, India has summoned Pakistan deputy high commissioner Syed Haider Shah. India is treating today’s action by the Pakistan Air Force as an act of military aggression.
