India is proud of your courage: President, PM Modi lead nation to give rousing welcome to Abhinandan

Abhinandan Varthaman made a sombre walk towards the Indian side of the Wagah-Attari border.

As IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman slowly walked into the Indian territory after two days of captivity, President Ram Nath Kovind, Prime Minister Narendra Modi led the nation in welcoming the hero back home.

President Kovind welcomed Abhinandan Varthaman home. He wrote on Twitter: "Welcome home Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman! India is proud of your courage and sense of duty, and above all your dignity. Wishing you and our entire Air Force every success in the future #PresidentKovind".

PM Modi tweeted, "Welcome Home Wing Commander Abhinandan! The nation is proud of your exemplary courage. Our armed forces are an inspiration for 130 crore Indians. Vande Mataram!"

Politicians and ministers across party lines came together to welcome the braveheart home.

Home Minister Rajnath Singh tweeted, "Welcome Home! The entire Nation is proud of Wing Commander Abhinandan."

Congress president Rahul Gandhi wrote: "Wing Cdr. Abhinandan, your dignity, poise and bravery made us all proud. Welcome back and much love".

Welcome home Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman! India is proud of your courage and sense of duty, and above all your dignity. Wishing you and our entire Air Force every success in the future #PresidentKovind President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) March 1, 2019

Welcome Home Wing Commander Abhinandan!



The nation is proud of your exemplary courage.



Our armed forces are an inspiration for 130 crore Indians.



Vande Mataram! March 1, 2019





Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman wrote "Jai Hind" in her first tweet and added in another tweet, "Proud of you Wing Commander #AbhinandanVarthaman. The entire nation appreciates your valour and grit. You held your calm in the face of adversity. You are an inspiration to our youth. Salute. Vande Mataram".

Indian Air Force pilot Abhinandan Varthaman was captured by the Pakistan Army after his fighter jet crashed after an air duel with a Pakistani F-16 on Wednesday.

He shot down the plane before his MiG 21 went down, forcing him to eject. He fell into Pakistani territory when Pakistani army took him in custody.

Abhinandan was thrashed, chased down by locals on hostile territory as he ejected out of his crashed jet. He was then taken into custody, blindfolded and interrogated by the Pakistani army officials.

But Abhinandan put up a stoic face amid all adversity and refused to divulge any information about the Indian forces.

Reacting on his much-awaited return, BJP president Amit Shah tweeted, "Dear Wing Commander Abhinandan, entire nation is proud of your courage and valour. India is glad to have you back. May you continue to serve the nation and IAF with unparalleled passion and dedication. Best wishes for your bright future."

Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav wrote: "The nation salutes you Wing Commander. Welcome home!"

National Conference leader and former Jammu and Kashmir CM Omar Abdullah tweeted, "Welcome home Wing Commander. It's great to have you back."
