Does this mean war?

In the summer of 1990, the world was riven with tectonic shifts. The Cold War had ended, the Berlin Wall had collapsed and the Soviet Union had plunged into chaos. A series of events in May that year led the United States to believe South Asia was teetering on a nuclear precipice. Pakistani troops were massed along the border, India had moved troops into Jammu and Kashmir as the situation there worsened after a Pakistan-backed insurgency had taken hold. Both sides engaged in shrill war rhetoric, then Pakistan PM Benazir Bhutto’s vow of a thousand-year war with India was met with her Indian counterpart V.P. Singh’s retort that such a misadventure would not be without cost.

The US believed that Pakistan was prepared to use nuclear weapons in any such conflict and felt compelled to step in to de-escalate the situation. Analysts like Commodore C. Uday Bhaskar (retd) term the South Asia crisis of 1990 as the starting point for Nuclear Weapon Enabled Terrorism’ or NWET, the use of terrorist proxies to wage a sub-conventional war while using nuclear weapons to deter India from using its conventional military superiority. Over the years, NWET, it would seem, succeeded in deterring a conventional military response from India after every major terror attack, the 1993 Mumbai serial bombings, the 2001 attack on Parliament by the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) and the November 26, 2008 terror attacks on Mumbai.

The February 26 operation in which Indian Air Force (IAF) Mirages crossed into Pakistan and executed pre-emptive, non-military air strikes’ on targets, the first time since the 1971 war when IAF jets had bombed targets in Pakistancrossed a Rubicon, say Indian defence analysts. It has set a resolve to deal with the sub-conventional threat conventionally, irrespective of the damage caused and Pakistani perception management in that operation, says Lt General P. Ravi Shankar, former director general, artillery.

The strike, however, drew an instant retaliation from the Pakistan air force (PAF) whose jets crossed the Line of Control (LoC) to drop bombs in Bhimber, KG Top and Narian in Jammu and Kashmir, and shoot down an IAF MiG-21 Bison. India’s claim of having shot down one of the PAF aircraft, believed to be an F-16, somewhat levelled the score except that it was complicated by the capture of the downed MiG-21 pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman. A stream of visuals of the downed pilot, blindfolded and his face bloodied after capture, were released on Pakistani social media. In its demarche to Pakistan’s acting high commissioner in New Delhi, the ministry of external affairs (MEA) termed the videos a vulgar display of an injured personnel in violation of all norms of international humanitarian law and the Geneva Convention (specifically Article 13, which protects prisoners of war from public curiosity or displaying them as war trophies)’. Pakistan was clearly milking the PR opportunity for what it was worth, even as its prime minister, Imran Khan, spoke of peace, warned of miscalculation and offered to sit down and talk out differences’ with India.

Mixed signals went out on the day of Khan’s address when #SayNoToWar was trending on Twitter, with militaries on both sides on full alert, India’s service chiefs briefing PM Narendra Modi on their war preparedness, fighter jets on combat air patrols and reports of precautionary air-raid blackouts in Karachi.

There was no sign, however, that New Delhi was preparing for a climbdown. Defence officials believe that while a military option is very much on the cards and an escalation is possible, the decision is going to be a political one. What the government does in the next 24 hours after the PAF strikes will clearly be watched carefully. By using air strikes to hit at camps deep within its territory, India might have called Pakistan’s bluff, signalling that terrorism was no longer a low-cost option. But will it choose to climb up the escalation ladder by ratcheting up tensions or would it prefer to take up PM Khan’s offer and reduce tensions?

A HOT LoC

(Level 4 on the India-Pakistan escalation ladder)

Probability: High

In most conflicts with Pakistan, the LoC has been the ground zero for a ferocious exchange of small arms and artillery fire. Last year, for instance, the LoC remained the hottest it has been in 15 years. The government says there were 2,936 instances of ceasefire violations by Pakistan. Heating up the LoC is only a facesaver, which will subside when ammunition shortage starts pinching and our retaliation becomes stronger, says Lt Gen. Shankar. In any case, we should be prepared to win some and lose some. It will be a long haul. At some stage, bigger numbers will prevail and Pakistan will crack.

Strengths are relative since the IAF and Indian army are deployed on two fronts

Limiting a conflict to the LoC might not work, feels Brig. Kuldip Singh (retd), former head of the defence wing in the Joint Intelligence Committee. Punitive strikes across the LoC may not achieve the necessary goals as Pakistan will be able to side-step resources from the Int­ernational Boundary (IB) sector to achieve parity in the LoC sector, he says. To fix Pakistan’s resources in the IB sector, India must mobilise fully and pose a credible threat. Mere mobilisation, as was done during Operation Parakram (after the Parliament attack) just won’t do. But posing a credible threat holds the potential for escalation to full-scale war.

CONVENTIONAL WAR

(Level 11)

Probability: Remote

The Indian army’s Cold Start doctrine, which calls for rapid mobilisation of conventional forces to launch attacks within hours, has its origins in a JeM attack. Soon after the terror group attacked Parliament in December 2001, the army carried out its largest mobilisation since the 1971 war, deploying along the IB. The army never carried out the attack it had threatened, leading to a climbdown after 11 months. A senior defence official calls Cold Start, as the new war-fighting strategy came to be called, the only military option against Pakistan. The army, however, is several months away from addressing fuel and ammunition deficiencies in its inventories. Also, India lacks the overwhelming conventional military dominance over Pakistan to be able to enforce a decisive outcome in a short war.

UP IN SMOKE Wreckage of what Pakistan says is an IAF jet shot down in Pakistan occupied Kashmir

If India carries out a serious, punitive military strike, it may be difficult to control the military escalation as Pakistan will be compelled to respond in kind at every level, says Brig. Singh. In any case, neither the government nor the army anticipates an escalation to this stage.

COVERT OPTIONS

(Level 4)

Probability: Low

Asked whether India should go in for an offensive hybrid war, that is, employ its own covert actors, army chief General Bipin Rawat had an interesting response at a seminar in Delhi in November. A stone thrown directly up will come and fall on your headwhat happens to these people (non-state actors) after the ends of the state have been achieved? It was a rhetorical question simply because India has no covert capability or, at least, has not had it for several decades now.

In 1998, then prime minister I.K. Guj­ral famously shut down India’s covert capabilities inside Pakistantwo operations named CIT-X and CIT-J being run by India’s external intelligence agency, Research & Analysis Wing (R&AW). According to a senior diplomat, then prime minister A.B. Vajpayee refused to green-light the resumption of these operations. These covert actors would have been the ideal agents to carry out a campaign of targeting non-state actors of the JeM and Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) inside Pakistan, they say. At the very least, officials say, it would have paid Pakistan back in its own coin. Pakistan had used hybrid warfare against India in all but one of its wars, from 1947-48 to 1965 and 1999. It used suicide attackers affiliated to the Haqqani network to target Indian interests in Afghanistan between 2008 and 2010. In the most brazen attack, a suicide bomber attacked the Indian embassy in Kabul killing 58 people, including the military attache.

One of the pillars of hybrid warfare is the use of what are variously called non-state actors, guerrillas, terrorist proxies or irregulars to fight conventional armies. India has used this option against Pakistan just once, during the 1971 war when it trained close to 100,000 East Pakistani nationals, the Mukti Bahini’ that tied down the Pakistan army garrison. Using the covert option to retaliate is complicated because, as analysts say, it takes several years to raise such capabilities and sustain them. It is hence not an option that is on the table.

AIR ACTION

(Escalate to level 5)

Probability of further use: Low

The death of 40 CRPF troopers in an attack by a suicide bomber on February 14 in Pulwama put tremendous pressure on the Narendra Modi government to act. Particularly since the government is in election mode. The options for a ground assault using special forces or the regular army were severely restricted because most of the LoC was snowbound. Air strikes using the air force were seen as the preferred mode of delivering ordnance on the targets selected by Indian intelligence agencies. The use of air power in the attack was hugely escalatory as it gave the strike high visibility and added a new dimension to Indian retaliation. Further air strikes could, however, dramatically escalate the conflict since both sides are capable of striking at each other. Even now, with the retaliatory air strikes by Pakistan, the government is under more pressure to respond and top up its escalatory dynamic. The utility of this move could prove limiting as India presently lacks overwhelming air superiority over the PAF of the kind Israel enjoys over all its neighbours, for example.

We can keep doing this one-off air strike thing with Pakistan. We can send in a batch of 20 aircraft, but Pakistan can do the same with a smaller number of aircraft and hit you, says a senior defence official.

DE-ESCALATION

(Back to level 1 on the escalation ladder)

Probability: High

Analysts say this is an extremely likely next course of action. Imran Khan signalled this hours after the PAF jets intruded into the LoC. The counter-response to the Pakistani pro­vo­cation lies in the Indian domain but it is unlikely that India will calibrate this any higher, says Lt Gen. Syed Ata Hasnain (retd), former 15 Corps Commander. With Pakistan effectively isolated and the international community firmly with India, this may be the time for us to de-escalate. However, the release of the Indian pilot is now a major priority. The narrative will once again move into the diplomatic domain.

Pakistan has tried to retaliate through non-military means and attempted a face-saver by going up the escalatory ladder. Both sides need to understand that any more escalation could be dangerous and stand down, says Air Marshal S.R.K. Nair (retd).
