Be liberal but responsible too !

All high pitch discussions on the Pulwama terror attack and what followed thereafter, seems coloured by the fact that 2019 Lok Sabha elections are near. This applies both to liberals and core nationalists if they were to frame this as a binary – as the question seems to do and when crossing some threshold limits.

Our liberals are not homogenous. Their habitual kindness towards Pakistan is irrespective of the leader there. They were as praising to General Musharraf, a military usurper (and the architect of the Kargil war), as they are to Imran Khan now. More than whatever the views they hold, the prime objection is that they do not appreciate the timing of their postures which has potential to harm the national interests. Unfortunate part is they release the heat meant for Modi towards the National interests.

On the other side, the Right-wingers who advocate for a more muscular response by a ‘new India’ say Pakistan had no choice but to return Abhinandan. Untrue. It took eight days to secure the release of Kambampati Nachiketa. Captain Saurabh Kalia was tortured and murdered as a POW by Pakistan.

For most of these liberals, disliking Modi is an extension of their basic aversion to the BJP-RSS. They had the same aversion for Atal Bihari Vajpayee and L.K. Advani too.

Some of chums, for whatever reasons, with sundry Pakistanis and their outfits backed by Pakistani establishment. Yet some others are politicians having a stake in various anti-BJP moves here.

It didn’t help create goodwill either between Muslims and Hindus, or between Pakistan and India. If at all, such posturing of the liberals always brought additional, reflex support to it. Many people, otherwise disinterested in party politics, become sympathetic and supportive to the BJP. The present scenario seems to be unfolding the same way.

Therefore, we should reasonably appreciate Imran Khan for his single gesture even if he had not uttered a word of condemnation against Terror by his state for its continued sponsorship of terrorism. This is the evidence that we have seen.

Related
