Tax season leads to more fraudsters, report Kingston Police, RCMP

While fraud exists all year, tax season is by far the worst time of year for fraudsters to come calling, Kingston Police report.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

“It does happen all year, but we get flooded with reports this time of year,” Det. Brad Hughes of the Kingston Police fraud unit said of fraudsters calling residents and claiming to be from the Canada Revenue Agency. “It’s actually worse after the tax deadline.”

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Tax season leads to more fraudsters, report Kingston Police, RCMP Back to video

March is fraud month across the country and police agencies are encouraging residents to remain vigilant. It seems like once a week this reporter receives a scam in some form, whether it be in an email, over the phone or via text message.

On Wednesday, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police also warned the public of the CRA scam and explained that through their work with international partners, they’ve been able to track down some of the fraudsters. They’ve dismantled an illegal call centre network in India that they claim “is responsible for perpetrating the CRA tax scam and other mass marketing-related scams.”

“The results of these combined law enforcement efforts from September 2018 to January 2019 include the takedown of approximately 40 call centres and the arrests of over 60 individuals, who are now facing prosecution in India,” the news release said. “The scam is being committed by organized crime groups operating out of multiple locations throughout India.”

Hughes said Friday morning that just last month scammers called his work cellphone at the police station.

“They wanted me to verify my address. If they are calling you and they want you to verify your information with them, that’s a huge red flag, because the CRA would already have your address,” Hughes explained. “I said, ‘No, because I don’t know who you are,’ and they replied, ‘Well, you owe back taxes and there’s a warrant for your arrest. You have to pay and your local RCMP are going to come arrest you.’”
