Rape, graver offence than murder: Maharashtra Govt

Continuing it's discourse, Maharashtra government on Friday, argued that post the Nirbhaya case, the legislature had taken all aspects into consideration before bring in the amendment to section 376 (E) giving death penalty to repeat rape offenders.



Advocate general Ashutosh Kumbhakoni arguing for the state said, "The amendment is not a knee-jerk reaction to the brutal offence against Nirbhaya, but the legislature took into consideration, views of all concerned and then delivered the judgement on the new law." He further opposed the petition filed by culprits Vijay Jadhav, Kasim Bengali and Salim Ansari, convicted in the infamous Shakti Mills rape case, challenging the Constitutional validity of Section 376 (E) of the Indian Penal Code, which stipulates death penalty for second-time offenders. The amendment was brought in post the Nirbhaya case.



On Thursday, he had argued that, India has a victim centric sentencing approach. Rape is a graver offence than murder and the impact on the society at large of the offence has to be considered before giving the punishment. "What happens across the world cannot be accepted by India. Thus if death penalty is abolished across some foreign countries does not mean it should be done in India," argued Kumbhakoni.



Similarly, amicus curiae, Abad Ponda pointed out that death was prescribed not only alone in Section 302 (murder) but 33 other provisions in falling under different laws. Moreover, the recent amendment to Section 376 (rape) brought in by the legislature prescribes death penalty for offences committed below the age of 12 year and gang rape on minors below the age of 12.



Comparing laws prevalent in USA and India, he argued that in 44 states of 50 states in USA, deaths were abolished for child rape offences. A division bench of Justice B P Dharmadhikari and Justice Revati Mohite Dhere, will hear the arguments on Monday.

Case File

Govt opposed the petition filed by culprits convicted in Shakti Mills rape case, challenging the Constitutional validity of Section 376 (E) of the Indian Penal Code, which stipulates death penalty for second-time offenders.
