Worst ever engineered false flag attack

My opinion: Worst ever Engineered False flag attack by India - badly busted (Lets connect the dots).



Conclusion based on the different facts on ground, observations and calculations of many defense and security experts across the world.



Purpose of Pulwana attack was to Isolate Pakistan and get votes in upcoming elections by creating a war hysteria between the both countries. Especially when BJP and its top leadership facing corruption charges. Clearly evident, pre-launched campaign of Modi and Ajit Doval (India’s core master mind of such false flag activities). Many on both sides (which include Indian opposition), pre-empt this months before the attack. That was the only plan which GOI and its allies have to gain their objectives.



After 30 years of continous struggle, finally Pakistan comeout from the worst political and diplomatic era. World is now considering Pakistan as a great place for investment whether you see CPEC, GCC, Turkish, American and british business giants direct investments. There was no real reason or gain for Pakistan and its intelligence agencies to execute such attacks which is against the rise of the country at this crucial stage especially when the Saudis are coming for $20 Billion Investments package in Pakistan. So the intend of this false flag is very clear who did this and why.



Now how Ajit Doval formulate this:



1. Story begin from the Kidnapping of the kashmiri kid.

2. Dressup him like a Jihadi style and take his interview on a gunpoint with the name of JEM (Why choose JEM instead of JUI because India is a part of FATF. Pakistan has submitted a concrete evidences of its constructivr actions against the outfits (what so ever), and the governing body of the FATF is quite happy and comfortable.

3. Later released the Kashmiri kid after making a interview video so that nobody conclude the reason of his kidnap after the event.

4. Again kidnap by the Indian Army.

5. Killed him before the attack.

6. Send 350KG of dynamite van (practically and logicially it is not easy for anyone to develop such level of explosive at home. You need high level technical expertise, place and off course support to develop such level of load. It is impossible to do these things in Indian Occupied Kashmir (Jammu & Kashmir) where the massive Indian intelligence and 0.7M Army deployement (more than the population). As per commander J&K, he clearly stated that this is not possible that some one bring or carry such level of explosive outside the IOK.



Keep in mind there were more than 4 different check points and active intelligence deployment nearby the convey when the attack occurred.



7. Sucessfully managed to kill its own soldiers and released the video after the attack immidiately (No one ever bother to check the source and time).



Note: Ajit Doval and RAW have learned from the Mumbai False flag attack that the statement taken after the attack is always considered as engineered so its better to make a video before the so called suicide attack. Things are more easier to control at later stages.



Another technical reasons of inside Job:



JEM never ever take the responsibility of any attack through their Jihadis. JEM always officially admit about their activities through their top leadership in past (remember JEM attack on Musharaf?)



Afghan Talibans, JEM always do such admissions through their respective leaderships unlike Al-Qaida, TTP and the BLA (The model is completely differ).
