Gangster murdered, his body set on fire over share in Bihar's illegal liquor business

Amit Singh had emerged as a big player in the illegal business of liquor in Bihar | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: After Bihar, the war over multi-million illegal liquor business has started in Delhi. The incident took place 10 days ago, when Amit Singh was kidnapped, killed and his body allegedly set on fire by a gang for demanding a bigger market share in the liquor business in areas like Darbhanga, Muzaffarpur and Samastipur. The conflict took place between the gang of Chunnu Thakur, a known criminal and Amit Singh a renowned history-sheeter of Bihar.

As per the reports from TOI, Singh had emerged as a big player in the illegal business of liquor. Also, more than 20 cases of murder and kidnapping had been filed against Singh. His gang was known to effectively transport illegal liquor from Delhi, UP and Haryana to Bihar.

Also Read: Noida: Women booked for extorting money from retd officer; 'Rs 35-40 lakh already extorted': victim's wife

Thakur is a known criminal in the Bihar underworld and he started his own gang. He has over 150 cases of murders, extortion, robbery and dacoity against him. Not only this, last year he had fled from custody in Muzaffarpur but surrendered afterwards.

Reportedly, Rajesh Deo, DCP of crime branch arrested one of the key members of Thakur gang, Pankaj Kumar who during interrogation disclosed the secret of how the deceased was knocked out for demanding a bigger share of liquor market. Kumar had also been involved in money laundering businesses from Gandhi Nagar Market in east Delhi.

He further mentioned that several teams are conducting raids in Delhi, Faridabad and Bihar. Also, the special investigative team is now looking for Thakur and his associates.

Deo told TOI that Kumar, Ravi and Manu (other members of the gang) bluffed Singh and took him to a flat on Delhi outskirts where they allegedly poured petrol over the body and set him on fire.
