Poonch: Pakistan's ceasefire violation kills mother, her two...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Poonch: Pakistan's ceasefire violation kills mother, her two minor kids

02 Mar 2019

On Friday night, Pakistan violated ceasefire in Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir killing three members of the same family and seriously injuring two others. A nine-month-old baby was among the ones who lost their lives.

Pakistan continued its wicked actions soon after it handed over Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman.

Earlier, this week Pakistani PM Imran Khan spoke about "peace" but violations haven't stopped.

Children, aged five and nine months, die in shelling

What happened

Ceasefire violation in J&K increased after IAF's successful operation in Balakot, Pakistan. On Friday, the shelling intensified after 10:30 PM.

The Pakistani Army targeted villages along the LoC and several houses were hit by shells.

One of the shells exploded in Rubina Kouser's house. Kouser, her five-year-old son Faizan, and nine-month-old daughter Shabnam were killed while her husband Mohammed Younis was seriously injured.

Pakistan has violated ceasefire about 60 times this week

Details

On Thursday, the shelling in Poonch killed an off-duty soldier and injured a 27-year-old woman identified as Amina Akhter.

Taking into account the heavy cross-border firing, district administration ordered that all schools within a five-kilometer radius will remain closed.

The Pakistani Army has violated ceasefire a record 60 times this week. It has targeted nearly 70 forward posts in different areas of J&K.

A few hours ago, Pakistan violated ceasefire again

Fact

"On Saturday, Pakistan continued with its nefarious designs and at about 12:30 hours again initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by shelling with mortars and firing of small arms along the LoC in Nowshera sector of Rajouri district," said Defense spokesman Lt. Col Devender Anand.

In 2018, Pakistan violated ceasefire nearly 3,000 times

Agreement

India and Pakistan agreed to a ceasefire along the LoC in 2003 but the neighboring country has many times shown its complete disregard for laws.

Ignoring repeated calls for restraint, Pakistan violated ceasefire 2,936 times in 2018, the highest in 15 years.

That Khan spoke about "choosing our actions wisely" just a few days ago, shows he has little control over his country's army.

Pakistan's jets were forced to return after IAF's intervention

Combat

Not only ground, but Pakistan also took the aerial route to attack military installments of India. On Wednesday, 24 PAF jets attempted to violate Indian airspace but were forced to return after IAF's timely intervention.

Pakistan used US-made F-16 jets for the act of aggression and ended up violating the agreement.

In the air combat, Abhinandan scripted history by shooting down one F-16 jet.
