OIC reaffirms support to Kashmiris, condemns Indian terrorism in IoK

Flags of member states can be seen in this picture from the plenary session of the 46th Council of Foreign Ministers at the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) on Saturday, March 2, 2019.—Photo: OIC

ABU DHABI: Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) on Saturday reaffirmed their unwavering support for the Kashmiri people in their just cause and condemned Indian terrorism in occupied Kashmir.



In a resolution adopted by the 46th session of the Council of Foreign Ministers (CFM), the OIC member states reiterated that Jammu and Kashmir remains the core dispute between Pakistan and India and its resolution is indispensable for the dream for peace in South Asia.

"The OIC resolution also condemned in the strongest terms recent wave of Indian terrorism in Occupied Jammu and Kashmir and expressed deep concern over the atrocities and human rights violations in IoK," said a press release from the Foreign Office.

The resolution also reminded the international community of its obligation to ensure implementation of UN Security Council resolutions on the Jammu and Kashmir dispute, it said.

OIC affirms Pakistan's right to self-defence, welcomes PM Imran's offer of dialogue with India

The OIC expressed concern over Indian violation of Pakistani airspace, backing Pakistan's right to defend itself against unprovoked acts of aggression.

In a new resolution sponsored by Pakistan, OIC member states urged India to refrain from the threat or use of force.

This OIC resolution on regional peace and security in South Asia also welcomed Prime Minister Imran Khan's renewed offer of dialogue to India and the goodwill gesture of handing over captured Indian Air Force pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman.

"The resolution called for restraint and de-escalation as well as the need to resolve outstanding issues through peaceful means," said a press release from Pakistan's Foreign Office.

The pilot was captured on Wednesday when his MiG-21 among two Indian military aircraft was shot down by Pakistan Air Force after they ventured into the Pakistani airspace. He was released and handed over to India via the Wagah border on Friday in a "peace gesture" praised by the international community and observers from both sides of the border.

OIC resolution endorses Pakistan's stance, says Qureshi

Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, in his reaction to the OIC declaration, said the OIC resolution has endorsed Pakistan’s stance on Kashmir calling it central to regional peace and has condemned Indian terrorism in Kashmir.

"The OIC, recognising Pakistan's right to self defence, denounced Indian aggression. I congratulate the nation on this success," Qureshi said in a tweet.



Pakistan protests invitation to India

Meanwhile, Pakistan boycotted the plenary session of the 46th Council of Foreign Ministers at the Foreign Minister level in protest against an invitation extended to Indian Foreign Minister Sushma Swaraj as guest of honour at the inaugural session.

Pakistan had previously conveyed its decision to boycott the session over the invitation to the Indian foreign minister, while Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi had announced on Friday that he would not be attending the session if the invitation to India is not withdrawn.

Pakistan's foreign minister boycotted the session while the country's diplomatic officials attended the meeting.

In another significant development, the OIC elected Pakistan as a member of its Independent Permanent Human Rights Commission from the Asian region, in acknowledgement of Pakistan's constructive contribution to human rights discourse, norms and policies.

The OIC adopted two other resolutions sponsored by Pakistan on international disarmament and non-proliferation issues and reform of the UN Security Council.

The strong OIC support to the people of Indian Occupied Jammu and Kashmir and the centrality of this core issue to regional peace is recognition of the key role that Pakistan plays as a founding OIC member.




