Cop thrashed inside police station, father-son duo held

Ludhiana: A father-son duo allegedly thrashed a police official inside Sadar Raikot police station on Friday evening after the latter had called them in an assault case in which the duo was the complainants.

Police have arrested Jagtar Singh and his son Surinder Singh of Burj Hari Singh for the assault.

In his complaint, ASI Gulab Singh of Barnala claimed after the registration of an assault case, he had called Jagtar with medico legal report and other party to the police station at 4pm on Friday.

The complainant said as Jagtar Singh along with his son and the other party were discussing the matter, Surinder raised his pitch and uttered foul language against him. Surinder asked him whether he was trying to strike a compromise into the matter, he added.

The ASI said as he asked Surinder to tone down, he used slangs against him. He said Jagtar then pushed him and the duo kicked him several times.

The cop said besides tossing his turban, the accused even tore his uniform. He said the accused obstructed him from performing his duty.

ASI Gulab Singh said later other cops rushed to his aid. He said the accused were later arrested in the evening.

Police have booked the accused under Sections 353 (Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty), 186 (Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions), 295 (injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to insult the religion of any class), 34 (Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Sources said the ASI had allegedly slapped Surinder after he raised pitch as he felt that the officer is taking side of the opposite party. They said later Jagtar and his son beat the ASI.

Refuting the allegations, the investigating officer of the case said they have registered a case on the complaint of ASI Gulab Singh. He said the allegations against the complainant are wrong.

Police officials said whereas Jagtar is a farmer, his son works in block development office.

Box: Khaki under attack

July 14, 2018 | Saleem Tabri police booked two persons for manhandling, dragging and snatching phone of a cop when he was making a video of the fight between two groups

May 26, 2018 | Dugri police booked four persons for assaulting an on-duty constable Lovepreet Singh when he had stopped their car for checking at a check post

May 14, 2018: A car-borne drug peddler, carrying 52kg poppy husk, tried to run over cops at a check post near Khanna



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
