Delhi: Help held for kidnapping child, says he grew too fond of her

NEW DELHI: “I will bring her back soon,” was the single line that Praveen repeated every time the mother of the one-year-old girl he had kidnapped contacted him. All this while, however, he moved further away from Delhi and towards the India-Nepal border. This unlikely case of a domestic help getting too attached to a child put under his care came to an abrupt end on Friday, when the 22-year-old man was arrested from Tundla railway station in UP.DCP (northeast) Atul Kumar Thakur said that a case of kidnapping has been registered against the neurotic nanny at Seelampur police station and assistant sub-inspector Abdul Rahim has been given charge of recovering the child.Praveen was hired by the parents of four children in northeast Delhi’s Seelampur a year ago to take care of the youngest of the children, a baby girl. Praveen stayed at home and looked after the baby when the parents were away at work.The couple concurred that they no longer needed to keep Praveen in their employ after February and informed him of their decision. On February 24, the youth, who had grown overly fond of his charge, disappeared from the house with her. When the girl’s mother returned home and found them missing, she called the accused, who assured her that he would return soon. But the woman was not reassured and she and her husband alerted the cops of the developments.The investigating teams found that the family had not got Praveen’s police verification done and so they only had his phone number and knew he was from a village near Etah in UP. To their respite, however, the man did not switch off his mobile phone, and in fact, talked to the girl’s mother whenever she called to request him to bring her daughter home. Police said that the youth did not demand any ransom, only assured everyone that the girl was safe and would return home soon.The cops kept track of his movements through his mobile phone, even raiding a house in Noida but missing him.On February 26, Praveen reached Tundla station with the child and stayed at the railway station. The following day, he went to Etah to his parents’ home, but they refused to let him keep the baby since he was unmarried. After staying the night there, Praveen returned to Tundla, planning to go further to Gorakhpur . However, the sleuths who were trailing him managed to nab him before he boarded the train.The medical examination of the child showed no assault. Praveen told police that in addition to being attached to the girl, he was angry with her parents for refusing to give him the Rs 30,000 he had requested.
