ABVP workers force Karnataka professor to kneel, apologise over FB post praising Pakistan PM Imran Khan

Members of Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) on Saturday forced a Karnataka college professor to kneel and apologise over an alleged "anti-India" message on social media, according to media reports.

The incident occurred at Vachana Pitamaha Dr PG Halakatti College of Engineering and Technology in Vijayapura district of Karnataka. Even though the incident took place in the presence of police constable, no case has been filed as of now.

Sandeep Wathar, a professor of civil engineering in the college, questioned the BJP government at the Centre for creating a war-like situation in the country while praising Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan for his stand in one of the two posts.

In the second post, he slammed "bhakts" for escalating tension and creating a war-like situation.

"Who sounds more intelligent in all this? You bhakts. You will [be] the reason for the destruction of millions of lives if this tension escalates. BJPabsolutely zero shame," Warthar said in the questionable post.

ABVP forces Karnataka lecturer to kneel, apologise for abusing BJP, praising Imran Khan in "anti national" social media post, while police look on in college run by Congress home minister. Police chief: whatever happened was wrong but can't act without complaint! #NewIndia pic.twitter.com/GgQBFakwBm March 3, 2019

Both ABVP and BJP activists have demanded his resignation of the professor, who has deleted the Facebook posts. The right-wing group activists also forced Sandeep Wathar to kneel and apologise for the post, according to a viral video that is doing rounds on social media.

The institution where the incident occurred is run by Bijapur Lingayat Development Education Society, which is owned by Karnataka Home Minister and Congress leader MB Patil.

It has been reported that the professor was allegedly persuaded by the college management to apologise as ABVP made their stand clear and started a demonstration.

When the professor finally came out to apologise, the protestors made him kneel and apologise for his mistake with his hands folded. The ABVP workers even made Warthar promise that he would not ever post such comments on social media ever again.

Commenting on the incident, College principal Professor VP Huggi said Warthar has not been suspended as of now and order on the same will be issued on Tuesday when the college reopens.

He further stated that Warthar has switched off his phone and is unreachable at present.

This is not the first time ABVP have treated a college professor in this manner. Last year, a college professor from Madhya Pradesh had to touch the feet of an ABVP worker to apologise after he had initially stopped them from raising nationalist slogans.
