Armed forces to soon get ''Made-in-Amethi'' AK-203 rifles, says PM Modi

amansharma@tribunemail.com

Shahira Naim

Tribune News Service

Lucknow, March 3

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday attacked the Congress for “compromising with the security of the country and the life of the jawans” by denying the armed forces modern rifles, bullet proof jackets, Howitzer guns and even creating hurdles in acquiring Rafale fighter jets.

PM Modi announced the beginning of production of the modern assault rifle in the Kalashnikov series AK-203 in Amethi’s ordnance factory at Korwa. This rifle is the latest derivative of the legendary AK-47 rifle.

Being produced under an Indo-Russian joint venture signed between the countries to manufacture 750,000 such assault rifles which would be given to the army’s infantry troops.

Speaking on the occasion at a public rally at Korwa, Gauriganj, PM Modi said Amethi is to get a new identity as the armed forces will soon be using made in Amethi modern rifles.

PM Modi pointed out that in 2005 the armed forces had placed the demand for modern weapons which was being actualised only now.

He charged Congress president Rahul Gandhi with not starting the production of modern rifles in the ordnance factory in Amethi in time which was a great injustice to the jawans and the armed forces.

Accusing the Amethi MP of being a liar, PM Modi saiid he failed to fulfil his promise to the people of starting production at the Amethi ordnance factory in 2010 and giving jobs to 1,500 youths.

“The previous government neglected the security of the country and jawans. In 2009 the armed forces demanded 1.86 lakh bulletproof jackets for the jawans for which my government finally placed an order to supple 2.20 lakh bullet proof jackets.”

“Today in Amethi, I ask you who were these people who made the armed forces wait for modern rifles and bulletproof jackets,” he said.

At this juncture, a section of the crowd waving the BJP flag chanted “Rahul Gandhi chor hai” making PM Modi pause for a moment and cry out “Bharat Mata ki jai” before continuing.

Declaring that the Rafale jets would soon be in the skies of the country, PM Modi charged the previous government of not negotiating the Rafael deal as their intention was not right.

He charged the Congress government of continuing its effort to stall the acquisition of the Rafale aircraft for their “personal interest”.

“From the Supreme Court to CAG every institution is saying that the government of India has taken a right decision at the right time and struck the right deal in the interest of the country. But these people are spreading lies. The desperation of not getting commission in this defence deal is written on their faces,” he said.

He also charged Gandhi with letting down the people of Amethi by not completing any of the promised development projects like the steel factory, mega Food Park and Gauriganj’s cycle factory.

Clearly indicating the candidature of Union minister Smriti Irani from Amethi, PM Modi said she had worked harder for the development of Amethi during the last five years than the sitting MP.

During the first visit of a Prime Minister to Amethi in the last three decades, Modi inaugurated or laid the foundation stone of 17 projects to the tune of Rs 538 crore.
