PM addresses his first rally in Amethi, lays foundation stone of rifle manufacturing unit

Amethi (UP): Prime Minister Narendra Modi Sunday addressed his first rally in Amethi, the Lok Sabha constituency of Congress president Rahul Gandhi, since coming to power in 2014 and laid the foundation stone of a manufacturing unit for AK-203 rifles.

Modi, who landed in the city after addressing a rally in Bihar's Patna, said Amethi, which has traditionally been loyal to the Gandhi family, was the best example of his government's 'Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas' (together with all, development for all) motto.

"We were not able to win the seat the last time but won your hearts. Smritiji worked for the development here and did more work than that done by the one who has won from here," he said, referring to Union Minister Smriti Irani who unsuccessfully contested the last election from Amethi.

"Are you happy with the works we have done, have we not cared for you and tried honestly for your welfare...have we done any injustice to you," Modi told the rally.

"Those who voted for us and those who did not, all are ours...This is the mantra of 'Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas'," Modi said.

The Congress president has alleged that his constituency has been receiving step-motherly treatment ever since the BJP-led government came to power at the Centre, with various development works being stalled.

After laying the foundation stone of the rifle-manufacturing unit, he said these modern rifles will be made in Amethi under a Russia-India joint venture.

These rifles will be known as 'made in Amethi' and will help our jawans in encounters with naxals and terrorists, he said. "Amethi will get a new identity now," Modi said.

He accused previous governments of neglecting the armed forces and their needs. Attacking the previous UPA government, Modi said, "These people sat on Rafale deal for years and when it was time for their government to go, they pushed it into cold storage."

"When our government assumed office, we finalised it in one-and-a-half years...and the first Rafale aircraft will be in our skies soon," he added.

This is Modi's first visit to Amethi after coming to power in 2014. He visited the neighbouring Rae Bareli constituency, represented in Lok Sabha by UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi, in December.

#WATCH Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Amethi: Kuch log duniya mein ghomte-ghoomte batate hain 'Made in Ujjain', 'Made in Jaipur', Made in Jaisalmer'...bhashan karte hain. Unke bhashan hi reh jate hain. Yeh Modi hai, ab 'Made in Amethi' AK-203 rifle hogi. pic.twitter.com/XeyzoY2U6f — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) March 3, 2019

Russian president Putin hopes AK-203 rifles will help Indian security agencies

The new joint venture between India and Russia to manufacture the Kalashnikov assault rifles' 200 series will be able to fulfil Indian security agencies' requirement for small arms, Russian President Vladmir Putin said in a message read out by Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman here on Sunday.

Sitharaman read out the message during an event of Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Uttar Pradesh's Amethi where he laid the foundation stone of a manufacturing unit for the AK-203 assault rifles.

Russian Pres: New joint venture will produce Kalashnikov AR's of newest 200 series&eventually reach full localization of production. Thus, Indian defence-industrial sector will have opportunity to fulfill needs of national security agencies in this category of small arms. #Amethi pic.twitter.com/fbbjurk9qE — ANI (@ANI) March 3, 2019

"The new joint venture will manufacture world famous Kalashnikov assault rifles of the newest 200 series and eventually will reach full localisation of production.

"Thus, the Indian defence-industrial sector will have the opportunity to fulfil the needs of national security agencies in this category of small arms, resting upon advanced Russian technologies," Putin said in his message.

He said military and technical cooperation has traditionally been one of the key areas of the special and privileged strategic partnership between Russia and India.

"For more than seven decades, we have been supplying reliable and high-quality armaments and equipment to Indian friends. Around 170 military and industrial facilities have been set up in India with assistance from our country," Putin said.

It was during his official visit to India last October that Putin and Modi reached an agreement on producing Kalashnikov rifles in India.

The inter-governmental agreement was prepared and signed in the shortest possible time. "In this regard, I would like to express gratitude to Russian and Indian specialists, to all those who so promptly made this project happen," the Russian president said.

Putin said he is convinced that commissioning of the new enterprise will contribute to stronger defence potential of India and to further advance the scientific and industrial basis of the national economy.

It will be instrumental in terms of creating new jobs for a qualified work force and will provide an impetus to professional education and personnel training, he said.

"The plant itself will become another symbol of friendship and constructive cooperation between our two countries," he said in his message read out by the defence minister.

PTI
