Masood Azhar ‘alive and well’, says JeM – A comprehensive timeline of terror attacks by Jaish-e-Mohammad

JeM chief Masood Azhar

New Delhi/Islamabad: Less than a week after India bombed terror camps of Jaish-e-Mohammad in Pakistan’s Balakot, speculations were rife that JeM chief and dreaded terrorist Masood Azhar had died on Sunday. While a few media reports claimed that Azhar died after battling prolonged illness, others suggested that he had succumbed to his injuries after Indian Air Force (IAF) jets struck the Jaish camp in Balakot.

However, on Sunday evening, Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad group released a statement, stating that the terror commander was alive and doing well. Earlier in the day, a minister in the Imran Khan government in Pakistan had claimed that Azhar was ‘very critical’ and was undergoing treatment at an Army hospital in the country.

Tensions between India and Pakistan have flared up since February 14 after a JeM operative rammed an explosive-laden vehicle into a bus plying CRPF soldiers in Pulwama, killing at least 40 CRPF jawans. India retaliated to the terror strike on February 26 when IAF’s 12 Mirage 2000 jets crossed LoC and destroyed the Jaish camp in Balakot. Amid speculations over Masood Azhar’s death, Jaish-e-Mohammed releases statement saying he is doing well

A brief history of Masood Azhar:

In 1979-89, Azhar was selected as the head of Harkat ul Ansar's (HuA) department of motivation after he was injured in Soveit-Afghan war. In the early 1990s, he was named as the general secretary of HuA and later visited Zambia, Abu Dhabi, Saudi Arabia, Mongolia, UK and Albania to recruit people and to raise funds.

In August 1993, Azhar visited UK in order to spread the message of jihad and for recruitments and raising funds.

In 1994, he was arrested in Jammu and Kashmir for spreading hatred. However, Azhar – along with two other terrorists - was later released by the Indian government in 1999 in a 'prisoner swap' after Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, with tacit support from Pakistan's ISI, hijacked Indian Airlines Flight 814 (IC 814)

Here’s a look at the timeline of the dastardly terror attacks carried out by Masood Azhar’s JeM:

1999-2000: Masood Azhar formed the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror group shortly after being released from Indian custody.

April 2000: JeM terrorists execute car-borne IED attack at Badami Bagh cantonment in Srinagar, killing 30.

June 2000: 3 Jammu and Kashmir armed police personnel are killed by Jaish terrorists

December 2000: I killed in mine attack on BSF vehicle on the Srinagar-Baramulla highway. JeM claims responsibility for the attack.

October 2001: Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorists bomb Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) assembly, killing 31.

December 2001: JeM attacks Indian Parliament, just weeks after Al-Qaeda chief Osama Bin Laden is cornered in Tora Bora caves. Escalating tensions at the Indo-Pakistan border force Pakistan Army to withdraw cordon from Tora Bora caves, aiding Osama to escape

January 2002: Jaish terrorists abduct and execute Wall Street Journal journalist Daniel Pearl in Karachi, Pakistan

June 2002: US Consulate in Pakistan's Karachi bombed by JeM terrorists.

January 2003: BSF personnel killed by Jaish terrorists at Batmaloo bus stand in Srinagar.

November 2005: A car bomb was detonated by JeM terrorists in Nowgam shortly before the searing-in ceremony of Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad as the CM, resulting in the deaths of 10 people

March 2005: JeM terrorists execute a grenade attack in Pulwama, killing 23 civilians and injuring 2 CRPF soldiers.

May 2005: JeM terrorists carry out a grenade attack on Human Rights Commission escort vehicle in Srinagar.

July 2008: A Special Police Officer (SPO) is killed by two Jaish terrorists on Sopore-Bandipora road

May 2014: Army Colonel's vehicle attacked by JeM operatives in Baramulla.

Jan 2016: Jaish-e-Mohammad plans and executes the attack on Pathankot Air Force Station, which claims lives of 7 security personnel and one civilian.

August 2016: JeM terrorists ambush army convoy in Baramulla, killing 2 people

September 2016: JeM terrorists attacked 12th Brigage of the army in Uri sector in Jammu and Kashmir, resulting in the deaths of 19 soldiers.

February 2019: CRPF convoy attacked by JeM operatives in Pulwama, killing 40 CRPF jawans

Meanwhile, following the Pulwama attack last month, the US, the UK and France backed India's demand to designate Azhar as a 'global terrorist' and moved a fresh proposal in the UN Security Council regarding the same. As a designated global terrorist, Azhar can face global travel ban, asset freeze and arms embargo.


