IAS topper Shah Faesal resigns, likely to join politics; Omar Abdullah says 'welcome'

New Delhi:

Shah Faesal, the 2009 IAS topper, has decided to quit over in protest against the “unabated killings in Kashmir”, and is likely join politics. Reports suggest Faesal may contest the upcoming Lok Sabha elections. According to latest media reports, the National Conference is likely to give ticket to Faesal. Taking to micro blogging website Twitter, Faesal wrote: “To protest the unabated killings in Kashmir and absence of any credible political initiative from Union Government, I have decided to resign from IAS. Kashmiri lives matter.”

Faesal added that he will address a press-conference on Friday.

To protest the unabated killings in Kashmir and absence of any credible political initiative from Union Government, I have decided to resign from IAS.

Kashmiri lives matter.

I will be addressing a press-conference on Friday.

Attached is my detailed statement. pic.twitter.com/Dp41rFIzIg

Former chief minister and National Conference vice president Omar Abdullah also took to Twitter saying “the bureaucracy’s loss is politics’ gain.”

The bureaucracy’s loss is politics’ gain. Welcome to the fold @shahfaesal. https://t.co/955C4m5T6V — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) January 9, 2019

The 35-year-old belongs to Kupwara’s Lolab Valley. The ex-IAS officer had hit the national headlines in July last year after a departmental inquiry was launched against him for posting a sarcastic tweet over the sensational Kathua rape and murder case.

In his controversial tweet, Faesal allegedly targeted the government and wrote ‘Patriarchy+Population+Illiteracy+Alcohol+Porn+Technology+Anarchy = Rapistan!’ This post drew the ire of the DoPT. In a notice to Faesal, the General Administration Department had said, "You have allegedly failed to maintain absolute honesty and integrity in the discharge of official duty and thus acted in a manner unbecoming of a public servant. " The GAD initiated the disciplinary proceedings at the request of the Centre's Department of Personnel and Training, sources said.

"Love letter from my boss for my sarcastic tweet against rape-culture in South Asia. The Irony here is that service rules with a colonial spirit are invoked in a democratic India to stifle the freedom of conscience." "I'm sharing this to underscore the need for a rule change," Faesal wrote on his twitter handle while posting the copy of the notice with it.

National Conference leader Omar Abdullah commenting on the issue said the DoPT seemed to be determined to chase Faesal out of civil service. "Looks like the DOPT is determined to chase @shahfaesal out of the civil services. The last line of this page is shocking & unacceptable where they question Faesal's integrity & honesty. How is a sarcastic tweet dishonest? How does it make him corrupt?" he asked in a tweet.

At that time, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi had backed Faesal. He, in fact wrote Faesal and said, “"I write to you in solidarity against the Jammu and Kashmir government's decision to initiate an inquiry for expressing your opinion on the rising incidents of rapes in India."

(With PTI inputs)

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
