Streamline judicial process to ensure hanging of Nirbhaya's rapists: DCW to President Kovind

New Delhi [India], Mar 3 (ANI): DCW Chief Swati Maliwal on Sunday wrote a letter to President Ram Nath Kovind demanding streamlining of the judicial process to make the hanging of Nirbhaya's rapists time-bound.

This letter comes after it has been reported that the convicts in the case are planning to file a curative petition.

Maliwal has asked the President to direct the government to immediately introduce an ordinance in the country that ensures that in the cases of rape, the trial is completed within 3 months of the crime and all appeals, review petitions and curative petitions are disposed off within the next three months, thus guaranteeing justice within 6 months.

In her letter, she said that Delhi is disgraced with being tagged as the 'Rape Capital' of the world. Girls as young as 8 months old have been brutalized in the city. Citing National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) statistics Maliwal, contended that on an average, 3 minor girls become victims of sexual assault every day in Delhi.

Furthermore, she has requested President Kovind to ensure that at least in cases of rape there should be a fixed timeline within which the entire judicial process is completed.

In the letter, it has also been mentioned how the Nirbhaya's case has still not reached its closure even after six years and her parents are still running from pillar to post in order to ensure justice for their daughter, even though the Supreme Court confirmed capital punishment in June 2017 to the four men who raped and murdered Nirbhaya.

Moreover, the review petition has also been rejected, but till date, the order for execution of the accused persons has not been complied with. Now, the convicts will be filing a curative petition in the Supreme Court, she said.

Lamenting that while there is a fixed time for filing a review petition, there is no time limit for filing of curative and mercy petitions; she also requested the President to consider fixing a timeline within which the entire judicial process needs to be completed at least in cases of rape. (ANI)


