AK 203 rifle India: How AK-203, superior to INSAS, will end forces’ hunt for a reliable rifle

AK-203s will be made in Amethi: PM Narendra Modi

NEW DELHI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi laying the foundation stone of a manufacturing unit for AK-203 rifles in Uttar Pradesh’s Amethi district on Sunday has finally ended the hunt of Indian security forces for a reliable assault rifle.Though the Indian military is considered among the top five in the world, it has been yearning for an all-weather durable assault rifle for quite some time as its mainstay weapon INSAS (India Small Arms System) rifle is riddled with problems. For years, the Indian military and paramilitary forces have been trying to find an alternative to INSAS rifle as it has several issues like gun jamming, rifle going into automatic mode when it was set for three-round bursts and oil falling on a user’s eyes during the combat. Even during the 1999 Kargil war, soldiers had complained of INSAS guns jamming or magazine cracking during the combat operation in the freezing temperature and had a tough time taking on enemies.Frustrated with the quality of the gun, soldiers deployed in counter-terror operations in J&K and northeast have started using either the world’s most reliable AK-47 or imported guns. Even the CRPF has switched over to AK-47 in militancy-infested areas. Special forces like Para commandos, Marine Commandos (popularly known as Marcos), Garud Commando Force (IAF special force) and even National Security Guard (anti-terror force) also rely on German or Israel automatic rifles like Heckler and Koch MP5 sub-machine guns and Tavor rifles. Even Special Protection Group, which provides the inner-layer security cover to VVIPs like the PM, prefer Belgium-made FN F2000 bullpup assault rifle, which is very effective in close-quarter combat.(INSAS rifle)It is said that INSAS rifle, being manufactured in the Tiruchirappalli ordnance factory, Kanpur small arms factory and rifle factory Ichhapur in West Bengal, was primarily meant to incapacitate enemies, but not to kill. On the other hand, terrorists in J&K, militants in northeast and Naxals in the Red-infested zones have been inflicting heavy casualties on security forces with the use of AK-47, which is primarily made for the kill.The bullets fired from INSAS have an effective range of 400 metre and the gun magazine can hold 20 rounds. Though its magazine is translucent (one can count the number of bullets left), it some time breaks on falling on ground. Also, INSAS is longer and heavier (4.15kg without magazine & bayonet) and difficult to carry.On the other hand, AK-203, which India under a deal with Russia will manufacture at the Amethi factory, is an advanced version of AK-47. It’s magazine can hold 30 bullets. The gun has an effective range of 400 metre and is considered 100% accurate. It will be lighter and shorter than an INSAS rifle. It can host an underbarrel grenade launcher or a bayonet and all versions can be equipped with quick-detachable tactical sound suppressors. The 7.62 mm ammunition in AK-203 gun is NATO grade and therefore more powerful. The rifle, which can fire 600 bullets in one minute, means 10 bullets in a second, can be used in automatic and semi-automatic mode. The most important quality of AK-series rifles is they never get jammed. The Kalashnikovs can work under extreme climatic conditions and are effective even in sand, soil and water.Because of its reliability, militaries of 50 countries use AK-47 and over 30 countries have the licence to manufacture the Russian assault rifle. Being the new series of AK-47, even Russian special forces use AK-203.Under the ‘Make in India’ programme, the Amethi factory, which was lying idle for quite some time, will churn out over seven lakh units of AK-203 rifles that will replace INSAS being used by Army and paramilitary forces. Later, state police will also be provided with AK-203 rifles. It is said the Amethi factory will first make the gas chamber and spring of the rifle more advanced before starting the mass production of the desi-version of AK-203.The ordnance factory board will possess the majority share of 50.5% in the JV while Russian company Kalashnikov Concern will hold 49.5% share. It was during his official visit to India last October that Russian President Putin and PM Modi reached an agreement on producing Kalashnikov rifles in India. In a message on Sunday, President Putin said he is convinced that the commissioning of the new enterprise “will fulfil the needs of national (Indian) security agencies in this category of small arms... and will contribute to stronger defence potential of India”.Due to its reliability, durability and effectiveness, AK-203 rifle will hopefully become the trustworthy weapon of our soldiers.
