Parents of two girls try to kidnap baby boy from hospital in Surat

SURAT: Three persons including two women , were nabbed by a group of people when they tried to abduct a baby boy from New Civil Hospital here on Saturday. The alert father of the baby boy expressed doubts about the accused following which they were nabbed by people in the hospital and handed over to police. Police investigation revealed that a couple from Mumbai, who had two daughters and wanted to have a son Police arrested Sanjudevi Ramesh Yadav, a resident of Dindoli and native of Uttar Pradesh, Sushila Yadav and her husband Ram Sajivan, a taxi driver, both residents of Jogeshwari West in Mumbai. A complaint against the accused was lodged by Vijay Bhabhor, a labourer, who lives in Magdalla. The accused were arrested and booked for kidnapping and other sections of Indian Penal Code at Khatodara police station.Vijay’s wife Suman had delivered a baby boy on Thursday in an ambulance. She was admitted to NCH and the accused women met Vijay, who was sitting with the child in ward.They told Vijay that parents of a newborn child can get Rs12,000 under a government scheme, but for that a form is required to be submitted to the hospital. Vijay went with them to ground floor near case registration window. The women told him that the counter is closed, but they have a form on which he needs to take his wife’s signature. They told Vijay to go back to the ward and offered to keep his child until he returned. But Vijay refused and just then a couple of security guards asked him if his wife and child have been discharged from the hospital.Vijay was describing them the details when the accused ran towards their car parked outside the hospital. However, the security guards and other people nabbed them and handed them over to police. Police seized the car in which the accused came and found diapers and clothes of children in it.Police produced them in a local court on Sunday and sought their custody, but it sent them to judicial custody. Police investigation revealed that the Mumbai couple had two daughters and wanted a son. Sanjudevi, cousin of Sushila, had promised to them that if she gave birth to a baby boy she will give him to them.“Sanjudevi had lied to her cousin that she was pregnant. When the couple came here from Mumbai she took them to NCH and planned kidnapping of the baby boy. They were nabbed before they could succeed in their plan,” a police officer said.A childless couple was recently arrested by crime branch for abducting a 25-day-old baby girl from NCH.
