'You are afraid that Amethi is developing': Irani hits back at Rahul Gandhi over Ordinance Factory tweet

'You are afraid that Amethi is developing': Irani hits back at Rahul Gandhi over Ordinance Factory tweet

Union Minister Smriti Irani on Monday hit out at Congress President Rahul Gandhi after Congress President claimed that he had inaugurated ordinance factory way back in 2010. Rahul Gandhi also called PM Modi a liar. In a way Gandhi tried to play down the fact that Kalashnikov rifles will be built in Amethi based on joint venture with Russia.

Also Read: 'Made in Amethi' AK-203 Rifles: PM praises Smriti Irani's work, says history will be created in 2019 elections

During his visit to Rahul Gandhi's Lok Sabha constituency, Prime Minister Modi dedicated to the nation the Joint Venture of Indo-Russian Rifles Pvt Ltd, for Kalashnikov Assault Rifle Production.However, Rahul has accused the Prime Minister of lying in a post on Twitter in Hindi which roughly translates as, "Dear Prime Minister, I had myself laid the foundation stone for Ordnance Factory in Amethi in 2010. Production of small arms has been going on there since last few years. Yesterday you went to Amethi and lied again. Don't you feel ashamed at all?"

Also Read:Naked dance of dictatorship': BJP slams Mamata government as workers clash with police after bike rallies prevented

Also Read: Rafale: Prashant Bhushan quotes Pakistani channel's report to make point against PM Modi

Soon after Rahul Gandhi's tweet, BJP leader Smriti Irani criticised the Congress president of lying to the people about development projects in Amethi.She said the Gandhi scion has "destroyed" Amethi."You are so much scared with development of Amethi that you didn't see that yesterday inauguration of a joint venture took place in Korwa. Under this, an agreement was done between India and Russia to build AK 203 rifle," Irani tweeted.

She followed up with couple of more tweets with links of news reports which showed that the ordinance factory was in limbo in 2010.

Here's the complete breakdown of the controversy:

(With agency inputs)
