Schoolgirl, 16, is raped 'by her neighbour' in latest sex attack to shock India

A 16-year-old girl was allegedly raped, drenched in petrol, and burnt to death by her neighbour in the latest sickening sex attack to shock India.

The schoolgirl, from Dildarnagar in the Ghazipur district, was alone in her home on Saturday when a neighbouring youth broke into the property and raped her, Indian media report.

In a statement made by the youngster before her death, she told police that the accused tried to force her to elope with him and when she refused, he doused her in petrol and set her on fire.

A 16-year-old girl was allegedly raped, drenched in petrol, and burnt to death by her neighbour in the latest sickening sex attack to shock India (file picture)

Hearing her cries, neighbours rushed to the scene and took the terrified youngster to the local police station, where she was transported to the district hospital.

She was later transferred to the trauma centre in Varanasi but died of her injuries during the journey.

Arvind Chaturvedi, the Ghazipur superintendent of police, told The Times of India: 'The girl died on the way to Varanasi and the body has been sent for post mortem.

'On the basis of her statement recorded by the Dildarnagar police before her death and on the complaint of her brother, a named FIR has been lodged in this connection and several teams have been engaged to arrest the accused.'

The schoolgirl, of Dildarnagar in the Ghazipur district, was alone in her home on Saturday when a neighbouring youth broke into the property and raped her, Indian media report (file photo showing activists protesting against rape in India)

India has seen a number of high profile rape cases in recent years, leading to widespread protests (file photo)

India has seen a number of high profile rape cases in recent years, leading to widespread protests.

Last month, a man raped and beheaded a four-year-old girl before peeling off the skin of her face so she could not be identified, police said.

The 27-year-old, from Khopoli town in Maharashtra, India, had wanted to have a sexual relationship with the girl's mother, according to officers.

But he killed the child out of revenge after she rejected his advances and reprimanded him public.

In January, an engineering student was subjected to a two-day gang rape before being left for dead in a wood in the eastern state of Odisha.

The 20-year-old woman was left in critical condition following the attack which started when a man claiming to be friends with her brother approached her at a station as she waited for a train.

The man wrongly told her that, due to repair work on the line, trains were not running to her destination and suggested she travel with him instead.
