Wg Cmdr Abhinandan will fly again if declared fit, says IAF chief BS Dhanoa

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman | Photo Credit: ANI

Coimbatore: Indian Air Force (IAF) chief Air Marshal BS Dhanoa in a presser on Monday said that Wing Commander Abhinandan, who is currently undergoing Medical examination at the Army RR Hospital in Delhi, will fly again if he's declared fit by the medical board. Dhanoa said that if Abhinandan clears the medical standards of IAF flying officers then he'll be back in the cockpit while adding that if he doesn't then he'll become a low medical category officer till the time he can recover and clear the standards.

"If he is fit to fly a fighter, then he will go back soon. If he is not fit to fly, he will become a low medical category till the time he gets his currency. He will then go back when he gets his fighter currency back," Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa was quoted by ANI as saying.

According to the Air Force Central Medical Establishment (AFCME) there are in total 12 medical categories in Air Force out of which only the personnel placed in the top 3 medical categories are fit to fly. Wing Commander Abhinandan's medical test results are not yet out.

Highlighting the risks involved in ejection from a fighter jet, Dhanoa said that it's something that takes a toll on one's body and if a person is not perfectly fit and he ejects again, then the person might have to spend the rest of his life on a wheelchair. "Your physical condition and curvature of spine has to be very good to take that kind of ejection injury," he said.

On February 27, Abhinandan was captured by the Pakistani forces after his fighter jet crash-landed across the Line of Control, chasing an F-16 that tried to violate Indian air space. Abhinandan was held captive by the Pakistani army for almost 60 hours before being handed over to the Indian forces through Attari-Wagah border.

After Abhinandan returned to India, he met Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman after being briefing the Air Chief about his detention in Pakistan.
