India vs Pakistan EXPLAINED: Timeline as nuclear-armed countries taken to brink of war

India Pakistan: Jet fighters appear to battle over Kashmir

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Tensions between Pakistan and India have been growing over recent weeks, with both sides undertaking tit-for-tat airstrikes and shooting down one another’s fighter jets. Global concerns have also grown the two nuclear-armed countries could trigger a war. Last week an Indian pilot who was captured by Pakistan was released as a gesture of peace.

One of the key points of contention is the mountainous region of Kashmir - which has been a source of conflict since independence from British colonial rule in 1947.



India and Pakistan have fought several wars over the region, with both countries laying claim to the region in full but controlling only portions.



The last time Indian and Pakistani jets had bombed each other’s territory was in 1971 - in the depths of war.



More than 10,000 soldiers died and more than 100 planes were shot from the sky but neither side had the nuclear arsenals that they do now. Read More: Pakistan vs India allies and enemies: What countries support India?

India vs Pakistan: Indian Border Security Force soldiers patrol close to the India-Pakistan border

Here is a timeline of events between the conflicting countries over the past few weeks.



February 14: A suicide bomber ploughed a car into a bus which was carrying Indian paramilitary police in Kashmir, killing more than 40.



This attack was described as one of the deadliest on security forces in the region in decades.



Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweeted that "a befitting reply will be given to the perpetrators of the heinous attack and their patrons."



February 15: A Pakistan-based terror group, Jaish-e-Mohammed, claimed responsibility for the previous day's attack.



Pakistan's foreign ministry said it has "always condemned heightened acts of violence" in Kashmir but it strongly rejected "any insinuation by elements in the Indian government and media circles that seek to link the attack to the State of Pakistan without investigations."



India's Ministry of External Affairs said Jaish-E-Mohammed and its leadership are located in Pakistan.



"(They) cannot claim that it is unaware of their presence and their activities. They have not taken any action against these groups despite international demands," the official spokesperson said.



February 16: Indian Finance Minister Arun Jaitley tweeted New Delhi had withdrawn Pakistan's "most favoured nation" status, which is granted to countries who then gain trade advantages like low tariffs.



Basic customs duty on Pakistani exports to India was then raised to 200 percent, he said.



February 18: Nine people, including four Indian soldiers and a policeman, were killed during a gun battle in India-controlled Kashmir, escalating tensions yet further.



Reports said the operation targeted a residential area which was said to be a hideout for suspected militants.



February 19: Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan offered India assistance to investigate the suicide bombing but also warned his country would retaliate against any acts of aggression from New Delhi.



India then dismissed Khan's offer, citing previous terror attacks in Mumbai and an airbase.



India vs Pakistan explained: Kashmir is hotly contested between the two South Asian countries

February 20: India suspended a bus service between the capital of India-controlled Kashmir, Srinagar, and Muzaffarabad, the capital of the Pakistan-controlled Kashmir, with no explanation.



February 23 to 24: New Delhi increased its crackdown in Kashmir by arresting more than 160 separatists, according to reports.



Five people were killed as Indian security forces fought with members of a Pakistani militant group in the disputed region.



February 26: India said its air force carried out strikes against a Jaish-e-Mohammed training base at Balakot in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province and the attack killed a "very large number" of terrorists, trainers and senior commanders.



Pakistan denied there were any victims from that attack and said the strikes did not hit any targets.



Pakistan's foreign ministry said the "Indian aggression was a threat to regional peace and stability and would get a befitting response by Pakistan at a time and place of its choosing."



India Pakistan: Captured pilot freed by military on Wagah border

February 27: Pakistani media reported that Khan led a meeting of the National Command Authority, the body that commands the country's nuclear warheads.



Pakistan said its air force undertook strikes across the so-called Line of Control to display its "right, will and capability for self-defence." The Line of Control is the de-facto border separating the Indian and Pakistani parts of Kashmir.



A spokesman for the Pakistani armed forces said Indian planes entered its air space and two jets were shot out of the sky. One of the aircraft dropped on India's side of Kashmir while the second came down in Pakistani territory, and its pilot detained.



India's foreign ministry recognised that a pilot was missing and a combat jet had fallen. The ministry spokesperson also maintained a Pakistani jet had been shot down in the altercation.

Then, a video surfaced of a man identified by Islamabad as the captured Indian pilot. India also said it handed over a dossier to its counterpart with specific details of Jaish-e-Mohammed's role in the February 14 terror attack and their residence in Pakistan.

India vs Pakistan explained: A fin of an exploded mortar is pictured inside a damaged house in India
