4 held for rape, murder of South Delhi woman

The Delhi Police said that the four persons (pictured above) who gang-raped and strangulated the 25-year-old woman to death were arrested on Monday.

The mystery surrounding the body of a young woman found from a railway track near Sarita Vihar on Feb 27 has finally been solved.

Police said that four people, who raped and strangulated the 25-year-old woman to death, were arrested on Monday.

Police said that the motive behind the gang-rape and murder was to frame their 'rivals' in a property dispute.

The accused, 25-year-old Dinesh, 19-year-old Saurabh Bhardwaj, 30-year-old Chanderkesh and 25-year-old Rahimudin confronted of their crime to the police. The main accused, Dhirender, is on the run and further investigation is underway, police said.

Police said that they executed the crime at the behest of main accused, Dhirender, who wanted to take revenge from an inmate who he met in Tihar Jail. "The motive behind the crime is very shocking. They targeted an innocent woman and used her to frame three persons for the murder. They even mislead police by leaving a murder note with the woman's body at the dump site," said ChinmoyBiswal, Deputy Commissioner of Police, South-east district.

"They conspired about the murder two months ago when the main accused, Dhirender, was released from Tihar Jail. Dhirender and inmate Bunty became enemies during their term the jail. Dhirender made a plan to frame Bunty's brother Aarush in the murder case. They also grabbed his property of 1,800-square-feet land in Burari," added Biswal.

Dhirender and Dinesh, who became friends during their term in prison, were released around two months ago and they started took a house in Sangam Vihar. They then contacted other persons - Saurabh Chanderkesh and Rahimudin - who are accomplices of Dinesh, to execute the plan.

The accused lured the 25-year-old victim, who was also a resident of Sangam Vihar, by offering her a 'respectable job'. They had contacted the victim by using a phone with a fake SIM card.

"They had called the woman for the job interview at an apartment. When she reached there, Dhirender, Dinesh and Saurabh attacked her. They even forced her to write a letter saying that she got threats from three men - Aarush, Vinesh and another person. After she had written the letter, the accused gangraped her and then strangulated her to death. With the help of two other people - Chanderkeshand Rahimudin - the accused then disposed the victim's body near Sarita Vihar," said Biswal.

"The accused paid Chanderkesh and Rahimudin Rs 4,000 each to dump the victim's body. They also hired a Honda City car for Rs 7,800. The accused put the body in a gunny sack, loaded it in the vehicle, drove the car and dumped it near a railway track in Sarita Vihar. They also put the fake murder note in the deceased's pocket," said Biswal.

"After recovering the victim's body and the note, we zeroed in on three individuals. We finally cracked the case after we scanned call details of the victim," added Biswal.

ALSO READ | 10-yr-old girl raped, killed in Madhya Pradesh

ALSO READ | Two minor girls molested by hostel warden, her husband in Rajasthan's Alwar
