Surat: Five-year-old rape survivor may be shifted to AIIMS

SURAT: The five-year-old girl , who was raped by a 19-year-old man on September 30 in Dindoli, is likely to be shifted to AIIMS in New Delhi as the severe injuries she suffered in the assault are yet to heal.Even five months after the brutal rape, she is unable to answer nature’s call like a normal human being due to deep injuries. Her rectum got ruptured and alternative arrangements were made for her to pass stool. It is also uncertain whether her reproductive organs can function properly, doctors informed.The minor could not depose before the court during hearing of the case in the last week of February due to her poor physical and mental health condition. She is very weak and under medical assistance, said sources. She was treated at a different government and private hospitals in the city. “She was examined by experienced doctors and it was initially believed that her wounds would heal after the alternative arrangements are made to pass stool. But the injury was too deep,” said a police official.After two surgeries and continuous treatment, doctors are not sure exactly when she can live normal life. “Doctors at SMIMER claimed that they are unable to do the surgery and advised to get an opinion from experts in Mumbai or AIIMS in New Delhi. Hence we are trying to contact doctors at these places,” said Vidhi Chaudhary, deputy commissioner of police, zone III, who is assisting the family to get medical treatment.The minor was playing near her house on September 29 afternoon when the accused Roshal alias Kalu Bhumihar, a labourer, kidnapped her. He took the girl in an open plot opposite Ambika Nagar and raped her inside a huge pipe stored in the plot. The survivor knew the accused as they lived in same locality. The accused escaped from the spot after the crime, but police nabbed him late in the evening as he was noticed by a boy at time of kidnapping.Initially he denied kidnapping the minor, but later confessed and took police to the spot. The minor was found in pool of blood and in partially conscious condition. She was shifted to hospital in critical condition and since then her health condition is poor.
