Opposition wants to remove me, says PM Narendra Modi

Targeting the grand alliance of opposition parties, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that the motive of the alliance was to remove him from power. On the other hand, he wants to make the country free of terrorism. Modi said this while inaugurating Guru Gobind Singh Hospital at Jamnagar on Monday. He also claimed that the speed of execution of welfare measures under his leadership is faster than in the case of previous regimes.

"Whether it was electrification of railways or gauge conversion, the speed is double now compared to what it was in previous regimes," said Modi. He alleged that the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government fooled the masses through its scheme for waiver of farm loans to get votes. "Only a fraction of farmers benefited from it. The government had then spent Rs 52,000 crore. However, PM-KISAN Yojana will provide Rs 75,000 crore to farmers each year for ten years. Rs 7.5 lakh crore over ten years will be a big boost to the rural economy," he said.

He also dismissed the allegation of the opposition that he is trying to get political benefit by launching schemes ahead of the elections. "I had started SAUNI scheme in 2012. People said Modi launches schemes when there are elections. In India, we have some or other elections every year," he said. He highlighted various welfare schemes executed by his government. Terming the Ayushman Bharat Yojana is the largest ever scheme in the world, he said that the number of beneficiaries under the scheme is more than the combined population of United States of America, Canada and Mexico put together. Under the scheme, medical expense up to Rs five lakh will be borne by the government, independent of where the patient is treated.

Modi inaugurated an annexe building of Guru Govind Singh hospital, flagged off the Bandra-Jamnagar Humsafar Express and launched development projects, including the 51-km water pipeline from Aaji-3 dam to Khijadia.

PM’s Words

Terming the Ayushman Bharat Yojana is the largest ever scheme in the world, he said that the number of beneficiaries under the scheme is more than the combined population of USA, Canada and Mexico put together.
