Sarita Vihar Murder: Former Tihar inmates gang-raped, murdered 25-year-old girl for their vendetta

Delhi police personnel with the men who were named in the letter | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: An investigation into the brutal murder of a 25-year-old girl whose body was found stuffed in a jute sack in Delhi's Sarita Vihar area on February 27 has led to startling revelations. Police officials familiar with the matter said that a letter found near the body of the victim carried the names of three men who were later arrested in this regard.

However, a further inquiry led Delhi police to suspect that the letter might have been planted by the culprits to frame the three men who were named in it. Deputy commissioner of police (DCP), south-east, Chinmoy Biswal said that the four men whose names were mentioned in the letter were arrested on Monday but their interrogation led investigators to believe that they were in no way associated with the victim.

DCP (south-east): Dinesh&Dhirender were in Tihar jail&had an enmity with inmate Bunty. On coming out, they made a plan to frame Bunty's brother Arush in a murder case with an intention to take revenge & acquire his land. Accused have confessed of gang-rape.Dhirender is absconding https://t.co/mLIiKokEPg — ANI (@ANI) March 4, 2019

While a handwriting analysis confirmed that the letter was written by the victim, Delhi police later found out that she was made to write it. Four men, including 25-year-old Dinesh Prasad and Dhirender, gang-raped the victim and killed her after she wrote the letter framing three men for her murder. The accused committed the crime to frame one of the men mentioned in the letter, said Biswal adding that their purpose was to act on personal enmity.

The victim was an acquaintance of Dinesh who was recently released from Tihar jail along with co-accused Dhirendra. The two called the girl on the pretext of offering her a job, made her write the letter framing Arush and two others before gang-raping and killing her, added the DCP. He further clarified that the two accused were on loggerheads with another inmate inside Tihar jail who is Arush's brother. They wanted to frame Arush and take over his land holdings. As per latest reports, Dinesh has been arrested and has confessed to gang-rape and murder while Dhirender is still at large.

Must Read: Mumbai: Men pose as CBI officials, con forex firms; arrested
