'If they have guts, RSS should shoot Modi': Cong leader Belur Gopalakrishna kicks off row

'If they have guts, RSS should shoot Modi': Cong leader Belur Gopalakrishna kicks off row

The BJP took to Twitter and demanded that legal action be taken against the Congress leader.

news Politics

The BJP in Karnataka on Tuesday accused Congress leader Belur Gopalakrishna of trying to instigate people to kill Prime Minister Narendra Modi. The BJP posted a short clip of Gopalakrishna's speech in Bengaluru at a party function. The comment was made in a longer speech during which Belur Gopalakrishna claims polarisation of the country following the BJP’s leadership and the functioning of the RSS.

"Today, they (RSS) talk about Nathuram Godse, who killed Gandhiji. These people should not live in our country. Friends, they are trying to destroy democracy and if they (RSS) have the guts, then they can shoot Modi but don't kill anyone else," Belur Gopalakrishna is heard saying in a video.

Soon after his statement was aired by local news channels, the BJP took to Twitter and demanded that action be taken against the Congress leader.

Belur Gopalakrishna, a Congress leader in a official party function calls for assassination of democratically elected PM Sri @narendramodi ji.



Instigating for assassination of PM of a country is a nation threat & we urge @HMOIndia, @CPBlr to impose legal action immediately. pic.twitter.com/Tg9GO0FCdM March 5, 2019

"Belur Gopalakrishna, a Congress leader in a official party function calls for assassination of democratically elected PM Sri Narendra Modi ji.”

“Instigating for assassination of PM of a country is a national threat and we urge Union Home Minister and Bengaluru Police Commissioner to impose legal action immediately," the BJP tweeted.

Reacting to Belu Gopalakrishna's speech, Udupi-Chikkamagaluru BJP MP Shobha Karandlaje tweeted, "Shocking statement from #Congress leader Belur Gopalakrishna, he calls out to assassinate PM Narendra Modi. To appease a particular section, Congress is instigating for the assassination of an elected PM. Urge Deputy CM Dr G parameshwara and CM HD Kumaraswamy to take legal action against him."

Shocking statement from #CONgress leader Belur Gopalakrishna, he calls out to assassinate PM @narendramodi.



To appease a particular section #Congress instigating for the assassination of an elected PM.



Urge @DrParameshwara & @hd_kumaraswamy to take legal actions against him. pic.twitter.com/R0WQ69JH8h — Shobha Karandlaje (@ShobhaBJP) March 5, 2019

Known as a party-hopper, Belur Gopalakrishna had contested on a BJP ticket from Sagar in Shivamogga and defeated Congress heavyweight Kagodu Thimappa in the 2004 and 2008 Karnataka Assembly elections. He defected to the JD(S) in 2012 after the Ballari illegal mining scam in 2011 had split the state BJP unit. He contested from a JD(S) ticket in 2013 but lost the seat. In 2018, after differences with JD(S), he joined the Congress.
