How can I be silent when Gandhiji is disrespected?: Karnataka Cong leader defends 'assassinate PM Modi' remark

Karnataka Congress leader Belur Gopalakrishna. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Bengaluru: Karnataka Congress leader Belur Gopalakrishna on Tuesday evening issued a clarification over his "assassinate PM Modi" remark and said that he couldn't control his anger after people talked about Mahatma Gandhi disrespectfully.

Speaking to media persons, Gopalakrishna said, "How can I be silent when Gandhiji is disrespected? I have immense respect for the Prime Minister, I never said PM has to be assassinated... I asked those people whether they would do the same thing to the PM. I will definitely apologise if my statements hurt anyone."

In a video that surfaced on social media and shared by Karnataka BJP on micro-blogging platform Twitter, the Congress leader can be heard making inflammatory statements, in a way instigating people to "assassinate" Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who also belongs to the Bharatiya Janata Party.

Congress leader Belur Gopalkrishna: I have respect for the Prime Minister, I never said PM has to be assassinated. How can I be silent when Gandhiji is disrespected? I said will you do the same thing to the PM? I will definitely apologise if my statements hurt anyone. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/9ZPxr7W2ZD — ANI (@ANI) March 5, 2019

Belur Gopalakrishna, a Congress leader in a official party function calls for assassination of democratically elected PM Sri @narendramodi ji.



Instigating for assassination of PM of a country is a nation threat & we urge @HMOIndia, @CPBlr to impose legal action immediately. pic.twitter.com/Tg9GO0FCdM — BJP Karnataka (@BJP4Karnataka) March 5, 2019

“Belur Gopalakrishna, a Congress leader in an official party function calls for assassination of democratically elected PM Sri @narendramodi ji. Instigating for the assassination of PM of a country is a national threat & we urge @HMOIndia, @CPBlr to impose legal action immediately,” the local BJP unit said in the tweet.
