Maharashtra: Cops book 4 school staff members for sexually assaulting specially-abled minor

The police have booked the caretakers and two teachers in the case. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Mumbai: In an appalling case reported, the Pimpri-Chinchwad police booked two staff members and two caretakers of a residential school for assaulting a minor student.

According to a report in Hindustan Times (HT), the complaint was minor's 38-year-old woman, who works as a domestic help in Pimpri Chinchwad area. The sub-inspector of Chakan police station, Pramod Kathore told HT, that the survivor girl has a mental and physical handicap. The survivor was undergoing tests at the Yashwantrao Chavan Memorial hospital and the police will continue investigation after they will receive the test reports.

Reportedly, the school is home to 10-13 specially-abled students. The police have booked the caretakers and two teachers in the case. The survivor once told her parents that the staff members used to tie her up and hit her. The survivor's parents also found burn injuries on her.

Also Read: Madhya Pradesh nuns' rape case: After 21 years, gang-rape accused arrested by police

However, the police have booked the accused under the sections 324 (voluntarily causing hurt), 420 (punishment for cheating), 34 (common intention) of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 75, 85, 87 of the Juvenile Justice Act. The case has been registered at the Chakan police station.

In a similar case reported from Assam, a mentally challenged woman was allegedly gang-raped by five youths at the Kachua village in Nagaon district of central Assam. The matter came to light when the woman returned home and narrated her ordeal before her family who decided to lodge an official police complaint in this regard.

Reportedly, the woman went for a bicycle ride and did not return home until late which prompted her family members to alert police officials and locals about her disappearance. However, the woman returned home later and further investigation by the police is underway.
