6 awarded death by SC in 2009, acquitted in 2019

NEW DELHI: In a first ever instance, the Supreme Court on Tuesday acquitted six persons whom it had awarded death sentence 10 years ago in a 2003 case involving dacoity, gang rape of a woman and murder of five persons of a family in Nashik Apart from acquitting the accused, who were from a nomadic tribe and falsely implicated in the case by police, a bench of Justices A K Sikri, S Abdul Nazeer and M R Shah ordered the Maharashtra government to pay compensation of Rs 5 lakh to each person within four weeks and identify officials who let the real culprits get away.“All of them, who were between the ages of 25 and 30 years (and one of the accused was a juvenile), have lost valuable years of their life in jail. Their family members have also suffered. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, and in exercise of our powers under Article 142 of the Constitution, we direct the state of Maharashtra to pay a sum of Rs 5 lakh to each by way of compensation, within a period of four weeks,” the court said.The prosecution had alleged that nine persons in shorts and vests entered the house of a family and looted valuables, raped a woman and killed five. A Nashik sessions court on June 12, 2006, awarded death penalty to six of those arrested, finding them guilty of the crimes.On appeal, the Bombay High Court upheld death sentence of three persons but commuted the sentence of three others to life imprisonment. Those awarded death penalty moved the SC. The state too appealed in the SC and sought restoration of death penalty on the three who were given life sentence. On April 30, 2009, the SC found all six guilty of dacoity, gang rape and murder and imposed death penalty on all the accused.The three given life sentence by the HC filed a petition seeking review of the SC’s 2009 verdict. The SC on October 31 last year decided to hear arguments of all six convicts and on Tuesday reached a startling conclusion that all of them were innocent and were framed in the case.Giving a fresh lease of life to the six who were on death row since 2006, the bench said, “It is to be noted that all the accused persons are from nomadic tribes coming from the lower strata of society and are very poor labourers. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, false implication cannot be ruled out since it is common occurrence that in serious offences, sometimes innocent persons are roped in.”Agreeing with advocates Yug Mohit Chaudhary and Rishabh Sancheti, who exposed grave contradictions in deposition of witnesses who survived the attack and the prosecution story, the bench said, “There is a serious lapse on the part of the investigating agency, which has affected fair investigation and fair trial and, therefore, we are of the opinion that the same is violative of fundamental rights of the accused guaranteed under Articles 20 and 21 of the Constitution of India .”Writing the unanimous 75-page judgment, Justice Shah said, “The conviction and sentence imposed by the high court cannot be sustained. The prosecution has failed to prove the case against the accused beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore, we have no other alternative but to acquit the accused for the offences for which they are convicted.”The SC said it could not lose sight of the gruesome crime, involving murder of five persons and a woman being gang raped, going unpunished because of poor investigation. “We direct the chief secretary, home department, state of Maharashtra, to look into the matter and identify such erring officers/officials responsible for failure of a prosecution case,” the court said. It pointed out that negligence or culpable lapses, had led the real culprits to remain free.
