Pakistan Navy stops Indian submarine from entering its waters

KARACHI (Dunya News) – Sequel to Indian Air Force intrusion into Pakistani air space, India continues to embark upon a series of provocative actions against Pakistan.

Indian Navy has deviously deployed its submarines against Pakistan in line with Indian nefarious designs. However, Pakistan Navy detected and blocked Indian Navy Submarine from entering into Pakistani waters, a naval spokesperson said.

“The Submarine was detected and localized in Pakistan’s maritime zone on 04 March 19. The submarine could have been easily engaged and destroyed had it not been Pakistan’s policy to exercise restraint in the face of Indian aggression and to give peace a chance to prevail. However, the submarine is being kept under watch alongwith monitoring of other Indian Navy units. The detected submarine is one of the latest submarines of Indian Navy.”

The navy also released what it said was video of the submarine, with the grainy black and white footage showing only what appeared to be a periscope above water. The timestamp on the video clip shows it began at 8.35 pm.

It is the second incident of the sort that Pakistan Navy detected an Indian Submarine in Pakistani waters. Previously on 14 Nov 16, Pakistan Navy caught Indian Navy Submarine operating in Pakistani EEZ.

The incident vividly reflects high vigilance and competence of Pakistan Navy. It also reflects the commitment and resolve of Pakistan Navy to defend geographical frontiers of the Motherland in sync with Pakistan Army and Air Force.

The development came days after a rare aerial dogfight between India and Pakistan over the disputed territory of Kashmir ignited fears of an all-out conflict, with world powers rushing to urge restraint.

Pak-India tensions

Tensions between Pakistan and India rose when at least 44 Indian paramilitary soldiers were killed on February 14 in Indian-occupied Kashmir in one the deadliest attacks. The attack saw explosives packed inside a van rip through buses in a convoy of 78 vehicles carrying some 2,500 members of the paramilitary CRPF.

Two blue buses carrying around 35 people each bore the brunt of the massive blast, heard miles away, around 20 kilometres (12 miles) from the city of Srinagar on the main highway to Jammu.

Indian government had blamed Pakistan for Pulwama attack and threatened to isolate it at international level. Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi said those behind the terror attack would pay a "very heavy price" and had made a "huge mistake".

Union Minister Arun Jaitley said they will take all possible diplomatic steps to ensure "complete isolation" of Pakistan and had withdrawn Most Favoured Nation status to the country.

PM Imran’s response

Prime Minister Imran Khan responded to his Indian counterpart Narendra Modi’s comments and offered India of full support in carrying out the investigations and guaranteed to take action ‘without any pressure’ against the responsible if India provides Pakistan with any evidence or actionable intelligence.

“It is against our own interests if Pakistan’s soil is used to facilitate terrorists,” he affirmed. Imran Khan said terrorism is the issue of the whole region, and Pakistan itself is the biggest victim.

India intrudes Pakistan’s airspace

On February 26, Indian warplanes intruded in Pakistani airspace inside Balakot and New Delhi claimed of killing of a "large number" of militants, including commanders, and had avoided civilian casualties on what New Delhi alleged were militant camps. Islamabad denied any such camps existed.

ISPR Director General Major General Asif Ghafoor said the strikes caused no casualties. He tweeted that Pakistani jets were scrambled and forced the Indian planes to make a "hasty withdrawal", dropping their payload in an open area.

He said Indian aircrafts intruded from Muzafarabad sector. Facing timely and effective response from Pakistan Air Force released payload in haste while escaping which fell near Balakot. No casualties or damage.

PAF downs two Indian fighter jets

On February 27, in a response to Indian Line of Control (LoC) violation, Pakistan Air Force (PAF) had destroyed two Indian fighter jets. The wreckage of one aircraft fell in Central Kashmir’s Budgam while the other’s in Pakistan territory.

The ISPR Director General said that Pakistan Air Force engaged six targets from across the Line of Control in Occupied Kashmir.

He said Pak armed forces have capability, will, resolve, people backing and all resources. But being a responsible state, we decided that we will not aim any military target. We also wanted to ensure that no human loss or collateral damage is done during our engaging the targets.
