Temple bells to toll for Pandits, thanks to Muslim brethren

In the valley of death, a ray of hope rekindles from the troubled spot of Pulwama.

Temple bells are all set to toll again after 29 years in the 80-year-old revered Swami Jagarnath Asthapan temple at Acchan village in the troubled Pulwama district of south Kashmir.

Thanks to the local Muslim Auqaf, which have joined hands with a lone Pandit family to restore the temple to its pristine glory in Acchan village of Pulwama. Incidentally, the village is just 15 kilometres away from Lethpora where a suicide bomber rammed his car into the CRPF convoy killing more than 40 soldiers on Feb 14.

There were more than 40 Pandit families living in this village before the onset of militancy in 1989. Except one family entire Pandit community migrated from this village to Jammu and other parts of the country.

Swami Jagarnath Asthapan temple, a holy site for Pandits, remained unattended. Years passed by and the temple started showing signs of decay and dilapidation. "Last year in August the lone Pandit family came to us and sought our help in restoring this temple. It was in a very dilapidated condition. Its roof had crumbled and water was seeping inside. So Auqaf took up the case with the administration for renovation. We followed it up continuously for three months and finally the government sanctioned Rs four lakh for renovation," said Mir Nazir, head of Auqaf Committee Acchan.

Apart from being a place of worship, this 80 year old temple has been a symbol of Kashmiryat (composite culture of Kashmir) in south Kashmir. It shares a six feet boundary wall with local Jamia Masjid and for ages temple Bells and Azaan has echoed the village creating a mélange of spirituality.

On the occasion of Mahashivratri on Monday, Muslims converged in large numbers in the temple and distributed Kahwa (Kashmiri green tea) among the people as a gesture of love and goodwill. "Muslims joined voluntarily to lend help hand at the site. Some Muslims brought Kahwa and distributed among the people," said Mir.

Kashmir's Migrant Population
