Not fire, Akshay Kumar is afraid of wife Twinkle Khanna and this tweet is proof!

Follow us on Image Source : TWITTER Not fire, Akshay Kumar is afraid of wife Twinkle Khanna and this tweet is proof!

Akshay Kumar shocked everyone when he set himself on fire at the launch of his debut digital show The End. The actor walked on the stage with his body set to fire and while everyone applauded him for his bravery, the actor’s wife Twinkle Khanna didn’t look much impressed. After Akshay Kumar shared the pictures on his twitter saying, “Literally, all fired up for my association with Amazon Prime India’s The End (working title). Trust me, this is only the beginning,” wife Twinkle Khanna took to Twitter to react on Khiladi Kumar’s daredevil act and wrote, “Crap! This is how I find out that you decided to set yourself on fire ! Come home and I am going to kill you-in case you do survive this! #GodHelpMe”.

Her tweet definitely left many people in splits. Whuke Twinkle’s tweet was enough to make us laugh, Akshay Kumar’s response to it worked as the cherry on the cake. After the fiery act, Akki took to twitter to respond his wife and wrote, “Now that's something I'd actually be afraid of”. Well, may be not fire but wife Twinkle Khanna has surely frightened khiladi Akshay Kumar. Check out their cute twitter banter here-

Bollywood actor Akshay Kumar is known to have mastered every genre by now be it comedy, action, thriller, mystery, or any other drama. Now, in the digital maelstrom, the 51-year-old actor is all set to mark his streaming debut with an edge-of-the-seat thriller series whose working title is The End. In a statement, Akshay said: "From the very concept of the show, I am working closely with the team as they create this compelling and highly intriguing story. I can't wait to start rolling for this action-adventure series."

Headded, "The digital world excited me and I am delighted to make my streaming debut with this show. If I were to make a small confession here, it was my son Aarav who suggested that I make my digital debut as that's what the youth is hooked onto. On this medium, I want to create something extraordinary and connect with them".

On the work front, Akshay Kumar has his hands full with projects this year. The actor is gearing up for his upcoming Bollywood film Kesari which will hit the theaters on March 21, on Holi. He also has Housefull 4 and Sooryavanshi in the pipeline.

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
