Terrorists trained to attack via sea: Navy chief Sunil Lanba

India faces the threat of terror through the seas, Navy Chief Admiral Sunil Lanba said on Tuesday.

Without naming Pakistan he made a reference to the recent Pulwama attack where a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed his explosives-laden car into a bus carrying CRPF troops killing 40 of them.

"India faces a more serious form of terrorism, state-sponsored terrorism," he said. He said terrorists have been quickly evolving and the Indian security establishment is continuously working to combat the new threats.

"We also have reports of terrorists being trained to carry out attacks with varying modus operandi including through the medium of the sea," Admiral Lanba added speaking at a seminar on Indo-Pacific maritime relations.

Indicating that Pakistan has been inflicting violence on India, he made a reference to the recent Pulwama attacks.

"You have all witnessed the horrific scale of the extremist attack in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir just three weeks ago. This violence was perpetrated by extremists aided and abetted by a state which seeks to destabilise India."

India faced a terror attack through the seas in 2008 when Pakistan trained terrorists entered Mumbai. The event referred to as the 26/11 Mumbai attack remains one of the deadliest strikes by terrorists on India.

Like this time, when the IAF carried out aerial strikes at a terror camp in Balakot, the option for a similar raid was put to the then Manmohan Singhled government but it was not exercised.

Recent intelligence reports have indicated the growing threat of a terror attack through the seas by Pakistan based terrorists backed by their military. There are inputs that several aquatic wings of the terror outfits have been set up. Groups like LeT and JeM are training their new recruits in water combat skills, reports suggest.

The Navy chief said that terrorist groups have quickly evolved across the globe and this particular 'brand' of terror may well become a global problem in the near future.

"The Indian security establishment is continuously working to address this menace. It is imperative that the global community acts in concert to contain and eliminate terrorism, in all its forms."

ALSO READ | India readies report on Pakistani terror hubs to shame Islamabad globally

ALSO READ | Exposed! Pakistan bluff on Hafiz Saeed network ban

ALSO WATCH | Indian Air Force jets shoot down Pakistani drone in Bikaner
