Every infiltrator will be thrown out of the country if we are voted to power: Shah

Godda: Stoking sentiments of nationalism and patriotism, BJP national president Amti Shah on Tuesday said that the 2019 general elections is not only important for his party but is also crucial for “maa Bharati”.Speaking at his maiden public meeting in the tribal heartland of Santhal Pagrana , Shah asked his party workers to work overtime to ensure Narendra Modi returns as the Prime Minister once again. He went on to claim that under Modi, people are now realizing that the country’s borders are safe and secure.Citing examples of two surgical strikes under the Modi regime, Shah said: “The entire world has taken note of these strikes. Unlike Mauni Baba ( Manmohan Singh )’s 10 years, where nothing was done even when jawans got beheaded by terrorists. Modi has proved to the entire world that he won’t sit calm if anyone dares to touch our borders or kill our jawans.”Shah’s visit to Santhal Paragana assumes importance as it also marks the formal launch of BJP’s campaign. Of the 14 Lok Sabha seats in Jharkhand , BJP is yet to capture Dumka and Raj Mahal, which is held by JMM’s Shibu Soren and Vijay Hansda.Addressing a gathering of 10,000-plus booth-level workers of three assembly constituencies — Dumka, Raj Mahal and Godda in Santhal Pargana — considered to be JMM’s strong hold, at railway ground in Godda district, Shah promises that illegal immigrants are the biggest threat to this country and they will be thrown out permanently if BJP returns to power.“Kashmir se Kanyakumari, Assam se Gujarat tak, ek ek ghuspaithiyon ko chun chuk kar nikalenge desh se bahar ek baar aur humari sarkar bani toh. (We will ensure each and every illegal immigrant is thrown out of this country if we are voted to power again),” he said amid thunderous applause by the crowd.Sahebganj MLA Anant Ojha, who has been one of the vocal voices in Jharkhand demanding National Register of Citizens to flush out Bangaldeshis settled illegally in Sahebganj and Pakur, was on the stage with Shah.“The enthusiasm of chants and claps should convert into our victory on all 14 LS seats. Victory should be such that the margin should give a heart attack to opponent candidates,” Shah said. Shah went on to question opposition parties and mahagathbandhan on this issue citing how they went on crying foul over NRC in Assam.“You tell me whether ghuspaithiye (illegal residents/immigrants) should live in this country or not?” he asked the crowd. “After bringing NRC in Assam, we identified 40 lakh people living there illegally, but right from Congress to DMK and the Left, all opposition parties started crying over it. Illegal residents are a threat to the country’s security. I want to ask opposition parties which side are they on. They should clear their stand,” he said.Slamming the opposition for raising questions against the authenticity of the Pulwama terror attack and air strikes carried out by India Air Force, Shah said: “The party (Congress) which ruled the longest time in the country had tied up the hands of our mighty army and its leaders are now questioning the strength of our brave soldiers. In this race, Madhya Pradesh leader (Digvijay Singh) seems to be at the top.” Shah further stated that Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was brought back to India from Pakistan within 48 hours due to the efforts made by Modi.Criticising AICC president Rahul Gandhi ’s March 2 rally at Ranchi’s Mohrabadi ground, Shah said “baba” posed several questions for the Modi government and asked him to prove what has been done in the last four years. “You tell me. Your four generations ruled this country for the last 55 years. What have your governments done? I don't want to comment or reply to any of the questions raised by him (Rahul). I am answerable to the people of the country and the people of Jharkhand,” he said.“During the UPA’s rule, they gave Rs 55,000 crore to Jharkhand. In the last five years, the Modi government gave Rs 3.12 lakh crore to the state. Congress once formed a government in Jharkhand by installing an independent candidate as CM (Madhu Koda) and started a Rs 12 lakh crore scam. Under BJP, about 50 crore poor in the country have benefited by cashless healthcare scheme (Ayushman Bharat), 13 crore women have got free gas cylinders and so on,” he said.
