Mamta Banerjee strongly condemned this kind of politics…see what she said

New Delhi: On Tuesday, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee attacked the Narendra Modi government for allegedly “politicising the sacrifices of jawans” and said that she strongly condemned those who “play politics with martyrs.” The Trinamool Congress chief said, “You cannot win elections over jawans' blood,” and added that a jawan “sheds his blood for the nation.” Slamming the ruling party at the Centre, the West Bengal CM said, “You cannot win elections over jawans' blood. A jawan sheds his blood for the country. They serve the country; they do not indulge in politics. I strongly condemn those who play politics with martyrs.” She also questioned the government over the Pulwama attack, calling it an intelligence failure and said, “Who gives these intelligence reports?”

also read Pakistan Punjab Minster Fayyaz ul Hassan Chohan apologies over his comment on anti-Hindu comments

In an all-out attack against PM Modi, she accused the Prime Minister of turning BJP into a “private organisation.” She said, “We are against Modi and BJP. Modi has turned the BJP into a private organisation. Whenever someone says something against Modi babu, then that person is branded a Pakistan supporter.” The TMC chief further said, “My father was a freedom fighter, I will not learn patriotism from them.”

Last week, Banerjee had asked the government to provide "details" of the exact place where the Indian Air Force (IAF) had conducted airstrikes in Pakistan's Balakot and the number of casualties inflicted on the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) in the strike because the international media had claimed that there no casualties.

also read Jaish-e-Mohammed's chief Masood Azhar's brother gets preventive detention by Pak Army

She had told reporters, "We, as the Opposition, want to know the details of the air strike. Where were the bombs dropped? How many people died? I was reading the New York Times and Washington Post and they said that there were no casualties. Some media houses said one died. We want to know the details."

On February 14, a JeM suicide bomber had rammed an explosive-laden vehicle with a bus plying CRPF jawans in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama, killing at least 40 CRPF jawans. In retaliation, 12 Mirage 2000s of Indian Air Force (IAF) crossed the Line of Control (LoC) on February 26 and bombed a Jaish terror camp in Pakistan’s Balakot, killing several terrorists.
