Working towards gender parity

vermaajay1968@gmail.com

Swati Rai

Beyond the tokenism celebration of a day dedicated to women, there is an urgent need to reassess policies in place, that make the 21st century workplace, egalitarian. While the sharp focus on the treatment of women workforce became sharper post the #MeToo movement, it would be myopic to narrow it down to just this aspect of working.

Recruitment, mentoring and retention of women workforce; creating a supportive, safe and secure work atmosphere are essential to making it women friendly in the truest sense. Corporate India share the best practices that are in place for development and advancement of women:

Inclusive eco-system

Rohit Kumar, Director- HR, Kellogg South Asia lays emphasis on the monitoring and execution of the standard operating procedures in place at the company to foster a supportive, positive environment and strengthen the diversity and inclusion culture. “Through the Employee Resource Group called 'Women of Kellogg' (WOK) we provide female employees with a wide range of networking and career development opportunities. This presents a welcoming and inclusive environment for them to share their input, feedback and address their issues around the SOPs. As part of this, we conducted an unconscious bias training workshop with employees across the company to recognise when positive or negative unconscious biases may be influencing decisions.”

Growth opportunities

Despite the benefits of hiring and retaining women employees, there is also the case of a ‘leaky’ talent pipe and of the miniscule representation of women in the top echelons of the organisation. AccelHERate, a JobsForHer initiative, brought together companies committed to increasing women’s participation in the Indian workforce.

Vijay Arcot, Talent Acquisition, IDC, Intuit India, Winner of DivHersity Awards, Top 5 Most Innovative Practices, Women Returnee Programmes at AccelHERate shared his focus on attracting, retaining and advancing women in technical roles as well, “We know that inclusiveness drives empathy for our customers. That’s why we continuously strive to create a workforce that reflects the demographics of those we serve, helping us create products that solve important problems and exceed expectations. As many as 27 per cent of our global tech workforce is female. Whether it is our Tech Women @ Intuit initiative or our ‘Back to Work program Intuit Again’. With sponsorship by leaders, peer mentoring, development workshops like negotiation, executive presence and speaking skills, on-site events and tech workshops & hackathons at universities, we continue to take steps on our journey towards building a truly diverse workforce.”

Safety measures

Most companies have the safety of the female employee paramount by arranging a pick and drop facility early in the morning and late in the night. An accompanying guard is also ensured at most times. The ongoing involvement of corporates in ensuring a safe and inclusive workplace has also accelerated, post the #MeToo movement. Kumar shares their approach, that lays stress on dignity and respect. “Apart form the anti sexual-harassment and discrimination policies that have always been there, we will soon be holding a workshop that will help provide effective self-defence training, ideal for working women across ages. ”

Highlighting the strong impact of teams that are built on the principles of diversity and inclusion is also a must do. When the chatter about inclusivity, equality and retention of women at the workplace reaches a crescendo around Women’s Day — a challenge remains, of ensuring a non-discriminatory policy that is also not partial towards women and ignores male employees' grievances.

Sensitisation drives

Another way companies ensure an egalitarian atmosphere is through holding inspiring, educational events and employee sensitisation workshops. On ground, this translates into a commitment towards maternity benefits that includes leave and crèche facilities for children. Sameer Bora, Executive Vice-President, Next Education India, shares these inclusive measures, “Apart from following the government mandated maternity benefits, we have a policy in place where in the case of a miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy, the female employee is allowed six weeks of paid leave. We also take into consideration, the gravity of the medical emergency in every single case and provide a work-from-home facility or sabbatical leaves according to the requirement of the employee.”
