File case against me, if you can: Digvijaya Singh on Pulwama ‘accident’ remark

New Delhi: Asserting that the controversial remarks in which he had referred to Pulwama terror attack as an ‘accident’ was made from Delhi, Congress leader Digvijaya Singh on Wednesday dared the Central government to file a lawsuit against him.

Taking to Twitter, former chief minister of Madhya Pradesh, Singh wrote in Hindi, ” Modi ji, you and your ministers have made many allegations against me. Many of your BJP leaders want to file a sedition case against me.”

“The tweet on the basis of which you and your minister term me as a pro-Pakistan sympathiser was done by me from Delhi, where the police comes under the central government. If you have the courage, then file a lawsuit against me,” Singh wrote in two consecutive tweets on the micro-blogging website.

Earlier on Tuesday, reacting to criticism for his “accident” remarks about the Pulwama terror attack, Singh demanded the Modi government to come up with the “truth” behind the air strike by the Indian Air Force (IAF) on Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror camp in Balakot in Pakistan.

“This is just a political vendetta. We just want to know the truth as some BJP ministers say we killed 300 terrorists, Amit Shah says 250, Yogi Adityanath says 400 while Union Minister SS Ahluwalia says no one killed.

There are several media reports raising doubts over the air strike. Now, it is for the government to clarify what is the truth,” he said.

The Congress leader said, “I am shocked to see that instead of answering to my valid question, the ministers from the ruling government and Prime Minister Modi are calling me ‘anti-national’. I have condemned the terror attack but what will you say to a terror attack. I have said several times that Hafiz Saeed and Masood Azhar who were released by your (Atal Bihari Vajpayee-led NDA) government only, should now be brought back by putting pressure on Pakistan,” he added.

Singh termed the ghastly February 14 terror attack an “accident” and said that “doubt” expressed in reports of a section of foreign media over the February 26 air strike by the IAF is putting a question mark on the credibility of the Indian government.

[source_without_link]ANI[/source_without_link]
