Girl, 16, 'gang-raped for seven months' fled only to be raped again in a separate attack in India

A 16-year-old girl who was allegedly gang-raped by four bus conductors across seven months fled when she feared she was pregnant - only to be raped again in a separate sickening attack in India.

The teenager was commuting to Nagpur, where she studied, when she said she was befriended by bus conductor Dharmapal Meshram, 22, of Pardi Village in Parseoni Tehsil.

Speaking to police, she explained how in July last year she exchanged phone numbers with the accused, who repeatedly asked to meet up with her.

Dharmapal Meshram, 22, Varshapal Meshram, 22, Ashish Kashinath Lokhande, 25, and Shailesh Wanjari, (all pictured in black hoods and accompanied by police) have been accused of repeatedly raping a 16-year-old girl for seven months

Unaware of his intentions, the 16-year-old agreed to meet with Dharmapal, and was taken to a rented apartment in Mankapur on July 1, 2018, Indian media reports.

This allegedly began a horrific time of abuse for the teenager who claims she was repeatedly raped by Dharmapal as well as his friends Varshapal Meshram, 22, Ashish Kashinath Lokhande, 25, and Shailesh Wanjari, until late February this year.

On February 28, the 16-year-old fled from her home to Dongargarh as she feared getting pregnant.

The four accused have been arrested by Mankapur police under section 376(2) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (file picture)

It was here that the youngster was raped in a separate attack, according to The Times of India.

On March 1, her parents lodged a FIR of kidnapping at Yashodhara Nagar police station after realising their daughter was missing.

She was eventually discovered by a businessman in Raipur, who alerted police.

The four accused have been arrested by Mankapur police under section 376(2) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act.

Shivaji Jagtap, city transport manager, told the publication that Dhammapal and Lokhande have been fired while the two others accused are not city bus service employees.
