Shoe shoe main main: BJP MP thrashes BJP MLA in Uttar Pradesh as cops look on

A commonly heard phrase when people disagree with each other is that they 'traded barbs'. However, two BJP legislators took it many steps ahead today. Barbs escalated to shoes!

In a bizarre video that is going viral on social media the argument between two BJP lawmakers from Uttar Pradesh escalated to such a level that one started hitting the other with a shoe.

The incident happened at a District Action Plan Committee meeting at the Sant Kabir Nagar Collectorate. A disagreement broke out between BJP MP Sharad Tripathi and BJP MLA Rakesh Singh Baghel. The disagreement became a thrashing. It started raining shoes on MLA Rakesh Singh courtesy Sharad Tripathi.

However, Tripathi did not take the 'shoewer' silently, he hit back by slapping the MP.

Watch the video here:

#WATCH Sant Kabir Nagar: BJP MP Sharad Tripathi and BJP MLA Rakesh Singh exchange blows after an argument broke out over placement of names on a foundation stone of a project pic.twitter.com/gP5RM8DgId ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) March 6, 2019

The reason for the 'shoedown'? The two lawmakers were arguing over the placement of names on a foundation stone of a project.

Also present in the august house were UP minister of technological and medical education Ashutosh Tandon, district panchayat head, DM as well as officials from different departments and members of the district panchayat.

Not only did they engage in fisticuffs, but also showered abuses on each other. When the present ministers and the police tried to mediate, they were paid no heed to.

"The meeting was underway when the brawl broke out between the BJP MP and MLA over some issue related to PWD. We could not even complete the meeting. This is highly condemnable. We were trying to discuss things about development, members and officers were also present," an eyewitness told news agency ANI.

Baghel has not taken the situation lightly. The MLA and his supporters protested outside the District Magistrate office demanding the arrest of BJP MP Sharad Tripathi.

Sant Kabir Nagar: BJP MLA Rakesh Singh Baghel and his supporters protest outside the District Magistrate office demanding arrest of BJP MP Sharad Tripathi with whom Baghel was involved in a brawl earlier today. pic.twitter.com/8DxFd85WOc ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) March 6, 2019

The state unit of the BJP has taken note of the 'condemnable incident'. Giving a statement, MN Pandey, BJP UP president said, "We have taken cognizance of this condemnable incident and both have been summoned to Lucknow. Strict disciplinary action will be taken."

(with inputs from JV Shivendra Srivastava)
