Right-wing ‘activists’ thrash Kashmiri dry fruit sellers in Lucknow; locals come to rescue - Watch

Arrested accused | Photo Credit: Twitter

Lucknow: In a fresh case of assault on Kashmiris, two men selling dry fruits in Lucknow were thrashed by two saffron-clad members of a right-wing outfit in Lucknow on Wednesday. In a video of the incident which is going viral on social media, the two Kashmiri men were beaten with sticks, abused and slapped because of their identity. While one of the men ran away the other one was cornered by the right-wing men. He was later saved when a local interfered and stopped the saffron-clad men from attacking the innocent Kashmiri.

The incident was reported from Daliganj area and has since gone viral on social media platforms. Lucknow police later registered a case under Section 147/323/504 of the IPC and arrested the accused.

In the video, the local who saved the Kashmiris can be seen asking the right-wing goons why they were assaulting the Kashmiri men to which they reply saying ‘they are Kashmiris’.

The Kashmiri men were later asked to produce Aadhaar cards.

Speaking to ANI, Kalanidhi Naithani, SSP said, "A man was seen in a viral video thrashing a Kashmiri street vendor in Lucknow, the vendor was later saved by locals. The culprit Bajrang Sonkar has been arrested by Police. Sonkar has criminal background and has 12 cases including a murder case against him."

SHOCKING: Some goons in saffron kurtas throttle, assault a Kashmiri dry fruit seller in Lucknow. Passersby come to rescue of the Kashmiri. Case yet to be registered.



Hope @Uppolice @Igrangelucknow @lkopolice register an FIR and jab these goondas at the earliest. pic.twitter.com/zXjI3Anh2n — Prashant Kumar (@scribe_prashant) March 6, 2019

This is not the first time that Kashmiris selling dry fruits have been assaulted in Lucknow. Earlier too, few Kashmiris selling dry fruits were thrashed by right-wing goons near Daliganj Bridge in Lucknow.

Dear PM @narendramodi Sahib, this is what you had spoken against & yet it continues unabated. This is the state governed by your handpicked Chief Minister. Can we expect action in this case or do we file your concern & assurances as a jumla, meant to placate but nothing more? https://t.co/QyJKJ2i498 — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) March 7, 2019

Reports about the assault on Kashmiris have been reported from all over the country after Pulwama terror attack in South Kashmir in which 40 CRPF jawans lost their lives after a suicide bomber affiliated to Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed rammed explosive-laden SUV into the convoy.
