Pub staff accused of attacking customer

pub

By Amit KumarEmployees of Indiranagarmanhandled woman while asking her, friends to leaveA 24-year-old woman has accused the manager and other employees of a pub on Indiranagar 100 ft Road of have attacked her over an argument.The incident took place at 657 Wall Street pub on March 3. The woman, Rakshita (name changed), had visited the pub along with four friends around 10.30 pm. Rakshita and her friends were allegedly sitting inside the pub till 1 am. When the manager of the pub, Farooq, asked them to go out, a tiff broke out between the group and the restaurant employees and it during this argument that Rakshita says she was attacked.According to the woman’s complaint, she got into an argument with the manager. The manager and other employees manhandled her, due to which she suffered minor injuries. She has filed a complaint with the Indiranagar police station against the manager Farooq and others.The complaint filed by Rakshitha states, “Around 1.15 am, the pub manager Farooq assaulted me and I suffered injuries on my face and nose. My friends Shaiva and Ghanshyam were assaulted too by Farooq and other staff members.”Managing Director of Wall Street pub, Ravindra, told BM, “I am unaware of the incident as I am currently out of the country on a business trip. But if such an incident has taken place, and if there is a fault from our staff members, then definitely strict action will be taken against them.”Farooq gave his version of the events to BM. “The girl was a part of a group of six members that had visited the pub. A fight broke out among the friends and they started creating a ruckus. It was already 1 am, so I requested the group to go out of the pub and sort out their issues. But all of them were under the influence of alcohol and among them, one girl (the complainant) started abusing the staff using filthy language. When the other captains of the pub (staff), tried to control her, she assaulted one of the employees. So we had to forcefully send them out. We followed the policy of the pub, and did not hit our customers. Especially if the customer is a woman, we are respectful at all times,” he said.A police official from Indiranagar staion said they are investigating the case.“The victim has stated in her complaint that the manager and other staff members misbehaved with her. It was late and closing time for the pub. We are yet to question the MD of the pub as he is out of the country,” he said. The official said they would collect the security camera footage to ascertain the sequence of events.Meanwhile an FIR has been filed under Section 323 (Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt), 354 (Making sexual remarks).
