Mumbai: Ignored by husband, 2nd wife strangles his latest bride

Representative image

MUMBAI: A 32-year-old Nalasopara woman allegedly killed her husband's third wife with the help of her two minor stepdaughters. The body of Yogita Devre (35) was found in a secluded spot in Nalasopara on March 1. At that time, the deceased was not identified.

Closed circuit television images near the spot showed the movement of an autorickshaw with the name 'Janvi' on the rear. Crime Branch officials searched around 4,000 autos in the district and zeroed in on the one in which the body was transported.

After interrogating the driver, Neeraj Mishra, they arrested Parvati Mane, a resident of Don Lane. She is the second wife of Sushil Mishra (45), a contract labourer. Sushil's first wife lives in Uttar Pradesh while his two minor daughters from the first wife lived with Mane.

A year ago, Sushil married a third time to the victim Devre. Sushil left Mane and his two daughters and moved to Devre's home, also in Nalasopara. According to Mane, Sushil was not providing financial support to her and his daughters. She told the police that Sushil had even refused to have physical relations with her and insulted her in front of Devre.

That's when she hatched a plan to kill Devre and roped in her stepdaughters and the boyfriend of one stepdaughter, Shailesh Kale. Early on Friday, when Sushil was in Ahmedabad to attend a wedding, Mane, her stepdaughters and Kale came to Devre's building. They offered liquor to the security guard. When he passed out, they entered Devre's flat with a duplicate key, and strangled Devre who was asleep, said a police officer.

Kale then called the younger sister's boyfriend, Neeraj Mishra, a rickshaw driver and told him that Devre was unwell and had be taken to the doctor. Neeraj, who was unaware of the murder, helped take Devre whose body was wrapped in a blanket. At an isolated spot, they asked Neeraj to leave, saying they would take time to find a hospital. After he left, the four dumped the body, said the police. All four have been arrested.


