Cabinet clears Rs 33,500-crore power projects

NEW DELHI: The Cabinet on Thursday gave the green light to power projects worth Rs 33,500 crore and breathed fresh life into stressed projects by facilitating coal supply to the fuel-starved plants.The flurry of decisions in the run-up to the general elections include a new mechanism to speed up strategic disinvestment, giving a boost to the hydro power sector, supporting electric vehicles, a Rs 30,849-crore facelift to the Mumbai urban transport network over five years, a new Metro line for Delhi, steps to support sugarcane farmers, setting up Kendriya Vidyalayas and initiatives to improve regional air connectivity infrastructure.The government has lifted restrictions on coal allotment to merchant power plants that supply electricity to shortterm markets, including power exchanges, after almost a decade. This is expected to help them clear their debts. Restrictions on coal supply were lifted last year for plants with medium-term power purchase agreements. Plants feeding shortterm competitive markets procure fuel from e-auctions or global markets.The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has decided to treat all hydro plants as renewable, giving them access to cheaper overseas funds. The decisions include imposing hydro power obligationson states to cover future projects. It also approved raising debt repayment period to 18 years from 12 years and budgetary support for funding connecting roads and flood moderation component.Power minister RK Singh said that the Cabinet’s decisions would address coalrelated issues of stressed assets and make hydropower more affordable.The panel approved various recommendations on coal supply made by a group of ministers on stressed power plants. The decisions include allowing power plants to use coal contracts in case of termination of power purchase agreements due to payment default by discoms and procurement of bulk power by a nodal agency against pre-declared Coal India contracts. Increasing quantity of coal for special forward e-auction for the power sector and holding coal supply auctions at regular intervals were also allowed.The CCEA delegated more responsibilities to the alternative mechanism in all the cases of strategic disinvestment of central public sector entities (CPSEs) with in-principle approval to stake sale. “This will facilitate quick decision-making and obviate the need for multiple instances of approval by CCEA for the same CPSE,” the government said. The alternative mechanism includes finance minister and minister for road transport and highways as permanent members. The minister for the relevant ministry of the CPSE being divested joins the mechanism as a temporary member for decision on that unit.The CCEA has allowed the alternative mechanism to decide on the quantum of shares to be transacted, mode of sale and final pricing of the transaction.The Cabinet also cleared three separate measures to boost new-age mobility solutions such as setting up of a National Mission on Transformative Mobility and Battery Storage to drive clean, connected, shared, sustainable and holistic mobility initiatives.It will have an inter-ministerial steering committee chaired by the NITI Aayog chief. The mission will also finalise a five-year phased manufacturing programme (PMP) till 2024 to support setting up of a few large-scale, export-competitive integrated batteries and cell-manufacturing giga-plants in India. The PMP will aim to localise production across the entire electric vehicles value chain.For regional air connectivity, CCEA has given more time for and extended the scope for revival and development of unserved and underserved airstrips of states, Airports Authority of India (AAI), civil enclaves, central public sector undertakings (CPSUs), helipads and water aerodromes. A budgetary support of Rs 4,500 crore has been earmarked for this.The CCEA on Thursday approved Phase-IIIA of the Mumbai Urban Transport Project that will improve the city’s suburban rails by introducing air-conditioned coaches with automatic doors, extension and creation of rail corridors, modern control systems and decongestion of entry/exit points at stations. The network is severely congested as it carries traffic four times its capacity.The new projects include two 1320-MW thermal power plants at Buxar in Bihar by SJVN Ltd and in Khurja, Uttar Pradesh, by THDC Ltd. Announcements for both the projects were made in 2015 and THDC was allotted the Amelia coal mine in Madhya Pradesh in January 2017. UP discoms will purchase 60% power from the Khurja project, while Bihar discoms will offtake 85% from the Buxar plant.Approval for acquisition ofTeesta Hydro Power Ltd (LTHPL) and execution of balance work of the Teesta Stage-Vl project in Sikkim byat a cost of Rs 5,748 crore was also cleared.Investment sanction of Rs 4,287 crore for construction of the 624-MW Kiru Hydro Electric Project in Jammu & Kashmir by NHPC and the state power development utility was also approved.
