PM says maaro, CM says thoko, BJP leaders' shoe-fight had to happen, says Akhilesh Yadav

Two Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) legislators recently traded blows at a District Action Plan Committee meeting at the Sant Kabir Nagar Collectorate in Uttar Pradesh, triggering varying reactions from people and politicos alike.

Former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Akhilesh Yadav on Thursday gave it a different spin altogether.

Akhilesh said when the Prime Minister says 'ghar mein ghus ke marunga' and the CM says 'thoko', what can be expected of the BJP leaders.

Akhilesh said, "When the PM and the CM use such language that shouldn't be used in a democracy; that's what will happen."

Akhilesh said the BJP workers were left confused with this whole episode and have, since, been asking the high-command of the party whether to follow "jhoot [lies] and boot" or "youth and booth".

"First there were parallel negotiations. Then the files were stolen. Meanwhile in UP, MP-MLA used shoes for dispute resolution at a meeting to discuss development. Now BJP workers are asking their leaders what to campaign on? The jhoot and the boot or the youth and the booth?" Akhilesh tweeted.

First there were parallel negotiations. Then the files were stolen. Meanwhile in UP, MP-MLA used shoes for dispute resolution at a meeting to discuss development.



Now BJP workers are asking their leaders what to campaign on?



The jhoot and the boot or the youth and the booth? March 7, 2019





The Samajwadi Party chief had earlier also, as soon as the bizarre video went viral, tweeted (in Hindi) and said the saffron party was not able to find any suitable candidate to contest elections after the whole "jooton ka aadaan pradaan."





For the unversed, the disagreement that broke out between BJP MP Sharad Tripathi and BJP MLA Rakesh Singh Baghel became a thrashing and it started raining shoes on the MLA courtesy Tripathi.

However, Tripathi did not take the 'shoewer' silently and hit back by slapping the MP.

The reason for the 'shoedown'? The two lawmakers were arguing over the placement of names on a foundation stone of a project.

Also present in the august house at the time of the scuffle were UP minister of technological and medical education Ashutosh Tandon, district panchayat head, DM as well as officials from different departments and members of the district panchayat.

Baghel did not take the situation lightly. The MLA and his supporters protested outside the district magistrate office demanding the arrest of BJP MP Sharad Tripathi.

The state unit of the BJP took note of the incident. MN Pandey, BJP UP president, said, "We have taken cognizance of this condemnable incident and both have been summoned to Lucknow. Strict disciplinary action will be taken."

READ THE FULL STORY HERE | Shoe shoe main main: BJP MP thrashes BJP MLA in Uttar Pradesh as cops look on

WATCH THE VIDEO HERE | Image of the day: BJP MP loses hosh, thrashes BJP MLA with josh
