Hum koi hero-pero nahin hain, says Lucknow man who saved Kashmiri vendors from saffron goons

According to a few media reports, when Rizvi was asked to come on camera for a comment, he simply said, "Bhaiya, humaara farz thha; humne bachaaya. Isspar aagey kya hi boloon?" (Photo: Twitter)

Bhaiya, hum koi hero-pero nahin hain; agar achchha kaam thha toh bass oopar waala qubool karle -- is the message from the young man who intervened and saved Kashmiri vendors from goons in Lucknow on March 2.

Videos of the incident became the talking point today and the goons were arrested. In the videos, two saffron-clad, lathi wielding men are seen beating up two or three Kashmiri young men selling dry fruits at Daliganj Bridge in Lucknow accusing them of pelting stones in Kashmir. Passers-by watched in silence.

One youn man, Zafar Rizvi, however, had the courage to stand up for the innocent vendors. He intervened and saved them. The whole incident was captured in a video and Rizvi became a hero -- something which does not amuse him much.

Zafar Rizvi, in a series of posts on Facebook, said he did not wish to be an overnight hero. He added instead of admiring others' heroics and making them overnight sensations, people should try to become 'Hero' themselves.

According to a few media reports, when Rizvi was asked to come on camera for a comment, he simply said, "Bhaiya, humaara farz thha; humne bachaaya. Isspar aagey kya hi boloon? [It was my duty to save those men. What shall I further say on this?]"

Incidents of Kashmiri men and women being harassed have been on the rise ever since a suicide bomber drove into a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama, killing over 40 jawans. The suicide bomber, Adil Ahmad Dar, was a Kashmiri youth, misled by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed.

In Lucknow, the dry fruit vendors from Kashmir were attacked by men from a fringe right-wing group. Four attackers have been arrested so far after the videos were widely shared.

In the videos, one of the assailants is heard saying the men were being beaten up as they were Kashmiris. This is when Zafar Rizvi stepped in and saved them.
