Stay sharp at the ATM

ATM

smart phone

CCTV footage

Beware of overtly helpful persons, especially when you are in thekiosk. Or let this youngster’s story be a warning. Nanda Kumar, who was trying to deposit money, ended up losing Rs 10,000 and hisafter he took the ‘help’ of two persons at the ATM near BEL Market.Nanda Kumar, a resident of Jalahalli, had gone to deposit money at an SBI ATM for his family settled in his hometown in Bihar, on January 7 around 1.45 pm. He noticed the machine was switched off. Before he could leave the kiosk, two persons blocked his way and told him that they too had come to deposit the money in the kiosk. They asked him why he was returning without making any transaction. When Kumar told them the machine was switched off, the duo showed him their money wrapped in a handkerchief and told him they had to deposit the money immediately.The duo told him they would look for another ATM nearby and asked Kumar if he wanted to accompany them. Kumar readily agreed and went with them to BEL Circle. One of the two persons asked Kumar whether he was well-versed with the process of depositing the money and Kumar admitted that he wasn’t. So the stranger asked him to give the money to him and he would help deposit it. Kumar gave the money to him. Before they entered the kiosk, the other man asked Kumar to give him his phone as he had to make an emergency call. Kumar gave his phone to him. The man pretended to be dialling a number and started walking in the Hebbal direction.Kumar was looking at the man who had his phone assuming that the other had gone into the ATM kiosk. But when he turned around, the man who had taken Rs 10,000 from him was missing and there was no sign of the man who took the phone too. He looked around for the duo but they were untraceable. Kumar then filed a complaint with the Jalahalli police.An investigating officer said, “We have taken up a case of cheating. We have given a request to the bank to give us theto ascertain the details about the miscreants. Such incidents of fraudsters targeting gullible people near ATM kiosks are on the rise in the city. Nobody should take the help of strangers at ATM kiosks and should wait for the guards if there are none.”A couple died and two others have sustained injuries when a car crashed into their scooter and bike on Bannerghatta Road. Balan, 63, and his wife Bhagyamma, 58, residents of Pillaganahalli were returning from work on the scooter when the car hit their vehicle. “In the impact of the collision, Balan died on the spot while Bhagyamma died en route to a hospital. The other two injured were first shifted to a nearby private hospital and from there to the Victoria Hospital. The injured Valmiki Sahani and Jayaram, of Bannerghatta, are said to be in a critical condition.A student of a private college in the city was assaulted and robbed while waiting for a bus near Austin Town. Seilenthang Kom (20), who hails from Manipur, was at the bus stop around 8.45 am, when a miscreant came and snatched his phone. Another man hit the student on his ear from the back. As the student was wincing in the pain, the miscreants fled with the phone.Seilenthang’s cousin told BM, “My brother was assaulted in front of the bus stand, but nobody came for help. My cousin cannot hear properly since the attack. Police are doing their work properly and we hope the miscreants will be arrested soon.”Victor Serto, President of Komrem Students Union said it was said that the boy was robbed on the busy road.The Lokayukta special court on Wednesday rejected the bail petition of stenographer of Department of Backward Classes Welfare, Mohan Kumar and handed him to the custody of the Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) police for three days. The ACB after taking up the case against Kumar took him into their custody to record his statement. Kumar had filed bail petition, since the ACB police placed their request for Kumar’s custody to investigate from where he got Rs 25.7 lakh. Kumar was caught exiting Vidhana Soudha with the money on January 4.
