18 Injured In Jammu Bus Stand Blast, Musharraf Admits Using Jaish For Attacks In India + Top News

At least 18 people were left injured after a powerful explosion ripped through a bus stand in Jammu. According to police, the explosion which took place around 12 noon on Thursday in the old city was triggered by a grenade.

“It was a grenade explosion, it has caused injuries to approximately 18 people, all the injured have been shifted to hospital,” Jammu IGP MK Sinha said, adding that the intention was to disturb communal peace and harmony. Read More.

Here's More Top News For The Day:

1) Musharraf Admits Using Jaish For Attacks In India, Minister Says In Touch With JeM, Army Says No Jaish In Pakistan

Facing global isolation for harbouring terrorists, the establishment in Pakistan seems to have gone into a tizzy. While the civilian leadership is busy defending "unwell" Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) chief Masood Azhar who "cannot even leave his home" the powerful Pakistan Army says there is no Jaish in Pakistan.

And even as Pakistan continues to deny the JeM links to the Pulwama terror attack and acknowledge the evidence handed over by India, the country had more international embarrassment on Wednesday after former Army Chief and President Pervez Musharraf admitted that the ISI has been using the terror outfit to carry out attacks in India during his tenure. Read More.

2) BJP Workers Beat Up Youth In UP For Questioning Govt Over Jobs, Brand Him ‘Anti-National’

The current political climate of India has reached a point where questioning the government over its accountability is equivalent to being an ‘anti-national’, a term that has gained momentum in the past five years.

Now that right-wing outfits have assumed supremacy in maintaining the so called ‘moral fabric and the law and order of the country’, another shocking incident came to light from Uttar Pradesh. Read More.

3) Locals In Lucknow Turn Saviours As Two Saffron-Clad Goons Thrash Kashmiri Vendors For No Reason

Kashmiris living outside the state, running business and studying in colleges across the country have been on the receiving end of the backlash following the Pulwama terror attack last month which killed over 40 CRPF personnel.

In yet another such shameful incident two Kashmiri street vendors selling dry fruits on in Uttar Pradesh's capital Lucknow were assaulted for being Kashmiris. Read More.

4) Women Need Governmental Support To Deal With Climate Change In The Himalayas

A recent report, ‘Hindu Kush Himalaya (HKH) Assessment: Mountains, Climate Change, Sustainability, and People’, released by the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) on February 4, highlighted that “existing laws and policies do not support the multiple ways in which women negotiate their roles in households, communities, and the market.” Read More.

5) Continuous Violent Incidents Against Kashmiris Show How We Are Alienating Our Own People

Ever since the Pulwama terror attack, last month where more than 40 CRPF personnel were killed in a suicide bomb blast this has been an all too familiar story. Yes, everyone in this country were angry and wanted revenge for the blood of our soldiers, a small section of our society decided to take it upon themselves to give justice to the families of the martyrs, by not going to war, but by intimidating and beating up Kashmiris. Read More.
