Textile tycoon’s son denied bail in Irani woman’s torture case

Dhanraj Morarji to now move Bombay High Court against the district court’s order



A day after the public prosecutor submitted in court on behalf of the key witness that she was being threatened by goons in the case of confinement and torture of Parvin Ghelichi in upscale Koregaon Park, Pune sessions court on Wednesday refused to grant bail to Dhanraj Morarji, son of late textile tycoon Arvind Morarji, the accused in the case. The court agreed with the public prosecutor’s concerns that the accused may threaten both the victim and witnesses if he is released on bail.



Dhanraj was arrested on December 24, 2018, by Koregaon Park police, after 30-yearold Ghelichi, an Irani national, who is in Pune to pursue a course in computers, alleged that she was ruthlessly thrashed, tortured and kept in confinement by the 47-year-old accused.



Ghelichi had met Dhanraj through a common friend and instantly took a liking for him. The two started living together at his plush apartment from November 2018, soon after. She claimed that while for the first few days Dhanraj was nice to her, barely a week later, he started physically abusing her.



~~67462046~~

From punching and kicking her over petty issues, she alleged that he gave her cigarette burns on her neck, hands and shoulder and even burnt her hair.



In the FIR, Ghelichi alleged that he would take away her cell phone and go through her messages and calls and let his dogs loose to ensure that she wouldn’t step out of the house without him knowing. Unable to bear the torture, she reached out to her friend, who also hails from Iran through Instagram, a social media platform that Dhanraj wasn’t very familiar with.



From punching and kicking her over petty issues, she alleged that he gave her cigarette burns on her neck, hands and shoulder and even burnt her hair.



In the FIR, Ghelichi alleged that he would take away her cell phone and go through her messages and calls and let his dogs loose to ensure that she wouldn’t step out of the house without him knowing. Unable to bear the torture, she reached out to her friend, who also hails from Iran through Instagram, a social media platform that Dhanraj wasn’t very familiar with.



Dhanraj’s lawyers, on the other hand, argued that the 47-year-old never ill-treated Ghelichi. They argued that the complaint was false and that the couple was living together amicably. They said that Dhanraj would cooperate with ongoing investigation and not tamper with witnesses or victim.



Additional sessions judge MM Deshpande, who was hearing the case, observed that Dhanraj had treated Ghelichi well for few days and later started ill-treating her. The judge felt that the prosecutor’s apprehension about Dhanraj were ‘well founded’. “Considering these facts and the role played by the accused in the offence in question, I am of the view that this is not a fit case to exhaust judicial discretion of bail,” the judge observed while rejecting Dhanraj’s bail plea on Wednesday.



When Mirror contacted advocate Bidkar who is representing Dhanraj, he said that the accused’s family has decided to approach Bombay High Court against district court’s order.



Considering the role played by accused in the offence, I am of the view that this is not a fit case to exhaust judicial discretion of bail —Sessions judge MM Deshpande


