Four-year-old leopard found dead in Umarpada taluka

SURAT: A four-year-old male leopard was found dead near Juna Umarpada village of Umarpada taluka in Surat district during early hours on Thursday. This is the third leopard to be found dead in the district in a suspicious condition in the past one month and the second in a week in Mangrol , the constituency of environment minister Ganpat Vasava.Preliminary investigation by forest officials revealed that the cat may have died from a fracture in the skull. Forest department registered a first offense report (FOR) under the Wildlife Protection Act and started an investigation. The carcass was sent for post mortem and viscera samples were sent for FSL tests.The leopard may have been a victim of a man-animal conflict. On Wednesday evening a leopard attacked and injured three persons working in a farm in Juna Umarpada village. Of them, Narsingh Vasava , 49, and Nitesh Vasava were shifted to a hospital for treatment. Villagers gathered at the spot when the victims shouted for help and rescued the two persons by attacking the leopard with farm tools and sticks. “The victims suffered minor injuries. The forest officials started checking in the area to spot the leopard after the incident and found the carcass in the wee hours on Thursday. It is suspected that the leopard died from the injuries inflicted by the villagers,” said Puneet Nayyar, deputy conservator of forest, Surat. “Forest department will start a campaign to create awareness in villagers to prevent such conflicts,” he added.Earlier, a two-and-half-year-old leopard was killed on March 4 by villagers when it tried to attack a sleeping child in the morning in Dhamdod village of Magrol taluka in Surat district. The child’s uncle, Dinesh Vasava spotted the big cat in his home and attacked it to save the child. After he shouted for help, villager reached the spot and thrashed the leopard to death with sticks and farming tools.Again, on February 6, another one-and-half-year-old female leopard was found dead near Kankariya village of Mahuva taluka in Surat district in a suspicious condition.
