harassment: Mumbai: Women thrash man who used to harass neighbour

Dombivali East

social media

Balaji Nagar

harassment

After beating him up, the women dragged Tushar Bansode to his house

Dombivali resident forced to apologise in front of wife.About a dozen women beat up and paraded a man who used to allegedly stalk and harass a woman in. The video of the incident has gone viral onAccording to the police, the women after thrashing Tushar Bansode, an electrician fromarea in Dombivali East, took him to his house and forced him to apologise to the woman in the presence of his wife.The police said the Monday evening incident happened in the same area of Dombivali East where recently a woman chopped off private parts of her harasser. The man succumbed a few days later.According to the police, Bansode, who runs a shop in Nandivali area of Dombivali, had been harassing the woman, who is separated from her husband, for the past few months. The victim lives near Bansode’s house and used to pass through his shop on her way to work. “He used to follow the woman, who is employed with a small company and supplements her income by working as a house-help. He would often make obscene gestures at the woman,’’ said one of the women activists who was part of the group that beat up Bansode.Bansode also threatened and assaulted her 12-year-old-son, said the activist. “After facing thefor long, she narrated the incident to one of us. On Monday evening, we reached the spot to confront and question him about it. As he gave us vague and arrogant answers, we caught him by his collar and slapped him,” said another woman activist. “Though Bansode apologised to the victim and her son who were present at the spot, we feared that he might target them again. So, we dragged him to his house in Balaji Nagar and asked him to apologies to the victim in front of his wife,’’ said the activists.The activists said that confronting Bansode in front of his wife was a right move because if she knows what he does outside the house, she would try to restrain him. Neither the victim nor the alleged harasser approached the police.
