Probe ordered into death of snatching accused

Ludhiana: A day after a 20-year-old man was arrested for vehicle snatching, the youth died under mysterious circumstances at the main gate of Ludhiana Central Jail, when police personnel were handing his custody over to jail officials on Wednesday evening. A judicial probe has been marked to find the exact cause and circumstances leading to death of Ajay Kumar, a resident of New Sundar Nagar of Lohara road.

He was arrested along with two others by Dehlon police on Wednesday.

Kin of deceased initially alleged that the police had tortured the youth in the custody which claimed his life, but did not lodge any complaint later. Cops, however, claimed that the youth was a drug addict and he was physically weak. They also claimed that the youth might have died of cardiac arrest.

Police said Ajay along with his two aides Sachin a resident of New Janta Nagar and Gorkha Singh of Dhillon Naga was arrested and booked under sections 379-B and 34 of IPC. The police also claimed to have recovered a stolen motorcycle from their possession.

After producing the accused in the court, when cops went to hand him over to jail, along with co accused, the jail staff refused to take his custody sensing his critical condition. According to jail officials, Ajay was unable to walk on his own and two cops were giving him the support. Seeing his condition, the jail personnel insisted that he should be taken to the hospital. In the meanwhile he got unconscious and collapsed. He was rushed to the hospital where doctors declared him dead.

Ludhiana Central Jail superintendent Shamsher Singh Boparai said when the police personnel brought him to jail, the accused Ajay was in a precarious condition. “I had asked the police personnel to take him to the hospital but they were adamant. After a few minutes Ajay died,” he claimed. Boparai added that soon after the incident, he called up two ACPs, who visited the jail.

Additional deputy commissioner of police-II Jaskaran Singh said the cause of death would be ascertained following the chemical examination of viscera of the deceased. “Ajay’s medical examination was conducted in the civil hospital on Wednesday and there seemed no issue with his health. When he reached the jail he started shivering. It is suspected that he died of cardiac arrest. However, a judicial inquiry has been marked, which would clear the matter.”

The family meanwhile conducted last rites of the youth on Thursday evening after the postmortem.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
