Pak terrorists planning another Pulwama-style attack, 2 groups trying to infiltrate : Reports

As per sources, one group comprising at least five Pakistan-trained terrorists have reportedly arrived in Nikial in a black colour vehicle directly from Kotli terror camp in the PoK.

The group is reportedly being escorted by allegedly their handler named Haji Arif. They have been recently spotted near the LoC on the other side of the border in the Rajouri sector.

Another group comprising of six terrorists probably from the Jaish-e-Mohammad and Lashkar-e-Toiba have been spotted near village Mohra Shried at LoC and reportedly waiting for a favourable time to slip into the Indian side.

According to the intelligence inputs received by the security forces, these terrorists are being accompanied by few members of the Pakistan Army’s Special Service Group.

The inputs regarding the possible infiltration attempt by Pakistan-supported terrorists coincides with intelligence warnings that Pakistan-backed terrorist outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) is planning to carry out another Pulwama-style terror strike in Jammu and Kashmir in the next 3-4 days, intelligence sources have warned.

According to the intelligence inputs, the Masood Azhar-led JeM has planned to carry out an IED attack in Qazigund and Anantnag of south Kashmir. This time, they plan to use a Tata Sumo SUV to execute their plans.

In view of the specifics, security has been beefed up across Jammu and Kashmir and the security agencies have been directed to remain on high alert mode.

This warning came hours after a grenade attack was executed at a bus stop in Jammu on 7th March which left one 17-year-old Mohammad Sharik from Haridwar in Uttarakhand dead and at least 30 others injured.

The security agencies arrested a Hizbul-Mujahideen member, Yasir Arhaan in connection with the grenade attack at the Jammu bus stand in the evening. He had later confessed to the crime and, during his interrogation, revealed that the attack was masterminded by the district commander of Hizbul Mujahideen in Kulgam, Farooq Ahmed Bhatt alias Omar.

The grenade blast comes on the backdrop of the Pulwama Terror Attack that martyred over 40 soldiers of the CRPF. India had responded to it with airstrikes within Pakistani territory that led to tensions between India and Pakistan.

Source : Op India
