Day after bus stop blast, circuit used in making bombs found near Jammu airport

New Delhi :

A day after the grenade attack at Jammu bus stop that killed one person, security agencies on Friday recovered a circuit used in making bombs near Jammu airport. The circuit was connected with a battery. Following the recovery of the bomb circuit, a bomb disposal unit rushed to the spot and taken the device into their custody. As of now, the police has denied finding any kind of explosive but they launched a search operation around the airport premises. The area was already on high alert after the grenade blast at Jammu bus stop.

On Thursday, at least two persons were killed while 33 others sustained serious injuries in a grenade blast beneath a bus at Jammu bust stop. Jammu Medical Superintendent said. All the injured were rushed to Government Medical College hospital for treatment in critical condition. This is the third grenade attack by terrorists in Jammu bus stand since May last year.

Within hours of the blast, Yasir Javed Bhat, a resident of Khanpora-Dassein village in Kulgam whom the police said was tasked by terror outfit Hizbul Mujahideen to carry out the attack was arrested.

Meanwhile, a day after the ghastly terror attack in the state, Jammu and Kashmir Police on Friday appealed to shopkeepers to install CCTV cameras to help the force to keep the city safe. Inspector General of Police, Jammu, M K Sinha made the appeal in a post on his Twitter account.

It was the third grenade attack by terrorists on Jammu bus stand since May 2018 and comes just three weeks after the gruesome terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama on February 14 that killed 42 CRPF jawans and injured dozens of others bringing India and Pakistan on brink of war.

The grenade explosion was carried out inside the general bus stand area around 11.50 am on Thursday morning. A parked bus of the state road transport corporation (SRTC) suffered extensive damage in the blast causing panic among the people.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
