2 days after attack, Kashmiri vendors back on Lucknow streets, buyers throng stalls

Abdul Salam, one of the two dry-fruit sellers, felt a sense of gratitude towards the local police and people.

Two days after they were beaten up by lathi-wielding saffron-clad men for being from Jammu and Kashmir, the dry-fruit sellers are back on the streets of Lucknow with their wares.

They are, however, not back at their usual spot in Daliganj. The two men have shifted base to Lohia Path.

In the new area too, they had no dearth of customers and many people swarmed in to show solidarity with the Kashmiri vendors.

Abdul Salam, one of the two dry-fruit sellers, felt a sense of gratitude towards the local police and people in view of their support.

"I have been coming to Lucknow for ten years but this is the first time we were targetted. I am thankful to police for arresting the perpetrators and assuring us security. Many social workers and organisations have extended their support," Salam told India Today.

Mohd. Afzal, another Kashmiri trader, said, "The people who attacked us had asked for our ID cards and called us stone pelters. We are poor people who travel to other states to work. However, after the incident the support of the locals and police have given us a lot of strength."

Incidents of Kashmiri men and women being harassed have been on the rise ever since a suicide bomber drove into a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama, killing over 40 jawans. The suicide bomber, Adil Ahmad Dar, was a Kashmiri youth, misled by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed.

In Lucknow, these dry fruit vendors from Kashmir were attacked by men from a fringe right-wing group. Four attackers have been arrested so far after the videos were widely shared. The main accused, Bajrang Sonkar, has also been arrested and has been sent to jail.

In the videos, one of the assailants is heard saying the men were being beaten up as they were Kashmiris. This is when a few locals stepped in, intervened and saved them.
