Rahul promises women quota if Congress returns to power

The Congress president also said his party will adopt zero tolerance with regard to atrocities on women.

Koraput: Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Friday utilised the occasion of International Women’s Day to strike an emotional chord with the women voters of the country.

He promised passage of the Women Reservation Bill in the Parliament if the Congress comes to power in the 2019 general elections.

“We will pass the Women Reservation Bill if our party comes to power at the Centre in the forthcoming Lok Sabha polls,” Mr Gandhi said while interacting with tribal women at Jeypore in Odisha’s Koraput district.

The Congress president also said his party will adopt zero tolerance with regard to atrocities on women.

“We will adopt a zero tolerance with regard to atrocities against women. Perpetrators would be dealt with exemplary punishments,” Mr Gandhi said.

He promised free higher education for women belonging to tribal and weaker sections.

“We promise free higher and professional education, including medical science and law, for women of tribal communities and weaker sections if our party forms the governments at the Centre and Odisha,” said Mr Gandhi.

Later in the day, while addressing a public meeting, the Congress supremo also announced to provide marriage kit for the poor women for marriage.

“Financial assistance will be provided to every poor girl for marriage. We will hike widow allowance to Rs 2,000,” he said.

Mr Gandhi continued targeting Narendra Modi government over several issues, including Rafale deal and unemployment.

The Nehru-Gandhi scion also promised to waive off farm loans and to hike paddy MSP in Odisha if the party comes to power in 2019 elections.

Hitting out at the BJD government over the rising number of rape cases in the Odisha, he said that a special officer will be appointed in every panchayat for women.

“A financial corporation will be set up for women entrepreneurs who run small business units in the State,” said the Congress supremo at the public meeting.

He slammed Naveen Patnaik-led government for allegedly suppressing the voice of people including dalits and tribals in the State.

“We want to form the government of dalits, oppressed, tribals, women and labourers here. We want the people’s voice to be heard in Assembly. We do not want to tell you ‘Mann Ki Baat’, rather we want to run the government hearing your ‘Mann Ki Baat’,” said Gandhi said.
