Army says soldier who was feared abducted in Valley is safe

“A search is being conducted and efforts are on to locate him,” said police. Express Photo By Shuaib Masoodi

An Army jawan who was on leave and feared to be abducted by suspected militants from his home in Qazipora area of Budgam district on Friday evening has returned home safe. A senior police officer had said the soldier has been identified as Mohammed Yasin Bhat of the Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry.

On Saturday morning, the Ministry of Defence Spokesperson claimed the soldier was “safe” and the media reports of his abduction were “incorrect”. JK Police sources too confirmed that Bhat has returned home and a team was being sent to check on him.

Clarification. Media reports of the abduction of a serving Army soldier on leave from Qazipora, Chadoora, Budgam are incorrect. Individual is safe. Speculations may please be avoided.@PMOIndia @nsitharaman @DefenceMinIndia @PIB_India @adgpi — Defence Spokesperson (@SpokespersonMoD) March 9, 2019

SSP Budgam Nagpure Amod Ashok also said in a statement this morning: “Rfn Yaseen Bhat resident of Qazipora Budgam , is safe in his unit. Media is requested not to speculate. Further details shall follow.”

A senior police officer, meanwhile, told The Indian Express, “We were informed by the family yesterday that unknown gunmen barged into the house on Friday night and they took him away… we have received information that he has been traced and is now safe.” He said an investigation is underway.

In the past too, militants have targeted security personnel on leave. In June 2018, a Rashtriya Rifles soldier, Aurangzeb, who was heading home for Eid, was abducted and killed by militants in Pulwama.

In September 2017, militants dragged out BSF constable Mohammad Ramzan Parray from his house in Hajin, Bandipore, and killed him.

Two months later, in November, militants abducted soldier Irfan Ahmad Dar from his home in Sazan in Shopian. His bullet-riddled body was found later.

In May 2017, militants abducted an Army officer, Lt Umar Fayaz Parray, from Shopian and killed him. Parray was in Shopian to attend the wedding of a cousin when militants barged into the house and abducted him.
