'Naya Pakistan' should show 'nayi soch' with 'naya action' against terrorist groups: India

Amid claims by Pakistan government that it has seized the headquarters of Hafiz Saeed led Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JuD) in Lahore, India on Saturday said Islamabad should show 'nayi soch' with 'naya action' against terrorist groups and cross border terrorism.

Mumbai terror attack mastermind Hafiz Saeed was barred by Pakistan's Punjab provincial government from delivering the Friday sermon at JuD headquarters in Lahore, where a government-appointed cleric led prayers and delivered the weekly sermon. The government of Pakistan's Punjab province had taken over the mosque as part of a crackdown on the terror group.

Referring to Prime Minister Imran Khan's slogan of “Naya Pakistan”, the Ministry of External Affairs said, "If Pakistan claims to be a 'Naya Pakistan' with 'nayi soch' then it should show 'naya action' against terrorist groups and cross border terrorism."

#WATCH Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) Spokesperson, Raveesh Kumar: If Pakistan claims to be a 'Naya Pakistan' with 'nayi soch' then it should demonstrate 'naya action' against terrorist groups and cross border terrorism in support of its claims. pic.twitter.com/Ji7ZBZsVjc — ANI (@ANI) March 9, 2019

Slamming Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi for his statement on JeM's role in Pulwama attack, MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said, "It is regrettable that Pakistan still continues to deny Jaish-e-Mohammed's own claim of taking ownership of Pulwama attack. Pak Foreign Minister said 'they (JeM) have not claimed responsibility of the attack, there is some confusion'. Is Pakistan defending the JeM?"

On February 14, a suicide bomber had targeted an Indian paramilitary convoy after he blew off an explosive-laden vehicle killing 40 CRPF personnel. Masood Azhar-led JeM had taken responsibility for the attack.

Pakistan Foreign Minister had last week said that there was some confusion in terms of JeM's involvement in the Pulwama terror attack because they claim no responsibility.

"All members of the UNSC are aware about JeM training camps in Pakistan and about the chief of JeM Masood Azhar & his presence in Pakistan. We call upon all members of UNSC to list Masood Azhar as a designated terrorist under UN sanction committee," Kumar said.

Following the Pulwama terror attack, India had bombed the largest JeM terror training camp in Balakot in a preemptive action against the terror group which was planning further strikes in India.

After IAF airstrike targeting the terror group, Pakistan attempted to attack military establishment in India lost its MiG-21 which was being flown by Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman. During the combat, he had to eject himself but unfortunately, his parachute landed on Pakistan occupied Kashmir following which he was captured by Pakistani Army. The IAF pilot shot down an F-16 jet of Pak Air Force before he ejected from MiG-21.

Pakistan has denied that it used F-16 jets to target Indian military installations. On this, Kumar said India has enough evidence to counter Pak claims. "There are eyewitness accounts and electronic evidence that Pakistan deployed F-16 aircraft and that one F-16 was shot down by Wing Commander Abhinandan," he said.

"We have asked USA to also examine whether the use of F-16 against India is in accordance with terms and conditions of sale," the spokesperson added.
