‘Move beyond words’: India on Imran Khan’s promise not to allow terrorists to use Pakistani soil

Ministry of External Affairs Spokesperson Raveesh Kumar on Saturday appeared skeptical of Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s claim that Islamabad will not allow its soil to be used for terrorism abroad.

“We see the same script repeating again,” Kumar said at a press briefing. “Pakistan has to now move ahead, beyond mere words, and take some credible, verifiable and sustained action against terrorists and terror groups.”

The Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson said that if Imran Khan’s Pakistan is a “naya Pakistan with a nayi soch” (new Pakistan with a new way of thinking), then it should also demonstrate “naya action” (new action) against terrorist groups and infrastructure on its soil, and end cross-border terrorism.

Kumar questioned Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi’s claim earlier this month that Jaish-e-Mohammad has not claimed responsibility for the Pulwama attack of February 14. He said the United Nations Security Council has unanimously said that Jaish-e-Mohammad has taken responsibility.

“Is Pakistan defending the Jaish-e-Mohammad?” the spokesperson asked “Does Pakistan’s claim have any credibility?” He said in 2004, the then-Pakistan president had said that Pakistan will not allow its soil to be used for terorrist activities, but they still continue to flourish.

Pakistani law enforcement agencies began a crackdown on banned groups on Tuesday by detaining more than 100 people, and took control of 182 schools till Thursday. It added Lashkar-e-Taiba founder Hafiz Saeed’s organisations Jamaat-ud-Dawa and Falah-e-Insaniyat to its list of proscribed groups. Previously, these groups were only on the “watch” list.

Pakistan also claimed to have detained 44 individuals linked to banned outfits, including Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar’s brother and son. Jaish-e-Mohammad had claimed responsibility for a terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on February 14, which killed 40 Central Reserve Police Force soldiers.

On Thursday, Pakistan said it has sealed the Lahore headquarters of the Jamaat-ud-Dawa and Falah-e-Insaniyat.

However, Kumar said: “Pakistan claims to proscribe groups and individuals, but this is only on paper. Actually, terrorist groups and individuals continue their activities without hindrance. Pakistan has not shown any serious intent to address the legitimate concerns of India and the international community.”

The spokesperson said Major Asif Ghafoor, the director general of the Inter-Services Public Relations, the Pakistan military’s media arm, openly denied that Jaish-e-Mohammad exists in Pakistan, despite former Pakistan President Pervez Musharraf admitted the group’s presence in the country.

The Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson said that the Indian government has eyewitness accounts and electronic evidence to show that a Pakistani F-16 jet was shot down. Parts of the AMRAAM missile, which only Pakistan F-16s carry, are also available as evidence, Kumar added.

Kumar said that Pakistan has refused access to journalists to the area in Balakot where the Indian Air Force conducted strikes on a Jaish-e-Mohammad camp on February 26. This means, he said, that they have “plenty to hide”. “We are absolutely confident that the strike on Balakot was successful, and has achieved our objectives,” he added.

Kumar also said, in response to a question, that India has put in an extradition request for businessman Nirav Modi with the British authorities, but the United Kingdom is yet to respond. A report on Friday had said that Modi is living at a plush apartment in London’s West End. Modi is accused of defrauding the Punjab National Bank of Rs 13,000 crore, and had fled India in 2018. The scam is till date the biggest banking fraud in the country’s history.

Weekly Media Briefing by Official Spokesperson (March 09, 2019) https://t.co/q1RcC9Z462 — Raveesh Kumar (@MEAIndia) March 9, 2019

Here’s the full text of the Ministry of External Affairs’ statement:
