India-Pakistan crisis: Soldier ‘kidnapped’ by gunmen is safe, insists Indian army

A soldier reported to have been kidnapped by militants is safe, insists the Indian army

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

On Friday local police said infantryman Mohammad Yaseen Bhat was taken by four militants from his home in the village of Qazipora, Budgam, about 70 miles from the Line of Control. The military line, which separates the Indian and Pakistani controlled parts of the state of Jammu and Kashmir, has been hit by artillery shelling and gunfire in recent weeks as tensions escalate between the two countries. Reporters in the region published what they said were photos of the missing 27-year-old soldier, saying India was “praying for his safety, silently”.

But hours later, a spokesman for the Indian Defence Ministry put out a statement rejecting claims Mr Bhat had been abducted. The spokesman tweeted: “Clarification. Media reports of the abduction of a serving army soldier on leave from Qazipora, Chadoora, Budgam are incorrect. “Individual is safe. Speculations may please be avoided.” The longstanding conflict between the two countries boiled over last month when Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), a Pakistan-based terror group affiliated with al-Qaeda, carried out a deadly car bomb attack.

The skirmishes have resulted in many civilians being injured and killed

India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi promised a “strong response” to the incident which left at least 40 troops dead, saying: “If our neighbour thinks it can destabilise India, then it’s making a big mistake.” New Delhi responded by carrying out airstrikes on suspected terrorist training camps on the Pakistani side of the border. The move ignited skirmishes which resulted in the downing of an Indian MiG-21 and a Pakistani F-16. Multiple civilian injuries and deaths were also reported.

Tensions have escalated between India and Pakistan after a deadly car bomb attack

Indians celebrated the downing of a Pakistani jet by Indian forces

At least 40 Indian troops were killed in the car bomb attack last month
