Kedia abduction mastermind killed by his own aides

Birgunj, March 9

It has come to the light that the notorious Indian criminal Bablu Dubey, who masterminded the abduction of Birgunj’s businessman Suresh Kedia, was murdered by his aides.

The fact came to light after two Indian nationals were held on the charge of abducting Kedia. Organising a press meet, District Police Office Parsa made public the two arrestees today.

Those arrested are Bablu Paswan, 35 and Bijaya Mahato, 25, of Bihar, India. Superintendent of Police Rewati Dhakal said Paswan was the key suspect involved in Kedia’s abduction while Mahato had taken away Kedia in the vehicle after his kidnapping.

Police had taken Paswan and Mahato under control from Bhiswa area of Parsa’s Chhipharmai Rural Municipality on Thursday night. After their arrest, their involvement in Kedia’s abduction was revealed.

Kedia was abducted from Pasaha bridge of Bara’s Mahagadhimai Municiplaity-1 on May 26, 2016. Police said that abducted Kedia was freed with support from Indian police three days later. Paswan, however, claimed that Kedia was released after he paid Rs 100 million in ransom.

At the press meet, Paswan said Bablu Dubey was the mastermind behind Kedia’s kidnapping. “We killed Dubey after he did not give us Rs 10 million as per the agreement,” Paswan claimed. He revealed that Kedia was kidnapped as per Dubey’s plan and victim had paid Rs 100 million in ransom. “Since Dubey did not abide by the agreement, we killed him,” Paswan said. “We worked hard. We have to spend time in jail and he took all the money. Thus, we killed him,” Paswan added.

Permanent resident of India’s Motihari District, Bablu Dubey had been operating criminal activities both in Nepal and India while he was doing time in jail. While in prison, Dubey had masterminded the abduction of Kedia and mobilized his aides for his kidnapping. While Dubey was being escorted to Betiya Civil Court in May 2017, he was shot to death within police cordon. A band of three armed persons had shot Dubey to death inside the court premises.

Dubey’s group had been operating various criminal activities including murder, abduction, and extortion along Birgunj-Raxaul area. Incumbent IGP Sarbendra Khanal, when he was SSP, had arrested Dubey from Sitapaila-based Guest House acting on tip-off on May 29, 2013. He was handed over to Indian police after no evidence of crime committed by him was found in Nepal.

Police have already arrested five persons including Chanchala Pandey, Birendra Yadav, Jiyalal Yadav for their alleged involvement in Kedia’s abduction.

READ ALSO:
