Indian troops martyr two youth in Pulwama

Indian troops martyr two youth in Pulwama

In occupied Kashmir, Indian troops in their fresh act of state terrorism martyred two youth in Pulwama district on Sunday.

The youth were killed during a cordon and search operation at Pinglish in Tral area of district.

High Court Bar Association at its executive body meeting in Srinagar condemned the summoning of Hurriyat forum Chairman, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and the son of APHC Chairman, Syed Ali Gilani by Indian National Investigation Agency to New Delhi for questioning.

Bar Association said, by summoning Mirwaiz Umar Farooq the NIA was actually going to subject him to humiliation and intimidation only because he was spearheading the Kashmiris’ ongoing struggle for right to self-determination.

Meanwhile, shutdown was observed in downtown Srinagar and adjoining areas, today, against the NIA summon to Mirwaiz Umar Farooq.

Call for the strike was given by the Srinagar-based Traders Coordination Committee, an amalgam of various trade bodies.

The authorities had imposed restrictions in parts of Srinagar city to prevent anti-India protests.

Most of English and Urdu newspapers, today, published blank front pages in protest against unexplained denial by Indian authorities of advertisements to valley-based two leading newspapers, Greater Kashmir and Kashmir Reader.

Kashmir Editors Guild held a protest demonstration at Kashmir Press Club in Srinagar against the ban on advertisements to newspapers by Kashmir administration under Governor Satya Pal Malik.

Senior editors and journalists took part in the protest to demand revocation of the ban.

Jammu and Kashmir Socio Economic Coordination Committee at a meeting in Srinagar said Kashmir was facing an undeclared economic warlike situation as a result of Indian policies.

On the other hand, on-governmental organisations community will submit a petition to President of Human Rights Council and member states to hold a panel discussion on Report of United Nations Human Rights Commissioner on Kashmir as the rights situation in occupied Kashmir has massively deteriorated.

This was disclosed at roadside roundtable organised jointly by International Human Rights Association of American Minorities, International Muslim Women’s Union, South Asia Centre for Peace and Human Rights and International Commission for Human Rights in Geneva.
