Gujarat: Neighbour rapes 3-year-old girl in Morbi, accused still at large

PTI report mentioned that the girl's family members noticed blood on her clothes when she returned | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Ahmedabad: In another case of child rape reported, a three-year-old girl was allegedly raped by a neighbour in Gujarat's Morbi town. The incident took place on Saturday and the local police confirmed it on Sunday.

The news agency PTI reported the accused was identified as Ramesh Koli, was a resident of Indira Nagar area in Morbi. Reportedly, the survivor went to Koli's house to play with his children. Morbi B-division police station's sub-inspector, A B Jadeja told the agency that the accused was alone at home when the girl went to his house. He then allegedly raped her.

Meanwhile, the PTI report mentioned that the girl's family members noticed blood on her clothes when she returned. In order to check, they went to Koli's house found blood there as well.

Also Read: Chandigarh: Two gang-rape and bludgeon minor, abandon body at a godown

However, the girl's parents have lodged an FIR in the case. The accused has been booked under the sections of the Indian Penal Code and the provisions of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The survivor was immediately rushed to a hospital for medical tests. Also, the accused Koli is absconding.

In a similar case reported from Punjab, a seven-year-old girl was allegedly raped and killed by her father's relative after she was abducted by him in Doraha town. The local police have registered a complaint filed by the victim's mother. News agency PTI reported, the main accused was her husband's nephew and he came to their house on Saturday night.

However, the accused allegedly raped the survivor in vacant godown near railways tracks and then he killed her, the police officials told PTI. Inspector Karnail Singh, SHO Doraha police station told PTI that an FIR was registered under provisions of the Indian Penal Code and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act. The accused is absconding.
