Rowdy claims police staged encounter

notorious rowdy

JV George

CCB

High Court not ready to believe him as he had not given any such statement before the Magistrate earlier, claimed before the High Court that the police had staged a fake encounter to arrest him. However, the court was not ready to believe his claims as he had not made such a statement when he was produced before a Magistrate soon after his arrest. This is the second time that George has been arrested following a shootout. He was arrested in 2015 following a shootout near the Palace Grounds. He was arrested again on October 3, 2018 after a shootout near Vittalnagar.George was arrested in October after the police were on his trail seeking his custody in a murder case. The complainant in the case, registered at Chamrajpet police station, was the police inspector of, Prakash R. The police spotted George and tried to apprehend him near Mullakattamma temple in Vittalnagar when George assaulted the police officers. The police claim they opened fire in self-defence and George suffered a gunshot injury on his right thigh.George claimed in the HC that the police filed a case against him for trying to murder the police officers during the encounter. He has been granted bail in that case. He then sought bail in the main case.The government advocate pointed out that George did not claim that the shootout encounter was fake before the Magistrate when he was produced right after his arrest. The court was told that he was a habitual offender and was involved in six other criminal cases.The High Court checked the order sheet of the case and found that there was no allegation of a fake encounter made before the Magistrate. “The medical records show that petitioner was taken to the hospital on 4.10.208 with history of ‘gunshot injury’”, the HC noted.The HC refused to believe in the fake encounter theory and rejected George’s bail plea. The HC order said, “Under these circumstances, at this stage, this Court is not convinced to accept the theory of police highhandedly firing at him. Having regard to the material on record and the nature of the offence, it is not a fit case to grant bail. Therefore, the petition is dismissed.”
