Foreign Secretary Gokhale meets Pompeo, appreciates US support after Pulwama terror attack

Washington D.C. [USA], Mar 11 (ANI): India's Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale on Monday met US Secretary of State Michael R Pompeo and appreciated the firm support that India received from Washington in the aftermath of Pulawama terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir in which 40 CRPF jawans were killed.

During his meeting, Gokhale also apprised Pompeo about the recent developments in this regard.

According to a statement released by the Indian Embassy in Washington, Pompeo expressed his understanding of India's concerns regarding cross -border terrorism.

"They agreed that Pakistan needs to take concerted action to dismantle the terrorist infrastructure and to deny safe haven to all terrorist groups in its territory," said the statement.

"They also agreed that those who support or abet terrorism in any form should be held accountable," added the statement.

It is worth noting that Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) suicide bomber attacked CRPF convoy in Pulwama on February 14 in which 40 jawans were killed.

In retaliation, Indian Air Force (IAF) targetted JeM's largest training centre at Balakot in Pakistan on February 26 wee hours.

Gokhale also expressed satisfaction over the significant progress and the quality of India-US Strategic Partnership since Secretary Pompeo's visit to India in September last year for the first-ever Ministerial 2+2 Dialogue, the statement said.

Gokhale and Pompeo also discussed other issues of mutual interest including Afghanistan and cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region and agreed to closely work together in this regard.

In response to Pompeo's reference to bilateral trade matters, Gokhale underscored the significant reduction in the trade deficit in the last three years and conveyed India's willingness to remain engaged with the US for a meaningful and mutually acceptable package on trade issues.

According to reports, Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi discussed the regional security situation following Pulwama terror attack with US National Security Advisor John Bolton in a telephonic conversation on Monday.

A statement issued by Pakistan’s Foreign Office noted that the purpose of the phone call was to provide him Pakistan’s perspective on the recent regional developments. (ANI)
