FS Gokhale calls on Pompeo, assert that Pakistan must deny safe haven to terrorists

Seven US Lawmakers write to Mike Pompeo on Farmers' protest In India

FS Gokhale calls on Pompeo, assert that Pakistan must deny safe haven to terrorists

International

oi-Vikas SV

Washington, Mar 11: Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale on Monday called on US Secretary of State Michael Pompeo in Washington and apprised tha latter about recent developmens in the region after February 14 Pulwama terrorist attack.

Both hailed the significant progress and quality of India-US Strategic Partnership since Pompeo's visit to India last year to take part in the '2+2' dialogue.

Gokhale appreciated the US Government and Secretary Pompeo personally for the firm support that India received from the US in the aftermath of the terrorist attack in Pulwama, reported ANI.

US condemns Pulwama attack in strongest terms

Pompeo reportedly expressed his understanding of India's concerns regarding cross-border terrorism. They agreed that Pakistan needs to take concerted action to dismantle the terrorist infrastructure and to deny safe haven to all terrorist groups in its territory, ANI reported.

The United States on February 15 condemned in the strongest terms the Pulwama terror attack carried out by Jaish-e-Mohammed in which 40 CRPF jawans were martyred.

Pompeo last week discussed with British NSA Mark Sedwill the current situation between India and Pakistan and the efforts to reduce tensions between the two South Asian neighbours

Tensions between India and Pakistan escalated after a suicide bomber of Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) killed 40 CRPF personnel in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district in February 14. India launched a counter-terror operation in Balakot.

Mike Pompeo stresses on finding common ground between India and Pakistan

The next day, Pakistan Air Force retaliated and downed a MiG-21 in an aerial combat and captured its pilot, who was handed over to India on March 1. The US, the UK and France, the three permanent veto-wielding members of the 15-nation United Nations Security Council, last month moved a fresh proposal in the UNSC to designate JeM's chief Masood Azhar as a global terrorist.

Pompeo on March 5 said the United States is trying to find a common ground between India and Pakistan.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Monday, March 11, 2019, 21:29 [IST]
