Cornwall police charge woman with arsons

A 25-year-old woman is facing four charges after police responded to a fire on March 3.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

Police alleged the woman used a fire accelerant in her possession to set fire to a residence and vehicle belonging to a man she knows. She was arrested on Friday.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Cornwall police charge woman with arsons Back to video

Erica Brazeau, 25, was charged with arson – disregard for human life, arson – damage to property, possession of an incendiary material, and breach of undertaking.

She was held in police custody pending a bail hearing in Cornwall court.

Assault, breach

A 34-year-old woman from Cornwall is facing two charges after police responded to a complaint last month.

Police alleged the woman assaulted her boyfriend during an argument on Feb. 28. She was arrested on Friday.

The woman, whose identity was not released, was charged with domestic assault, and breach of probation for failing to keep the peace.

She was held in police custody pending a bail hearing in Cornwall court.

Assault

A 29-year-old man from Cornwall is facing a charge after police responded to a domestic call on Sunday.

Police alleged the man assaulted his girlfriend during an argument.

The man, whose identity was not released, was charged with domestic assault.

He was held in police custody pending a bail hearing in Cornwall court.

Human trafficking

HOGANSBURG, N.Y. — Two citizens of India are facing charges after U.S. Border Patrol agents stopped the vehicle they were travelling in on March 7.

Agents said they were observing a suspicious vehicle parked at the Akwesasne Mohawk Casino Resort and alleged they saw the occupants behaving suspiciously. The vehicle was stopped in Fort Covington, where agents alleged two of the six occupants were smuggled aliens.

The two, whose identities were not released, are facing charges of improper entry by alien.

U.S. Customs and Border Patrol said the investigation into this incident continues.
