‘Policemen assaulted us during march to BJP office’

Say protesting guest teachers

Protesting guest teachers alleged that they were manhandled and assaulted by Delhi Police personnel on Monday while they were on their way to the BJP’s Delhi unit office to demand extension of their contracts.

As many as 25,000 teachers are staring at uncertainty after their contracts ended on February 28. The Delhi Cabinet last week approved a policy to allow guest and contract teachers to continue in the job till they attain the age of superannuation so that schools can avail of their services uninterrupted.

The guest teachers have been sitting outside Delhi BJP office over the last two days to seek a meeting with Delhi BJP chief Manoj Tiwari.

On Monday, they alleged while they were on their way to Delhi BJP office on Pandit Pant Marg, they were detained and taken to Parliament Street police station.

The guests teachers alleged that when they tried to resist, they were manhandled and even women teachers were assaulted.

“Congress leader Kiran Walia came to the police station and helped us. We also had a meeting with the DCP who assured us that he will look into the matter,” said Shoaib Rana, a guest teacher.

Mild force

The police said around 100 persons were detained. “Mild force” was used to tackle the protesters, they said, adding that the teachers were detained and taken in two buses to Parliament Street police station, while the others came there by themselves.

After being released from the police station, the teachers went to Delhi BJP office and met Mr. Tiwari.

“We asked him when will the Lieutenant-Governor approve the guest teachers policy that was finalised by the Delhi government last week. He said the policy has been approved. We told him that the orders have not been issued and he said that it will be done in the next couple of days,” Rana said.

Another guest teacher, Shweta, said Tiwari assured them their contracts will be extended till August.

“The Delhi government had said that the teachers will be allowed to work till March 29. But that would mean that we will be thrown out after that. We requested him to give us more time and he said that he wold see what can be done,” she said.
