Inter-State burglars gang busted

With the arrest of seven accused, including two receivers of stolen items, Delhi Police on Monday claimed to have busted an inter-state gang of burglars known as 'Rajan Gang' in national Capital. After their arrest the sleuths of Delhi Police in Dwarka district have solved 18 cases of burglary and house theft that took place at different locations of Delhi and police have also made recovery in nine cases.

The accused all from different states have been identified as the kingpin of gang Rajan (38) a resident of Balrampur in Mathura Uttar Pradesh (UP), Ravi (28) a resident of Raj Nagar, Palam Colony, New Delhi, Rajesh (30) a resident of Begusarai, Bihar, Ansar (36) a resident of Bhagalpur, Bihar, Yashvir (35) a resident of Dholpur Rajasthan, Afsar Malik (23) a resident of Vikas Nagar in Delhi's Uttam Nagar and Asif Malik (21) a resident of Seelampur Market in Delhi.

According to Anto Alphonse, the Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP), Dwarka district, due to recent incidents of burglary in the area a police team was tasked to analyze the crime trends and to collect CCTV footage of the incident and other vicinity. "Specific inputs were received on March 7 regarding the gang of burglars following which a trap was laid and five persons were apprehended near Power House, Dwarka Sector-1. The car they were travelling was found to be stolen," said the DCP.

"During interrogation, their unique modus operandi surfaced as the accused persons disclosed that they used to target mainly shops. Each members of this gang has his own task, like two members of the gang Rajesh and Ansar were tasked to get the targets and recce the market area and for this they used to broom/clean in the market area. While cleaning they used to note down the least protected shops," said the DCP. "Another accused Yashvir, master in auto lifting, was tasked to arrange vehicle for movement and shifting of burgled items. These gang members specifically after committing crime used to shift to other parts of the country. Their kingpin is Rajan who is also arrested by the police," said the DCP.

"On their instance, two receivers, Afsar Malik and Asif Malik, were also arrested and recovery of Rs 1,30,000/- were made from them," the DCP said. "On the instance of accused persons, recovery of case property of nine different cases has been made out. Further, CCTV footage of incident reported in other 12 cases also confirmed the involvement of this gang. Further investigation is underway," the DCP added.
