Knot my type, he said after sex

matchmaking portal

matrimonial site

Bangalore

Bengaluru

By Amit KumarThey met onand decided to get married; but man backs out saying she is ‘dark’ and has rashes on skinLooking for the perfect partner through aproved to be a disaster for a 28-year-old techie in the city.The woman met an eligible man from Ranchi (Jharkhand), through an online marriage portal. The two were seeing each other for about half a year and were physically intimate during the courtship period. After a year the man decided to end the relationship. And the reason he gave to do this was all the more devastating for the woman: He told her she was too dark-skinned for him and complained about the rashes on her skin. On top of that, he told her that the physical relation they had was not intentional, but purely under the influence of alcohol.Rakshitha (name changed), who works with a private firm, met Ankur Kumar (30), an employee of a bank located in Richmond Circle on the portal in November 2018. They decided to get married soon. Ankur introduced Rakshitha to his family members (brother and sister in law), and the families agreed to the marriage.In January, Rakshitha had a row with her parents and she moved to Ankur’s apartment at Roopena Agrahara where they lived together. During the time of live-in relationship, Ankur reportedly convinced Rakshitha to have a physical relation with him as they were getting married soon. Soon after on January 15, Ankur refused to marry Rakshitha and blamed it on her complexion.After being betrayed by her boyfriend, Rakshitha went to Ranchi to meet Ankur’s parents and convince them. Allegedly Ankur’s father Dhirendra Kumar refused to accept Rakshitha as their daughter-in-law. Rakshitha also alleged that Ankur’s father demanded Rs 25 lakh as dowry from her family.Rakshitha toldMirror, “During the early stage of our relationship, he never had any problem with my dark skin and he forced me to get into a physical relationship with him. But after that he told me the rashes on my skin made him lose interest in me. He blocked my number on WhatsApp and during the time he started having an affair with two other girls.” She said she had gone to meet his father on February 3. “Dheerendra Kumar refused me to identify me though I had spoken to him over the phone several times.”She filed a complaint at the Ranchi local police station. When the cops made Dheerendra Kumar to come to the police station, he promised me that he would advise his son by coming toon February 15. “So I returned to the city and was waiting for Ankur’s father to come, but he did not. When I called him, he demanded a huge amount in dowry,” she added.A police official from Bommanahalli police station, said “We got to know from the neighbours that he vacated the house on February 20. Officials are in search of the accused,” he added. An FIR has been registered under Section 506 (Punishment for criminal intimidation), 376 (Punishment for rape), 406 (Punishment for criminal breach of the trust) and 420 (Punishment for cheating) against Ankur, his father and rest of the family members.
