Auto drivers allegedly assault Bengaluru cop after argument over high fare

Auto drivers allegedly assault Bengaluru cop after argument over high fare

According to reports, the auto driver demanded Rs 200 from assistant sub-inspector Kariyanna for a six-kilometre ride.

news Crime

An assistant sub-inspector (ASI) in Bengaluru was attacked by two autorickshaw drivers near the Cantonment Railway Station after he reportedly argued with them about the high fares being charged for his ride. The incident took place on Wednesday.

As the argument turned physical, passers-by soon came to the rescue of 58-year-old Kariyanna, who is attached to the State Crime Record Bureau. He sustained injuries and was taken to a hospital nearby. Kariyanna later filed a complaint with the High Grounds police.

Per his complaint to the police, Kariyanna was on his way home after attending a meeting near the railway station. He wanted to take an auto to Lingarajapura to take his daughter-in-law to hospital.

According to reports, Kariyanna asked the driver to run the meter and that he would pay him Rs 10 extra. The auto driver, however, refused this and demanded Rs 200 for the six-kilometre ride. This resulted in a quarrel between the two, following which, the auto driver reportedly forced Kariyanna out of the auto. Kariyanna then proceeded to note the number of the autorickshaw, which supposedly irked the driver. The driver, along with another driver reportedly started attacking him.

When people in the vicinity intervened, the autorickshaw drivers left the scene. Kariyanna had sustained multiple injuries and was bleeding.

The High Grounds police, according to The Hindu, have taken up a case of assault, wrongful restraint and provoking breach of peace. The two drivers are absconding and the police are tracking them down.

In another incident in January, an auto driver was beaten to death by other drivers at an auto stand in Yemalur, Bengaluru. The victim, YM Narayana, had started driving an auto rickshaw after retiring from his job as a driver for the tax department. He was known to offer rides for low fares, which irked Babu, another auto driver in the area. Babu assaulted Narayana, following which he collapsed and was taken to the hospital by other drivers who intervened. Doctors declared him dead upon arrival.
