Police brutality on Jagan attacker: SC Commission slams AP cops for skipping summons

Police brutality on Jagan attacker: SC Commission slams AP cops for skipping summons

Although Andhra DGP RP Thakur was summoned, he assigned Visakhapatnam Commissioner to attend it. The latter instead sent ACP Nageshwar Rao on his behalf.

news Jagan Attack

The National Commission of Scheduled Castes has slammed the Andhra Pradesh police for failing to appear for the summons regarding the alleged life threats to Janipalli Srinivas, the accused in the attack against YSRCP chief YS Jaganmohan Reddy inside Visakhapatnam Airport in October 2018. Based on a representation made by Mala Welfare Association, alleging that the police had used third-degree torture against Srinivas, who belongs to SC Mala community, the Commission member K Ramulu had summoned the Andhra DGP RP Thakur on Wednesday in Hyderabad.

The DGP, however, had informed the Commission that the Visakhapatnam Commissioner Mahesh Chandra Laddha would be instead attending the meeting and give the clarification. But, even Mahesh Chandra did not attend the meeting. The Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP), Nageshwar Rao, who is the Investigating Officer in the case, was instead sent on his behalf.

Irked by this behaviour, the Commission member slammed the ACP for disrespecting the Commission and postponed the hearing. Others present in the meeting were Srinivas’s brother Subba Rao and Telangana Mala Welfare Association President Battula Ram Prasad.

Earlier in November, Ram Prasad had filed a petition with the National Commission for Scheduled Castes on Thursday alleging police brutality against Srinivas. The Commission had then asked the Andhra DGP to submit the facts and information on the allegation within 30 days.

The police then gave the details about the case, denying brutality against the accused, Srinivas. However, the Commission had summoned the DGP to have a meeting in person along with the petitioner on January 9.

Ram Prasad has been alleging that the police have used excessive force against Srinivas after detaining him. Recalling Srinivas's medical check-up in November, when he was brought in a wheel-chair, Ram Prasad said, “Srinivas was unable to walk. The police definitely used third-degree torture methods, and as a result, he was wheelchair-bound. Several media channels have captured his testimony where he yelled that there was a threat to his life. This is evidence enough to suggest police brutality.”

The activist further said that since elections are looming and Srinivas has become a 'pawn in the political game', he sought special protection for him.

Janipalli Srinivas, who was working in a restaurant in Vizag airport, had allegedly attacked Andhra Pradesh leader of Opposition Jaganmohan with a knife used in rooster fights, last year in October.

Last week, Investigating Officer Nageshwar Rao claimed that the attack on Jagan by Srinivas was “pre-planned”.
