Ask the government where 15 lakh rupees and 2 million jobs: Priyanka Gandhi

Home >> Noida Ask the government where 15 lakh rupees and 2 million jobs: Priyanka Gandhi

The election, she said, was "nothing less" than Independence movement She targeted PM Modi without once taking his name "Your vote is your weapon. Make the right decision": Priyanka Gandhi

Ahmedabad: Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra gave her first speech in Gujarat. She said that today there is a great deal of suffering from what is happening in the country, your awareness is a weapon. It is such a weapon that does not hurt anyone, we do not have to harm anyone. He said that avoid the issues of disorder in elections. Priyanka Gandhi said our institutions are being destroyed. You need to be aware. This election is important to all of you. We must recognize our issues. He said raise the right issues and ask the right questions from your leaders. The more we have to do in the country`s freedom, the more we will have to do now.

The April-May national election, she said, was "nothing less" than the Independence movement. "Think and decide - those who talk big in front of you, where are the jobs they promised? What about the Rs. 15 lakh in every bank account that they talked about? What about women`s safety?" she said at the rally in Ahmedabad, dressed in a white and blue sari.

Giant cutouts of her grandmother Indira Gandhi at the venue in Gandhinagar reminded many in the crowds of her striking resemblance to the former prime minister.

"Those who talk about fitrat (nature), the fitrat of this country is to seek the truth, the fitrat of this nation is to blow away the winds of hate with love," said the 47-year-old, using a word that PM Modi had used quite recently. At a rally, also in Ahmedabad, PM Modi had said: "Chun chun ke hisab lena mera fitrat hai. (It is my nature to avenge every wrongdoing)" The words were directed at Pakistan, days after India sent its fighter jets to bomb a terror camp in Balakot across the border. The air strikes were in response to a suicide attack in Kashmir`s Pulwama on February 14, in which 40 soldiers were killed.

In the next two months, said Priyanka Gandhi, "they" will raise all kinds of issues. "Ask the right questions, this is your country. You have to guard the country," she said. This is nothing less than the independence movement. Our institutions are being attacked, hatred is being spread everywhere. There can be no bigger thing than guarding the country and moving ahead together."
