Traffic inspector accuses DCP of misbehaviour

Senior police officer refutes allegations; vigilance inquiry ordered into the matter

A Delhi Traffic Police inspector has lodged a complaint against Madhur Verma, DCP (New Delhi), accusing him of assaulting and misbehaving with him while on duty at the Tughlak Road police station on Sunday night.

Refuting the allegations, Mr. Verma said the inspector had misbehaved and thrashed his wireless operator.

Special Commissioner of Police (Administration) Rajesh Malik said he has received a complaint in the matter. A vigilance inquiry has been ordered.

Additional PRO of Delhi Police Anil Mittal said a fact-finding vigilance inquiry has been ordered since there are two versions in the matter.

Karamvir Singh, a traffic inspector in the New Delhi range, alleged that on Sunday night when he was on duty on Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Road, he noticed Mr. Verma’s wireless operator Rohit driving a Punjab-registered SUV on the wrong side of the road, which was causing a major traffic jam.

Even after intervention, the operator refused to obey orders and a verbal argument ensued between the two.

In his complaint, Mr. Singh alleged that after the argument with the operator, he received a call from his senior asking him to call Mr. Verma. The DCP then asked him to come to the Tughlak Road police station at 11 p.m.

At the police station, his mobile phone was allegedly taken away by Mr. Verma.

The inspector was allegedly slapped and abused by the DCP in front of the SHO of Tughlak Road police station and other staff. He was also allegedly detained at the police station. When Mr. Singh alerted his seniors about the incident, no action was allegedly taken.

Mr. Verma said the inspector was summoned at the Tughlaq Road police station for an explanation.

‘Malicious complaint’

“By filing malicious complaint against me, the inspector is protecting himself from a departmental action that was ordered against him for his behaviour,” Mr. Verma said.

“We have eyewitness testimony of his misbehaviour with the operator. He had apologised for his behaviour before he was let off but later he filed a complaint in order to protect himself. We have medico-legal case reports of the operator who was thrashed by the inspector,” said Mr. Verma.

Mr. Singh had joined the Delhi Police in 1982 as a constable. He got two out-of-turn promotions during the service.
