Convicted for repeated rape of minor, man jailed for life

LUDHIANA: A local court has sentenced a person to life imprisonment for repeated rape of a minor girl in a village. The court of additional sessions judge Rashmi Sharma also imposed a fine of Rs2.1 lakh on the convict, of which Rs2 lakh would be paid by him to the survivor as compensation. On January 30 January 2017, Jodhan police had booked the 53-year-old accused under Section 376 (rape) of the IPC and sections 6 and 8 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Pocso) Act for violating a teenaged niece of his sister-in-law.As per prosecution, the girl initially brought up by her grandparents, as her mother and other family members had left her. She studied in her village till class 5, and later her paternal aunt and husband took the survivor to their village for further studies. Soon, the accused who is unmarried and lived in the same house, started sexually abusing the minor and forcibly developed physical relations with her.Though the girl informed the family members about her exploitation, no action was taken against the accused, and instead she was beaten up. Subsequently, she left the house and went to her grandparents. However, after a while, her paternal aunt brought the girl back to her village on the pretext of her exams, and the accused again started violating her. It was only after she narrated about her exploitation to teachers in the school that police was informed, and a case was registered against the accused. The accused was later arrested and a chargesheet was presented against him in the court.While the defence counsel pleaded innocence during the trial of the case, the additional public prosecutor SS Haidar sought severe punishment to the accused on the basis of prosecution evidence, including the deposition of minor, her teacher, investigation officers, and medical evidence. The defence, among other contentions, referred to the unexplained delay in the lodging of FIR, but the court turned it down and observed that delay in lodging the FIR cannot be used as a ritualistic ground for discarding prosecution cases and doubting the authenticity.
