London-based student and boyfriend held for Bengaluru rowdy sheeter's murder

London-based student and boyfriend held for Bengaluru rowdy sheeter's murder

Police say the motive behind the murder was alleged interference in their love affair.

news Crime

Less than a week after one of Bengaluru’s most notorious rowdy-sheeters Lakshmana was hacked to death in broad daylight, police have arrested a 21-year-old psychology student who is pursuing her Master's in a London institution. Police say the accused— Varshini Harish, daughter of another alleged habitual offender and JD(S) leader, plotted the murder.

Police say the motive behind the murder was alleged interference in her love affair by Lakshmana who was acting on behalf of Varshini’s parents.

Lakshmana and Varshini’s parents, who were neighbours in Bengaluru, knew each other well. Her parents were against her relationship with a man named Roopesh, claim the police.

“When Varshini's parents learnt she was in love with Roopesh, they requested Lakshmana to warn Roopesh to keep away from Varshini. But Lakshmana tried to become close to Varshini instead,” a police officer told The Times of India.

According to reports, Varshini, who had just arrived in the city on Monday was arrested before she could reach her residence, on the way from the airport.

Along with Varshini, the Central Crime Branch have arrested seven others in connection with the case including her 25-year-old history-sheeter boyfriend Roopesh R aka Roopesh Gowda and another JD(S) leader Padma. Others arrested in the case include Cat Raja, Decaraj, Varunkumar, Madhukumar, Aloka and a contract killer Hemanth Kumar.

The murder

TNM had earlier reported how Lakshmana, who has multiple cases of murder and land-grabbing registered against him at various police stations in Bengaluru was hacked near the ISKCON temple on March 7. He was out on bail and was travelling in an SUV when a gang of men in another SUV waylaid him and attacked him with machetes resulting in his death.

According to police, Varshini had called Lakshmana to a hotel near the temple asking him to meet her, in order to set him up for the crime.

“On March 7, acting on Roopesh’s instructions, Varshini called Lakshmana on his mobile phone and asked him to meet her at a hotel in Mahalakshmi Layout. He went to meet her, but she wasn’t there. As Lakshmana was driving back, a gang of armed men in an SUV intercepted his car near the ISKCON temple and hacked him to death,” a senior police officer told The Hindu.
