Indian teen girl beheaded, mutilated in suspected honour killing

India is reeling after a teenage girl was discovered beheaded, her face doused in acid and her breasts mutilated.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

While the girl’s family claims she was the victim of a horrendous gang rape, detectives believe she was the victim of an honour killing.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Indian teen girl beheaded, mutilated in suspected honour killing Back to video

Protests have erupted around the country demanding justice for the 16-year-old, who has been identified only as “Anjana” on social media.

Her body was discovered on Sunday, several hundred feet from her family home in the holy city of Gaya, Bindar.

Since the grim discovery, hundreds of protesters have taken to the streets.

According to NDTV , Anjana vanished on Dec. 28, a missing persons report filed to the police by her father on Jan. 6 claims.

But the doomed teenager’s mother and sisters told a different tale.

Senior officer Rajiv Mishra said the women revealed that Anjana did, in fact, return home on Dec. 28 but was sent away by her father with a man who is known to the family.

Cops say they have detained Anjana’s mother, father and another relative.

NDTV is reporting that the man has denied killing the girl but cops say his call records indicate he was in touch with several local criminals. The autopsy report is awaited to determine if the girl was raped or tortured before she was murdered.

The girl is just the latest victim of sexual violence in India. According to the Daily Mail , more than 100 rapes are reported each day, using the most recent figures.

Rituparna Chatterjee, the leader of India’s #MeToo movement, has demanded action from Prime Minister Narendra Modi and local politicians.

“Just had a phone conversation with one of the protesters and organizers of the candle march. The family is allegedly in police custody and the police are trying to give this an honour killing angle,” she said.
