High alert after Indian defence radars detect two Pakistani jets go supersonic near LoC: Sources

New Delhi:

All Indian air defences and radar systems are on high alert after defence radars on Tuesday night detected two Pakistani Air Force jets go supersonic 10 kilometres from the Line of Control (LoC) (within their territory) in the Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch sector, news agency ANI quoted government sources as saying. The sources said loud bangs were also heard in the area due to sonic booms.

The incident came days after Pakistan violated the Indian airspace in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pooch area. on February 28, two fighter jets of the Pakistan Air Force were intercepted over Poonch and Krishna Ghati sector. While there are no reports of any aerial combat, news agency ANI had reported that Pakistan also violated the ceasefire in the area. This was the second time in less than 24 hours that the PAF had crossed into the Indian airspace.

Tensions between India and Pakistan flared up after a suicide bomber of Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror group killed 40 Central Reserve Police Force personnel in Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14. India launched a counter-terror operation in Balakot on February 26. The next day, Pakistan Air Force retaliated and downed a MiG-21 and captured Indian Air Force pilot Abhinandan Varthaman.

However, in the air fight, the Air Force pilot had also shot down Pakistan's F-16 fighter jet. After his capture and subsequent release, the Air Force pilot became an overnight sensation across the country.

On March 10, two drones crossed over the Indian territory of Rajasthan’s Sri Ganganagar area. On March 9, the Indian Army shot down an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), also known as drone, Sri Ganganagar sector around 7.30 pm. This was the second such incident of the day that took place in Sri Ganganagar. Hours before that, India had shot down a Pakistani drone along the international border (IB) in Sri Ganganagar after it violated Indian airspace. This is the fifth time Pakistani drone destroyed by India along the IB since February 26 air strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp in Balakot inside Pakistani territory.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
