Members of notorious 'fracture gang', including leader arrested by Delhi police Crime Branch

Arrested members of the 'Fracture Gang' with police personnel | Photo Credit: ANI

Faridabad: Personnel with the Crime Branch in the national capital have arrested three members of the infamous 'fracture gang' who had developed a notorious reputation for themselves by torturing and thrashing those they had enmity with. Among those arrested is also the leader of the gang which is known for its barbaric acts of violence.

Police officials who carried out the raid which led to the arrests said that the gang got its name from their reputation of breaking the limbs of their enemies. With operations spread across Faridabad and other parts of Delhi, the gang was contracted by other criminals in the national capital region for all sorts of contracts, including extortion and aggravated assault among others.

Faridabad: Three members of "fracture gang" including its leader arrested by Crime Branch. The gang used to break hands & legs of people with whom it had personal enmity & also used to record the act to instill fear. #Haryana pic.twitter.com/FTdwiHSSjC — ANI (@ANI) March 13, 2019

The name given to the gang is inspired from Sanjay Dutt-starrer Vaastav where members of his gang broke limbs for a living. Police are currently interrogating the three accused, including the gang's leader. They are expected to make more arrests after extracting information from the arrested members during the course of interrogation. An official also said that law enforcement agencies will gain a clearer insight into the operations of the gang following rounds of interrogation with the arrested members.

A similar notorious gang had emerged from Ahmedabad in Gujarat in 2008 when Mangal Punjabi, the son of a factory worker was arrested for assaulting several people either out of personal enmity or on a contract basis. The 27-year-old was booked in seven cases of extortion and criminal intimidation at the time of his arrest in January of 2008.

Must Read: Brother of eve-teasing victim confronts accused, beaten to death with sticks
