Phoolan Devi murder accused Rana to make electoral debut in Hry

Sher Singh Rana, accused in the sensational murder of bandit-turned-Lok Sabha MP Phoolan Devi on Wednesday announced that his political outfit-Rastrawadi Janlok Party (RJP)— will make electoral debut in Haryana.

Rana, who is national president of RJP, announced here that his party will contest on Karnal Lok Sabha constituency in Haryana and Gautam Budh Nagar seat in Uttar Pradesh.

“We will contest on both these Lok Sabha seats in an alliance with a national party. The alliance will be announced in a few days,” Rana said while talking to The Pioneer.

During his electoral debut earlier, Rana had unsuccessfully contested from Jewar assembly constituency in Uttar Pradesh in 2012 assembly polls.

Rana had hit the headlines after he allegedly killed Phoolan Devi, popularly known as “Bandit Queen” in New Delhi in July 2001.

A Delhi court had convicted him in the murder case in the year 2014 and sentenced him to life imprisonment and a fine of Rs 100,000 for Phoolan Devi’s assassination, as well as charges of conspiracy. Rana had later challenged the lower court’s decision in the Delhi High Court, which had granted him bail in 2016.

On the high-profile murder case, he says, “I was framed… Even Phoolan Devi’s sister had came out in my support and said that I was framed in the murder case.”

When pressed further to comment on his conviction, he says that the case is now sub-judice in Delhi High Court and I was given bail in 2016.

I have done nothing wrong and had no role in assassination of Phoolan Devi, he adds.

Rana had earlier reportedly admitted that he killed Phoolan Devi to avenge the killings of Thakurs by her in Behmai in the year 1981.

An author of a book, “Jail Diary: Tihar Se Kabul-Kandhar Tak”, Rana was also involved in a sensational jail break case in Tihar.

Stating that he did fled from the Tihar Jail in 2004, Rana claims that he had gone to Afghanistan to get back the remains of Rajput king Prithviraj Chauhan. But I had surrendered again in 2006, he adds.

The murder accused also says that a biopic based on his life is scheduled to be released next year.

“A top actor and director have collaborated for this biopic which will be released next year. The director had met and also discussed about my book “Jail Diary: Tihar Se Kabul-Kandhar Tak” and my journey so far,” he says without revealing their names.

Last year, it was reported that actor Ajay Devgn, might play Sher Singh Rana on the silver screen.

Ironically, Phoolan Devi, who was allegedly assassinated by Sher Singh Rana, also had a biopic “Bandit Queen” made on her life.

Rana’s RJP to make electoral debut in Haryana

, who belongs to western Uttar Pradesh says that his party will field a candidate in Karnal Lok Sabha seat of Haryana and will also independently contest

Vidhan Sabha elections in Haryana due to be held later this year.

On choosing Chief Minister Manohar Lal constituency Karnal for electoral battle, he says, “Karnal has been chosen as the constituency has Kshatriya vote bank.”

While there are 10 Lok Sabha seats in Haryana, the State Assembly has 90 seats.

When asked about RJP’s election strategy, he said that the party has planned to carry out padhyatra in Haryana in the last week of May soon after Lok Sabha polls.

“We will study each district of Haryana and people will be apprized about party’s ideology and it will be only after studying each district that party will decide on which seats it would be contesting assembly elections”, Rana adds.

The RJP chief further says, “The party will work for the welfare of general category who have not been taken care by anyone, including the current BJP Government in Haryana. There is a need to create more employment opportunities for them.”

The name of Haryana party unit president will be announced later. The office bearers of Haryana party state unit which has been announced today, would be working to strengthen the party presence in the state,” Rana adds.
