‘Half the victims in rape cases are minors’

They mostly hail from Agency and rural areas of the district, say Sakhi Cell counsellors

One Stop Centre (Sakhi Cell), which has been set up at King George Hospital in Visakhapatnam, to cater to the needs of victims of sexual abuse, domestic violence, cheating etc, has been receiving about 20 to 30 calls per month.

The counsellors say that among the cases, rape and cheating cases top the chart. But what seems to be worrying is that, almost half of the victims in rape cases are said to be minors.

“In February, we received 26 cases, in which almost 20 cases are of cheating and rape. In about 10 rape victims, five are minors.

The recent minor, we counselled was the 15-year old Class IX girl, who was allegedly raped by a teacher at Cheedikada mandal in Visakhapatnam district,” said Administrator of One Stop Centre Padmavathi.

‘Known persons’

Ms Padmavathi also said that there were incidents, in which five-year-old and 10-year-old girls were also brought to the centre.

Moreover victims in these cases, mostly hail from Agency or rural areas of Visakhapatnam district, she said.

Referring to the past incidents, a senior police officer from the city said that in most of the cases, known persons (lover, family relatives, neighbours etc), auto-rickshaw drivers have been the accused, who befriend the victims and trap them.

16 members

“In many cases, the victim say that they were threatened not to tell about the rape, but they come to light after parents found some behavioural change in the girl,” he said. At present, the One Stop Centre works with 16 member staff with Women Police Station Assistant Commissioner of Police as Nodal Officer, at King George Hospital.

The team in One Stop Centre counsels and tries to bring them back to normal life.

Cheating cases

“Some women undergo complete depression after such incidents. It's also sad to see women and teenage girls in such stage. We counsel them about importance of life and ask to lead normal life again. We advise them to focus on studies, career, achieve greater heights and do good to the society, giving case studies,” added Ms Padmavathi.

The One Stop Centre is also witnessing a number of cheating cases referred by the women police station. The officials say that in most of these cases, teenage, college-going and even educated girls are falling in the trap of several men, who make false marriage promises. Dowry harassment cases also reach One Stop Centre, in which it was observed that many husbands in these cases are alcohol addicts.
