Sexual assault case transferred to CBI

CHENNAI/COIMBATORE: The Tamil Nadu government on Wednesday ordered transfer of the Pollachi sexual assault case and a related assault case from the Crime Branch CID to the Central Bureau of Investigation. Governor Banwarilal Purohit accorded consent to the transfer of case to CBI.An order to this effect was issued by the home department based on the recommendation of DGP T K Rajendran. The case was initially registered by Pollachi East police station and it was subsequently taken over by the CBCID.In a communication to the state government, the DGP said the two cases were transferred to the Crime Branch-CID on March 12. Since the investigation involves technical issues, including analysis of Facebook data, IP logs/addresses, internet usage logs, communication with Facebook service providers and other internet service providers in various countries and since the nature of the crime is extremely serious demanding some specialised attention, the central agency would be best placed to handle it.The government has decided to accept the proposal of the DGP and transfer the case to CBI for further investigation by issuing a notification under Section 6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act of 1946, said home secretary Niranjan Mardi in his order.The case came out in the open after a girl student from a Pollachi college complained to the Pollachi East Police Station on February 24 that she was physically and sexually harassed and robbed of her one sovereign gold chain worth Rs 20,000 by a group of men inside a car. A case was registered under Sections 354 A (Sexual harassment and punishment for sexual harassment), 354 B (Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe) and 392 (Punishment for robbery) of the IPC and Section 66-E of the Information Technology Act and Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act against the accused, Sabarirajan, Thirunavukkarasu, Sathish and Vasanthakumar. They have been arrested and remanded in judicial custody.On February 26, the brother of the victim filed a complaint at the same police station that he was assaulted by Senthil, Babu, Mani and Vasanthakumar. While Senthil, Babu and Vasanthakumar were arrested the same day and remanded in judicial custody, another accused, Nagaraj, was arrested a day later. All of them were later released on bail by a judicial magistrate.In Coimbatore, CB-CID inspector general of police C Sridhar, superintendent of police Nisha Parthiban and CB-CID officials inspected a house belonging to Thirunavukkarasu at Chinnappampalayam near Anaimalai on Wednesday morning. According to sources, Thirunavukkarasu used the house for allegedly taking obscene videographs of college students and many women.Earlier, the CB-CID police officials conducted a meeting with Coimbatore Superintendent of Police R Pandiarajan and Pollachi DSP Jayaraman at the police guest house on the Police Recruitment School campus here. Later CB-CID IGP Sridhar met the reporters and said that an investigation team has been formed and SP Nisha will lead the teams. “We will hand over the documents to CBI when they will start their investigation,” he said.
