Morning digest: Fares fly high as Boeing 737 Max 8 planes grounded, China places hold on listing Azhar as designated terrorist, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day

China has placed a technical hold on the listing request for Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad’s (JeM) leader Masood Azhar at the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) 1267 Committee. No reason for a hold — which lasts for three months and then can be extended for another six — need be given, and China gave none, diplomatic sources at the U.N told The Hindu.

The “photocopying” of sensitive documents on the war capacity of the Rafale combat aircraft and their leakage is a “conspiracy” affecting national security, the government claimed in the Supreme Court on Wednesday. The photocopying was done without the “permission, consent, acquiescence” of the government. It thus amounts to theft, an offence under the Indian Penal Code.

The grounding of more than 70 aircraft by Jet Airways, SpiceJet, Go Air and IndiGo due to various reasons has created a massive demand-supply gap, resulting in an increase in airfares besides causing inconvenience to passengers. Considering that one plane flies seven sectors a day, about 500 flights have been cancelled across India and abroad.

If Mr. Modi was the challenger in 2014, in 2019, he is the defender. And starting with his first election in Gujarat in 2002, he has shown a unique capability to play the victim and victor simultaneously. Still, he must have been wary of making his personality — with demonetisation as its most remarkable exposition — the front and centre of the campaign this time. He would surely have liked a different storyline. Then Pulwama happened.

Tamil Nadu Governor Banwarilal Purohit has accorded consent to the transfer of the Pollachi sexual assault and blackmail case to the CBI. On Wednesday, the State government issued an order, invoking Section 6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (Consent of State to exercise of powers and jurisdiction). The order, issued through the State Home Department, permitted the extension of powers and jurisdiction to members of the Delhi Special Police Establishment in the whole of T.N.

The British government has suffered another significant defeat as MPs voted to reject a no-deal Brexit at any time, overriding the government’s initial motion that ruled out no-deal but only on March 29 and left open the possibility of it taking place at a later stage. There were gasps in the House of Commons chamber as the amendment by Caroline Spelman — a Conservative MP — scraped through by a margin of four (312 votes to 308).

“We're going to be issuing an emergency order of prohibition regarding all flights of the 737 MAX 8 and 737 MAX 9,” Mr. Trump told reporters at the White House. Boeing shares fell precipitously on March 13, moments after Mr. Trump’s announcement.

Asked if a woman will go to the Moon for the first time, NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine said, “The answer is absolutely. In fact, it is likely to be a woman, the first next person on the Moon.” “It is also true that the first person on Mars is likely to be a woman,” he said during an interview on the science and technology radio talk show “Science Friday.”

As India’s worries grew, the 35-run victory, in the fifth and final ODI at the Ferozeshah Kotla here, gave Australia a well-deserved 3-2 series triumph, its first in India since 2009. India’s third successive defeat also blew the lid off the much-underlined ‘problem of plenty’ in selection and exposed plenty of problems.

Manufacturing activity in the country continues to remain becalmed. The latest Index of Industrial Production data show that output across the broad sector expanded 1.3% in January, a clear loss of momentum from the 3% pace in December and a drastic slowdown from the 8.7% growth seen in January 2018. Overall, industrial output growth slumped to 1.7%, from 2.6% in December, and 7.5% a year earlier, as production in 12 of the 23 industry groups that comprise the manufacturing sector shrank from a year earlier.
