‘ISRAEL aided India air strikes’ claim wild Pakistani conspiracy theories as tensions SOAR

Theories in Pakistan have linked Israel to India

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Following skirmishes by both the Indian and Pakistani military last month, tensions between the two countries have continued to simmer following the two states coming perilously close to all-out war last month. Amid the close conflict, Israeli newspaper Haaretz claimed the established narrative in Pakistan is India was aided by Israel in its recent attacks. Writing for the publication Pakistan-based correspondent Kunwar Khuldune Shahid said: "It is now an established narrative in Pakistan, not a fringe opinion, that Israel helped India plan the air raid.

Mr Shahid explained among those who have propagated this narrative is the progressive English daily, Dawn, which last week carried a report headlined, "India plotted dangerous attack with Israeli help," citing an anonymous Pakistani government official who was not even properly quoted as evidence for the "Indo-Israeli plot." The conspiracy theory follows Israeli President, Benjamin Netanyahu’s recent visit to the country in January. While there’s no substantive proof of any Israeli-India ties in relation to the last month’s conflict, recently Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi boasted the country's reported strike on a terrorist position. The Indian Air Force reportedly hit a Jaish-Mohammad terrorist group who claimed responsibility for a terrorist attack in Indian-administered Kashmir. READ MORE: World War 3: Pakistan tests missile with EXTENDED RANGE - 'FULL FORCE'

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi

The terrorist attack on Pulwana killed 40 Indian paramilitary police and is widely seen as the starting point of the conflict between the two states. In retaliation for the attack, India reportedly launched an airstrike in Pakistan which reportedly destroyed the terrorist group’s training facility. As Mr Modi recently said regarding the strike: “Our soldiers struck terrorists inside their home. “Terrorists and their guardians had not expected such action.” READ MORE: India-Pakistan crisis: Soldier ‘kidnapped’ by gunmen is 'safe'

Imran Khan

India Pakistan: We are ready for war says Imran Khan
