Imran Khan must answer how terrorists are roaming free in Pakistan: Bilawal Bhutto

New Delhi:

Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) chairman Bilawal Bhutto on Wednesday attacked Pakistan government for lack of action against groups that killed children in Pakistan and carried out attacks on foreign soil. Earlier, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan had said no militant group would be allowed to operate from Pakistani soil to carry out attacks abroad, days after his government announced a crackdown against Islamist militant organisations.



Bilawal Bhutto has claimed there are at least three ministers from Imran Khan's Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party who have links to banned groups.



Ties between India and Pakistan have plummeted since a Jaish-e-Mohammed claimed the Pulwama attack. On February 14, at least 42 CRPF personnel were killed in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district when a Jaish suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 30 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district that also left many critically wounded.

More than 2,500 Central Reserve Police Force personnel, many of them returning from leave to rejoin duty in the Valley, were travelling in the convoy of 78 vehicles when they were ambushed on the Srinagar-Jammu highway at Latoomode in Awantipora in south Kashmir.



Earlier, Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan had assured the world that Pakistani soil will not be used for carrying out terrorist strikes in other countries. Addressing a public a rally at Chachro in southern Sindh province near border, Khan had accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi of resorting to the "politics of hatred" and beating war drums just to win the coming Lok Sabha elections scheduled to be held in May this year.

"The politics of hatred, dividing people for votes, is easy politics. This is the politics of Narendra Modi. Divide humans, spread hatred and when a leader starts this, the workers under him do what we saw happened to the Kashmiris in India after Pulwama," Khan had said referring to a series of attacks on Kashmiris across the country.

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
