Bilawal Bhutto blasts Pakistan govt: Why are terrorists who attack other nations free?

Bilawal Bhutto Zardari has questioned Pakistan's inaction against groups that attack other nations, delivering a stinging rebuke of his country's government.

Bilawal, the son of former Pakistan Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, was speaking to reporters at the Sindh Assembly on Wednesday. A top opposition leader, he is the chairman of the Pakistan Peoples Party, or PPP.

He decried the contrast between the punishment given to his mother and his father -- former Pakistan President Asif Ali Zardari -- and the lack of action against groups that killed children in Pakistan and carried out attacks on foreign soil.

.@BBhuttoZardari: In #Pakistan a three time elected #primeminister is in jail but banned [#militant] organizations are free to commit #terror on our soil and other countries.



- Powerful msg from the #PPP chairman to the #military establishment and its selected govt pic.twitter.com/QOijTLQgiw Taha Siddiqui (@TahaSSiddiqui) March 13, 2019

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan recently said no militant group would be allowed to operate from Pakistani soil to carry out attacks abroad, days after his government announced a crackdown against Islamist militant organisations.

Bilawal Bhutto has claimed there are at least three ministers from Imran Khan's Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party who have links to banned groups.

.@BBhuttoZardari puts forth 3 conditions for govt to fulfill to prove seriousness in implementing NAP:



1. Form Parliament's Nat'l Security Committee

2. Distance from past actions/statements in support of banned orgs

3. Remove 3 ministers who've had association w/ the said orgs pic.twitter.com/n7FsE3luyz Maleeha Manzoor (@MaleehaManzoor) March 13, 2019

Ties between India and Pakistan have plummeted since a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber killed dozens of Indian paramilitary soldiers in southern Kashmir on February 14.

India carried out airstrikes on the terrorist group in Pakistan's Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province on February 26. A day later, New Delhi said it had thwarted an attempt by Pakistani warplanes to target its military installations.

China has now -- once again -- prevented a UN Security Council committee from blacklisting Masood Azhar, the head of Jaish-e-Mohammed.
