India’s first Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train set to miss deadline? Land acquisition delays plague project

Along with the National High Speed Rail Corporation Limited (NHSRCL), which is executing the bullet train project in India, the state governments will acquire 612 hectare in Gujarat, 246 hectare in Maharashtra and 7.5 hectare in Dadra and Nagar Haveli.

Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train: India’s first bullet train project has missed its land acquisition deadline! Recently, the Consul General of Japan in Mumbai Ryoji Noda was quoted in an IE report saying that the deadline of December 2018 has been missed and he does not know if this would delay the scheduled completion of the Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train project by 2022. The Japanese side cannot do anything about the delay, so they are waiting for the state governments of Gujarat and Maharashtra to procure the land, he said. Earlier this year, it was reported that the process of land acquisition in Gujarat would take another 7-8 months and stretch beyond the month of June 2019, after the upcoming Lok Sabha elections.

Along with the National High Speed Rail Corporation Limited (NHSRCL), which is executing the bullet train project in India, the state governments will acquire 612 hectare in Gujarat, 246 hectare in Maharashtra and 7.5 hectare in Dadra and Nagar Haveli. For the development of the project, as many as 5,404 people will have to give up their land in Gujarat, with the city of Ahmedabad topping the list with 1,196 people, the report said.

While speaking about the project during Question Hour in the Gujarat Assembly, Deputy Chief minister Nitin Patel on February 10 said that a total of 197 villages of Gujarat’s 32 talukas will be acquired. Till now, a total of 110 plots, measuring 160 hectare, have been acquired from farmers with their consent. An amount of Rs 620 crore has been disbursed for this as compensation, he said.

The entire process of land acquisition for this project was started in August. As compensation to farmers, the state government said that it will pay 25 per cent more than the award to those farmers who have consented to give up their land. Also, the government will pay 80 per cent of the awarded amount, up front, the report stated.

With the commencement of the Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train, it is being expected that the journey between the two cities would take only around 2 hours, which currently takes 7 hours approximately.
