India expresses disappointment as China blocks move to name Masood Azhar as a terrorist at UNSC

China which holds veto power as it is a permanent member of the UNSC has blocked such moves to put Masood Azhar as a terrorist in 2009, 2016 and 2017.

Seeking more time to conduct a “thorough, in-depth investigation on the matter”, China for the fourth time blocked yet another move at the United Nations to designate Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad’s chief Masood Azhar as a “global terrorist”. China put a “technical hold” on the proposal seeking “more time to examine” the move on Masood Azhar in UN Security Council.

China which holds veto power as it is a permanent member of the UNSC has blocked such moves to put Masood Azhar as a terrorist in 2009, 2016 and 2017.

Without naming China, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) said the UN’s 1267 Sanctions Committee was not able to come to a decision on the proposal for listing Masood Azhar on account of a member placing the proposal on hold. And said that India will continue to pursue all available avenues to ensure that leaders of terror groups involved in heinous attacks on Indian citizens are brought to justice.

Also read| India to have 6 more nuclear plants! US to build new atomic power centers, to boost India’s $150 billion programme

“This has prevented action by the international community to designate the leader of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), a proscribed and active terrorist organization which has claimed responsibility for the terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir on February 14.”

The proposal to designate Azhar under the 1267 Al Qaeda Sanctions Committee of the UN Security Council was moved by France, the UK and the US last month, soon after a suicide bomber of the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) killed 40 CRPF soldiers in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama. Since borders on both sides have heated up. .

The Al Qaeda Sanctions Committee members had 10 working days to raise any objections to the proposal. Just before the deadline ended, China put a “technical hold” on the proposal seeking “more time to examine” it. The proposal was the fourth such bid at the UN in the last 10 years to list Azhar as a global terrorist.

China has offered its help to the parties concerned to engage in more talks to find a “lasting solution” acceptable to all. In a media briefing, according to PTI report, Foreign Ministry spokesman Lu Kang said that Beijing’s decision is in line with the rules of the committee.

Justifying the technical hold, Lu Kang has said that it was taken to make sure that the committee will have enough time to study the matter so that the relevant sides will have time for dialogue and consultation.
