Nehru: Fall guy for all seasons

In 2003, then Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh chief K.S. Sudarshan had accused Mahatma Gandhi of “two mistakes: supporting the Khilafat movement and making Jawaharlal Nehru the first Prime Minister”.

“The end result was that two enemies, Pakistan and Bangladesh, were created forever,” he had added.

In 2014, an article in the Sangh’s Malayalam mouthpiece, Kesari, said: “Nehru’s selfish politics was behind national tragedies such as the Partition and Gandhi’s assassination. After evaluating Nathuram Godse’s arguments in the light of historical documents related to the Partition, if students of history feel Godse aimed at the wrong target, they cannot be blamed. Nehru was solely responsible for the Partition of the country.”

Former BJP minister M.J. Akbar, however, says in his biographical work Nehru: The Making of India: “Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, the strong man of India, had accepted the idea of Partition even before Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, the romantic.”

In 2009, Modi, then chief minister of Gujarat, had banned a book by former BJP minister Jaswant Singh that blamed Pakistan’s founder Mohammed Ali Jinnah, Nehru and Sardar Patel equally for the Partition.

Kashmir imbroglio

In the Lok Sabha last year, Modi had said: “All of Kashmir would have been India’s if Patel (instead of Nehru) had been allowed to become India’s first Prime Minister.”

The BJP has consistently blamed Nehru for Article 370 of the Constitution, which gives Jammu and Kashmir a degree of autonomy. This was a condition for the princely state’s accession to India.

Yet, some authors believe that Patel was ready to relinquish India’s claim on Kashmir in exchange for Hyderabad (before its annexation) or East Pakistan.

Mahatma Gandhi’s grandson Rajmohan Gandhi, in his biographical work, Patel: A Life, quotes a speech by Patel in Junagadh after the princely state had merged with India. Patel said: “We would agree to Kashmir if they (Pakistan) agreed to Hyderabad.”

The Biography of Bharat Kesri Dr Syama Prasad Mookerjee: With Modern Implications, by S.C. Das, says Patel was keen on trading the Kashmir Valley for East Pakistan and that “there was (a) consensus between Dr Mookerjee and India’s Iron Man Sardar Patel on this grave issue”.

Mookerjee, founder of the Jana Sangh, is revered by the BJP.
