masood azhar news: China blocks move to ban Masood Azhar: A look at Pakistan's network of terror

WHAT THESE TERROR GROUPS ARE AFTER

HOW PAKISTAN BECAME A HOTBED FOR TERRORISTS

HuJI (Harkat-ul-Jihadi al-Islam)

Present status:

HuM (Harkat-ulMujahideen)

(HuM leader Faziur Rehman Khalil, active in Pakistani politics)

,

Present status:

HuA ( Harkat-ul-Ansar )

JeM (Jaish-eMohammad)

(JeM leader Masood Azhar)

,

Present status:

HM ( Hizbul Mujahideen)

(HM leader Syed Salahuddin )

,

,

Present status:

LeT ( Lashkar-e-Taiba)

( LeT leader Hafiz Saeed)

Present status:

THE MAJOR STRIKES CARRIED OUT BY THESE GROUPS IN INDIA

Dec 24, 1999 |

April 19, 2000 |

Dec 13, 2001 |

Oct 29, 2005 |

July 11, 2006 |

Nov 26, 2008 |

Sep 7, 2011 |

Sep 18, 2016 |

Feb 14, 2019 |

Text: Anjishnu Das; Graphic: Sunil Singh

China blocks India’s bid to designate Masood Azhar as global terrorist by UNSC

NEW DELHI: For decades, it’s been no secret that Pakistan uses terrorists as proxies to aid the insurgency in J&K and mount attacks against India. A CIA report going back to 1996 found that Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence agency was funding Masood Azhar with as much as $60,000 a month. On Thursday, China again blocked Azhar’s terrorist designation at the UN. Azhar is only one of many terrorists backed by Pakistan. A look at major anti-India terror groups operating out of Pakistan with ISI’s blessing.An objective shared by these terror outfits is to ‘liberate’ J&K and merge it with Pakistan. While some were founded to fight Soviet presence in Afghanistan, they eventually turned their attention to J&K under the guidance of Pakistan’s ISI. ISI has reportedly not only helped found some groups, but it also continues to finance their activities, train fighters and provide logistical support.It wasfounded in Pakistan in 1984 and received support from ISI to destabilise J&K. In 2004, it was designated a terrorist organisation by India. The group’s most active unit operated in Bangladesh.Banned by US and India.In 1985, HuM splintered off from HuJ. In 2003, it briefly changed its name to Jamiat-ul-Ansar, likely to evade authorities. In 2014Ansarul-Ummah was recognised by the US as front for HuM. A year later, it was banned by India.Banned by Pakistan, Canada, Australia, UK, US and UN.HuA was created as a merger of HuJI and HuM in 1993. During 1993-94, several leaders, including Masood Azhar, were arrested. Four years later, HuA split after it was banned by US and ceased to exist. However, HuJI and HuM continue to operate independently.In 2000Azhar’s released from jail in the Indian Airlines hostage swap and created JeM. Many HuM members left to join JeM. A year later, JeM renamed itself Tehrik-ul-Furqan and shifted it funds to avoid US proscription. In the same year, India, UN and US designated JeM a terrorist organisation.Banned by India, Pakistan, US and UN.HM was created as the militant wing of the Islamist organisation Jama‘ate-Islami reportedly under the guidance of ISI in 1989. In 1994, the United Jihad Council , an anti-India coalition of terrorist groups with the common goal of ‘liberating’ J&K, created with Syed Salahuddin as its leader. It has at least 13 members including LeT, HuM and al-Badr.Al-Badr, initially operated under the HM banner until ISI reportedly encouraged it to run independently in 1998. Recently, however, JeM and al-Badr have reportedly drawn closer and begun to merge. In 2002India designated Hizbul Mijahideen a terrorist organisation. But during July- Sept 2016the valley descends into months of unrest with anti-government protests when popular Hizb commander Burhan Wani was killed by security forces. At least 90 civilians killed and hundreds injured.Banned by India.LeT was founded as the military wing of Islamist organisation Markazad-Dawa-wal-Irshad in 1990. It reportedly, with support from ISI, turned its attention to the growing insurgency in J&K. In 2001, US designated it a terrorist organisation and a year later Pakistan too followed .In 2002, Jama‘at-ud-Dawa, the front organisation of LeT was formed. It provided charitable services targeting impoverished communities, fostering support for LeT among Pakistanis.Banned by India, Pakistan, US and UNHuM hijacks Indian Airlines flight carrying 176 passengers from Kathmandu and flies it to Afghanistan. The group secures the release of three militants, including Masood Azhar.JeM carries out the first suicide car bombing in India outside an Army building near Srinagar.Armed JeM terrorists attack the Parliament in Delhi, killing 14 and injuring more than 20.Three coordinated bombings in Delhi markets by LeT, killing 63 and wounded at least 200.LeT detonates seven pressure cooker bombs on Mumbai commuter trains, killing 180 and injuring 800.LeT conducted a coordinated attack in Mumbai, targeting a hotel, a popular restaurant and a Jewish centre. At least 170 killed and 300 wounded.HuJI detonates a briefcase bomb at Delhi HC in response to Mohammad Afzal Guru’s death sentence for the 2001 Parliament attack.Four JeM terrorists attack an Indian Army post in Uri along LoC. All terrorist and 19 soldiers killed.A JeM suicide attacker drives an explosiveladen car into a CRPF bus in Pulwama, J&K, killing more than 40 jawans.
