Bengaluru Horror! Army Major takes colleague for a drive, rapes her on deserted airport road

A case of rape and assault under IPC has been registered against the Army Major | Representational Image | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Bengaluru: In a shocking incident from Bengaluru, an Army Major has been booked for allegedly raping his colleague on the old Airport road. A case of rape and assault under the Indian Penal Code (IPC) Section 376 and 323 has been registered against the accused, who was arrested but later granted bail from March 8 to 21.

According to reports, the incident happened late on February 4 after the victim returned home from attending a party hosted by a senior colleague. The accused then called the victim and invited her for a drive to which she agreed. The accused took her towards Old Airport road and parked his car on a deserted stretch. Both consumed alcohol in the car during which the Army officer started misbehaving with her.

According to the complaint filed by the victim, after she resisted the Army officer's attempts and pushed him, asking him to drop her home. He started the car but only to stop it after some distance on a more remote stretch. He then forcibly pushed the victim on the back seat and allegedly raped her.

After the incident, the woman was shocked and traumatised for two days before finally opening up about the incident to her parents, who then rushed to Bengaluru and complained to her senior officials. The victim was then hospitalised into the Command Hospital for treatment.

Reports suggest that the victim was first reluctant to file a police complaint saying that she has complained to her seniors but later filed an FIR at Viveknagar police station. As per the Amry court of enquiry procedure, an FIR is required for it to be initiated.

As of now, the case has been transferred to Ulsoor police station where an investigation into the case has begun. Deputy Police Commissioner (east division) Rahulkumar Shahpurwad has said that police will take legal action against the Army Major.
