Bangalore: Army Major Amit Choudhary takes colleague on drive, rapes her in Bengaluru

Major granted interim bail

BENAGLURU: A 29-year-old defence personnel has alleged that her colleague assaulted and raped her in his car on Old Airport Road, East Bengaluru, recently. Acting on her complaint, the city police registered a case of rape and assault against Major Amit Choudhary.She alleged that she attended a party hosted by a senior colleague at his residence on February 4, and returned home. The accused called her on the phone and invited her for a drive . She agreed as she was feeling hungry and thought she could eat something outside. She went in his car towards Old Airport Road. The accused parked the car on a deserted stretch and the duo consumed alcohol in the vehicle.The complainant alleged that Major Choudhary began misbehaving with her and touched her inappropriately. She pushed him away but he slapped her. She pleaded with him to drop her home. He started the car but after some distance, he stopped it. "He pushed me forcefully on to the back seat of the car and raped me before dropping me at my residence," she alleged in the complaint.The woman said she was in shock for two days and later informed her parents about the incident. Her parents rushed to Bengaluru on February 8 and she decided to complain to her senior officials. She met her superiors with her parents and orally complained to them. She was admitted to Command Hospital for treatment. Bengaluru city police came to know about the incident and rushed there to record her statement but she declined saying she would complain to her superiors.However, she rushed to Viveknagar police station on February 15 and filed a complaint as the FIR was required for the court of inquiry. Police registered a case of rape and assault under IPC Sections 376 and 323. “Viveknagar police arrested Choudhary, but he availed interim bail from March 8-21,” a police officer said.Police, meanwhile, identified the crime scene and transferred the case to jurisdictional Ulsoor police station.Rahulkumar Shahapurwad, deputy commissioner of police (east division), said Ulsoor police received the case papers on Tuesday. “We’re investigating the case and will take legal action against the accused,” he said.
