YSR Congress leader Vivekananda Reddy was stabbed to death, confirms forensic report

Forensic reports have confirmed that YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) leader YS Vivekananda Reddy was murdered. Reports suggest that Vivekananda Reddy was stabbed to death. A preliminary post-mortem report found seven stab wounds on his body.

A press release put out by the YSRCP says, "Preliminary conclusions of the post-mortem stated that YS Vivekananda Reddy had been murdered. The coroner's report held that there were seven stab wounds on his body made by a sharp object."

YS Vivekananda Reddy, former minister and younger brother of former Andhra Pradesh CM YS Rajasekhara Reddy, was found dead at his residence in Kadapa district of Andhra Pradesh on March 15.

Kadapa SP Rahul Dev Sharma told India Today TV, "We have formed a SIT headed by ASP operations who will lead the team and investigate the murder. We have collected fingerprints and other forensic evidence. The victim has seven deep wounds on the head and right hand."

According to police, the team is trying to determine the motive behind the murder and witnesses are being examined. The SIT is also looking into what Vivekananda Reddy was doing up to 24 hours prior to his death. They are trying to reconstruct the sequence of events that led to YS Vivekananda Reddy's murder.

Two days ago, Vivekananda Reddy was seen at the Lotus Pond residence of Jagan Mohan Reddy in Hyderabad and on Thursday, Viveka, as he was known by, campaigned for the YSRC in Pulivendula constituency.

He was alone at his residence in Pulivendula on Thursday night.

"There was no response when I went to his house this morning. I called his wife in Hyderabad over the phone and she asked me not to disturb him. Later, the cook and other household staff reached the house but they too did not get any response. I then went in through a side door and found Vivekananda's body in the bathroom, with blood clots in the bedroom and the bathroom," said his personal assistant Krishna Reddy.

YSRCP demands CBI probe

Meanwhile, the YSRCP has demanded a CBI probe into the death of party MP YS Vivekananda Reddy.

YSRCP spokesperson Vasireddy Padma said, "The cause behind the suspicious death of YS Vivekananda Reddy should be probed by a high-level investigation agency as the circumstances leading to the death causes concern."

The party has alleged that Reddy's murder is a part of a conspiracy to target members of the YSR family. YSRCP said Vivekananda Reddy's death cannot be solved by a SIT and needs a 'high-level probe'.

"They [circumstances leading to death] cannot be brushed aside by a regular inquiry like SIT as there has been a methodical attack on the YSR family members," said party spokesperson Vasireddy Padma.

She alleged that the death of former Andhra Pradesh CM YS Rajashekhara Reddy in a helicopter crash and the recent attack on YS Jagan Mohan Reddy at the Vishakapatnam airport point to a conspiracy.
