New Zealand mosque shooting: 3-year-old boy who went missing after terror attack 'died in his father's arms'

The shootings at the Al-Noor and Linwood Mosques in Christchurch in New Zealand during the Friday prayers by suspected gunman Brenton Tarrant, 27, has left 49 dead and at least another 20 injured. Many were reported missing after the terror attacks, with the brother and father of three-year-old Mucad Ibrahim being among them. Now it has been reported that Mucad, described as "energetic and playful" died in his father's arms, his family wrote on social media.

According to the Daily Mail, Mucad was attending the Friday prayers at the Al-Noor mosque in 101 Deans Avenue with his father and older brother, Abdi Abraham, when the gunman walked in and indiscriminately shot at those inside.

3 year old Mucad Ibrahim, is missing right now. He was in the mosque at the time of the shooting, most know what it means when someone isn’t located after a terror attack... Funny is it? You, are a waste of oxygen. pic.twitter.com/pCzfcyGWa8 — Lindsey Atkinson (@SpursGyal) March 15, 2019

While the three-year-old's father and brother managed to make it out alive by pretending to be dead, Mucad reportedly tried to run from the gunfire. He was reported missing since then.

A friend of the family confirmed on Saturday that little Mucad had died the previous evening in his father's arms. "Mucad Ibrahim sadly passed away in his fathers arms, last night , and was taken away by staff," he said.

"RIP my little friend, you will be sorely missed by all. Such a beacon of light," he added.

"Verily we belong to God and to Him we shall return," Ibrahim said, the Daily Mail reported.

He added: 'Will miss you dearly brother'.

Meanwhile, others have been reported missing after the horrific attacks. The Mirror reported that Janna Ezat and Hazim Al-Umari are so now fearing the worst after their son Hussain could not be found in the aftermath of the shootings. "We love you, Hussain," his mother said. "If he dies it's a holy Friday and he'll be safe with God."

Farhaj Ahsan, a person of Indian origin, was also reported to have gone to the same mosque and is currently missing. His family in Hyderabad, I request immediate assistance to his family as well. His family’s contact details are available with me & I’ll share the same with you. pic.twitter.com/KYwBcs2yTM — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) March 15, 2019

Farhaj Ahsan, a man of Indian origin, was last seen at the Al-Noor mosque. His family, which is still in the Indian city of Hyderabad, has requested assistance in finding their son. Cashmere High School also said three of its students, including two brothers, were at the mosque when the gunman open fired and that none of them have been accounted for since.

Canterbury District Health Board chief executive David Meates said there were around 200 family members at the hospital waiting for news about their loved ones. "Together with police, we are providing support to these people," he said.

A man in his 20s who has been charged by the police with murder, and who is believed to be Tarrant, appeared at the Christchurch District Court on Saturday, March 16, to face the charges against him.
