Pakistani Student kills Principal for Exposing Affair with Teacher

Shagufta told them to be vigilant over their son's activities

A Pakistani student identified as Rizwan, aged 18, from Lahore, was arrested on Wednesday, March 13, 2019, after he allegedly stabbed his school principal to death.

Rizwan, who is a final year student, murdered the principal, Shagufta, after she found out about his relationship with one of the teachers.

The incident took place at the victim’s house in the Sundar area of the city. Rizwan also injured the victim’s sister when she tried to help.

Reportedly, the accused had developed an intimate relationship with one of the teachers at his school. But Rizwan had said it was “a friendship”.

She took action by firing the teacher and expelling Rizwan on March 12, 2019. Shagufta also exposed the affair by telling Rizwan’s family about it.

Shagufta told them to be vigilant over their son’s activities in the future. Following the incident, Rizwan became enraged and decided to take action.

He visited the victim’s house where he attacked her with a knife, critically injuring her. When Shagufta’s sister Farkhanda tried to come to her aid, she was also attacked.

The victim’s husband Muhammad Ashraf saw the student fleeing the scene with a knife in his hand.

He found both injured women lying on the floor. Mr Ashraf discovered that his wife’s throat had been slit during the attack.

Both injured women were taken to Jinnah Hospital in Lahore. Shagufta died on the way to the hospital while Farkhanda underwent treatment for her injuries.

Mr Ashraf, who co-owned the school along with his wife, lodged a case against Rizwan.

In the complaint, he said that he and his wife found out about the “illicit” relationship between the boy and a teacher at the school.

When they became aware, they contacted his parents and expelled him on March 12, 2019.

Police arrested the suspect where he told them: “Why did she tell my parents about my friendship?”

A case was registered under sections 302 (murder) and 324 (attempted murder) of the Pakistan Penal Code. Further investigations regarding the case continue.

In another case which took place in India, a teacher was stabbed to death after she rejected a marriage proposal.

A man named Rajasekhar knew Miss Ramya since college and he had asked to marry her, however, it was rejected.

He went to her classroom, where an argument broke out between the two. Rajasekhar attacked Miss Ramya with a knife, stabbing her in the neck.

Rajasekhar fled the scene, leaving the victim to die. Police have investigated the suspect’s family in a bid to search for his whereabouts.
