Lucknow: In a bid to escape molestation, girls jumps from autorickshaw; angered mob assaults driver

The people nearby beat up the driver and even overturned the vehicle. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Lucknow: In an attempt to save herself from being molested, a girl jumped off from a moving autorickshaw. The video of a mob beating the autorickshaw driver has been doing the rounds on social media. The video shows the man being beaten up by the angry mob while policemen try to save him.

The alleged incident took place in Gomti Nagar area, Lucknow. It is being alleged that the autorickshaw driver made inappropriate advances towards the victim which prompted her to jump from the vehicle.

Lucknow: People thrashed an auto driver who allegedly molested a woman passenger in Gomti Nagar area,y'day. Police say,"He molested the woman, she jumped out&got hurt. Driver&people who thrashed him were brought to police station,woman sent to hospital.Further action to be taken" pic.twitter.com/fYm2dMT7xT — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) March 16, 2019

Also Read: To save herself from molestation by employer, domestic help jumps out of window in Gurugram

While talking to the news agency ANI, a police officer stated that the driver was in an inebriated state and allegedly molested the passenger. In a bid to save herself, the victim jumped from the autorickshaw and injured herself in the process. The people nearby beat up the driver and even overturned the vehicle.

The police caught hold of the driver and the people beating him and took them to the police station. The victim was taken to a nearby hospital for treatment. Further action on the case is yet to be taken.

A similar incident was reported from Gurugram when a house help jumped from the window of a house after repeated molestation from her employer. The maid was taken to the Gurugram Civil Hospital where she shared her plight with the police. Despite her objection, the accused used to molest the victim every time she used to go to his house. On the day of the incident, when the accused started misbehaving with her, she jumped from the window, injuring herself. The police arrested the accused and filed an FIR.


