Pune: In a 1st, Pune woman among 4 to get 20-yr jail for gangrape

PUNE: In the first ruling of its kind in Maharashtra after the 2013 criminal law amendment, a sessions court convicted and sentenced a 34-year-old woman, along with three men, to 20 years’ rigorous imprisonment for the gang rape of a 12-year-old girl in the jurisdiction of the Chandannagar police station here in 2016.The woman is the girl’s maternal aunt, while one of the three accused men is the cousin of the survivor’s mother. The woman, described by the court as the “kingpin”, has been lodged at the Yerawada central jail since her arrest on June 29, 2016, while the three accused men had secured bail from the Supreme Court.However, after the sentencing by the Pune court, the police took the three men into custody and sent them to Yerawada jail for serving jail term.“Additional sessions S K Karhale found the four accused guilty under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. This included the main charge under Section 376-D of the amended criminal law, which deals with gang rape. It has been made gender neutral so as to try men, women and even transgenders in such cases,” additional public prosecutor Rajesh Kavediya told TOI.The prosecution said that the girl, a student from the Vidarbha region, had come for her summer vacations to her maternal uncle’s house in Mundhwa in 2016. She was taken by her aunt on different occasions between April 13 and May 25 that year to flats at four different localities in Mundhwa and Kharadi. Here, the woman would indulge in sexual relations with the three accused men in front of the girl. She would also coax the girl to commit similar acts.On May 14 the same year, the woman took the girl to her father-in-law’s flat at Pingle Vasti in Mundhwa on the pretext of showing her the place. There, she pushed the girl to the floor and gagged her mouth while two of the men held her hands and legs and the third man sexually assaulted her. They warned her not to tell of the incident to anyone.When the girl’s parents learnt of the incidents after she returned to her home in Vidarbha, they lodged a complaint with the Chandannagar police. On May 31, 2016, the police booked the four accused for outraging the girl’s modesty after she narrated only those incidents wherein her aunt engaged in physical relations with the three men in front of her.However, a few days later, the girl confided in her parents about the gang-rape incident and went on to record her statement before a magistrate. following which the sections of gang rape and POCSO Act were added.Kavediya said, “The amended law has widened the definition of rape by replacing the word ‘a man is said to commit rape’ with ‘a person....’ Section 376-D states, where a woman is raped by one or more ‘persons’ constituting a group or acting in furtherance of a common intention, ‘each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed the offence of rape’ and shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 20 years, but which may extend to life imprisonment.”Kavediya had argued for severe punishment to all the accused on the grounds that it was a case of most severe trauma for the rape survivor. “The abuser is a close relative and a natural protector of the girl who trusted her. As such, the offence was a traumatic event for the child,” he submitted.
