India has exposed China and Pakistan in front of the world: Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad

Follow us on Image Source : INDIA TV Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad

Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad on Saturday said Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visits to foreign nations has helped build India's stature in the world. Speaking at IndiaTV's mega conclave on terrorism - 'Vande Mataram', the minister said the recent move designate Pakistan-based terror group Jasih-e-Mohammed (JeM) chief Masood Azhar in the United Nations Security Council is proof of India's strong relations with the rest of the world powers.

"All the foreign nations are standing united with India. The recent move to ban JeM chief Masood Azhar at the UN is a proof of India's position in the world.

The union minister said that this time the bid to designate Masood Azhar as a 'global terrorist' was not proposed by India but countries like the United Nations, France and the United Kingdom.

Also Read: Postcards from India TV conclave Vande Mataram

"This time the move to ban Azhar was not proposed by India but by France, United Kingdom and the United States and the move was supported by Russia and all the other members of the UNSC, excluding only China," Prasad said.

China for the fourth time blocked a bid in the UNSC to designate Masood Azhar as a 'global terrorist' by putting a technical hold on the proposal, a move India termed as disappointing.

The proposal to designate Masood Azhar under the 1267 Al Qaeda Sanctions Committee of the UNSC was moved by France, the UK and the US on February 27, days after a suicide bomber of the JeM killed 40 CRPF personnel in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama, leading to a flare-up in tensions between India and Pakistan.

Prasad said India has now exposed China and Pakistan in front of the entire world.

"Today, we have exposed both Pakistan and China at the United Nations, this displays our strong relations with the rest of the nations. And you saw how France decided to block assets of Masood Azhar after the move was blocked by China. The entire middle-east is backing India on this," he said.

The union minister was referring to the French government's decision to freeze the assets of Masood Azhar.

Prasad also came down heavily on the Congress party which, according to him, has continued to present a divided front before India's enemies.

"Congress continues to present a divided front before India's enemies by making unacceptable remarks towards the leader of the government," he said.

"Please criticise Modi, BJP, Ravi Shankar Prasad, but please do not do anything which weakens our system and unity.

"No world power has asked India to produce proof. Only Congress has asked," he added

Also Watch:

Latest India News
