TDP Dividing Muslims For Electoral Benefits

Anantapur: Telugu Desam Party stepping into the appointment of religious heads has irked many from the Muslim community. It is reported that TDP leaders are supporting Wakf board land grabbers in Guntakal and Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu has denied a ticket to the member of the community in the upcoming election.

Mohammed Ismail from Kadiri had been loyal to the TDP since its inception. His name was referred by Jamaat-E-Hind leaders from Delhi, but he had been denied the party ticket. Petrified with this incident all the Imams, Mutavalli’s have come together and discussed on the negligent attitude of Chandrababu towards Muslims.

In Anantapur, almost 210 acres of Wakf board land exists, in Kadiri alone there are 110 acres of land. However, most of these lands have been grabbed. One particular piece of 90 cents land, which is worth crores in Goothy road, Anantapur had been illegally held by the TDP leaders.

Muslims got divided into two groups over this issue and one of the groups met the then Minority welfare minister Palle Raghunatha Reddy. Meanwhile, the occupiers of the plot are being supported by Minister Sunitha. Since then, the TDP biggies are particular about dividing Muslims for their electoral benefits.

TDP leaders are appointing incompetent individuals to the role of Qazi. This issue was finally resolved in the Court. TDP MLAs and ministers are even involving in the prayers to be held at the Edga.

The welfare scheme announced for the Muslim minorities have been not implemented up to the mark namely Dulhan scheme, minority sub plan and loans through the special corporation.

The amount of Rs 50,000 given to the newly wed women under Dulhan scheme is being given only to TDP workers.

Minority subplan developed for the welfare of Muslims has not been executed properly, this is agreed by the leaders from the community too.

Chandrababu had promised loans through a special corporation to the Muslims, but after getting elected he had done nothing. Chandrababu even denied fees reimbursement to the students. It is learned that many students had to stop their education in the middle, due to the dearth of funds.

TDP Government Side-Tracking Probe Into YS Vivekananda Reddy Murder
