Greater Noida: Coming home after meeting jailed father, woman gang-raped by his friends

A zero FIR was filed in Mayur Vihar Phase 3 police station against the three accused in December 2018. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Greater Noida: A 20-year-old woman was allegedly gang-raped by three men in Greater Noida on August 24, 2018, while she was returning home after meeting her father in jail. The Ecotech 1 police station in Greater Noida received the case on Thursday after which it has started the investigation.

A zero FIR was filed in Mayur Vihar Phase 3 police station against the three accused in December 2018, according to a report on Hindustan Times. The survivor in her complaint stated that a man identified as Bobby contacted her to inform her that he could get her father out of jail.

The woman visited her father in Luksar jail on October 24 to tell him what Bobby had told her. While returning home, she met the second accused identified as Rahul who told her that Bobby had asked him to pick her up. The woman knew Rahul from before as he had come to her place once with her father.

Also Read: Pune: Woman gets 20-year jail term for gang-rape of her 12-year-old niece

Reportedly, Rahul took her to a room where the third accused identified as Vikram was already present. The men allegedly took turns to rape her after which they put her in an autorickshaw and sent her home.

The woman also said that she was horrified to tell anyone about it. The accused men called her again to tell her that they had obscene videos of her. The men abused her again and took money from her by threatening her. The accused are said to be hailing from Delhi.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
