CPM demands HC-monitored CBI probe in Pollachi case

Coimbatore: Investigation into the Pollachi sexual assault and blackmail case should be conducted by the CBI under the supervision of the Madras high court, said G Ramakrishnan, leader and politburo member of the CPM on Sunday. He was speaking to reporters in the city.

“The consensus of the DMK-led Secular Progressive Alliance is that there should be a high court-monitored CBI probe into the Pollachi sexual assault case,” Ramakrishnan said.

He said while it was a welcome move that the high court has come down upon police officials for revealing the name of the complainant and ordering Rs25lakh compensation to the complainant, it was condemnable that the state government hasn’t replied to it yet. “The court has said the state should take disciplinary action against Coimbatore SP and give Rs25lakh compensation to the victim. After the high court’s order, till now the state has not reacted. Is the state government disrespecting the court order? The state should have said it would implement the order,” he said.

In the background of election code of conduct, the election commission has said it had no issues with the state acting against Coimbatore SP, Ramakrishnan pointed out.

Around 30 college students from the city who had staged a protest on Sunday seeking proper probe and trial in the Pollachi issue, were detained by the police. Ramakrishnan said instead of acting into the issue, the state was arresting students who were seeking action.

Meanwhile, activists have raised concerns over videos related to the Pollachi issue being leaked on social media even as a probe was on. They sought that those behind the leak of the videos be identified and punished too. The Madurai bench of the Madras high court had also ordered that the videos relating to the Pollachi incident be removed from the internet.

On Sunday evening, students of the Bharathiar University staged a protest in front of the university campus demanding that there be a proper trial in the case and the accused be given the sternest punishment.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
