Pune: Woman gets 20-year jail term for gang-rape of her 12-year-old niece

The woman is the survivor's maternal aunt and one of the accused men is the cousin of the girl's mother. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Pune: In the first verdict of its kind in the country, a sessions court in Pune convicted a 34-year-woman for the gang-rape of her 12-year-old niece. The woman and three other men have been sentenced to 20 years of imprisonment. The woman is the survivor's maternal aunt and one of the accused men is the cousin of the girl's mother.

The girl was visiting her aunt during summer vacations in 2016 when she was taken to different locations, according to a report in The Times of India. At these places, the woman would indulge in sexual activities with the accused men in front of the girl. She would also persuade the girl to do the same.

On May 14 during the girl's stay, the woman took her to her father-in-law's house where she pushed her on the floor and covered her mouth. While two men held her hands and legs, the third man raped her. She was threatened not to tell about the incident.

Also Read: Gurugram shocker! Man rapes Class 11 student in toilet

On returning home, she informed her parents who filed a complaint against the four accused for outraging the girl's modesty as she had narrated only the incidents in which the woman indulged in physical relations with the men in front of her. When the girl confided in her parents about the whole crime, sections of gang rape and POCSO Act were added in the complaint.

The sessions court judge found the four accused guilty under several sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offenses (POCSO) Act. The main charge is under section 376 D of the amended criminal law that deals with gang-rape and has been made gender neutral so as to try men, women and even transgenders.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
