Delhi: To ‘avenge’ insult, teenager plots girl’s murder for 3 years; caught within hours of committing crime

After the FIR was lodged, police tried to trace the girl based on CCTV footages and also combed her call records. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: In a case of murder most foul, a 17-year-old boy murdered a 14-year-old girl after plotting the crime for three years. The accused had been harbouring murderous intentions since he was scolded by his tuition teacher upon receiving a complaint from the girl.

According to a report in The Times Of India, the boy, who was then 14, had ‘proposed’ to the 11-year-old girl and she had refused his advances. The girl had also apprised her tuition teacher, who also taught the boy, about the same and the boy received an earful from him. The boy felt the ‘insult’ was too unbearable and hatched a sinister plot.

He continued to talk to her and in due course of time, they became friends. In the coming years, he then hatched a plan to kidnap her and extort money from her father who is an established businessman in East Delhi’s Shahdara.

Putting his plan in motion, the boy then asked the girl out for a movie and she obliged. The two then went to Welcome metro station and the boy asked her to spend some time with him. He then took her to an isolated building he had already scouted and there, he gave her a soft drink laced with sedatives.

When the girl fell unconscious, he tied her up, smashed her head and strangulated her. Like a cold-blooded killer, the 17-year-old accused then nonchalantly came back home. When the victim did not reach home, her parents approached the police as her mobile phone was also switched off.

After the FIR was lodged, police tried to trace the girl based on CCTV footages and also combed her call records. It was then that they got hold of the accused’s phone number. When they contacted him, he told the cops that he had indeed met the victim. He concocted a story about meeting her for an ice cream and said that the two had gone to their separate ways after that.

However, upon tracing the locations of his cell phone, police knew that he was fibbing. Upon more questioning, he broke down and confessed to have committed the crime. He then took the police team to the spot where he had hidden the victim’s body.

The crime was solved within hours of it being reported and the victim’s body has been sent for autopsy to ascertain whether she was sexually assaulted as well.


