Celebratory firing: Woman shot in head by ex-Bihar legislator; 12-year-old hit in shoulder

A 42-year-old woman sustained gunshot injury in an alleged celebratory firing by a former Bihar legislator on the New Year eve party at his farmhouse in Delhi's Fatehpur Beri area. Police said that the accused is on the run.

The victim was identified as Archana Gupta who is an architect by profession. The alleged accused was identified as Raju Singh, a former JD (U) MLA from Bihar.

The incident took place on the intervening night of Monday and Tuesday. As per reports, Fortis Hospital in Vasant Kunj informed the police about the gunshot injury to the woman at about 1 am.

In his complaint, the victim's husband alleged that they were in a farmhouse on Monday night to celebrate the New Year along with many other friends. At around midnight, two-three rounds were fired by Raju Singh. Immediately after the firing, he noticed that his wife collapsed on the ground and when he checked, he found she was bleeding. Gupta was rushed to hospital where she is undergoing treatment, he added.

A case has been registered against Raju Singh and others under relevant sections of IPC and Arms Act, a senior police officer said. The officer also said that the accused has five cases registered against him in Bihar. His wife is also a former Member of Legislative Council of Bihar.

The farmhouse where the incident took place is owned by Singh's mother and he along with his two brothers live there with their families. The accused is absconding and police teams have been formed to nab him.

In a similar incident of celebratory firing, a 23-year-old man has been arrested for shooting at a 12-year-old boy during the New Year celebrations the same night in northeast Delhi's Welcome Colony, police said.

The accused was identified as Sakib. The boy sustained a gunshot injury in his shoulder. He was admitted to JPC hospital from where he was later referred to Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, the officer said. The victim is now out of danger, he added. Investigations revealed that the incident took place when a group of people including the victim's neighbours were celebrating the New Year on the terrace of their house, he said.

A case was registered and several suspects were questioned which led to the arrest of Sakib. Efforts are being made to recover the weapon of offence, said DCP (northeast) Atul Kumar Thakur.
