Where Knowledge is not free…

V Raghunathan is former Director, Schulich School of Business (India Program), York University, Toronto, former professor of IIM Ahmedabad, former president of ING Vysya Bank & former corporate CEO. He is also an adjunct professor at Schulich School of Business, Toronto. He is an author and a columnist, with over 12 books, 600 papers and articles. His latest book, a novel, is Return to Jammu (Harper Collins, 2018); others being The Good Indian’s Guide to Queue Jumping, Beyond the Call of Duty, Duryodhana; Locks, Mahabharata & Mathematics; Ganesha on the Dashboard; Don’t Sprint the Marathon, Corruption Conundrum; and Games Indians Play. LESS ... MORE

I came across the following circular sent out by the Registrar of Central University of Kerala, dated March 13, 2019, addressed to various Deans, HODs, and others within the University. The text of the circular is as under:

“1 The Vice Chancellor’s meeting held on 15.12.2018 at Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi to review the implementation status of all parameter (sic) indicated by Central Universities in the Tripartite MoU (CUK, MHRD, and UGC). In accordance with the decisions of the said meeting, the Vice-Chancellor has directed to implement the following in the Central University of Kerala.

To discourage research in irrelevant areas: When fellows are being admitted for PhDs, the topics for the thesis should be in accordance with the “national priorities” (quotes mine). Allotting privilege topics (sic) to the PhD students should be dispensed with; Therefore, all the Heads of the Department is (sic) hereby directed to convene the meeting of the Faculties. And to prepare a shelf of the project to be taken for research study pertaining to their subject considering national priorities. The student can opt from the shelf of the project (sic).

This is issued for compliance with the approval of the Vice Chancellor.”

Presumably, a similar circular must have gone out in most other Universities as well.

I am distressed to note that in the three months since the All-VCs meeting at Shastri Bhavan, one hasn’t seen a single resignation of a Vice-Chancellor in protest; or if there has been one, the media hasn’t picked it up.

The naïve may be taken in by terms like “national priorities” and “irrelevant areas”. But the smart ones must ask, “Who decides the national priority and relevance of academic research? The academic bodies and academics themselves or some babu or a politician (including some nearly illiterate ones) from Delhi? Is this how one develops academic excellence, assuming that was the objective of the exercise?

But then again, it is understandable if there have been no resignations. There was a time was when Vice Chancellors and academics of our Universities became the Presidents and political leaders in the country. Today, political appointees – even lecturers promoted to Reader or Associate Professor a day before in a private college in some cases – become Vice Chancellors of Universities. And if you ask anyone from within the system of the Indian academic institutions, you will learn that in the last two or three years, most institutions have been filled the top spots with personnel of a certain ideology – no awards for guessing which. That’s how we get enthusiastic Vice Chancellors who bend over backwards to please their political masters by announcing in Indian Science Congress that India had flying machines, head transplants and stem-cell research two thousand years ago!

Who is supposed to stand up for academic freedom if not the academics themselves? Isn’t academic freedom all about freedom of academics to search for truth using rigorous methodologies, their freedom to disseminate those hard-found truths in lectures without fear of retribution, and the free access of students to what academic wishes to teach? Aren’t universities the one place where knowledge ought to be pursued entirely freely, unlike say a government R&D lab? If this freedom is compromised and academics do not feel deeply distressed, what hope do we have for excellence in academia in our country?

One thought that the academic tradition is to believe that knowledge knows no boundaries. It is the very laissez-faire pursuit of knowledge that leads to the serendipity of knowledge. There is no such thing as irrelevant or relevant areas in the quest for knowledge. Since artificial intelligence and technology may take away jobs, shall we proscribe research in these areas, because India’s priority is job creation? Should a department of Sociology not investigate violence following cow slaughter because it does not suit a government to deem it a national priority? Was the physician Alexander Fleming pursuing relevant research when he trailed after some random bacterial growth of fungus on his staphylococcus plate culture, instead of what he had originally set upon to do, which was altogether something else? What was the relevance in ancient times when someone asked whether the world was earth-centric or sun-centric? What was the relevance of the discovery of zero?

Had Aryabhata been living today, ironically, his investigation into zero may be laughed out of the “shelf of the projects” at the Central University of Kerala.

The wag may quip saying I am raising mere academic issues here which are hardly real. And I’ll tell the wag, that’s exactly why these matters should be left to academics and not to Babus and half-literate politicians, or wags. Doing so would be setting a dangerous trend to all free thinking and end with directing all thinking only in certain directions. For argument’s sake, what would you say about Nazi medicines and researches on human beings for state specified research projects?

Therein lies the rub.

The way forward to improve our academic climate is to ensure that the senior academics reach their positions by virtue of their expertise and wisdom – and not by political shenanigans and bootlicking – and would guide the next generation of researchers using that wisdom. That the government of the day can arrogate itself all wisdom, including what academic subjects to investigate, is the beginning of the end. That’s why it bothers me that academics have absorbed this assault on academic freedom so quietly.

It is nobody’s case that Indian academia needs no lessons on excellence. But is this the way to improve our academic standards? I can think of a few likely projects from the future “shelf of projects” that the students may be allowed to opt from:

1) Aero-dynamics of Ravana’s Pushpa Vimana…

2) Space travels of Narada in 2000 BC…

3) Krishna’s flute playing: left-handed or right-handed?

And such…

I am not sure, but I have a hunch this kind of restriction on research must at least violate the spirit of our constitution, if not the letter. In any case, there is little point invoking the national anthem penned by Rabindranath Tagore in every film theatre, if we do not respect his lines: Where the mind is without fear and …Where knowledge is free …

Amen.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
