Delhi Crime: Shefali Shah on how she prepared for her role in Netflix series on Nirbhaya rape case

Netflix's Delhi Crime, a web series based on Nirbhaya rape case, is all set to drop on the digital streaming platform from March 22. The seven-part anthology series directed by Indo-Canadian filmmaker Richie Mehta stars Shefali Shah, Rasika Dugal, Rajesh Tailang, Adil Hussain, Gopal Datt, and Vinod Sherawat in important roles.

The series revolves around the investigation of the heinous crime that enraged the entire country in 2012. Nirbhaya and her friend were attacked by six men in a moving bus and the former was brutally tortured, beaten and gang-raped. The rape case shook the country's psyche and led to never-seen-before nation-wide protests.

Shefali Shah who plays the investigation officer Vartika Chaturvedi in the Netflix web series decided to do the series within five minutes of hearing the script.

When Richie starting telling me about the character, five minutes down the like I was like, I’m doing it," Shefali told Scroll.in in an interview.



Shefali's character is inspired from Chhaya Sharma who was the Deputy Commissioner of Police (South Delhi) at the time of the sexual assault on the 23-year-old, and the actress took generous notes from her to shape up the role.



"It was so enriching for me to meet someone like her. She was someone chose to fight for Nirbhaya and all the women. I had the honour of interacting with her, understanding how it works and what was going on in her mind. All of that went into creating Vartika. I then added my interpretation to it," the actress told the online portal.

About Vartika Chaturvedi: She doesn't let her emotion cloud her investigation

Any role I play is emotionally challenging because I don’t want to act like the character, I want to be the character, Shah said. In this character, yes she has anger and angst, but what she does it channelises all of it into a single focus of getting those guys. She doesn’t let her emotion cloud her investigation," Shefali told Scroll.in.

Shefali doesn't consider Vartika a character, but a real person. "It’s undermining to call it a role or character. This is a real person. It actually happened. And it’s commendable, how they handled [the case]. How inspiring is that. So if I could stand in those shoes, I find myself lucky," she added.

Delhi Crime is already creating waves across the web. The series premiered at the Sundance film festival 2019 and has received rave reviews from critics across the world. Delhi Crime will begin streaming from March 22, 2019 on Netflix.
