Punjab Cop jailed for Frequently Raping Wife of Criminal

She added that he would rape her multiple times

Former Punjab cop Salwinder Singh, from India, was jailed for 10 years after he repeatedly raped the wife of a criminal.

It was an allegation that had surfaced before and Singh was pronounced innocent, but a second probe into the case found him guilty.

Singh, who was a Superintendent (SP), was found guilty on February 15, 2019, and sentenced to prison by Additional District and Sessions Judge Prem Kumar.

He was also found guilty of corruption and jailed for five years. The sentences will run concurrently.

The victim and her husband were present in court. They registered the case in August 2016.

The unnamed woman had said that Singh used to visit her house after her husband had become involved in a criminal case.

She added that he would rape her multiple times on the pretext that he would absolve her husband from any wrongdoing.

Singh demanded Rs. 50,000 from the woman otherwise he would register an official case against her husband.

Police officers traced Singh’s mobile phone and discovered that he regularly contacted the victim.

A case under Section 376 (2) of the Indian Penal Code was registered at Gurdaspur police station. The victim’s husband approached the former Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal through the government’s online Sangat Darshan portal.

The charge was a public servant taking advantage of his official position to molest a woman.

An offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, was also registered. The victim’s husband claimed Singh took money from him to keep the case quiet.

Singh went to the High Court to apply for a legal remedy such as an injunction, however, his application was denied on September 23, 2016.

He went on the run and was declared a proclaimed offender. He eventually surrendered in a Gurdaspur court on April 20, 2017.

In November 2017, the state government ordered his early retirement after two FIRs and several indiscipline cases against him surfaced.

The government also took notice of two unfavourable entries recorded in his annual confidential reports.

Singh was sentenced to 10 years in prison for rape and five years for corruption. The sentences will be served concurrently.

In addition, a fine of Rs. 50,000 was imposed, but Singh said he would challenge the order.

Salwinder Singh became recognised when four militants allegedly kidnapped him and two others on December 31, 2015.

Two days later, the Pathankot Air Force station attack happened.

The National Investigation Agency (NIA) initially suspected that Singh had been involved by providing logistical support to the militants.

However, Singh was exonerated and the case against him was subsequently dropped.
