Pollachi sexual assault case: Family of accused claim innocence

Makkinampetti, a nondescript village located in Pollachi town, is the centre of activity in the last fortnight since the Pollachi sexual assault and blackmail case has unfolded.

26-year-old S Thirunavukarasu, the main accused in the case hails from this quaint village. An MBA graduate, Thirunavukarasu runs a finance business and is well known in the neighbourhood.

People in Makkinampetti are hesitant to share details about his family. They are yet to recover from the shock of the sordid incident that unfolded in their backyard.

A local, on condition of anonymity, said, "We do not want to speak to the family. What if the Crime Branch of Criminal Investigation Department (CBCID) comes to our house for investigation? The family is well known in the area because Thirunavukarasu's father was also in the money lending business."

Ever since the incident, Thirunavukarasu's home has come under security blanket. The villagers have ostracised the family and have kept away from them.

Speaking to India Today, Latha, Thirunavukarasu's mother, said her son was being framed in the case due to business rivalry.

"I am confident that my son has not done anything wrong. They have done something in a manner to frame my son in this case due to business rivalry. He wouldn't even have touched that girl," she added.

Further she alleged that her son was brutally attacked on February 17 by a gang. "The two men named as witnesses in the case borrowed Rs 20 lakh from my son. They were part of the gang that attacked my son. They took him from our house assuring to settle the loan but ended up attacking my son."

Meanwhile, CBCID probing the case has searched the house and seized electronic devices and documents relating to the crime and the money lending business of the family.

Thirunavukarasu is currently lodged in Coimbatore jail and sources in CBCID say they have collected a lot of evidence and are in the process of collating them. The agency hopes to file a chargesheet in the case at the earliest.

Also read | Pollachi sexual assault case: Lawyers boycott court proceedings

Also Read | Key accused in Pollachi case remanded to judicial custody

Also Watch | Pollachi sexual abuse horror rocks Tamil Nadu
