Kashmiri youth murdered in police custody, JRL announces strike – KashmirWatch

PTK reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

SRINAGAR, MAR 18 (PTK): A youth, who was detained by the Jammu and Kashmir police from Awantipora area of south Kashmir’s Pulwama district, died last night with his family alleging that he was killed in police custody.

Reports said that the victim, Rizwan Asad, was picked up by the state police in connection with a militancy related case some days ago. Sources said he was initially held by the district police after which he was shifted to Srinagar.

Rizwan Asad died in police custody at Srinagar during the intervening night of March 18 and 19. Police confirmed this death, saying that the matter is being investigated and the cops who were interrogating him are being questioned.

Reports said the victim, who was working as a teacher at a private school, died at Cargo camp of J&K Police’s Special Operations Group.

“A magisterial inquiry under 176 CrPc has been initiated to ascertain the cause of death after which any action can be taken,” the officer, who is not authorised to speak with the media, said. The J&K police has also ordered a separate inquiry to probe the youth’s death.

Tension is rising in Kashmir in the aftermath of the youth’s ‘killing’ with authorities suspending work at Islamic University in Awantipora to prevent and law and order problems. Rumours abound, in the absence of a proper official account.

According to various reports, the Inspector General of Police has requested for a magisterial probe into the incident.

Pertinently, before the news about Rizwan’s killing broke, authorities at Islamic University of Science and Technology postponed the semester examinations.

Meanwhile intense clashes broke out in Awantopora area. “Local youth assembled outside police station Awantipora and pelted stones on government forces, who retaliated by firing tear smoke shells”, reports said.

In the afternoon, Police issued a statement saying that in pursuance of “terror case investigation”, one suspect Rizwan Pandit was in police custody.

“The said person died in police custody. In this matter while following the procedure laid down in section 176 of crpc a magisterial enquiry is underway.”

Separately police investigation has also been initiated in the jurisdictional area of incident, it said.

The incident comes in the midst of a sweeping crackdown launched by the J&K Police against the separatists, Jamaat-e-Islami and their alleged sympathisers in Kashmir Valley in an attempt to restore a semblance of peace on the streets ahead of the Lok Sabha elections.

Last night, the J&K Police arrested a prominent religious cleric along with ten youth during nocturnal raids in the restive Pulwama district. Officials said Moulvi Amin, who led prayers at Khankhahi Mir Sahib mosque in Pulwama was arrested from his home while at least 10 youth were held from Drabgam village of the same district.

Since union home ministry banned the Jamaat, over 300 leaders and activists of the socio-religious group, leader and activist of Hurriyat and suspected over ground workers of militants have been arrested by police.

Situation continues to remain tense in Kashmir with a civilian shot dead by unknown gunmen last evening in Tral area of Pulwama district, in fourth such killing in the past five days in south Kashmir. (PTK)

PDP demands time bound and transparent probe into death of Rizwan

SRINAGAR, MAR 18 (PTK): PDP Chief Spokesperson Rafi Ahmad Mir today said that Government should take strict action those who are involved in the killing of Rizwan.

While speaking to News agency Press Trust of Kashmir Mir said “situation will be worst by such act, and people will not be happy with government. He added from the day one PDP urges government to initiate dialogue with Pakistan and resolve issues’.

He added that situation will be more worst if such thing may continue. Mir added there should be a time bound and transparent probe into the death of Rizwan Pandith. He said teachers are assets of Kashmir and that the death of Rizwan in custody wasn’t a good sign. (PTK)

Mainstream leaders, separatists condemns custodial death, demands action

SRINAGAR, MAR 18 (PTK): All mainstream Political parties in Jammu and Kashmir and separatist leaders has strongly reacted over the killing of a youth in police custody, who was detained by the Jammu and Kashmir police from Awantipora.

Former chief minister and National Conference Vice President, Omar Abdullah said the custodial death of a youth from south Kashmir’s Pulwama district was unacceptable and must be investigated in transparent and time bound manner.

“I had hoped custodial deaths were a thing of our dark past. This is an unacceptable development & must be investigated in a transparent, time bound manner. Exemplary punishment must be handed out to the killers of this young man,” Omar tweeted.

Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) president and former chief minister Mehbooba Mufti said under the present administration, innocent men are hauled up from their homes for interrogation return home only in coffins now.

She further said “GoI’s repressive approach leaves young educated men vulnerable who are forced to take up arms. Stop using Kashmir to exhibit your sick chauvinistic nationalism. We have suffered enough.”

In a tweet PDP president Mehbooba said, “Innocent men hauled up from their homes for interrogation return home only in coffins now. GoI’s repressive approach leaves young educated men vulnerable who are forced to take up arms. Stop using Kashmir to exhibit your sick chauvinistic nationalism. We have suffered enough.

Hurriyat Conference (M) Chairman Mirwaiz Umar Farooq termed the killing of a teacher in police custody once again exposes the vulnerability of Kashmiris.

In a tweet Mirwaiz said, “Distraught at the brutal custodial killing of young Rizwan Ahmed of Awantipora. The brutal killing once again exposes the, helplessness, vulnerability and insecurity to the lives of Kashmiri’s as impunity of the authorities keeps rising.

Peoples Conference Chairman Sajad Gani Lone condemned the custodial death of youth in Srinagar.

“Condemn in strongest terms the death in police custody in Srinagar. This is what the sanctity of human life has been reduced to in Kashmir. My thoughts are with the family of the deceased”, he said in a statement.

“Disturbing reports of custodial death of youth from Awantipora in Srinagar’s Cargo Camp. As per media he was picked up by police few days ago & was lodged in CARGO camp of (SOG). @jandkgovernor administration should come clean on this @HMOIndia @MehboobaMufti,” tweeted Nayeem Akhtar of People’s Democratic Party.

Former finance minister Syed Mohammad Altaf Bukhari demanded a time bound probe into the extra judicial killing of Awantipora resident who according to reports was arrested by police and died in custody at Srinagar.

“It is highly unfortunate that a young man, teacher by profession, has lost his life in police custody and it needs to be thoroughly investigated to know what went wrong and who are responsible for his death in custody,” Bukhari demanded.

He said, at a time when the police had to learn to behave responsibly and sensitively such sad incidents only add to the prevailing mistrust among the people with the system which nobody in a civilized society can afford. Bukhari said that authorities especially the Honb’le courts and the National Human Rights Commission have already set out detailed procedures to prevent and punish police use of torture and ill-treatment.

“However, such incidents of torture wherein suspects are punished to gather information is totally unacceptable in light of the laid down rules by the Supreme Court.”

CPI (M) leader Mohammad Yousuf Tarigami said no civilized society can tolerate such acts.

The custodial death of Rizwan Pandit must be investigated in a transparent and time bound manner and government must order a judicial enquiry into the incident immediately. Custodial killing isn’t acceptable to any human being and whosoever is involved Pandit’s killing must be given exemplary punishment. Custodial killing is a brutality and brutalities are unacceptable in whatever form they are.

Rizwan Asad died in police custody at Srinagar during the intervening night of March 18 and 19. A top police officer confirmed this death, saying that the matter is being investigated and the cops who were interrogating him are being questioned.

Reports said the victim, who was working as a teacher at a private school, died at Cargo camp of J&K Police’s Special Operations Group. According to some reports, he was being questioned by the National Investigation Agency.

“A magisterial inquiry under 176 CrPc has been initiated to ascertain the cause of death after which any action can be taken,” the officer, who is not authorised to speak with the media, said. The J&K police has also ordered a separate inquiry to probe the youth’s death.

Tensions are rising in Kashmir in the aftermath of the youth’s ‘killing’ with authorities suspending work at Islamic University in Awantipora to prevent and law and order problems. Rumours abound, in the absence of a proper official account.

According to various reports, the Inspector General of Police has requested for a magisterial probe into the incident.

Pertinently, before the news about Rizwan’s killing broke, authorities at Islamic University of Science and Technology postponed the semester examinations. (PTK)

Helplessness of Kashmiris is New Delhi’s defeat: Er. Rasheed

SRINAGAR, MAR 18 (PTK): Expressing grief, shock and anger over the custodial murder of Rizwwan Pandit, a school teacher, AIP President Er. Rasheed has said that Rizwan’s murder is the response shown by security agencies to Prime Minister’s declaration that security forces have been given free hand after Pulwama attack.

In a statement issued today Er. Rasheed said “There can be no excuse given by the state government and J&K Police to justify murder of Rizwan Ahmad Pandit, who was summoned to police station, tortured in Cargo and his dead body has been sent back home.

The incident should be matter or grave concern for the local cops who often claim to be Kashmiris and claim their respect for rights and sentiments of masses. Prime Minister of India owes an answer that why he was so inpatient to give forces a free hand to the extent that they dare to torture Kashmiris to death in custody in broad day light.

The promises of investigation and orders of enquiry carry no meaning as such shame enquiries have nothing yielded in the past. Now if Omer Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti talk about exemplary punishment to the killers it makes no sense as not even a single man in uniform has been punished or convicted since 1990”.

Er. Rasheed added that helplessness of Kashmiris is not New Delhi’s victory but adds to the alienation and is failure of New Delhi’s suppressive policies in Kashmir. He said “people of India should rise to the occasion and ask the political establishment to stop war against Kashmiris as murdering innocent and unarmed Kashmiris does not benefit Indian masses by any standards”.

Er. Rasheed added that while people are least interested in any enquiry being ordered by the govt. but the Governor administration needs to prove its credibility and claims of not being enemies of Kashmiris. (PTK)

Congress condemns custodial death of Rizwan Pandit

SRINAGAR, MAR 18 (PTK): The J&K Pradesh Congress Committee (JKPCC) has strongly condemned the custodial killing of a school teacher Rizwan Pandit reportedly in a police lockup, saying that Governor Administration was expected to initiate stern action against the responsible personnel.

The Party also said that such killings have isolated people to a largest extent in past and this incident has the potential to vitiate the atmosphere further in the valley and believe that the punishment against the responsible will restore the faith of people in the system.

The JKPCC President G.A. Mir while reacting to the killing of Rizwan Pandit resident of Awantipora in Police custody said that Congress Party strongly condemns the innocent killing and believe that the death of any person in police custody will have serious implications on the overall situation in the valley. Governor Administration must take effective measures to ascertain the identity of the persons responsible for the killing.

While expressing serious concern over the custodial death of School Techer, he (Mir) said the custodial killings in past has alienated the people to a largest extent, besides loosing faith in the system, but this time, people won’t be ready to believe any narrative except the exemplary punishment against the persons responsible for the custodial death of a young teacher.

Mir added that in order to ensure justice to Rizwan Pandit the Higher Authorities in the Police Department must investigate the matter on fast track basis to ensure punishment to those responsible in this act. (PTK)

CNS reports further

Custodial Killing:

Omar seeks exemplary punishment to killers, Mehbooba castigates GoI

Srinagar, Mar 19, CNS: Reacting to the death of Awantipora youth in police custody, former chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir Omar Abdullah termed the custodial death as unacceptable development and that exemplary punishment be handed out to the killers of the youth

Taking to his Twitter handle Omar Abdullah said that the killing must be investigated in transparent and time bound manner,”I had hoped custodial deaths were a thing of our dark past. This is an unacceptable development & must be investigated in a transparent, time bound manner. Exemplary punishment must be handed out to the killers of this young man.” Omar wrote.

Peoples Democratic Party president Mehbooba Mufti Tuesday lashed out at the government of India for it’s repressive approach towards educated youth of Kashmir.

The former chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir was reacting to the custodial death of a youth from south Kashmir’s Awantipora.

Taking to her Twitter handle, the only female chief minister of the state said that innocent men were being hauled up from their homes for interrogation only to return home in coffins, “Innocent men hauled up from their homes for interrogation return home only in coffins now. GoI’s repressive approach leaves young educated men vulnerable who are forced to take up arms. Stop using Kashmir to exhibit your sick chauvinistic nationalism. We have suffered enough.” She wrote.

Rizwan Ahmad Pandith son of Asaddulah Pandit a resident of Awantipora, a teacher by profession and a Jamaat-e- Islami activist died in police custody, police said, adding that he was being interrogated.

Altaf Bukhari condemns ‘custodial killing’ of Awantipora resident, seeks investigation

Srinagar, Mar 19, CNS: Former finance minister Syed Mohammad Altaf Bukhari on Tuesday demanded a time-bound probe into the extrajudicial killing of Awantipora resident who according to reports was arrested by police and died in custody at Srinagar.

Expressing serious concern over the incident, Bukhari expressed his heartfelt sympathies with the bereaved family and prayed for eternal peace to the departed soul.

“It is highly unfortunate that a young man, teacher by profession, has lost his life in police custody and it needs to be thoroughly investigated to know what went wrong and who are responsible for his death in custody,” Bukhari demanded.

He said, at a time when the police had to learn to behave responsibly and sensitively such sad incidents only add to the prevailing mistrust among the people with the system which nobody in a civilized society can afford. Bukhari said that authorities especially the Hon’ble courts and the National Human Rights Commission have already set out detailed procedures to prevent and punish police use of torture and ill-treatment.

“However, such incidents of torture wherein suspects are punished to gather information is totally unacceptable in light of the laid down rules by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.”

The former finance minister remarked that police abuse reflects a failure of any regime at the helms of affairs to implement accountability mechanisms.

“Despite strict guidelines in place, the authorities in Kashmir routinely fail to conduct foolproof investigations and prosecute police officials implicated in torture and ill-treatment of arrested persons. Police investigators often close cases relying solely on the accounts of the implicated police officers. This unfortunate trend that has grown mistrust among people in probes needs to be done away with,” Bukhari said in a statement.

He added: “In a democratic set-up we live in, the police must follow proper arrest procedures—including documenting the arrest, notifying family members, conducting medical examinations, and producing the suspect before a magistrate within 24 hours as has been directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.”

When these procedures are not followed in letter and spirit, Bukhari said the suspects become more vulnerable to abuse and may have contributed to a belief by some officials in the police department that any mistreatment with the inmates could be ‘covered up’.

Bukhari said that the guilty in the custodial killing case of Awantipora resident need to be immediately identified, arrested and brought to justice so that punishment given by the Hon’ble courts, in this case, becomes deterrence and prevent others from committing such heinous crimes in future.

Sajad Lone condemns killing of Rizwan

Srinagar, Mar 19, CNS: Peoples Conference chairman Sajad Lone on Tuesday condemned the death of Awantipora man in police custody.

The former MLA said condemned the death in strongest terms,”Condemn in strongest terms the death in police custody in Pulwama. This is what the sanctity of human life has been reduced to in Kashmir. My thoughts r with the family of the deceased.”

Rizwan Ahmad Pandith son of Asaddulah Pandit a resident of Awantipora, a teacher by profession and a Jamaat-e- Islami activist died in police custody, police said, adding that he was being interrogated.

JRL calls for shutdown on Wednesday against custodial killing

Srinagar, Mar 19, CNS: Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL) has strongly condemned the custodial killing of 28-year-old school teacher Rizwan Asad Pandith of Awantipora who was picked up by the SOG and NIA a few days ago and has been brutally killed in custody at SOG camp Cargo today. Paying glorious tributes to martyr Rizwan and expressing deep grief and sorrow at his brutal killing, JRL expressed sympathy with his bereaved family. Terming this brutal killing as gruesome, JRL said that this custodial killing is not only one of its kind but prior to this, hundreds and thousands of young and old Kashmiris have been killed in this manner. JRL said that this killing has actually increased the vulnerability of Kashmiri inmates languishing in different jails of India and jails of Jammu Kashmir, and jeopardized their lives.

Announcing a comprehensive protest program against this state terrorism, JRL said that people will observe a complete and comprehensive protest strike on Wednesday, March 20th, 2019 (Tomorrow), against the gruesome custodial killing of Rizwan Asad, Policies of intimidation and harassment by police, SOG and other Indian investigative agencies, arbitrary arrests, slapping of draconian PSA, summoning political activists to SOG camps and thus creating atmosphere of fear in Jammu Kashmir. On Thursday, March 21st, JRL appealed all segments of society including Traders, lawyers, bar association, civil society, and others from different walks of life to peacefully protest against the custodial killing and assaults on Kashmiris. On Friday, March 22nd, 2019, after Friday (Juma) prayers, people at all Masajid, Khanqahs and Imam Baras will raise their voices peacefully against this custodial killing by NIA and SOG and continuing policy of oppression unleashed by India.

JRL said that those who raise their voice against the killing of our youth their arrests and slapping with PSA are branded as “anti-national “and threatened with dire consequences and intimidation. JRL said that while crackdown and arrest spree against political and religious activists and youth continues unabated on the other hand SOG has been calling political activists and youth to SOG cargo camp to intimidate them and create an atmosphere of fear among people in general. JRL said through their investigative agencies NIA and ED, the authorities have let loose a reign of terror to instill fear among people and harass them.

JRL said that people of Kashmir have borne tremendous hardships and suffering for the last three decades especially, all because they are asking for an end to the conflict through peaceful resolution of the Kashmir dispute as per the people’s wishes but instead people are being crushed.

Killing a teacher is murder of nation : Shabir Qummi

Srinagar, Mar 19, CNS: Chief Patriot of Parwani-Wilayet Sibti Mohamad Shabir qummi has strongly condemned the killing of a teacher in police custody questions safety of prisoners.

Shabir qummi said that the killing of a teacher in police custody once again exposes the vulnerability of Kashmiris.

He strongly condemned this gruesome killing and said that the teacher is the worthy asset of the nation but the authority took them in the name of investigation and killing the mercilessly.

He questioned about the silence of world Communities and UNO. The blood of Kashmiri has no value, as it is spilled on every road of the valley. He stressed there should be international probe in these killing, which do take place daily in kashmir.

Shabir qummi also supported the Mirwaiz Umer Farooq’s decision not to present himself before NIA in Delhi, as there are killers in shape force men who not care to spill the blood of innocent Kashmiri’s.

He said that the brutal custodial killing of young Rizwan Ahmed of Awantipora. The brutal killing once again exposes the, helplessness, vulnerability and insecurity to the lives of Kashmiri’s as impunity of the authorities goes high day bay day.

He urged the UNO to take notice of Kashmiri situation and solve the issue according to wish of the people.

He also prayed for the departed soul and

KEA supports strike call, Condemns cold blooded murder of Awantipora youth

Srinagar, Mar 19, CNS: Kashmir Economic Alliance has supported the strike call extended by Joint Resistance Leadership against the brutal custodial killing of Awantipora youth Rizwan Asadh Pandit.

In a statement, Kashmir Economic Alliance Chairman Muhammad Yousuf Chapri and Vice Chairman Ajaz Ahmed Shahdhar said that killing of a teacher in cold blood makes it amply clear that people in Kashmir are totally unsafe. They said custodial killing in the civilized world implies that how human values have degraded and how state is sponsoring a system based on suppression, repression and oppression.

“The killing of Rizwan Asad Pandit is police custody is condemnable. It is a naked murder that has not justification. The killers need to be punished without any delay,” they said.

They while extending their support to the strike call forwarded by JRL appealed people mainly business community to observe a complete shutdown against this gruesome killing. (CNS)

Magisterial enquiry no answer to custodial death – Justice Masoodi

Withdraw NIA’s jurisdiction in J&K and register FIR against NIA officials.

Srinagar ,Mar 19 CNS: Former judge J&K High Court Hasnain Masoodi has strongly condemned the custodial death of Rizwan Pandith of Awantipora, who was allegedly killed in the joint custody of NIA and Police Component (SOG) Srinagar.

In a statement, Masoodi said that incidents like these are not only tragic and unfortunate but highly condemnable. Such incidents cannot be allowed to take place in a civilised society and custodial death in NIA custody reinforces the apprehension of people about safety of the political and religious leaders in the custody of NIA and others summoned to appear before it.

He said that it is high time to review the jurisdiction of NIA in the state and stop it from carrying out such and like acts in the state. Everybody has seen how the NIA has been misused in the state particularly in the valley to threaten and intimidate the people of the State for political considerations. Everyone in the State should be committed for withdrawal of NIA jurisdiction from the state.

He further stated that the investigation into the custodial death should be time bound and it must also ascertain the facts about wrongful and illegal detention by the NIA authorities.(CNS)
