Pollachi sexual assault case: Judicial custody of 4 accused extended till April 2

The Pollachi sexual abuse incident has triggered widespread protests in the state.(Image for representation)

The Coimbatore Chief Judicial Magistrate (CJM) on Tuesday (March 19) extended the judicial custody of the four key accused in the Pollachi sexual assault and blackmail case till April 2.

The accused were presented before judge S Nagarajan via video conferencing from the Coimbatore Central Prison where they were lodged, fearing breakdown of law and order situation.

The four accused - K Thirunavukkarasu, N Sabarirajan, N Sathish and T Vasanthakumar, were arrested on charges of sexual harassment and use of criminal force. They were detained under the Goondas Act.

On Monday, the Crime Branch-Crime Investigation Department (CB-CID) team completed Thirunavukarasu's interrogation and produced him at the residence of the Magistrate to avoid any untoward incident if produced before the court.

The Tamil Nadu government transferred the case from the Coimbatore Rural police to the CBCID on March 12, following protests by students and political parties.

A special team, led by superintendent of police Nisha Parthiban began investigations. CBCID sleuths took possession of all documents, material evidence and other records related to the case.

Sources in CBCID said they received several calls on the dedicated helpline number set up to receive complaints on the sexual assault case. However, the victims did not come forward to file a complaint.

Meanwhile, the Madras High Court has asked the Tamil Nadu government and the CBI to file their responses on a plea seeking a court-monitored probe in this case.

The Pollachi sexual abuse incident has triggered widespread protests in the state.

The four accused has been sexually assaulting women for years and several women have been victims of horrific crimes.

The incident came to ligh when a college student, who was sexually abused by the gang, complained it to her brother, who later went to the police.
