18-yr-old’s gangrape: MLR doubtful, swab report awaited

Ludhiana: The medical legal report (MLR) of the 18-year-old woman with learning disabilities has not ascertained signs of sexual assault on her. The report has stated that the hymen was partially ruptured and there were no visible injuries or bleeding. However, doctors have reserved their final views till the swab report is received.

The 18-year-old woman was allegedly gang-raped by three masked men at her house on Monday morning when she was alone.

The police on Tuesday scrutinized the footage of CCTV cameras installed in and around the area. Additional commissioner of police (Industrial area A) Harjinder Singh said, “The MLR has revealed no signs of assault on the woman, but swab report is still awaited. The police have already registered a case and investigation is on. We have scanned four CCTV cameras installed near the locality, in which movements of a few vehicles have been captured. The police will now trace all those vehicles.”

A doctor from Ludhiana civil hospital said, “The hymen being partly ruptured does not indicate much about sexual assault, as it is common in women who are 18 years old or above. The MLR neither ascertains sexual assault nor refuses it. Only swab report can make things clear.”

The case diary

On Monday, the 18-year-old woman had alleged that three men barged into her house when she was alone and gang-raped her.

In their police complaint, her parents said they had gone to work with their younger son when the trio, with their faces covered with handkerchiefs, violated their daughter.

The accused reportedly came on a motorcycle, raped the woman and escaped. The neighbours did not come to know of it. However, when the woman started crying, they came in and asked the reason. She didn’t tell them anything. The neighbours then informed her parents, who returned home and heard their daughter.

The woman’s mother said her daughter was initially not even able to explain what happened. She just kept crying.

When the police questioned the woman’s neighbours, they said they did not notice the accused coming in and going out of the house.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
