Rae Bareli: Congress workers 'thrash' Hindu Yuva Vahini worker after clashes over 'Chowkidar Chor Hai' slogan

Congress workers allegedly thrashed Hindu Yuva Vahini worker in Rae Bareli | Photo Credit: Times Now

Rae Bareli: In what can be described as growing intolerance in the Congress pertaining to its opposition, a group of Congress workers on Sunday allegedly brutally thrashed a Hindu Yuva Vahini (HVY) worker in Rae Bareli after the latter purportedly tried stopping them from chanting anti-PM Narendra Modi slogans, such as ‘Chowkidar Chor Hai’. A video of the incident has gone viral on the internet, in which the Congress supporters can be seen chasing the Hindu Yuva Vahini worker and beating him in the middle of the road.

The Yuva Vahini worker assaulted by the mob has been identified as the outfit’s district coordinator Ashish Pathak. The incident reportedly took place on Sunday evening when a group of Congress workers assembled at the city’s civil lines area to welcome AICC General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, who was going to cross Rae Bareli while travelling from Lucknow to Prayagraj by road on Sunday evening.

Reportedly, Pathak, along with a few members of the right-wing group, also reached the spot in order to protest Vadra’s visit. Shortly after that clashes broke out between the two groups over the alleged sloganeering against both Vadra and PM Modi.

Pathak told reporters that a scuffle erupted after he had attempted to stop the Congress workers from sloganeering against PM Modi. On the other hand, a few local media reports suggested that the situation escalated after the Hindu Yuva Vahini workers raised slogans against Priyanka Gandhi.

Following the clash, Pathak has reportedly filed a complaint with the police regarding the incident and an FIR has been registered against a few Congress workers for allegedly issuing threats and physically assaulting the HYV worker.

On Monday, a similar row had erupted after a few of protesters were arrested by the police at a Bengaluru event attended by Congress president Rahul Gandhi after they began chanting “Modi, Modi”. The arrested people were identified as techies by BJP’s Karnataka unit.

The pro-BJP protesters were later released by the police. However, the BJP slammed the Congress for what they said was an attempt to “curb free speech.” The incident occurred on Monday when the Congress president addressed entrepreneurs at an event held at Manyata Tech Park near Hebbal in the city.

A few protesters raised “Modi, Modi” slogan outside the venue, prompting the police to arrest at least seven of them. "Congress workers attack techies who shouted "Modi Modi" slogans when Rahul Gandhi went to Manyata Tech Park in Bengaluru,” BJP general secretary CT Ravi tweeted.

On Tuesday, BJP chief Amit Shah took to Twitter to lash out at Congress chief Rahul Gandhi over the arrest of the protesters, stating that Congress should “stop intimidating the youth.”

“Hugs for ‘Tukde Tukde’ gang and arrest of peaceful youth raising pro-Modi slogans? Where are the champions of ‘Free Speech’? Stop intimidating youth of India, which has rejected your brand of politics,” Amit Shah said in his tweet.

On the other hand, KPCC chief Dinesh Gundurao criticized the protests and said that the BJP had tried to disrupt Gandhi's event because it was "desperate and intolerant."


