Christchurch shooting: talented entrepreneurs and skilled workers lost

The sign on a business owned by one of the victims of the Christchurch shootings.

Canterbury has lost many entrepreneurs in Friday's terror attacks who owned small businesses that their families must now manage, while other firms are dealing with staff losses.

One of them was Mohammed Imran Khan, 46, who was originally from India, and known as Imran Bhai to family and friends.

His friends described him as a hard worker with three businesses he had opened, some of them recently.

One of them – the Indian Grill restaurant and takeaway in Hills Rd – was closed, but well wishers had left comforting comments in chalk on the pavement, and flowers.

READ MORE:

* Christchurch shooting: Security firms jump to the challenge

* Hey Facebook, what about this anti-Islamic Facebook 'hate' group?

* Meat plants impacted as Halal workers stay home to grieve

He had also recently opened the Macah halal butchery, also in Hills Rd, and a cafe run by his wife.

He died at the Linwood Masjid and is survived by his wife and 15-year-old son.

CHRIS HUTCHING/STUFF Families are dealing with loss of partners and parents, with the future of some businesses yet to be decided - flowers were left outside this Indian restaurant and takeaway in Hills Rd, Christchurch.

A long-time friend Sukhvinder Singh said he was a very kind and helpful man, well-loved in the Indian and Muslim communities.

He was a regular prayer at the Linwood mosque and often brought along food from his restaurant to share with everyone, particularly his speciality Biryani dish.

Canterbury Employers Chamber of Commerce chief executive, Leeann Watson, said that learning about the people who died made her realise how embedded the international community has become in Christchurch in recent years.

The loss of so many contributing members to the New Zealand commercial sector was felt at many businesses this week.

"That's positive because it shows how we've embraced them and we now have a large number of businesses with a very diverse work force," Watson said.

Many of those killed were highly skilled and educated, as illustrated by a handful of examples.

Syed Jahandad Ali, 34, from Pakistan, was a senior dynamics developer at software company Intergen, survived by his wife and three children.

Farhaj Ahsan, 30, a father of two, worked as a software engineer, engineer, Shahid Suhail, 35, was a production manager at resin manufacturer Hexion, while Ansi Alibava, 25, recently completed her Master of Agribusiness Management at Lincoln University, working part time at Lincoln Agritech and Kmart Riccarton.

Ozair Kadir, 24, was a student pilot, Haroon Mahmood, 40, tutored in economics and statistics at Lincoln University, and Canterbury College .

DAVID WALKER/STUFF Linwood resident Paddy Snowdon has placed white ribbons around the trees lining Linwood Ave, in memory of the 50 lives lost during the Christchurch mosque shootings.

Syed Areeb Ahmed, 26, recently moved to Christchurch from Karachi, Pakistan to work as a chartered accountant on secondment at PWC.

Paddy Snowdon, the owner of City Salvage Contractors also known as The Pumphouse, said last weekend was "very quiet". He had come to know some of the Muslim community when they came to obtain materials for their homes or small businesses.

Snowdon has placed tributes to the victims on trees near his house in Linwood.

"I'll leave them there for 10 days or so which I think is an appropriate time."
