Information on 2008 Mumbai Attack

The U.S. Department of State’s Rewards for Justice Program is offering a reward of up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest or conviction in any country of any individual who committed, conspired to commit, or aided in the execution of the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attack.

From November 26 to 29, 2008 ten individuals associated with the terrorist group Lashkar e-Tayyiba carried out a series of coordinated assaults against multiple targets in Mumbai, India. The attack resulted in the deaths of 166 people, including six Americans.

The United States is committed to working with our international partners to identify and bring to justice those responsible for the 2008 Mumbai attack.

The Department of State’s November 26, 2018 announcement marked the third Rewards For Justice reward offer seeking information on the perpetrators of the Mumbai attack. In April 2012, the Department of State announced reward offers for information that brings to justice Lashkar e-Tayyiba founder Hafiz Mohammad Saeed and Hafiz Abdul Rahman Makki, another senior Lashkar e-Tayyiba leader.

In December 2001, the Department of State designated Lashkar e-Tayyiba as a Foreign Terrorist Organization in accordance with section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended. Foreign Terrorist Organization designations play a critical role in our fight against terrorism and are an effective means of curtailing support for terrorist activities and pressuring groups to get out of the terrorism business. In May 2005, the United Nations (UN) 1267 Sanctions Committee added Lashkar e-Tayyiba to the Consolidated UN Security Council Sanctions List.

The U.S. guarantees that all reports will be investigated, and the identity of all informants will be kept confidential. On a case-by-case basis, the U.S. government may determine to relocate informant and their family as appropriate. If you have information on the 2008 Mumbai attack, submit a tip at www.rewardsforjustice.net or e-mail information to info@rewardsforjustice.net. In North America, call 1-800-877-3927.
