9 people injured in Maoist attack in Chhattisgarh

9 people injured in Maoist attack in Chhattisgarh: Nine people were injured in a Maoist attack on a civilian vehicle in Bijapur district in Chhattisgarh on Wednesday evening. Injured were shifted to hospital. On Monday, one CRPF jawan was killed and five others injured in a Maoist attack in Dantewada district.

9 people injured in Maoist attack in Chhattisgarh: Nine people were injured in an improvised Explosive Device (IED) blast on a civilian vehicle in Chhattisgarh on Wednesday evening. The blast took place in Maoist-affected Bijapur district when a vehicle carrying civilians was blown up. All the injured have been shifted to hospital for treatment. One person is stated to be in critical condition. Reports said that the injured were travelling to Dantewada for a fair. Bijapur is part of the red corridor region that witnesses most Maoist insurgency.

On Monday, a CRPF jawan was killed and five others injured in the Naxal attack in Dantewada district. The attack happened when Maoists set off an IED and then ambushed CRPF jawans belonging to 231 battalion. The attacks in twin districts of Chhattisgarh comes when the state is ready for polls due by next month. Due to security issues, the Election Commission of India has decided to conduct polls in three phases. The voting in Maoist-affected Bastar parliamentary seat would be held on April 11. The Lok Sabha seats of Mahasamund, Kanker and Rajnandgaonw would go for polls on April 18. The last phase of voting in Raipur, Surguja, Bilaspur, Korba, Janjgir-Champa, Durg and Rajgarh will be on April 23.

Chhattisgarh: 9 people injured after Naxals set off a blast in a car carrying villagers in Bijapur; injured have been shifted to hospital. pic.twitter.com/zaPt5BppLZ — ANI (@ANI) March 20, 2019

Chhattisgarh has a total of 11 Lok Sabha elections with BJP representing 10 while Congress only one. After BJP suffered a massive defeat in November 2018 assembly elections, the ruling national party has announced to replace all the 10 sitting MPs in the forthcoming Lok Sabha elections. BJP has declared to field 11 new faces in the polls due by next month.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
