Mother’s friend held for raping minor girl

Victim narrated her ordeal to neighbour, who in turn convinced her mother

A 14-year-old girl was allegedly raped by a 34-year-old man, who is a friend of the victim’s mother, in South West Delhi’s South Campus. The matter was reported to the police on Tuesday after which the accused was arrested, the police said.

A senior police officer privy to the case said that the accused identified as Brijesh lives close to the victim’s house and was her mother’s friend.

The victim, a Class VIII student of a government school, was allegedly raped by the man a few days ago.

Didn’t believe initially

“She told her mother, a domestic worker, that the man was touching her inappropriately. But the mother didn’t believe the girl,” the officer said.

The victim then confided in a neighbour she calls “didi” and narrated her ordeal. “The neighbour then raised the issue with the mother after which she decided to approach the police,” the officer said.

Police said that they received the information on Tuesday after which a case under Section 376 (punishment for rape) of the Indian Penal Code and under relevant Sections of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act was registered. The accused was arrested on the same day.

The officer said that the victim’s mother is separated from her husband and the man, her friend, used to visit the house frequently.

A similar case was reported from Dwarka a few weeks ago wherein a 16-year-old victim alleged that she was raped by her brother multiple times and also impregnated her. The victim had informed the mother of her pregnancy after which the mother allegedly asked her to seek help from the brother himself. The victim, a domestic help, then informed about the rape to her employer, who helped her approach the police.

2,043 cases last year

According to Delhi Police data, last year, a total of 2,043 rape cases were reported in the city. Out of this, 97.5% of the accused were either friends or family members of the victim. Only 51 rapes were committed by an unknown person/stranger.
