J&K: 2 policemen injured after grenade attack in Sopore

Two policemen including a Station House Officer (SHO) were injured after suspected terrorists hurled grenades at them in Jammu and Kashmir’s Sopore district.

A police officer told news agency PTI that the terrorists lobbed a grenade at the security forces party at Main Chowk, Sopore in the north Kashmir district.

An official statement released by the police indicated that the attack occurred at around 10:20 am when terrorists lobbed a grenade on a police party in Warpora area of Sopore.

"In this incident, SHO Dangiwacha Shri Muddasir Ahmad and his escort personnel received injuries. Both the injured have been shifted to hospital for medical attention. The area has been cordoned and searches are going on in the area pertinently. It is part of the encounter site, where SFs have laid cordon," said the statement.

Security forces initiated a cordon and search operation earlier in Sopore, Baramulla district to nab the suspected attackers.

According to officers, terrorists present in the area were responsible for the attack. Mobile internet has been suspended in the region.

Earlier, a gunfight had broken out between militants and security forces in Kandi area of Kalantra, Warpora of Sopore and Hajin Bandipora on Thursday morning.

SSP Baramulla Abdul Qayoom told India Today TV that the gunfight started in the Kalantara after the joint team of forces intensified the searches to hunt suspected terrorists.

The search operation was suspended late Wednesday evening in wake of darkness amid bad weather in the area, SSP had said.

The joint team of police and army's 29 RR had busted a militant hideout in the area yesterday evening.

Operations underway

Three search operations are currently underway in North Kashmir.

The first one at Warpora area of Sopore, where two foreign terrorists are believed to be holed up in a house. It has been learnt that six members of the house, where the terrorists are holed up, have been rescued. However, two members of the family, including a 10-year-old boy and his grandfather are still trapped inside the house.

An encounter had earlier broken out between security forces and the terrorists. However, the terrorists lobbed a grenade on the search party, injuring two policemen got injured.

The second operation is going on at Hajin, where two foreign terrorists are trapped inside a house. Security forces trying to evacuate locals before starting operation.

Another operation is ongoing in Kalantara area of Baramulla as firing resumed again after a 12-hour lull. However, it’s a jungle area and the actual location of terrorists remains unknown.

Meanwhile, an Indian Army rifleman from J&K Light Infantry division was killed today after Pakistani troops violated ceasefire along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir's Pallwanwalla sector.

Martyr Yash Paul was earlier reported to be critically injured.

The situation in Jammu and Kashmir has been tense since the Pulwama suicide attack, which claimed the lives of at least 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawans.

(With inputs from Ashraf Wani and Shuja-Ul-Haq)
