J&K: Minor held hostage during Bandipora encounter killed

A militant was killed on Friday in an encounter between militants and security forces in South Kashmir’s Shopian district

A minor who was held hostage by militants along with another civilian during an encounter in Hajin of Jammu and Kashmir’s Bandipora district on Thursday was reported dead on Friday. The body has also been recovered. According to Jammu and Kashmir police, the other civilian was rescued with the assistance of security forces and community members.

Meanwhile, in a separate incident, a militant was killed on Friday in an encounter between militants and security forces in South Kashmir’s Shopian district. Police said, Shopian’s Imam Sahib area is still under Cordon and search operation is underway.

A tweet from Kashmir police range this morning read:

Exchange of fire at #ImamSahib #Shopian. Area under Cordon. Details will follow. @JmuKmrPolice — Kashmir Zone Police (@KashmirPolice) March 21, 2019

In another incident today, an encounter between militants and security forces has started in Warpora area of Sopore in North Kashmir. A cordon and search operation was going on in Warpora area, said police. This is the fourth encounter which has taken place in the valley in the last 24 hours.

On Thursday, two Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) affiliated militants, including a Pakistani national, were killed in an encounter at Baramulla’s Kalantara in Kreeri area. One of the militants was identified as Aamir Rasool of Sopore. According to the police records, both the killed terrorists were wanted by law for their complicity in a series of terror crimes including attack on security establishments and civilian atrocities. They were involved in conspiring and executing many terror attacks in the area. Several terror crime cases were registered against both the militants.

Arms and ammunition including AK 47 rifles were recovered from the site of encounter. All these materials have been taken in the case records for further investigation and to probe their complicity in other terror cases.
