Pune citizens’ groups rally to stand with family of Baner assault survivor

We support #NirbhayNaari @rjshonali , Need more eminent personalities to bring culprits back to jail. https://t.co/cjvd2rRtjQ — Pune Citizen (@Pune_Citizen_) 1553100985000

@PMOIndia @CMOMaharashtra @NCWIndia @NHRCOFINDIA We demand action against the culprits who molested and brutally a… https://t.co/wCU2o6wnpl — PuneNGOsForum (@PuneNGOs) 1553098384000

Days after a violent sexual assault on a woman late at night along the upscale Baner Road stretch sent shockwaves through Pune, its residents now seem to be galvanised into ensuring that such crimes are curbed and eliminated within city limits, taking efforts for women’s safety into their own hands.Last weekend, a 25-year-old animal activist was returning home when she was groped and thrashed brutally by two youths, who allegedly displayed a callous attitude throughout and are now out on bail.~~68514539~~Appalled by this chain of events, several citizens’ groups are acting on the widespread restlessness evoked by the crime. Now, not only have multiple organisations come forth to extend solidarity to the survivor’s family, but they are also hell-bent on tackling the authorities to prevent such cases from recurring. Many have also rallied to promise the girl’s kin that they will stand by them till justice is won.One such group is the Baner-Balewadi-Pashan Residents’ Association — on whose turf the misogynistic attack occurred. Its member, Ashay Sawalkar, informed, “Since this case came to light, we area residents have had many concerns that need to be addressed. The most important one: Even after doing something brutal like this, how can the accused walk free in less than 24 hours? Don’t the police understand the gravity of the incident? They are supposed to ensure that stringent measures are taken to address this matter. If we see any leniency on their part, we are planning to go on a silent protest later this week to demonstrate our anger.”^^68485900^^This simmering rage has also translated into an online campaign to get authorities at the national level to take notice.Since Wednesday night, protesters have started blaring #NirbhayNaari across social media, and have tagged the Prime Minister’s Office, National Human Rights Commission, National Commission for Women (NCW) and Maharashtra (Chief Minister’s Office) to catch their eye.Meanwhile, representatives of the Aundh Vikas Mandal have also met with police inspector Bhaskar Jadhav of Chaturshringi police station to raise their concerns and demand quick action in this case. Besides, they are also pushing for safety measures across their area to be beefed up. Mandal president Vaishali Patkar shared, “It is the responsibility of the cops to make sure such terrible incidents don’t happen in the city. We want them to realise that this case cannot be brushed under the carpet. We are all set to approach the NCW and the Pune commissioner of police (CP). We want women to be safe in Pune.”Similarly, youth groups have also stepped up to support the family of the survivor — some are also offering their professional skills. Rohan Shetty, an advocate who works in the city, told Mirror, “I am a part of a youth group named Yudh — we are all firm that the girl must get justice. I have also spoken to her mother and assured her that they can rely on me for any legal help required. Further, many members of our Tulu community, which is spread nationwide, have expressed that they stand in solidarity with the family.”While still grappling with the trauma of the incident, the young girl’s kin are overwhelmed by the kind of support being showered on them, and have been motivated to take their struggle ahead. Her mother told Mirror, “It is an incredible thing, to see this kind of solidarity from various groups. They have all contributed in elevating our confidence to fight the anti-social elements who left us distressed. Unfortunately, there exists in general society a great deal of social stigma when it comes to the violation of women’s rights. This very mentality has to change. The system itself needs to be more sympathetic towards the victim — not the perpetrator. One hopes that this kind of public support ensures that the accused are punished, setting an example for anyone who feels they can harass a woman and get away with it.”When Mirror contacted police commissioner K Venkatesham about the wave of citizen outrage, he assured a meeting with protesters. “As far as the case is concerned, the intensity of the injury on the woman’s head did not allow for section 326 (voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means) of the Indian Penal Code to be applicable. We have been investigating the case. We welcome suggestions from residents and NGOs.”
