Mumbai: Abducted from home, 16-day-old toddler's body found in Sion gutter

The child's body was retrieved from a gutter not far from her home in Sion (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: Locals on Wednesday discovered the body of a 16-day-old toddler, abducted from her home a day earlier in Mumbai's Sion area. The child's corpse was recovered from a gutter not very far from her residence after the parents registered a missing person complaint in this regard at the Sion police station. Prima facie, a case of abduction and murder has been lodged against unidentified accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

In her complaint, the child's mother claimed that someone abducted the child from her house at Sunder Kamla Nagar slums near King Circle railway station when she went to the bathroom for barely a few minutes. She approached police when attempts made by her and other locals to locate the child went in vain, reported Mumbai Mirror. Based on her complaint, a team of personnel with Sion police wasted no time in launching a rescue operation.

A few hours later, the team recovered the child's body from inside a gutter near her home. Family members, including the mother, were then summoned to identify the body. They confirmed that the body was that of their 16-day-old baby girl. Following the recovery of the body, additional sections of murder were added to charges of abduction in this regard.

Police officials familiar with the matter suspect that the heinous crime may have been committed by someone known to the family. Everyone, including the mother, is being questioned by investigators who are probing the case from all angles. One officer was even quoted as saying by media outlets that the crime may have been committed out of personal enmity. The team has gathered some "vital leads" and whoever is responsible will be brought to justice, he added.

A similar case had come to light from Koti, Hyderabad in July of last year where a six-day-old baby was abducted from the Government Maternity Hospital. However, a team of officials with the Sultanbazar police swung into action in no time and managed to rescue the child within a matter of hours. Personnel also arrested the kidnapper, identified as a child trafficker from Bidar city in Karnataka.
