Mumbai model murder: Accused claims she threatened to file false rape case

The teenager who allegedly killed 20-year-old aspiring model Mansi Dixit at his flat in Oshiwara after she rejected his sexual advances has applied for bail. He has claimed Dixit demanded money from him and threatened to file a false rape or molestation case against him if he failed to do so.

He also claimed to have mental ailment and submitted that he often initiates physical fights with other people due to his aggressive nature. He said he was a “peace-loving” person and termed Dixit’s death an “accident.”

Syed Muzammil, 19, the accused, allegedly killed Dixit on October 15 last year.

In his bail application, Muzammil claimed he had a “friendly relationship” with Dixit through social media. Muzammil, an aspiring photographer, said Dixit approached him for a portfolio shoot. “[Muzammil] told her that he does not have his camera or material, [but] she informed him that she had a great fashion photography camera and she was ready to come [to his] home,” reads the plea submitted before the Dindoshi sessions court.

Muzammil has claimed Dixit arrived at his house without the camera and there was a heated argument between them. “She started demanding money and threatened to file a false rape or molestation case if he does not pay her,” he claimed. “If someone threatens him then he is not in his mental condition to handle the situation like a normal person,” Muzammil’s advocate submitted before the court. The teenager said that after Dixit’s threat, he pushed her out and told her to “get lost from here”. Following his push, Dixit fell down and hit her head on the wooden stool, losing consciousness, he claimed.

The defence submitted that Muzammil was scared and thought the girl had died. “So he put her in (a) bag and left her out.”

The court is likely to decide on his bail application on April 3.

Also Read | Accused in Mansi Dixit murder has mental ailment, anger issues, say family

SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON

ABOUT THE AUTHOR Farhan Shaikh Farhan Shaikh is a reporter with Hindustan Times, Mumbai. He writes for the crime and legal team, along with reportage on Mumbai traffic issues. ...view detail
