Pakistan violates ceasefire along LoC in Jammu and Kashmir's Mendhar sector

New Delhi:

The Pakistan Army violated ceasefire for the fifth consecutive day by shelling forward areas and posts along the LoC with mortar bombs in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch district, according to reports. At 03.45 pm Monday, the Pakistan Army initiated unprovoked ceasefire along the LoC in Mendhar sector. The Indian Army retaliated strongly and effectively. The firing was underway when the last reports came in.

"Jammu and Kashmir: Pakistan violated ceasefire in Poonch district today at about 15:45 hours by shelling with mortars and firing of small arms along LoC in Mendhar sector. Indian Army is retaliating befittingly," the news agency ANI reported.

Jammu and Kashmir: Pakistan violated ceasefire in Poonch district today at about 1545 hours by shelling with mortars and firing of small arms along LoC in Mendhar sector. Indian Army is retaliating befittingly. — ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2019

Early in the day, two Army jawans were injured as Pakistani troops continued night-long mortar shelling and firing in Pallanwala, Sunderbani and Nowshera sectors of Jammu and Kashmir. The two Army jawans, who were injured in Pallanwala sector, were admitted to a hospital, the officials said.

On Thursday, an Army jawan was killed as Pakistani troops shelled forward areas and Indian posts with artillery and mortar bombs heavily along the LoC in Jammu and Kashmir's Rajouri district.

The border skirmishes witnessed a spurt after India's air strike on a Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp in Balakot on February 26 in response to the February 14 Pulwama terror attack in which 42 CRPF personnel were killed and dozens of others injured.

Pakistani troops have violated ceasefire over 110 times along the Line of Control (LoC) this year. The year 2018 witnessed the highest number of ceasefire violations, numbering 2,936 by Pakistani troops, in the last 15 years along the Indo-Pak border.

Pakistan continues to violate the 2003 ceasefire agreement with India despite repeated calls for restraint and adherence to the pact during flag meetings between the two sides.

(With inputs from agencies)

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
