Shaheed Diwas 2019 Nation Remembers Bhagat Singh Shivaram Hari Rajguru Sukhdev Thapar Here Are The Unseen Pictures

Bhagat Singh, Shivaram Hari Rajguru, Sukhdev Thapar, was an Indian socialist revolutionary considered to be one of the most influential revolutionaries of the Indian independence movement. They gave their lives for the country.

The anniversary of the deaths of Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev Thapar, and Shivaram Rajguru on 23 March 1931, in Lahore (Pakistan), is declared to be Martyr's Day.

Two incidents during Bhagat’s teen days shaped his strong patriotic outlook - the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre in 1919 and killing of unarmed Akali protesters at the Nankana Sahib in 1921 when he was 12 years old, Singh visited the site of the Jallianwala Bagh massacre hours after thousands of unarmed people gathered at a public meeting had been killed.

His family believed in the Gandhian ideology of non-violent approach to attain Swaraj and for a while Bhagat Singh also supported the Indian National Congress and the causes behind the Non-Cooperation Movement. Following the Chauri Chaura Incident, Gandhi called for the withdrawal of the Non-Cooperation movement.

Unhappy with the decision, Bhagat Singh, isolated himself from Gandhi's nonviolent action and joined the Young Revolutionary Movement. Thus began his journey as the most prominent advocate of violent insurgency against the British Raj.

He was pursuing B.A. examination when his parents planned to have him married. He vehemently rejected the suggestion and said that,

“ If His Marriage Was To Take Place In Slave-India, My Bride Shall Be Only Death."A Year Later, To Avoid An Arranged Marriage, Singh Ran Away To Cawnpore.”

“ My Life Has Been Dedicated To The Noblest Cause, That Of The Freedom Of The Country. Therefore, There Is No Rest Or Worldly Desire That Can Lure Me Now”

Whereas, Sukhdev participated in numerous revolutionary activities such as the 'Prison hunger strike' in 1929; he is best known for his assaults in the Lahore Conspiracy Case (18 December 1928). Sukhdev was the prime accused in the Lahore Conspiracy Case of 1930, whose title reads "Crown versus Sukhdev and others."

On The other hand, Shivaram Hari Rajguru was known mainly for his involvement in the assassination of a British Raj police officer.

In December 1928, Bhagat Singh and an associate, Shivaram Rajguru, fatally shot a 21-year-old British police officer, John Saunders, in Lahore, British India. They mistook Saunders, who was still on probation, for the British police superintendent, James Scott, whom they had intended to assassinate.

They believed Scott was responsible for the death of popular Indian nationalist leader Lala Lajpat Rai, by having ordered a lathi charge in which Rai was injured, and, two weeks after which, died of a heart attack.

Saunders was felled by a single shot from Rajguru, a marksman. He was then shot several times by Singh, the postmortem report showing eight bullet wounds. Another associate of Singh, Chandra Shekhar Azad, shot dead an Indian police constable, Chanan Singh, who attempted to pursue Singh and Rajguru as they fled.

Eventually, Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and Sukhdev were tried for Saunders’ murder in what came to be known as the Lahore conspiracy case. They were found guilty and sentenced to death.

The executions were to be carried out on 24 March 1931, but the three prisoners were hanged a day before, on 23 March at 7.30 p.m.

A few months before he was hanged, Bhagat Singh, who used to read a lot in jail, had written in a pamphlet titled ‘Why I am an atheist’: “I know the moment the rope is fitted round my neck and rafters removed from under my feet, that will be the final moment….With no selfish motive, or desire to be awarded here or hereafter [in after-life], quite disinterestedly have I devoted my life to the cause of independence because I could not do otherwise.

"The day we find a great number of men and women with this psychology who cannot devote themselves to anything else than the service of mankind and emancipation of the suffering humanity, that day shall inaugurate the era of liberty.”

SOME INSPIRATIONAL QUOTES FOR NEW PATRIOTIC INDIA

" This Is Not The Time To Marry. My Country Is Calling Me. I Have Taken A Vow To Serve The Country With My Heart And Soul."

" Study was the cry that reverberated in the corridors of my mind. Study to enable yourself to face the arguments advanced by the opposition. Study to arm yourself with arguments in favor of your cult. I began to study."
