Pune: Six-year-old stabs classmate with geometry divider

PUNE: The Yerawada police on Friday booked a schoolteacher for neglecting the safety of students on school premises after a student of Standard I stabbed his classmate with a divider from his geometry box.The incident occurred on Monday afternoon at a private English medium school located in Yerawada. The girl student has sustained considerable injuries. Both students are six years old.After the girl’s mother (32), a resident of Yerawada, lodged a complaint with the police, a schoolteacher was booked for negligence. The police said the girl’s parents, both working professionals, are presently on a sabbatical.The incident came to light after the girl’s mother took her to the hospital where doctors informed her that the injuries were caused by a sharp instrument. When the girl’s mother enquired about the injuries, the girl narrated the incident.As per the police complaint, the incident occurred between 12.45pm and 1.30pm on Monday. The students of Std I were to attend a dance class but the girl decided to stay back in the classroom since she was sleepy. All other students proceeded to the dance class on the ground floor of the school while the girl put her head down on her desk.The police pointed out that the boy entered the classroom while the girl was alone. He went to her desk and shouted at her about breaking his scale. In a fit of rage, the boy pulled out a divider from his geometry box and hit the girl hard. He also went on to stab the girl thrice, the police said. When the girl screamed for help, teachers and other members of the school staff rushed to the classroom.The girl student was eventually admitted to a private hospital as the bleeding wouldn't stop.The police said that it was the class teacher’s duty to look after the students since they remain in their custody during school hours. The 39-year-old teacher neglected her duties, which led to the incident, the police said.The case against the teacher has been registered under relevant sections of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act.
