Times Of Swaziland

MBABANE – If former acting Mbabane Mayor Thulani Mkhonto thought the insensitive rape comment he posted on Facebook was now water under the bridge, he shouldn’t hold his breath.

He still has to appear before Deputy Prime Minister Themba Masuku who has summoned him to his office tomorrow afternoon.



INSENSITIVE STATEMENT



The DPM has described Mkhonto’s post as insensitive and condemned the statement.

The post, which Mkhonto later deleted after receiving huge criticism, read: “Life is like being raped: If you can’t fight it, just enjoy it.”

Even though he apologised “to all Facebook users and the Eswatini Nation” as well as to rape survivors and families, saying he had realised the insensitivity and inhumane nature of the post, Mkhonto was himself labelled a ‘rapist’ and given advice that issues touching on rape, violence and sickness were very sensitive and should be treated as such.



Masuku, the DPM, in a press statement, said such comments had exhibited a high degree of irresponsibility and were counterproductive “and have no place in our world”.

“This being the international women’s month we expect love and consideration for our women folk,” he said.



cases of abuse



He stated that his office had the mandate to address cases of any form of abuse and had laws aimed at protecting all emaSwati from such.

“Rape is a very serious and traumatic experience which can never be trivialised or turned into a joke. I therefore urge that we engage further in this matter with Mr. Mkhonto this coming Monday afternoon at the DPMO to appreciate his position and intentions,” Masuku said.



He added: “I am certain hereafter he will become one of our anti-rape advocates and speak out against such despicable acts. I further implore all emaSwati to speak out and report rape and domestic violence cases as no one is supposed to be violated.”

Mkhonto’s employer, the Eswatini Posts and Telecommunications Corporation (EPTC), issued a statement immediately after Mkhonto attracted social media bashing wherein the company noted with deep regret the publication of the Facebook post by its employee.



The company said the post had the effect of belittling the impact of rape.

“We would like to assure all our valued stakeholders and the public at large that the issue is being dealt with in accordance with internal policies,” the Corporation said.

Rape culture and cyber-bullying are dominating the spaces of students at higher-education institutions find themselves in.



Last September, the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC), in collaboration with the University of Johannesburg, held a dialogue in an effort to unpack the causes and solutions to the challenges of rape culture and cyber-bullying at universities.

Giving a feminist perspective‚ Mandisa Khanyile‚ who formed part of the national #TotalShutDown steering committee‚ said people tended to lack responsibility for what they say online because they had a sense of safety behind the screens of their mobile phones.



LIVES RUINED



“They think they can do whatever they want. People’s lives are ruined when we think we can make jokes about them or shame them. We need to develop a culture that respects people’s dignity‚ privacy‚ their sexuality and decisions. People have made it okay to bully others because they can‚“ Khanyile was quoted saying by TimesLive. “Social media is an unregulated space‚ and that should stop. We should find a middle ground,” she added.



should’ve known better



Mkhonto should have known better!

Yesterday, the former acting Mbabane Mayor revealed that the source of his insensitive rape post was a comment that was made by a top Indian investigator who also received serious bashing and had to apologise for having reportedly compared rape to unlicensed betting which, because it cannot be prevented, should be enjoyed. This happened in 2013 and activists called on the top investigator, Ranjit Sinha, the Central Bureau of Investigation in India, to step down.




