Sushma Swaraj Asks Report On Abduction Of Two Hindu Girls Who Forcefully Converts To Islam In Pakistan

External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj on Saturday has asked the Indian envoy in Islamabad for a report on an incident of apparent abduction of two girls belonging to the minority Hindu community in Pakistan’s Sindh province.

Sushma Swaraj took her concern to twitter and said, “I have asked the Indian High Commissioner in Pakistan to send a report on this.”

Mr.Minister @fawadchaudhry - I only asked for a report from Indian High Commissioner in Islamabad about the kidnapping and forced conversion of two minor Hindu girls to Islam. This was enough to make you jittery. This only shows your guilty conscience. @IndiainPakistan — Chowkidar Sushma Swaraj (@SushmaSwaraj) March 24, 2019

The incident first was splashed in the social media of Pakistan which showed a grieving father protesting in a police station at Dharki town of Ghotki district in Sindh asking for the release of his two daughters taken away by goons during the Holi.

According to the media report, the incident took place in Dharki town of Ghotki district in Sindh province on the eve of Holi. When the two girls, 13-year-old Raveena, and 15-year-old Reena, were allegedly kidnapped by a group of "influential" men from their home in Ghotki district on the eve of Holi.

Soon after the kidnapping, a video went viral in which a cleric was purportedly shown solemnizing the Nikah (marriage) of the two girls.

It said the Hindu community in the area staged protests, demanding action against perpetrators of the alleged crime. India has been raising the issue of the plight of minorities, particularly the Hindu community in Pakistan.

ALSO READ: 7 Militants Shot Down In Kashmir After A 24 Hour Gun Battle

Pakistan has recently passed a Hindu marriage law which allows greater citizenship rights to the minority community. However, incidents of forced conversion and violence against minority Hindus and Christians continued uninterrupted despite assurance from PM Imran Khan who recently assured the Hindu community of his country of equal rights.
