Top 10 weirdest moments on ITV This Morning with Holly Willoughby and Phillip Schofield

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Want all the best bits on the box? Share your email to get TV news, interviews, spoilers and more

The queen and king of daytime TV, Holly Willoughby and Phillip Schofield have entertained us for years.

From their drunken National Television Award antics to their frequent accidental innuendos - the nation loves them.

But occasionally, This Morning can take a rather weird turn and over the years there have been many examples of that.

From a woman claiming her family were abducted by aliens to a man pretending to be a puppy, we take a look at the top 10 bizarre moments on This Morning.

The human puppy

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

Audiences were shocked in 2016 when Tom Peters appeared on This Morning saying he was a human puppy.

The theatre sound and lighting technician, who goes by the name of Spot, said becoming a dog was a 'means of escaping life'.

He said: "You just have a chance to chill and relax and enjoy life with a chew toy and some scratches behind the ears.

"When you’re into it your mind has gone right down to being a puppy."

But viewers were more astounded that throughout the whole interview, Holly and Phil kept a straight face, especially when interviewing his ex-fiancée Rachel.

The biggest breasts

(Image: ITV)

Phillip Schofield didn’t know where to look when Chelsea Charms came on the programme showing off her 164XXX cup breasts.

Chelsea wanted to be a professional exotic dancer and decided that she needed to have bigger breasts to fit the role.

And despite Chelsea's open and honest nature, the whole interview was rather uncomfortable to watch thanks to Phil's squirming.

I have proof my family were abducted by aliens

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

In 1961, an American couple hit the headlines when they reported that they were abducted and experimented on by aliens.

Over 50 years later, Betty and Barney Hill's niece, Kathleen Marden appeared on This Morning to explain why she believes her family were telling the truth.

Her concrete evidence was that Betty had been wearing a blue dress when the 'abduction' took place, but when she took the dress out of her wardrobe at a later date it was covered in a pink powder.

I married my dog

(Image: ITV)

Back in 2014 Amanda Rodgers appeared on Holly and Phil’s sofa to defend her romantic ceremony with her dog.

Amanda had married Sheba in Croatia in front of 200 guests.

She said: “She was two weeks old and she was new to the world- but I fell in love with her… I knew we were meant to be.”

Phil vs Kim Woodburn

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

The Liverpool-raised TV personality got into a blazing row with the Phil during an interview about her time in Celebrity Big Brother.

74-year-old Kim left viewers cringing after the chat descended into a war of words - while Phil’s co-presenter Holly Willoughby was left trying to stifle laughter.

The How Clean is Your House star took offence to Phil’s questions about her behaviour during her time on CBB - which she has branded “hell on earth”.

She said: “Phillip you were not there. I know what went on in there. I went through hell.”

To which Phil replied: “There was a lot of exaggeration.”

She said: “Don’t think you are going to bully me, I have been around too long.”

A nervous pony

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

It’s normal when appearing on TV to be extremely nervous, but for one pony, the bright studio lights all became too much.

During a segment about Britain’s first ever guide ponies, Phillip asked one of the trainers whether a pony could be house-trained like a dog.

It was at that exact moment that one of the ponies had a bit of an accident.

Phil replied: “That’ll be all over the internet now - and all over the carpet.”

Guest falls into the Albert Dock

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

As This Morning celebrated its 30 year anniversary, Alison Hammond was on the Albert Dock ready to present the weather.

But, as Alison was just getting into the swing of weather reporting, things took a turn for the worse when one of her helpers fell face first into the Albert Dock .

The media personality attempted to jump from England to Northern Ireland on the map, but in turn managed to push one of the men helping her across into the Albert Dock.

A shocked Alison shouted: "Oh my gosh are you alright? I am so sorry."

My relationship with a ghost

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

Amethyst Realm appeared on ITV' s This Morning to talk about how she has ditched men for supernatural beings.

She claims she was caught cheating on her fiancé with her first spooky lover when he came home early from a business trip over a decade ago, and has never looked back.

Since then Amethyst said she has had sex more than 15 ghosts leading presenter Phillip to say: "You must have made quite a name for yourself in the spirit world."

Luckily she took it well, as he tried to refine what he meant by saying; "Well, they must like you, a lot come to you."

Holly vs Katie Hopkins

(Image: ITV)

Usually Holly manages to remain composed whatever the situation on This Morning. However in 2013, Holly became enraged with the controversial Katie Hopkins when she claimed it was acceptable to judge children based on their names.

The former Daily Mail columnist stated that she didn’t like geographical names such as Brooklyn or London.

But in one of the most iconic moments in daytime TV history, Phil pointed out that Katie’s daughter is called India to which Katie replied: “That’s not related to the place.”

Fear of Simon Cowell

(Image: ITV)

Many of us suffer from phobias – whether that be heights, spiders or birds.

But Michelle Hall’s fear was a bit more niche.

Standing in for Holly and Phil, Ruth and Eammon interviewed Michelle who was scared of Simon Cowell.

Can't get enough of TV and celeb news? For all the latest TV and celeb news you can follow us on Twitter @celebliverpool and Facebook via https://www.facebook.com/pg/Celebrityliverpoolecho You can also follow our individual reporters: Rebecca Koncienzcy: @RDKoncienzcy Lottie Gibbons: @lottgibbons Sophie McCoid: @Mccoidsophie

She said that when she looks at the music mogul, it feels like he's coming to get her - but turns out there was a rather rational explanation.

Therapist Nick explained that Michelle had created an association between anxiety and Simon Cowell.

After the programme, Michelle was offered therapy to help her cope with her fear.
