Delhi Crime review: A pacy drama, but where is Nirbhaya?

Delhi Crime, the Netflix India original, based on the investigation of the horrific 2012 Nirbhaya gangrape case, has been making the news ever since its announcement. It took us six and a half years back when the rape case shook the collective conscience of the nation as sordid details of the crime unfolded headline by headline, day after day and as the nation prayed for the survival of the rape victim even though she suffered irreparable damages and couldn't have ever led a normal life.

Six men lured Nirbhaya and his friend inside the bus from Munirka bus stop where they were looking for a ride back home after watching a movie in South Delhi, and assaulted them. The two were beat with iron rods and Nirbhaya was taken at the rear of the bus and gangraped by all. The perpetrators also assaulted her with iron rod and pulled her intestines out.



The case was so grim, dark and shocking that the role of Delhi Police could never come into light, and it looks like the creator of the series Richie Mehta wanted to show a different side of the institution and give them some credit for their hard work.

The series shows how all the six accused were nabbed in a span of five days with some of the best brains of Delhi Police at work.

How the story unfolds



The story revolves around the character of Vartika Chaturvedi, DCP South Delhi (Shefali Shah) who is woken up in the middle of the night by a disturbing call that states a naked boy and a girl are found in the middle of the road. Vartika immediately senses something fishy and begins the investigation. She is horrified by the never-seen-before brutality of the case. She resolves to crack it with lightning speed as any delay would mean the accused getting away from their hands forever. While Vartika has taken the battle personally considering she has a young daughter almost the age of Deepika, the political pressure continues to mount and the protests get more intense while her teenage daughter bears consequences of the negative wave against Delhi Police.

Undeterred by this, Vartika doesn't stop till she and her team are successful in nabbing all the six culprits.



Edge-of-the-seat drama

Delhi Crime is the edge-of-the-seat watch, but it's difficult to binge-watch it because of its sheer darkness and lack of light moments. It has a pacy narrative and well-etched characters, but one might want to see more of Nirbhaya (Deepika) and her life in the series. In fact, it is solely her character that has not been explored much. It tells us about the incident that happened with her, but nothing at all about her personal side, her hopes, aspirations.

A case for Delhi Police

The series makes it clear at the very outset that it is based on the investigation of Delhi Police into the 2012 rape case and does not go into the details of the ghastly act. Creator, writer and director of the series Richie Mehta said that when the crime happened there was a lot of anger towards the institution and when he met the police officials involved in the investigation, his motive was to bring their point of view forward.

The introductory voice-over says it all. "11,000 heinous crime are reported every year. Prevention is nearly impossible with half the police stuck on traffic duty and VIP protection. The city looks away because it has to. Because it always has. But once something happened, which made it stop. For a moment, the eyes of the entire world turned to Delhi. It was the crime that took the city to the brink."

It is clear, the web series celebrates Delhi Police even if it meant exaggerating their achievement and turning them into heroes. It also gives us a peek into the lives of officers who are at time made to work round the clock with minimal facilities. SHO Vinod Tiwari asking his staff to play electricity bills from fuel budget is something which makes us empathise with them. The anger and frustration of family members of these cops rightly come across in the scene where a wife disconnects her husband's call when he asks why his son had failed exams. Another family member complains of the broken furniture. If somebody has to fulfill a family obligation or attend to a person work, they have no option, but to bunk the shift.

Performances take the cake



Delhi Crime has some strong performances that support the intense and grippy storyline very well. Abhilasha Singh who plays the role of Deepika (Nirbhaya) leaves a strong impact whenever she's in the frame. She is bed-ridden and can only deliver with her dialogues and expressions, but is successful in making viewers feel her pain. Shefali Shah's Vartika Chaturvedi has ample scope for exploring different shades to her character from an able officer, an inspiring leader to a loving mother. She aces it all and comes out as a strong individual who's extremely focussed and would not stop before her goal despite hurdles galore. Rajesh Tailang as Bhupendra Singh is the backbone of the investigation and his quirky methods result in quick results. His level-headed and humanistic approach leaves one impressed. SHO Vinod Tiwari (Vinod Sharawat) is your quintessential cop who wants to evade duty by coming out with lame excuses but comes up with a path-breaking idea that helps Delhi Police collect crucial evidence against the perpetrators. Rasika Dugal as Neeti Singh is the conscience of the series. She is a dutiful officer and puts profession before personal needs. But when it comes to humanity, she rises above all and shows us the true mirror.



Yashaswini Dayama who plays Chandni, the teenage daughter of Vartika has a mind of her own and she would rather trust her instincts than feel protected in the shadow of her DCP mom. Chandni does not feel safe walking in the streets of Delhi and feels she can live freely only by moving away from the country. Her mother tries to convince her that the city is getting better, but then Deepika case happens and the protective mother will have to start the drill of convincing her all over again.

The shocking confession of physically disabled Jaisingh, one of the rape accused, in Episode 3 would leave everyone dumbfounded. The spine-chilling confession and remorseless eyes could give you sleepless nights. The accused felt justified about teaching lesson to the girl and the boy who were getting cosy inside the bus. He also felt justified in pulling out the intestines of the girl because he was angry.

Sandeep Bishnoi who plays Deepika's (Abhilasha Singh) friend Akash has a brief but a crucial role in the series. His character graph from a victim of violence to the one hungry for publicity is nicely captured.

End leaves us thinking



Richie ends the show at a point that leaves viewers uncomfortable rather than satisfied after all the culprits are nabbed by the Delhi Police. Neeti, the trainee IPS officer tells Vartika that deep in her heart, she doesn't care about the investigation, forget about any celebration on nabbing all the culprits, and just wants Deepika (Nirbhaya) to get recovered fully. Vartika is not allowed to bask in the satisfaction of cracking the case as she's informed that Jai Singh has committed suicide in the Tihar jail.

The fact is there couldn't have been a perfect end to this crime tale. Nirbhaya (Deepika in this series) died after the best treatment and the juvenile victim got away with just three months of punishment, while the four of them are still on death sentence.
