Shortage of anti-terror vans puts Delhi at risk?

Delhi Police's Parakram vans have meticulously trained commandos with assault rifles to act as the first responders in the shortest possible time and minimise casualties in case of terror attacks.

But the elite units may be falling short in numbers, and some of them may not be in the best of shape, multiple police sources have confirmed to Mail Today.

That's not all. About 60% of these anti-terror vehicles - rolled out after the 26/11 terror attacks in Mumbai - roam in already highly secured areas, including Lutyens' Delhi. Eighteen of these vans are generally deployed at places such as Rashtrapati Bhawan, India Gate, BJP headquarters, Delhi Airport's terminals I & III, Connaught Place, Lal Quila, Qutub Minar, Lajpat Nagar and Sarojini Nagar market.

They sometimes move around in neighbouring areas. This leaves uncovered some of the vulnerable and crowded places such as Delhi Secretariat, IGI Airport's Terminal II, Civil Lines and Karol Bagh, a Mail Today reality check has revealed. Delhi Police have 30 of these vans, and 30 more are needed, sources said, adding that about 7-8 are not operational. "Thirty vehicles are not good enough to provide security cover in all important places. The demand is almost double," said a top source in Delhi Police.

This may send alarm bells ringing, keeping in view Delhi's vulnerability to terror attacks. On Thursday night itself, Delhi Police's Special Cell arrested alleged Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist Sajjad Ahmed Khan from a place near the Red Fort. He had been in touch with the slain February 14 Pulwama terror attack mastermind Mudasir Ahmed Khan, the police said.

Sajjad was arranging for funds and weapons and identifying men to train them in terror operations, the police said, adding he had been sent to Delhi by JeM to choose important targets and to set up a hideout. Delhi is almost always in a state of high alert.

DELHI SECRETARIAT

The complex has the offices of the Chief Minister and his Cabinet colleagues. It has a daily footfall of 50,000 and is guarded by 50 cops.

CIVIL LINES

The north Delhi neighbourhood has the residences of Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal, his health minister Satyendar Jain and many other Cabinet colleagues.

Karol Bagh and Gaffar market are also some of the places that need these anti-terror vehicles, police sources said.

"We have been asking for handing over of Delhi Police to the Delhi government for long.

Unless the police are under the elected government, there will be issues like these," an Aam Aadmi Party spokesperson said.

IGI AIRPORT

Terminal II that has a 24-hour footfall of 30,000 doesn't have Parakram vans. But there are 25 cops to secure the area. Sanjay Bhatia, DCP (IGI Airport), said: "Following intelligence inputs, we personally monitor outer security of all three terminals.

One Parakram van is round the clock deployed at Terminal III that has a 24-hour footfall of 80,000. Another Parakram van is deployed at Terminal 1 (domestic airport) that has a footfall of 25,000."

POLICE STAND

No police official was willing to directly talk about any deficiency in the anti-terror systems.

Special Commissioner of Police (Operations) Sunil Kumar Gautam also refused to comment on the numbers.

Prem Nath, Additional Commissioner of Police (Operation& Modernisation Cell), however, said, "We consider Parakram vans as the first responders in case terror strikes a particular place. There are three commandos with assault rifles in each of them. They are well trained in man-to-man and firearms combat skills. They are well complemented by NSG-trained drivers and team leaders."

"The drivers have an important role to play and hence they undergo rigorous training at the NSG headquarters. They work as a team which makes them lethal and impeachable in antiterror operations," he said.

He said Delhi Police also have Special Weapons and Tactics or SWAT vans which work under the Special Cell. "They and NSG reach in a flash while Parakram commandos engage with terrorists," he said.

Also Read | Karnataka open for talks with Ola over six-month ban

Also Watch | DGCA tightens norms for flying Boeing 737 Max planes




