IAF wing Commander Abhinandan medical report reveals these 5 major disclosures

India wing commander Abhinandan, even though handed it over to India in 60 hours, but in Pakistan Abhinandan had to go through 60 hours, after that there are a series of disclosures after it. Yes, Abhinandan are undergoing treatment in India and many major disclosures have been made in medical reports so far, so that Pakistan has once again been exposed. There are 5 big disclosures in the Medical Report of Abhinandan, which also exposes the activities of Pakistan. So let's know that the medical report of the reveals

The first disclosure - mental harassment

It is clear from the medical report of Abhinandan that he has not been physically abused, but mental harassment has definitely happened. However, the Abhinandan had conveyed to the Army and the Defense Minister that when he came to India, he had been tortured mentally in Pakistan. According to medical reports, during the interrogation of the Abhinandan, the Pakistanis had mentally tortured.

Second revealing - spinal cord injuries



when Abhinandan was jammed from the parachute in Pakistan, he was caught by the crowd and had also beaten, that video was watched by the whole world. However, this confirmation has now been confirmed by the complimentary medical report. According to the medical report, Abhinandan have been suffered in the spinal cord and injury has also been done in the ribs, so that the convocation will be treated for a long time.

also read Taimur Ali Khan adorable pics of celebrating Holi with Pichkari…watch video inside

Third disclosure - body chip

when Abhinandan coming to India, it was believed that the Pakistanis could chip to spy in their bodies and clothes, but in the medical report it was revealed that there is no chip in the body of the Abhinandan. In such a situation, once the Abhinandan are recovered than soon teach seen flying to defence nation.

Fourth Revealed - ISI

According to intelligence sources, the Abhinandan were kept with the ISI in Pakistan and they asked questioned to Abhinandan. Apart from this, the delay in release of the Abhinandan was also the mind of the ISI and they had also edited the video, so that the video should bring the matter to its mind accordingly. Abhinandan were recorded mentally tortured for recording the video.

Fifth Revealed - Abhinandan on Health

Medical reports revealed that Abhinandan has injury in spinal cord, which can take two months to recover. That is made clear that Abhinandan can fly again after a couple of months. However, Abhinandan had recently made a statement that they are desperate to fly and so they will be given permission soon.

also read Delhi police arrested JeM terrorist from Red Fort area
