‘Godman’ held for raping woman, extorting Rs 3.5 lakh from couple

Mumbai

Trombay

Khandwa

Madhya Pradesh

Maharashtra

A self-declared godman who allegedly raped awoman on the pretext of curing her son of cancer, and extorted Rs 3.5 lakh from her scientist husband and she, was arrested by thepolice on Saturday. The accused has been identified as Chaitanya Soni, 41, a resident of Ujjain.A Chembur-based couple approached the Trombay police on March 15, claiming the man had duped them and raped the wife on the pretext of curing their son.The couple, whose son was diagnosed with cancer in 2017, had met the accused during a religious function at a temple, and the mother had narrated her son's ordeal to him, police said. The child passed away last year.The accused had then promised to cure their son's cancer through some rituals, and visited their house one day. He conducted a yagna in the house and asked the woman and the child to consume what he called holy ash. But the mother and son fell unconscious after consuming the ash."When they regained consciousness, they found the godman still in the house. He told them the son's 'cure' was complete, and the child would be fine soon. He also allegedly took jewellery worth Rs 60,000 from the woman and left the house. After a few days, the accused again contacted the woman to tell her he had detected some 'complications' in her son's case, and had a cure for them. He allegedly instructed her to visit the Andheri hotel room where he was staying to know about the cure. The victim went to the room, where the accused allegedly sexually assaulted her, claiming that it was a part of a vidhi (ritual). He also allegedly recorded the act on the camera and clicked photos of the woman. Later, he used the videos and the photos to blackmail her for money, and even threatened to upload them on social media," a police official said."The woman did not tell her husband about the sexual assault. The accused also took around Rs 2.98 lakh from her on the pretext of performing various rituals for her son's well-being.The alleged extortion and harassment by the godman continued even after the child died last year. The victim then finally narrated the assault to her husband, and the couple approached us. We immediately registered an FIR under sections of IPC for rape, extortion and sexual harassment, and a probe was begun," a police source said.Another police officer said, "We immediately formed a team to trace him, and it was dispatched to Ujjain. While we were trying to trace him, we found that he had not even visited his house for a long time. With technical help, we traced his location toin, and caught him at a lodge where he was staying."It was revealed that the accused had similarly raped another woman in Ujjain and a rape case is registered against him there. We are checking if he has also committed similar offences in. He is in police custody," the officer added.
