Chhapaak: Deepika Padukone’s first look as acid attack survivor Malti unveiled- first aid tips for acid burns

Deepika Padukone’s Chhapaak first look as acid attack survivor Malti unveiled | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: Deepika Padukone, one of the most talented actors in Bollywood, on Monday took to social media to share the first look of her upcoming film ‘Chhapaak’. Deepika, who shared her look as Malti on Twitter and Instagram, said her character will stay with her forever. Chhapaak, Meghna Gulzar, is based on the life and struggles of acid attack survivor Laxmi Agarwal.

Chhapaak also stars Vikrant Massey and is scheduled for release on January 10, 2020. “A character that will stay with me forever...#Malti,” Deepika, who will also produce the film, captioned the picture. The actress also said that the shooting of the Chhapaak begins on Monday, March 25, 2019. Check out her social media posts below!

Acid attacks take place all over the world, yet the prevalence of this vicious crime in India is disturbing. Acid attack, also known as acid throwing, is an act of extreme violence with the intention to disfigure, maim, torture or kill, and with most of the victims being women only. Acid attacks make the victim’s life irrecoverable and the impacts on health can be lifelong. With increasing crime rates, especially n a country like India, it’s important to know the first aid - dos and don’ts - if you find yourself aiding a victim or involved in an accident.

How to treat acid and chemical burns: Immediate first aid

The NHS and leading burn surgeons are providing some urgent steps a victim or witness can take that can help reduce the immediate pain and damage, as well as long-term injuries. According to the health agency, this type of criminal assault needs immediate medical attention.

The NHS England guidance ‘Report, Remove, Rinse’, which has been developed with specialist BAPRAS burns and trauma surgeons, instructs people to take three simple steps in the event they witness or are a victim of an attack:

Report the attack by dialling emergency medical services. Remove the chemical and any contaminated clothing carefully – ensure not to touch or spread the chemical as this can cause further injuries to the victim or the person helping them. Also, avoid wiping the skin as this may spread contamination. Rinse the affected area using clean water as soon as possible to remove any residual chemical, while avoiding rubbing or wiping the area.

Considering the fact the minutes after an acid attack are critical for helping a victim, the NHS guidance outlines what first steps to take in the event of an attack in those crucial minutes before professional help arrives on the scene.

Treatment for chemical burns

Acid attack victims need specialist burns treatment and may require reconstructive surgery. Chemicals like sulphuric and hydrochloric acid - the two types of acid which are used in acid attacks - cause coagulation necrosis, an accidental cell death that leads to tissue ulceration. patients may stay in the hospital for a number of days. Deeper burns can take months or even years to heal and cause permanent damage to facial structures, leaving visible scarring that affects the ability to create expression. Depending on the severity of the injury, an acid burn can cause lifelong deformities, including sight loss or restricted use of limbs or muscles.

Sadly, patients also undergo a lot of problems when it comes to accepting their appearance and dealing with what they look like after the traumatic event, hence, burns support group also provide practical and emotional support to victims and their families.

Disclaimer: Tips and suggestions mentioned in the article are for general information purposes only and should not be construed as professional medical advice. Always consult your doctor or a professional healthcare provider if you have any specific questions about any medical matter.
