Bengaluru artist creates portrait of IAF pilot Abhinandan Varthaman using a typewriter

ANI | Photo Credit: Twitter

Ever since Indian Air Force Wing Commander Abhinandan was captured by Pakistani Army on February 27 and released on March 1, his courage and confidence have been celebrated with many gestures across the country.

Thousands of Indians celebrated the brave pilot’s return by bursting crackers, writing poems, distributing sweets, and even naming newborns after his first name.

Last week, a chef at the 14th Culinary Art of India event in Delhi has carved the IAF pilot’s face on a watermelon. Chef Jitender created the tribute art while participating in the Fruit and Vegetable carving category.

This week, an artist from Bengaluru paid tribute to the Wing Commander by creating a black and white portrait using a typewriter. An image of the portrait has now gone viral on social media.

Artist Gurumurthy typed out numbers, alphabets, symbols and special characters that are available on a regular typewriter to create the image of the pilot.

The portrait is complete with Abhinandan’s gunslinger moustache which recently caught the fancy of thousands of users on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram. Even private companies leveraged his style to sell products.

“Unlike heroes in films, Abhinandan is the real hero. He brought real laurels for our country, this is what inspired me. I appreciate his bravery and the night he returned to India, I made this attempt,” he added,” Gurumurthy told ANI.

Here are some pictures of the portrait:

Bengaluru: Artist creates a portrait of Wing Commander Abhinandan using a manual typewriter. AC Gurumurthy, artist says, "He is the real hero, he brought real laurels for our country, this is what inspired me." #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/PFQC2E2gMu — ANI (@ANI) March 21, 2019

Gurumurthy, who dreams of entereing the Gunniess Book Of World Records with his art, has previously created typed portraits of former president APJ Abdul Kalam, former US president Barack Obama and Mother Teresa.
