Living in fear, assailants roaming free: Kashmiri student thrashed by mob in Bengaluru

The victim, 24-year-old Absar Zahoor Dhar, hails from Srinagar and works as a model to fund his studies. (Courtesy: Twitter/Fahad Shah)

A Kashmiri student was allegedly thrashed by a group of men near Hindustan Aeronautics Limited headquarters in southeast Bengaluru on March 20. Four of the accused have been arrested but granted bail within a day.

The accused have been identified as 25-year-old Nithin, 21-year-old Manjesh, 26-year-old Gautham, and 20-year-old Santhosh.

The victim, 24-year-old Absar Zahoor Dhar, hails from Srinagar and works as a model to fund his studies. He said that he has never seen the people who attacked him and has no clue why he was assaulted.

Also Read | Kashmiri student thrashed in Bengaluru, IPS officer threatens journalist for sharing post on Twitter

Speaking to IndiaToday.in, Dhar said, "On March 19, a man named Nithin accused me of teasing one of his friend’s girlfriend. I was shocked because I can never ever do that."

"The next day, I went to this coffee shop and ordered my food. When I was about to go back home at around 10:30 PM, some eight-nine people came in an auto and blocked my way. They then attacked me with rods and knives. I almost lost consciousness. I have never seen those people and I am still clueless," he said.

"It seemed like they were wanted a reason to hit me up for some personal grudge."

Dhar was later taken to a hospital where he received 13 stitches on his hand, six on the face and five on the head.

The victim said that he has been living in Bengaluru for the last three years and never faced any problem in the past. He said that he has been living in fear as the accused, who are now out on bail, have been roaming outside his house as if nothing has happened.

Absar Zahoor Dhar, 24-yr-old Kashmiri student has been beaten up in Bengaluru. Dhar, who funds his studies by modelling, says They could have killed me... I’m living in fear, not attending college as the assailants roam free in front of my house as if nothing happened. #kashmir pic.twitter.com/TcfeLbOFn1 Fahad Shah (@pzfahad) March 24, 2019

The Bengaluru incident has come days after three Kashmiri vendors were brutally thrashed by a group of men in Uttar Pradesh's Lucknow. The accused thrashed the Kashmiri vendors and called them stone-pelters. All the four accused were arrested later.
