College student abducted while on her way to college in Uttar Pradesh, police launch search

Uttar Pradesh police have launched a drive to locate the girl (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Kanpur: Police in Billhaur area of Uttar Pradesh have launched a search operation to rescue a 21-year-old post-graduate student who was abducted by unidentified assailants in broad daylight on Monday. Pursuing MA from a local college in the district, the girl left home to collect her admit card from the college on Monday and has not been seen since.

The girl's family members received a text message around 4 pm on the same day alerting them about her abduction which is when they decided to approach the police, reported Times of India. We were informed that our daughter has been abducted and whosoever wrote the text messages threatened us against approaching local law enforcement personnel.

On the basis of a complaint by the girl's family members, Billhaur Kotwali police launched a drive to locate her around Monday evening. Officials familiar with the matter said that they have limited information and that the girl's father has not received any calls for ransom as of yet. The girl's family have also denied any personal enmity with anyone, added the officer.

Inspector Gyan Singh with the Billhaur Kotwali police told the national daily that a first information report (FIR) has been lodged against unidentified assailants under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for the abduction and wrongful confinement among other charges. A team has been formed and is currently carrying out raids to nab the culprits and safely rescue the girl from her captors, said Inspector Singh.

A similar incident had come to light from Muzaffarnagar district in Uttar Pradesh earlier this year where a 17-year-old girl was abducted and gang-raped by five men when she was out in the fields to collect fodder for cattle. Acting on a complaint by the girl's brother, Ratenpuri police arrested the accused from Phulat village within hours of the incident. An official familiar with the case had told media officials at the time that the accused had recorded videos of the heinous act to threaten the survivor and stop her from alerting authorities.
