View: How much Nyay in Rahul Gandhi's income transfer scheme?

Is Rahul Gandhi ’s minimum income scheme for the poor breakthrough policy innovation to eradicate poverty or a path to fiscal and economic ruin? Or, alternatively, is it a hoax, on par with Narendra Modi ’s promise in 2014 to recover the presumed zillions Indians have stashed away abroad and put Rs 15 lakh into the bank account of every Indian?The honest answer is that it depends. It depends on political courage to radically reconfigure policy and spending. If that courage is forthcoming, the minimum income scheme — dubbed Nyay, meaning justice, as an acronym for Nyuntam Aay Yojana , Hindi for minimum income scheme — could be redemptive, not just for the poor but for the entire nation. Minus the needed courage, the policy would be disastrous folly.Nyay would run up an annual bill of Rs 3.60 lakh crore. That looks big in itself, but is only 1.7% of GDP, which, for 2019-20, is put at 210 lakh crore. The trouble is, India collects only a shade under 17% of GDP as taxes, the Centre and the states combined. The last budget presented by the outgoing Modi government put tax collection by the Centre at 12.2% of GDP, of which about one-third is transferred to the states. Nyay would eat up more than a fifth of the Centre’s net tax collections. It exceeds the entire explicit subsidy bill of the 2019-20 Budget and equals 13% of the total government expenditure. In short, Nyay just cannot be an add-on to existing expenditure, but must reconfigure assorted current expenditure, to make it fiscally sustainable.The biggest defender against any charge of unsustainability is, strangely enough, finance minister Arun Jaitley , who says that the present government already transfers over Rs 1 lakh as direct benefit transfer, far in excess of the Congress promise. A minor quibble might be, if that is the case, why are there any poor people still around? Such questions evidently are on par with “how come thieves and robbers still make news with intermittent loot of cash hoards worth lakhs and crores, when demonetisation has already destroyed black money?”How can Nyay work and be turned into an instrument of redemption? By folding assorted existing subsidies into this and liberating key prices, say, of food, fuel and power, from repression and distortion, so that these sectors turn viable.Take the power sector. In spite of repeated bouts of debt restructuring, distribution utilities remain broke and unable to purchase power from generators. The result is cruel perversity: at peak summer, India is able to run less than 50% of its installed generation capacity of 350,000 MW and people in small towns and rural areas run diesel generators to produce the power they need. The unused capacity represents financial ruin for those who invested in setting it up, enormous bad debt on banks’ books and lost production. The reason why power distribution utilities are broke is that politicians deem it their dharma to give power away to farmers and the poor and to patronise theft by others. About 30% of the power that is produced is not paid for, making the sector dysfunctional.If, after transferring Rs 6,000 a month to a poor family, it is asked to pay a realistic charge for the power it consumes, it will. In the process, all consumers of power can be asked to pay for the power they consume: a whole lot of theft takes place from unmetered connections meant for those who cannot afford to pay. If the power sector turns viable, stable, quality power would be available in rural India, allowing agro-processing industry to come up. This would eat into wastage of perishable produce, improve farmer income and incentivise greater output. The banking sector would turn a whole lot healthier, too.Another enormous potential is for reforming agriculture. Government intervention, in the name of helping the farmer (peace be upon him), of course, has produced crop choices that are, frankly, crazy. Sugarcane, a water guzzling crop, should be grown only in eastern UP and Bihar, where the floodplains brim with water. Free power, absent cess on ground water and liberal subsidies on fertiliser have led to mass cultivation of cane in arid Maharashtra. Tamil Nadu fights with Karnataka for water and pumps it to cane, besides wasteful, needless flood irrigation of paddy. Farmers continue to torture the depleted soil of Punjab to grow yet more rice and wheat, mounts of which rot in government godowns.Another state intervention in farming is via pricing. Some crops get artificially high support prices, which make them uncompetitive outside India. Others face export bans, repressing their price. All these distortions must go, and farmers enabled to realise a larger share of the value their produce gains on the way to the consumer, through organisations such as Amul, that would rid them of middlemen and inefficient logistics. A viable power sector is the key to both local value addition and growth of non-agricultural sectors in rural India. Taking a large proportion of the workforce — 49% still toil on the farm, as compared to 2% in, say, the US — out of farming and raising farmer incomes via an efficient crop mix and better price realisation are the means to ending rural distress.Income support to the poor will allow them to absorb the initial price shock such a correction of agricultural policy will entail.The short point is that far from being a prescription for fiscal and economic ruin, the income support scheme can open the way for an economic reboot, provided politicians find the courage to keep doing the right thing amidst howls of protest. Reconfiguring subsidy and policy would disrupt existing structures, produce losers — middlemen, for example, whose death cry can be frighteningly loud and send local political patrons rushing to the rescue — as well as far more numerous winners.Reconfiguring subsidy and policy is an anaemic term for the analyst. It spills blood and causes pain, as surgery does, in practice. Only if politicians have the stomach for it can Nyay live up to its meaning. Minus that, it would waste resources, erode vital state services and degrade society.
