Mother of all poll sops; but Congress fails to reveal the details

TOI Quick Edits are written by a team of seasoned journalists from the Times of India's Edit Page and TOI-Online who respond to important news stories as they develop. The team comprises senior journalists with wide-ranging interests who debate and opine on the news and issues of the day. LESS ... MORE

Congress, on Monday, sought to turn the electoral discourse back to welfarism with the promise of depositing Rs 6,000 per month in the accounts of the poorest 5 crore households in the country. Its president Rahul Gandhi termed this the “final assault on poverty”. Such a payout will account for nearly 1.5% of GDP and BJP has asked where Congress intends to find the resources. But it is precisely on this crucial point that Congress has offered no details.

The only way such a scheme can be rolled out is by folding up many of the existing welfare programmes. But that is easier said than done. Another headache will be the identification of the beneficiaries. An artificial line like BPL is hardly conclusive given that very little separates those under BPL and those unfortunate enough to fall just above it. This has bred corruption and patronage politics in many states.

Given that the stakes now involve a huge amount of money there is immense scope for social strife among those who lose out. Congress was the original welfarist party but in five years in power, BJP has appropriated that position through schemes like PM-Kisan, PMJAY and Ujjwala. But the original BJP promise of Achhe Din has gone silent with the party focusing now on ‘nationalism’. Given how poll sops eventually descend into one-upmanship it can be expected that BJP would have some aces up its sleeve too.

In 1971, Indira swept to power with the “Garibi Hatao” slogan but it was an empty slogan because government occupied the commanding heights in the economy and was in no position to create jobs. We are again nearing a point of saturation where new reforms are needed to generate more resources, even for redistribution. It is time political parties offered more clarity on the reforms that will keep us afloat and not just the sops that win the votes.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email
