HC orders CB-CID probe into boy’s death

Madurai

The Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court on Tuesday ordered a CB-CID inquiry into the custodial torture and resultant death of a boy from Madurai. It is said that the 17-year-old boy was picked up by the S.S. Colony police for inquiry into a jewel theft, kept in illegal custody for three days and subjected to custodial torture.

Justice N. Seshasayee observed that the court was not happy with how the case was handled by the police. Any amount of condemnation was not going to bring the boy alive. Yet, the court could not turn a blind eye in the case, he said while transferring the investigation to CB-CID. The court said that the case would be investigated under Section 302 (murder) of Indian Penal Code.

The court ordered that the investigation team of the CB-CID shall be led by an officer in the rank of IPS and shall not not be shifted from investigation till the leave of court. The court asked the registry to transfer the records to the DGP who, in turn, would hand over the documents to the CB-CID.

However, the court deferred the grant of compensation since materials available had not taken shape. The court said it would wait for the status report from the CB-CID to grant appropriate compensation to the family of the boy.

During the course of hearing, the court said that there were several loose ends in the case. It pulled up the authorities for their shoddy conduct in the case. The court questioned why no post mortem was conducted in the first place and why a case was not registered till court intervention.

“The police, Government Rajaji Hospital and the Juvenile Justice Board have not acted fairly in the case. Is it a case of criminal negligence or someone playing tacit accomplice for the death of the boy,” the court asked, expressing surprise and disappointment over the conduct of authorities.

The mother of the boy moved the court seeking a CB-CID inquiry, alleging that her son was subjected to custodial torture by the S.S. Colony police. She claimed that her son was picked up by the police for an inquiry in a case of jewel theft, kept in illegal custody for three days and subjected to torture. The boy succumbed to injuries at GRH where he was being treated.
