Aahana Kumra doesn’t blame Ranveer-Alia for her shocking run-in with a MakeMyTrip cab driver

Aahana Kumra, who was last seen in the critically-acclaimed film Lipstick Under My Burkha, went through a harrowing ordeal recently. After booking a cab from popular site MakeMyTrip, the talented actress was allegedly held hostage for hours by the driver. Why? It is because he hadn’t received the payment for the trip! After sharing her experience on Twitter, the actress managed to get some help and reach her destination safely. Since Alia Bhatt and Ranveer Singh are the brand ambassadors of MakeMyTrip, the whole episode became all the more serious, especially with Twitterati calling out the two stars. We got in touch with Aahana Kumra and asked her about the same. Read on to know what she had to say.

While speaking exclusively to CineBlitz, Aahana Kumra said, “I don’t think it has to do anything with MakeMyTrip’s brand ambassadors – Alia Bhatt and Ranveer Singh – as they don’t have to do anything with this. They are just paid by the company for it and they do their job. It is the responsibility of the company to provide me with a proper driver and do the needful.” She added, “I didn’t even know that Alia and Ranveer are the faces of the brand and when I was tweeting everyone was tagging them and I was clueless about it. Later, I got to know about it and I thought it was not fair to drag them into this as they have nothing to do with it.”

Coming back to Aahana’s nightmarish experience, her cab driver halted the car in the middle of nowhere. It obviously scared the actress. She tried getting in touch with MakeMyTrip, but her efforts went in vain. After being held captive for hours, Aahana took to Twitter and shared her experience via a series of tweets. As soon as the 35-year-old reached Amritsar, she tweeted, “To think that I can be heard because I’m a verified account on @Twitter is a blessing. I can’t imagine what companies like @makemytrip must be treating their other women passengers like with their most pathetic customer service.” What do you have to say about Aahana’s revelation? Share with us your thoughts in the comments section below!
