Indian Air Force pilot Abhinandan Varthaman returns to his squadron in Srinagar despite being on sick leave

File picture: Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was captured by Pakistan on February 27 and released on March 1, has gone back to his squadron in Srinagar despite being on a four-week sick leave, news agency PTI mentioned official sources as saying on Tuesday.

The IAF pilot, who had shot down a Pakistani F-16 jet with his MiG-21 Bison, was advised to go on sick leave by his doctors on March 14 after his debriefing and treatment at the Research and Referral Hospital.

However, Varthaman reportedly chose to stay with his squadron in Srinagar than going to spending time with his family in Chennai.

"During his sick leave, the officer had the option of going to his family home in Chennai where his parents live but he decided to go back to Srinagar where his squadron is deployed for operations," news agency ANI quoted sources in IAF as saying.

"At the moment, the officer has decided to stay with his men and machines in Srinagar and would be required to come back to New Delhi for a review medical board which will decide on his fitness for flying fighter planes," sources said.

The medical board will review his fitness after the conclusion of his four-week sick leave. Their assessment will assist the IAF top brass to ascertain whether Abhinandan can return to fighter cockpit or not.

The Pakistani Army had captured the brave IAF pilot on February 27 after his MiG-21 Bison jet was shot down in a dogfight with Pakistani jets. He had shot down an F-16 fighter jet of Pakistan before his aircraft was hit.

As he landed in a village in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir when his parachute drifted, the IAF pilot was manhandled by a crowd. The Pakistani Army soon took him into custody.

While the whole country prayed for Varthaman’s return, politicians, ex-servicemen, celebrities, strategic affairs experts heaped praise on the way he handled and tackled the questions as well as torture meted out to him in the Pakistani captivity.

He showed exemplary courage and grace despite being in the most difficult circumstances.

Tensions between India and Pakistan rose after a Pak-based terror group, Jaish-e-Mohammed, claimed responsibility for a suicide attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district on February 14. Forty CRPF jawans were killed in the ghastly act.

On February 26, Indian fighters bombed JeM’s biggest training camp near Balakot inside Pakistani territory. Pakistan retaliated by trying to target Indian military installations in Jammu and Kashmir on February 27. However, the IAF thwarted their plans.
