Opening in Orlando: Dumbo, Hotel Mumbai and more

Opening this week:

Dumbo I don't know what it is with these live-action remakes of two-dimensional cartoons. Beauty and the Beast. The Lion King. Your second marriage. I mean, leave well enough alone, right? This time, it's Tim Burton revisiting that which should remain untouched, namely Disney's classic 1941 plea for tolerance of the different and kindness toward animals. And boy, it says something about how unnecessary a project is when you can think of passing on a film that features the great Eva Green and Alan Arkin and a miniature Batman Returns reunion. (Michael Keaton and Danny DeVito, together again.) But this is how we live now. (PG)

Hotel Mumbai Where you go when they're full up at the Hotel Rwanda? Not necessarily, if you're expecting another "message picture" from this depiction of the 2008 terrorist attack on the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel. The Hollywood Reporter says the unflinching but context-free film raises questions, all right – chiefly, "Why am I sitting through this?" But you've got to respect a movie that's willing to tackle those tough issues. (R)

The Mustang A new inmate at a Nevada state prison learns to manage his anger issues by taming wild horses. In the alternate universe I choose to live in, this is what happened to Ann Romney. (R)

Also playing:

Cruel Intentions 20th Anniversary Just think, it was only 20 years ago that Reese Witherspoon was more believable as an innocent virgin than as a drunken fishwife who likes to tell off cops. We've all grown so much! (R; playing at Regal Winter Park Village Stadium 20 & RPX, Regal Waterford Lakes Stadium 20 & IMAX and Regal Oviedo Mall Stadium 22)

Giant Little Ones A teenager is falsely accused of being gay – an experience that may or may not repair his relationship with his father (Kyle MacLachlan), who left the boy's mother (Maria Bello) for a dude. Jesus, would everybody just put on Drag Race and do a bong rip. (R; playing at Regal Winter Park Village Stadium 20 & RPX)

Kesari The Sikh Regiment of the British Army faces off against Afghani tribesmen in a historical epic that enjoyed the best opening weekend of the year back home in India. Of course, that's all going to change with the release of Jawaharlal Nehru: Endgame. (NR; in Hindi; playing at Universal Cinemark at CityWalk and AMC West Oaks 14)

The Wedding Guest The great Michael Winterbottom directed this story about a kidnapper (Dev Patel) who abducts a woman from her wedding at the behest of the man who can't let her go. Patel is also on screens this week as a valiant waiter who helps defend the guests of the Hotel Mumbai from their terrorist attackers. Between going that extra mile and the whole willing-to-kidnap-a-bride thing, this is really the guy you want at your reception. Bet he does one hell of a chicken dance, too. (R; playing at Regal Winter Park Village Stadium 20 & RPX)
