Don't be bewitched by Dalai Lama or 'rumours' about the human rights situation in Tibet: Official

The international community must not be 'bewitched' by the exiled Dalai Lama or his 'rumours' about the human rights situation in Tibet, officials said today.

This year marks the 60th anniversary of a failed Tibetan uprising against Chinese rule that forced the region's spiritual leader into permanent exile in India.

It resulted in a bloody crackdown that the government-in-exile says killed tens of thousands.

Critics of Beijing's policies in Tibet were misled by rumours or 'bewitched by separatist groups such as that of the Dalai Lama', said Norbu Dondrup, vice-chairman of the regional government.

Tibetan officials defended China's polices and warned against being 'bewitched' by the Dalai Lama. This year marks the 60th anniversary of a failed Tibetan uprising against Chinese rule

Critics of Beijing's policies in Tibet were misled by rumours or 'bewitched by separatist groups such as that of the Dalai Lama', said Norbu Dondrup, vice chairman of the regional government

Beijing continues to be accused of political and religious repression in the region, but insists Tibetans enjoy extensive freedoms and that it has brought economic growth.

In a white paper published Wednesday, the Chinese government said 'economic and cultural ties between people in Tibet and those in the rest of China have become closer, with an increasing number of mixed communities and a closer emotional bond'.

It also said Tibet's regional economy was among the fastest growing in the country, and that the central government has poured about 1.4 billion yuan (£157 million) into restoring Tibetan cultural relics and refurbishing key monasteries.

Norbu Dondrup said Tibetan society was 'very dark and very cruel' before Communist Party rule.

He said ordinary people - or 'serfs' - could be bought and sold, thrown in jail, or even killed at will when the Dalai Lama was in charge in Tibet.

The Dalai Lama arrives at Tezpur, Assam in India on April 18, 1959. He fled to India from the Tibetan capita Lhasa after a failed uprising against Chinese rule

The Dalai Lama receives the Nobel Peace Prize from Egil Aarvik, chairman of the Norwegian Nobel Committee on December 10, 1989 at Oslo University. This year marks 60 years since the spiritual leader went into exile after fleeing a Chinese crackdown in Tibet in 1959

'The Dalai Lama attacking our human rights totally has ulterior motives. He tramples on human rights, and has no right, no qualifications, and is unworthy of talking about human rights,' Norbu Dondrup said.

'As for some countries slamming our human rights, they either don’t understand or believe the Dalai clique's rumors and bewitchments,' he said.

The human rights situation in Tibet was extremely good, he said, listing examples such as free medical care and an abundance of food.

Asked whether China would ever allow an independence referendum in Tibet, as has happened in Scotland and Quebec, Norbu Dondrup said Tibet has been an inseparable part of China since ancient times.

'We have never recognized Tibet independence, and neither has any other country,' he said. 'Moreover, the peoples of Tibet in the extended family of the peoples of the motherland now have very happy lives.'

A demonstrator holds a portrait of the Tibetan spiritual leader Dalai Lama, during a march of the Tibetan community in France in Paris on March 24

Tibetan exile Jamphel Yeshi, 27, runs as he is engulfed in flames after he set himself on fire during a protest in New Delhi on March 26, 2012. At least 150 Tibetans have set themselves on fire since 2009 in protest against Beijing's presence in Tibet, most of whom later died

Tibetan-Americans and friends and supporters of Tibet gather to protest in front of the Consulate General of China in Los Angeles, California on March 10

Supporters of the Dalai Lama chanted and prayed at the Buddhist shrine in mountainous Dharamsala - home to Tibet's government in exile in northern India

But at least 150 Tibetans have set themselves on fire since 2009 in protest against Beijing's presence in Tibet, most of whom later died.

China's investment in the region includes a huge outlay on security to build a surveillance state that makes it harder to organise protests.

Rights groups say that a government campaign targeting the family and friends of protesters has also helped suppress dissent.

Beijing has also restricted access to the region for journalists, diplomats and foreign visitors citing 'special geographic' and 'climatic conditions'.

The 83-year-old Dalai Lama, who gave up his political role in 2011 but remains based in Dharamsala, has gained worldwide respect for his pacifist approach, winning the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989.

He remains a thorn in the side to China, which adamantly rejects any suggestion of Tibetan autonomy and blacklisted the spiritual leader as a dangerous 'separatist'.

The Dalai Lama leads a group meditation at the Bercy arena in Paris on October 14, 2003

Above, the iconic Potala Palace in the regional capital of Lhasa in Tibet Autonomous Region

Last week, the Dalai Lama told Reuters in an interview published on Monday that it was possible his incarnation could be found in India, adding that the Chinese government could try to intervene and choose a successor it approves of.

'In future, in case you see two Dalai Lamas come, one from here, in free country, one chosen by Chinese, then nobody will trust, nobody will respect (the one chosen by China). So that's an additional problem for the Chinese! It's possible, it can happen,' he said.

The Chinese Foreign Ministry responded by saying that the reincarnation of the current Dalai Lama must comply with Chinese laws and regulations.

'The Chinese government has adopted policies on freedom of religious belief. The reincarnation system is respected and protected by such legal instruments as "Regulations on Religious Affairs" and "Measures on the Management of the Reincarnation of Living Buddhas",' spokesman Geng Shuang said.
