Police still clueless on abducted girl’s age

No valid record such as birth certificate or Aadhaar card

While the Oachira police have booked four youths under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act in connection with the alleged abduction of a 15-year-old Rajasthani nomad girl, there is still no clarity about the victim's original age.

The police team, that traced the girl and prime suspect Mohammed Roshan at Panavel in Mumbai on Tuesday, is expected to reach Kollam on Thursday morning. According to the statement of Roshan, the girl is not underage and he eloped with her since both the families were against their relationship. While her family insists that the girl is only 15, they have no document to prove her age.

"As of now, we have no valid record such as birth certificate or Aadhaar card that proves her age. The case was filed on the basis of her father's statement and no authentic document was produced then. Currently, we have just two options — either we find sufficient record and produce it before the court or we go for medical tests to verify the age,’’ Karunagapplly ACP Arunraj told The Hindu.

While the family allege that the girl was forcibly taken, the girl maintains that she left with Roshan by choice and she was not under any duress. ‘‘But her consent becomes valid only if she is 18 since a minor's consent is immaterial in the eyes of law. Under POCSO, her consent is nothing,’’ said Mr. Arunraj. According to the police, the girl had made another attempt to elope in the past and currently she has denied all other allegations made by her family.

Meanwhile, the local police and many persons from the neighbourhood allege that the case was blown out of proportion since the boy’s father is a local CPI leader.

‘‘The girl is the eldest of seven siblings and five of them used to dress up as boys. They were often seen working in and around Valiyakulangara and the parents were not sending them to schools. Once we had alerted the child protection unit about the children," said a neighbour.

He said the neighbours were aware of the affair though they had no idea about the girl's age. During last few days, a string of politicians, including Congress leaders Oommen Chandy and Ramesh Chennithala and Suresh Gopi, MP, had visited the girl’s home to offer their support.

Kollam DCC president Bindu Krishna who went on a 24-hour hunger strike in front of the home was later booked under POCSO Act for revealing the identity of the minor through social media
