Priyanka Chopra, Rani Mukerji, Tabu – 7 actresses who impressed us with their tough cop act

Vigour and self-belief are the key qualities that a cop should possess. It is not easy to fight criminals who are constantly preying on the innocents. Cops are always on their toes to protect the community from all sorts of harm. We have watched films like Singham, Simmba, Dabangg, Zanjeer and many others in which our male superstars have portrayed the role of a super-cop. With Mardaani 2 going on the floors and Rohit Shetty planning to make a female cop movie, looks like the era of women super-cops has finally dawned upon us. There have been some brave policewomen roles in the films from the past as well. Let’s take a look at 7 actresses who have donned khaki uniform onscreen:

Rekha in Phool Bane Angaaray (1991) – Rekha, throughout her career, has given some mind-blowing performances. But this film of hers has always held a special place in our hearts. In the film, when her husband gets killed, Rekha decides to join the police force and then avenges his death. Rekha played the brave cop role with panache. One could say that she totally owned the film with her performance.

Dimple Kapadia in Zakhmi Aurat (1988) – This film depicts what women have to go through in our country and shows even police officers are not spared from the mistreatment. Dimple Kapadia fearlessly portrays the role of a policewoman who is sexually harassed. After living through the trauma, she expresses her anguish when she is being denied justice. This film, nonetheless, brings awareness about prevalent sexual violence against women. Kudos to Dimple for playing such a role.

Vijayashanti in Tejasvini (1994) – Assistant Superintendent of Police Tejasvini Joshi, played by Vijayashanti, fights for justice in a city known for rampant corruption. She has the fire, vigour, and anguish to do what it takes to defeat corrupt officials. This film is based on the life of Kiran Bedi.

Priyanka Chopra in Jai Gangajal (2016)– Priyanka Chopra plays the role of an IPS officer Abha Mathur, doing full justice to her character. In the story, being a female cop, she is expected to take a softer stand on criminals. But Abha, who is a fierce woman with strong will power, goes all out and unleashes hell on the criminals. Priyanka emerges victorious and proves that women are not some dainty mannequins but powerful forces. We loved it.

Tabu in Drishyam (2015)- This is a fierce role played the one and only Tabu. Despite being an antagonist in the film, she makes us root for her character as she showcases the power of a strong cop and the vulnerability of a mother whose son is missing.

Shefali Shah in Delhi Crime (2019) – Ever since its release on the OTT platform, Netflix, Delhi Crime is fast becoming the most talked about web series in town. Based on one of Delhi’s most brutal rape cases, a Deputy Commissioner, Vartika Chaturvedi is leaving no stones unturned to find the culprits behind the heinous crime. Being a mother herself, she sensitively handles the case and is determined to deliver justice to the victim’s family.

Rani Mukerji in Mardaani (2014)– Making her comeback into films as a no-nonsense cop, Rani bowled over the audience and critics with her stunning portrayal of police officer Shivani Shivaji Roy. The story that is based on lines of child trafficking, involves Rani taking on the mastermind behind the crime racket.

To conclude, we doff our hats to these actresses who have fearlessly showcased the strength of the khaki-clad women. Stay tuned to CineBlitz for more news and updates from the world of Bollywood!
