Man blackmails, rapes ‘friend’ using pics

alcohol

rapes

We will have to check with the lodge located on Outer Ring Road in Marathahalli as she has given exact dates when she had been forced to visit him in the lodge where he raped her­ –An investigating officer

A 25-year-old man managed to take objectionable pictures and videos of his 'friend', a 21-year-old woman, when she was allegedly under the influence of, and is alleged to have used it to blackmail and repeatedly rape her. The man, Nagendra, is also accused of having promised to marry her and later blocked her number on his phone after refusing to keep his words. The victim has filed a complaint with the Marathahalli police.The woman, who works with a finance firm, has filed a complaint against Nagendra. She is a resident of Mahadevapura and claims to have met the accused through a common friend, while she was working as a hair technician in an elite hair transplant centre in the city.After the two became friends, the accused is alleged to have taken her to a pub on Old Madras Road and made her drink. He then reportedly took her to a lodge in Marathahalli and is alleged to have taken objectionable videos and pictures of her on his mobile phone without her knowledge. It is suspected that he had raped her while managing to film her.“The victim in her complaint has stated that the accused started blackmailing her with the videos and pictures of her. He would call and ask her to meet him at the same lodge and would then rape her, threatening to upload them on social networking sites, if she did not listen to him.The two are said to have known to each other since December 2017 and the alleged repeatedhave happened since then. She has claimed she has been raped for over five times,” said an officer on part of investigations.The victim in her complaint has further stated that the accused even promised to marry her and started avoiding her when she demanded to marry her. When he refused to marry her, she knocked the doors of the police.“The case has been registered on Monday which is under investigations. We will have to check with the lodge located on the Outer Ring Road in Marathahalli as she has given exact dates when she had been forced to visit him in the lodge and raped her,” the officer added.The police has registered a case of rape (IPC 376), punishment for cheating (IPC417) and criminal intimidation (IPC 506) against the rape accused.The Marathahalli police have registered a case.
