Ravneet Kaur, murder India: Indian police charge Gold Coast man Jaspreet Sing charge Ravneet Kaur, husband of nurse found dead in Canal with wife's murder

The husband of a pregnant Queensland nurse found dead in an Indian Canal has been charged with her murder.

Indian police confirmed to 9News they have charged Jaspreet Singh, from Surfers Paradise, over the death of his wife Ravneet Kaur.

Kaur, 29, who has a four-year-old daughter and was pregnant with her second baby, travelled to India on February 25 to visit family and friends.

Kaur, 29, who has a four-year-old daughter and was pregnant with her second baby, travelled to India on February 25 to visit family and friends. (Supplied)

Police confirmed the charge and will extradite Mr Singh, who was on the Gold Coast when his wife went to India, to the country. (Nine)

Her body was found in the canal, in Punjab, on Monday night.

Mohit Dhawn from Punjab Police had earlier alleged to 9News Mr Singh was having an affair, and “hatched the conspiracy” with his alleged mistress, Keran Preet Kaur.

“He was the only person who hatched the conspiracy with Keran to eliminate his wife,” Mr Dhawn said.

“They then used the sedative medicines to make her unconscious, tied her up and took her to the Bhakhra area they strangled her and threw her in the canal.”

Mr Singh said he has nothing to do with his wife's death., (Nine)

Kaur's body was found in the canal, in Punhjab, on Monday night. (Nine)

Police confirmed the charge and will extradite Mr Singh, who was on the Gold Coast when his wife went to India, to the country.

He told 9News last night he wasn’t involved.

Speaking on the phone from his Gold Coast apartment, he said: “I’m sitting alone, doing nothing, just thinking what happened to her".

“I have lost everything.

“Why would I kill her? She’s my wife. I have a daughter of four years.”

Mr Singh said he wasn't involved in his wife's death, (Supplied)

Mohit Dhawn from Punjab Police had earlier alleged to 9News Mr Singh was having an affair, and “hatched the conspiracy” with his alleged mistress. (Supplied)

He also claims his affair ended three years ago.

Jaspreet's alleged mistress was allegedly in Punjab the day Ravneet, who worked at Tricare on the Gold Coast, vanished.

Her sister, Taren Preet Kaur is accused of throwing Mrs Kaur’s body into the Bhakhra Canal, Indian police say.

Ravneet’s dad Harwinder Singh is fighting for justice for his daughter. (Nine)

9News has been told she is on a flight to India to face the law.

Ravneet’s dad Harwinder Singh is fighting for justice for his daughter.

Close friends have been left shattered.

“She was such a beautiful girl,” one said.
