Disha Patani sexy photo: Malang actor raises temperature with her latest bikini pictures

Disha Patani sexy photo: Malang actor who barely misses an opportunity of making her fans go gaga when it comes to putting sexy bikini pictures, once again set the Internet on fire. In a black and white striped bikini with black treggings. The sexy post of Disha Patani was shared by one of her fan pages on social media.

Disha Patani sexy photo: One of the sexiest divas of Bollywood industry who hardly misses a chance of making her fans go gaga with her pictures and videos, once again set the Internet on fire with her bikini images. Disha Patani who either flaunts her love for fitness via workout video or sizzling pictures in different attires, came to limelight after her Calvin Klein bikini shoot went viral on social media. Not just Calvin Klein, MS Dhoni: The Untold Story actor is also famous for her beach pictures in two pieces.

Well, Disha Patani is well known for raising the temperature with her bikini pictures. Not just her fans, Disha Patani’s rumoured boyfriend Tiger Shroff too agrees that the gorgeous lady is not just beautiful but hot as well. Her latest Instagram post in a pink monokini witnessed Tiger Shroff’s comment which has emoticons explaining that the Baaghi 2 star found his co-star’s photos too hot to handle.

Disha Patani who enjoys millions of fan following on social media, set the Internet on fire with her yet another bikini picture. One of Kung Fu Yoga actor’s fan pages took to her official Instagram handle to share her sexy bikini picture. In a black and white striped bikini, Disha Patani is seen flaunting her abs. If you missed taking a sneak peek into Disha Patani’s sexy photo, take a look at it here:

Baaghi 2 actor Disha Patani is all set to entertain her huge fan following with the upcoming movie Bharat which is helmed by Ali Abbas Zafar and bankrolled by Atul Agnihotri, Alvira Khan Agnihotri, Bhushan Kumar, Krishan Kumar, Salman Khan under the banners of Reel Life Productions, Salman Khan Films and T-Series.

Disha Patani will be sharing screens with Salman Khan, Katrina Kaif, Sunil Grover, Tabu and Jackie Shroff for love saga, Bharat. Apart from that, she will also make us fall in love with her by appearing in romantic horror named Malang. Anil Kapoor, Aditya Roy Kapur and Kunal Khemu starrer Malang.

For all the latest Entertainment News, download NewsX App
