Pakistan says Indian dossier failed to link Masood with Pulwama attack

ISLAMABAD: The dossier that India handed to Pakistan in February has failed to prove the link of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) chief Masood Azhar with the Pulwama incident, Foreign Office Spokesman Dr Mohammad Faisal has said.

At his weekly press briefing on Thursday, Dr Faisal said a 10-member investigative committee, constituted by Pakistan government, “found no connecting dots that could prove link of any Pakistani — including Masood Azhar to the Pulwama tragedy”.

The spokesman said only three out of six parts of India’s 91-page dossier pertained to the Pulwama incident, while a third of the names of the 90 people mentioned were “mere repetition”. However, he added: “Pakistan, in its reply to dossier, has informed India that it is still ready to cooperate on provision of any actionable evidence that would sustain or clear the threshold of Pakistani courts.”

He mentioned that all aspects of the information provided by India was thoroughly examined including the “confessional” video of Adil Dar, the “claim” of responsibility for the attack, WhatsApp and Telegram numbers used to share videos and messages in support of the attack, a list of 90 individuals suspected of belonging to a proscribed organisations and 22 pin locations of alleged training camps.

On a resolution tabled by the United States in the UN Security Council seeking to freeze Masood Azhar’s bank accounts, the spokesman said such a listing was purely a technical issue for which the UNSC 1267 Sanctions Committee was the appropriate forum.

He regretted the resolution was moved in the UNSC at a time when the matter was under consideration by the committee and added such “efforts to circumvent the established machinery would only weaken the 1267 regime”. He said Pakistan remained committed to fulfilling its obligations under the UNSC’s 1267 regime.

On the comments of Indian External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj seeking report from the Indian envoy in Islamabad over the alleged abduction of two girls who had reportedly converted to Islam, the spokesman termed the tweets “deplorable and an attempt to divert the world’s attention from their general election”. He said: Indian leaders might have short memory, but the world has not forgotten the gang rape of Muslim women of Gujarat and the viral videos of Muslim men beaten brutally by Hindu mobs in India.” He also urged the international community to take notice of the gross human rights violations in India.

With regards to the opening of Azad Kashmir’s Sharada Peeth temple for Hindu pilgrims, similar to the Kartarpur Corridor, the spokesman said: “No decision has been taken so far as a positive environment is a requisite for such developments.”

On the Afghan situation, the spokesman called upon all international stakeholders to “restrain and remain within diplomatic domain” while giving statements, keeping in view the “highly sensitive” nature of the issue.

He hinted that the “end [of the peace process] might not be that near and could take time” and thus required careful calibrations by all. About the United States recognising Israel’s claim on the Golan Heights, the spokesman said Pakistan joined the world community in voicing concern on the development. Its stance was based on principles of international law and the United Nations. He said the withdrawal of occupation forces from all Arab lands, including Lebanon and Syria, was vital for the future of Palestinians and also for international peace.
