Cylinder explodes on the sets of Chirranjeevi Sarja's Kannada movie Ranam - details inside

Chiranjeevi Sarja's Ranam

A fire broke out on the sets of Kannada film Ranam during a fight sequence. While Kannada actors Chirranjeevi Sarja and Chetan Kumar were shooting for the upcoming sandalwood movie, a cylinder exploded, where it is rumoured that two people died on the spot leaving several others injured. Amongst those who lost their lives were a woman and a child. According to Bengaluru police, further investigations about the incident are in progress.

As per a report on vijaykarnataka.indiatimes.com, the incident took place at 4:15 pm on Friday, where a car was supposed to blast in the action scene. While the car was ready to blast, a cylinder exploded and two crew members died on the spot. The bodies identified as Samarra, 28, and Ayira, 8, were recovered and sent to Yelahanka hospital. Chetan Kumar, who is also acting in the film, spoke to the media and said, "I did not know what happened."

According to Karnataka news channel News9, the makers of the film did not have permission to shoot on the site. Apparently, the blast happened near a police station, reports ANI.

Bengaluru: A cylinder exploded near Bagaluru police station limits earlier today, when shooting for a movie was underway at the spot. More details awaited. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/H5uPkTww74 — ANI (@ANI) March 29, 2019

Directed by V Samudra, Ranam is an action movie that will see Chirranjeevi Sarja in the lead alongside Chetan Kumar. While Chirranjeevi plays an encounter specialist (police officer) in the film, Chetan essays the role of revolutionary freedom fighter and his characters have been loosely based on the lines of Che Guevara, reports newindianexperss.com. Samudra was predominantly worked in Telugu cinema and is now dipping his toes in sandalwood movies.

Ranam will see regional actors like Chirranjeevi and Chetan coming together on the big screens for the first time. It is being made both in Kannada and Telugu languages. It is helmed by R Srinivas and the Kannada version will see Gurukiran as music director and Niranjan Babu as cinematographer.
