BJP has worked hard to take allies along: Ram Vilas Paswan

People used to think it was arrogant but the party has been more accommodative.

Pointing to the fissures in the opposition ranks, Union Minister and head of the BJP ally, the Lok Janshakti Party Ramvilas Paswan, exudes confidence about the Lok Sabha election, saying the next NDA government is already in place and only awaits the swearing in of Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a second term.

How confident are you that the NDA government is returning to power?

The NDA government has already formed and only the formality of appointing Narendra Modi Prime Minister remains. I say this because look at the way the opposition alliances are breaking up everywhere — Delhi, West Bengal, Bihar and so on. By the time the last vote is cast, the opposition will be completely non-existent. And we will win by three fourth majority.

In 2014 the allies had a limited role to play in the Modi government since BJP had the numbers. Do you see any change in that scenario?

The only change I see is that the perception that only the Congress can run a coalition government has changed. In fact, ahead of Lok Sabha elections, it is the BJP that has been more accommodative towards its allies. Look at Maharashtra, nobody thought that the BJP would give 50%seats to Shiv Sena which had been abusing PM Modi all along. Or in Bihar, where JD (U) got only two seats in 2014 Lok Sabha polls, the BJP would give them seats from its own quota. BJP contested on 31 seats in Bihar but this time is only contesting on 15 seats.

People used to think BJP was arrogant but in fact they have worked harder to take along allies. I would say the label of communalism and fundamentalist Hindutva that many stuck on the BJP government is also fading.

Has the arrogance decreased because the BJP needs allies now more than ever?

I can’t attribute any reasons to it. I would only say that people remain positive towards Narendra Modi and in fact, even the opposition has already conceded defeat. In this election, the BJP is using the slogan “NDA sarkaar” instead of “BJP sarkaar”.

Why do you say the fundamentalist Hindutva label is fading?

The masses does not believe that the Modi government is promoting the Hindutva agenda. It has done nothing in its tenure towards this goal. Some fringe elements may speak against the minorities but have you heard anything from PM himself? In fact he has directly and indirectly tried to reach out to the minority.

Union Minister Giriraj Singh sulked for a while after losing his sitting seat of Nawada to the LJP. Did the LJP have a role to play in this reshuffle?

No, we had no role to play. We had, in fact, conveyed to the BJP and JD(U) that we aren’t interested in taking any sitting seat of any of the allies. We gave up our sitting seat of Munger, because JD(U) wanted to contest from there. We had a limited demand that we should compensated for that one seat. The alliance partners unanimously decided to give us Nawada. Even after that, our party’s parliamentary board chairman Chirag Paswan consulted Girirajji who is a family friend and he did not protest.

The Congress recently announced NYAY, which it calls the final assault on poverty. Won’t it be a game changer in this election?

No one takes promises made in the election season seriously. Anyway, if you are not going to come to power, then you can promise the moon, how does it matter? And if they were so serious of eradicating poverty why didn’t they do it in 10 years of UPA government?

Upendra Kushwaha and Jitan Ram Manjhi were with NDA in 2014 and now in the opposition alliance. Will it affect the NDA’s voteshare?

The NDA will win all the 40 Lok Sabha seats in Bihar. There is no clear data on how much vote Kushwahaji or Manjhi can sway. More importantly, the JD(U) has joined the NDA this time. They had gone alone in 2014. And even then they managed to get 1 lakh to 1.5 lakh votes in each constituency. So that makes NDA a formidable alliance in Bihar.
