Gurugram: Notorious gang robs and threatens cab driver; police probe on

The accused left the victim near the Kapdiwas border on the NH8 at around 1 am (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Gurugram: A shocking incident recently surfaced in Gurugram. A gang allegedly abducted a cab driver and robbed him of his vehicle. The gang was constituted by four people who used the internet facility to book the ride. The incident took place on Wednesday night.

The gang allegedly robbed the cab driver of his car and his mobile phone. The 38-year-old had picked up the accused from Sector 39, Gurugram. The victim works with Ola, an online cab service provider.

In his FIR, the victim allegedly said that he had dropped a customer at the airport and was returning to Gurugram when he received the booking. He was supposed to drop the accused to Faridabad. He picked up the gang from Sector 39. However, when they reached the T-point to turn to Gurugram-Faridabad Raod, two of the accused stepped out of the car.

Following this, one of the accused allegedly approached the victim and slapped him several times while two others threatened him at gunpoint. Following this, the accused made the victim sit on the back seat of the car. The accused left the victim near the Kapdiwas border on the NH8 at around 1 am.

While talking to the Hindustan Times, Station House Officer, Sadar police station, Dalbir Singh said that they are trying to retrieve the details of the people who had booked the cab. The police are also trying to view the CCTV footage of the area. A spokesperson of the cab service company, Ola, expressed regret on the incident. He added that they have shared all necessary details with the authorities and are trying to support them in every way possible.

The police have registered an FIR against the accused under Section 379B of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and relevant sections of the Arms Act. The police are trying to trace criminals who operate in the area but have not nabbed anyone yet.
