Shock pics as Indian fighter jet is downed amid rising Pakistan-Indian tensions

India Pakistan: We are ready for war says Imran Khan

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The MiG 27 came down during a routine mission and the pilot managed to safely eject before impact. Indian Air Force (IAF) chiefs said the warplane was on a routine mission from Utarlai Air Force base in Barmer. They said a Court of Inquiry had been ordered into the crash.

Wreckage from the Indian jet fighter crash

The pilot of the IAF MiG 27 ejected before the plane hit the ground

An IAF spokesman said: “This morning at around 1145h, a MiG-27 UPG aircraft, which got airborne from Utarlai Air Force base experienced engine problems leading to a crash at about 120kms south of Jodhpur. “Pilot ejected safely. Preliminary reports indicate no loss of property or life on ground. A Court of Inquiry will investigate cause of the accident.” Today’s crash comes after a similar incident on February 12 when a MiG 27 aircraft came down near Pokhran range in Rajasthan. The pilot also managed to eject safest before the jet fighter hit the ground.

And Indian Defence Ministry spokesman said: "Pakistan initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by shelling with mortars and firing of small arms along the Line of Control in Nowshera sector of Rajouri. The Indian Army is retaliating befittingly.” He said there were no report of casualties in the cross-border shelling but said the latest hostilities - the third day of clashes between the two nuclear-capable nations - were ongoing. A civilian was injured yesterday when the Pakistan Army aimed mortar shells at villages in the Mankote sector of Poonch district.

The India jet crashed near the city of Jodhpur
