A 16-year-old girl was murdered after attending her boyfriend's party. This is her story.

At 16, love feels all-consuming.

There’s little more in life that seems more important than time spent with your significant other at this tender age.

And if, try as you might, you can’t convince your parents to let you see more of them, you’ll stop at nothing to find a way – even if you know it will ultimately get you into trouble.

But in the tale of one teenager’s short life – it’s a forbidden outing with her boyfriend that led to her brutal murder.

Murder at the hands of the people who gave her life.

Just nights after she told her older sister she was leaving the house to attend the party of her boyfriend, who she was dating against her family’s wishes, she returned home to a brutal beating by her father, who then, enlisting the help of a local butcher, murdered her in cold blood.

Weeks later, her mutilated body was found strewn across the road on the edge of her town.

She had been decapitated, her face completely disfigured by acid, and one of her arms cut off.

A few short weeks earlier, her father had played the role of concerned parent – reporting her missing in December. The report claimed he feared she had been abducted.

“We went to several places and searched our relatives’ homes but to no avail,” he said in a missing person’s submission. “She could have been abducted while going to meet a friend on the evening of December 28”.

But when her body was found and investigations were conducted, the family’s story came undone.

News.com.au reports the 16-year-old’s torso was in a field on the side of a road. Her severed head was found 5km away, its face seriously seared.

“It’s not possible that that was the spot where the murder happened and the body kept lying there without anyone noticing it,’’ a police spokesman said. “She was presumably killed soon after she was sent away by the father with his friend. And then they must have kept the body somewhere before throwing it on the outskirts of the village.’’

Police said the boyfriend was initially interviewed under suspicions she had been gang-raped.

However, on contacting the family, including her little sister, it became clear they were far from innocent.
