Ruhi Singh: Mumbai: Television actor Ruhi Singh booked for slapping cops, driving drunk

MUMBAI: Television actor Ruhi Singh has been booked for allegedly assaulting police officers and driving drunk early on Monday. The two offences against her were registered at different police stations. Ruhi was served a notice by the police, but not arrested, whereas her two friends were arrested in the assault case, said an official.The two incidents took place when Ruhi and four of her friends were returning from a pub in the western suburbs and stopped by a mall in Bandra to use a toilet. The mall staff, however, refused to let them use the toilet and this led to an altercation, the police said. The security guards at the mall then called the police control room and cops from Khar police station arrived at the spot. The police said that Ruhi, Rahul Singh and Swapnil Singh slapped two of their personnel and hence, they booked them. While Rahul and Swapnil were arrested, Ruhi and the other two friends were allowed to go, said the police."When Ruhi and her two friends were leaving, she got behind the wheel and rammed the car into a few parked vehicles in Santacruz as she was under the influence of alcohol. The Santacruz police station has booked her for rash driving also," said deputy commissioner of police (zone IX) Paramjit Singh DahiyaThe Khar police have booked Ruhi, Rahul and Swapnil under the IPC section 353 (assault or criminal force deterring public servant to perform duty) and the Santacruz police have booked her under IPC section 279 (rash driving) and under the Motor Vehicle Act for drunk driving.Senior inspector at Khar police station Sanjay More said that they arrested Rahul and Swapnil based on the CCTV camera footage that shows them and the actress assaulting the staff at the mall and slapping some cops. "Though we had served Ruhi a notice, she did not turn up at the police station on Monday. The other two friends were allowed to go the same night as they had tried to stop the fight," said More.
