Delhi Crime web series director Richie Mehta to be sued by Delhi Police SHO; Read Details

In recent times, if there is one web series which has managed to leave viewers completely shocked and appalled by its details, then it is Delhi Crime. The web series focuses on the investigation done by Delhi Police during the Delhi rape case that dates back to December 16, 2012. Directed by Richie Mehta, Delhi Crime showcased a mixture of facts and fiction related to the details of the investigation done by the team of Delhi Police. However, now, reports are in that Delhi Police Lodhi Colony SHO, Anil Sharma isn’t happy with the portrayal of his character in the series and will be suing Richie Mehta for it.



In the web series, the Lodhi Colony SHO, Vinod was shown as an irresponsible officer who gets scolded time and again by DCP Vartika Chaturvedi. However, in the real life, the SHO Lodhi Colony, Anil Sharma mentioned that he worked thoroughly in the investigation of the Delhi rape case and hence, wants to sue the director for the wrongful portrayal of his character in the web series. Sharma was SHO of the Vasant Vihar Police Station in 2012.



Sharma told IANS that he was upset with his ‘derogatory’ portrayal as a ‘dumb and slow’ officer. He even mentioned that he had been commended by the Police Department as well for his contributions to cracking the horrific crime. However, he isn’t too happy with the way Mehta has portrayed his character on the show. In the show, his character is shown as someone who wants to go to the gym to work out during the investigation, but Sharma told IANS that, “I am a national level athlete and never have been a gym-goer in my entire life.”

Sharma also said, “I lost my ailing father Harbans Lal Sharma and elder brother, Sanjay Sharma during the trial. My brother fell down in residence in my absence and later died of excess bleeding. I was bathing my brother’s body for last rites and at the same time, I got a call from my senior officer about the case, I immediately skipped the last rites and reported to the officer without telling about the tragedy.” Delhi Crime stars Shefali Shah as DCP Vartika Chaturvedi who makes a team to find the six accused culprits of the heinous Delhi rape case. In reality, it was DCP Chhaya Sharma who had led the investigation of the most horrible case Delhi had ever seen.

Also Read: Delhi Crime TV series: Not just a tale of the Delhi gang rape, but of several regular women across the country
