Ruhi Singh is shocked and angry over incorrect media reports

Mumbai: A case has been registered against TV Actor Ruhi Singh & 2 others after she allegedly assaulted a police pe… https://t.co/Fssvc6SJxp — ANI (@ANI) 1554173108000

Small time TV actor Ruhi Singh arrested for drunken driving and assaulting policemen @MumbaiPolice while escaping a… https://t.co/gY0Nq24nwh — dharmesh thakkar (@news_houndz) 1554182456000

.@ruhisingh11 opens up about incorrect media reports on her name https://t.co/FtrL09yMya — ETimes (@etimes) 1554211388000

.@ruhisingh11 talks about the mistaken identity from the viral video https://t.co/9FRB22W5Cg — ETimes (@etimes) 1554211535000

In a horrible case of mistaken identity, pictures of actress and former Miss India Ruhi Singh have been incorrectly used by media publications in their stories focusing on television actress Ruhi Shaileshkumar Singh's case of road rage.News agency ANI tweeted that a case has been registered against TV actor Ruhi Shaileshkumar Singh and 2 others after she allegedly assaulted a police officer at Linking Road, Bandra before fleeing in her car, in an inebriated state, and meeting with an accident at Santacruz. The incident took place on the night of 31st March.Videos of the incident have gone viral where Ruhi Shaileshkumar Singh can be seen arguing with people who had gathered around her car. She is also seen accusing police of assaulting her.Some renowned media outlets like India TV, Zee News and ABP showcased the video in their reports, but went ahead to use Ruhi Singh’s pictures and claimed that it was her who was involved in the controversy, when instead it was the television actress Ruhi Shaileshkumar Singh who was at the wheel.Ruhi expressed her displeasure over the incorrect reportage in a statement to TOI. She said, “I am very shocked and confused and highly disappointed, and surprised as well. Because these mainstream media houses like Zee News and India TV didn’t check their facts before using my pictures, which has done irreparable damage to my reputation.”“I am really angry and I am going to take legal action. It’s shameful that they never checked the facts and they are running the story with my name and photograph. There’s a video that clearly shows who was involved in the incident and they are still tagging me. It looks like an attempt to ruin my career.”Ruhi also added that she has been receiving hateful comments on her social media handles and she has been inundated with calls. She has also taken to social media to clarify she has been wrongfully dragged into reports on the television actress involved in the incident.The incident took place in the early hours of Monday when Ruhi Shaileshkumar Singh, 30, who was allegedly in an inebriated state, dashed her car with other vehicles, a police official said. Reports claimed that four two-wheelers and three cars were damaged, but no one was injured.The official said a case has been registered against the actor and investigation was underway.
