Stepfather rapes 15-year-old, gets 14 years in prison

A 53-year-old resident of Mumbai's Sewree has been sentenced to 14-years in prison by a special POCSO court for raping his stepdaughter.

The incident came to light when the victim became pregnant in 2017. It was later divulged that the man used to spike her drinks and rape her when her mother was not around, the Mumbai Mirror reported.

The man was held guilty by Special judge Bharti Kale under Sections 6 (aggravated sexual assault) and 10 (molestation) of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offenses (POCSO) Act, and section 328 (intoxication) of the IPC.

It was divulged by the prosecution that the victim was a student of the sixth standard, at the time of the incident. She told in the court that when she returned from school at 1.30 pm, her stepfather would be home for lunch while, while her mother would be away for work. She further said that her father used to send away her siblings and give her spiked juice and vada pav. After which the victim found it difficult to wake up for long hours.

Following this one day, the victim did not consume the juice and found her father raping her, and when she resisted she was told that it would only be her who will be defamed.

The man also threatened to kill the victim's mother if she would say anything to her.

Her mother took her to the doctor when she figured out irregularities in her menstrual cycle, where the girl was found to be pregnant. The victim was initially reluctant to share the incident behind her pregnancy but eventually revealed it when the doctor threatened to put her mother in jail.

12 witnesses have been examined by the prosecution led by special public prosecutor Rakesh Tiwari, including the victim, medical officer and her mother, all of whom supported the case. However, the accused was caught in the DNA test, which was found to be positive.

ALSO READ: DCW rescues 12 Nepali girls from trafficking

ALSO WATCH: List of horrific incidents that prove how unsafe schools are for your children in India!
