TV actor Ruhi Singh booked for assaulting cop; actress says it is a case of mistaken identity

Ruhi Singh has been apparently booked for two incidents

TV actress Ruhi Singh, who was booked for apparently assaulting cops in Mumbai, under the influence of alcohol, has pushed out a statement saying that the girl in question is not her.



According to a report in Times of India, Ruhi has been booked on two accounts – for assaulting a police officer and for driving under the influence of alcohol. Ruhi was with her friends at the time of the apparent assault. While two of her friends were arrested, she was let go.



According to the newspaper, the incident occurred when Ruhi and her friends were returning after an evening out and stopped at a mall in Bandra in order to use a toilet. Reportedly, an altercation happened at the scene as the staff of the mall denied them entry and called the cops. As police from Khar police station arrived at the spot, Ruhi, apparently slapped two officers. She reportedly then started to drive and rammed the car into a few vehicles parked in Santacruz.





On the other hand, Ruhi took to her Instagram and put out a post saying she has nothing to do with this incident. “This is to clarify, that media reports of ‘ruhi singh’ which have been published today are in no way related to me. The lady in concern possibly shares her name with me. It is amply clear from the screen shot posted above, that it is someone else. Highly irresponsible journalism by mainstream media houses, using my picture and falsely implicating me in an event I was certainly not a part of. This has caused irreparable damage to my reputation. Would request all media outlets to please verify facts before writing articles.”



The actress’ publicist also put out an official statement that read, “Yesterday an unfortunate incident occurred in Khar where a girl "Ruhi Singh" and two of her friends were involved in abusing a police officer and ramming their vehicles into many parked cars and bikes. This incident is in no way connected to model and actress Ruhi Singh (Miss Universe Peace and Humanity). Our client Ruhi Singh has been getting nonstop calls since last night asking her the same. It is a request to please confirm with us on this before carrying any news about it.”
