Ruhii Singh: I am shocked that the media has irresponsibly used my pictures with this news story, without verification

Film actress Ruhii Singh is livid about certain media outlets mistaking her for TV actress Ruhi Shaileshkumar Singh , who has been accused of drunk driving and assault in Mumbai.In an unfortunate case of mistaken identity, Bollywood actress Ruhii Singh (Miss Universal Peace And Humanity 2014), known for films like ' Calendar Girls ' and ' Ishq Forever ', found herself dragged into a controversy yesterday. Her picture was incorrectly used by several media outlets, including news channels like India TV, Zee News, News Nation and ABP in their coverage about a TV actress named Ruhi Shaileshkumar Singh, who is reportedly involved in a case of drunk driving and assault. A case has been registered against her and two others, after she allegedly assaulted a police officer at Linking Road, Bandra before fleeing in her car, in an inebriated state, and meeting with an accident in Santacruz.Ever since the incident was reported, movie actress Ruhii, who is in no way connected with the incident, was flooded with calls from the media. The TV news channels went ahead and showed the video of the incident, but used Ruhii’s pictures instead of the accused, and claimed that she was the one involved in this case.An upset Ruhii told BT, “I am extremely shocked and disappointed to see my pictures doing the rounds in the media in connection with this piece of news. It is irresponsible reporting by media to use my picture for this news story without any verification. This is damaging to my career and reputation. Though the video of the incident featuring the woman is already out, I have been inundated with calls inquiring about the accident. I have been busy clarifying to people that it wasn’t me. The incident happened when I was peacefully sleeping at home.” She added, “My father had a panic attack after he learnt about my name being dragged into this controversy. I am angry and disappointed. No matter how hard I try to clarify, people will associate me with this incident for a long time.”The Khar police have arrested the TV actress’ friends, Rahul Singh and Swapnil Singh, but she had not been arrested till the time we went into print.
