8 of gangs that robbed passengers in moving autos held in 24 hours

GHAZIABAD: Eight members of two gangs that allegedly robbed passengers in moving auto-rickshaws have been arrested in Ghaziabad in the past 24 hours. With the arrests, police claim to have solved three abduction-cum-robbery cases of last month, which included attacks on a dentist and a Delhi University student.Police said the gangs targeted passengers, especially women, who boarded auto-rickshaws from the city’s border areas. The gang had robbed a 30-year-old dentist on March 9 and an 18-year-old DU student on March 12 after gagging them in moving autos. Its five members were arrested on Monday night after an exchange of fire.The same gang had on Monday targeted a private firm employee, Ritu Rawat (23), who had gone to meet her friends in Noida. Around 10pm, Ritu had boarded an auto to go home, but instead of going towards the destination, the auto driver allegedly turned the vehicle towards a secluded area along NH-9. The driver and his accomplices tied her hands and snatched her purse, mobile phone and Rs 5,000 cash. She freed herself and sought help from a passerby to inform cops.Sources said the police had laid a trap after another woman complained of a similar attack. The auto gang allegedly fired at the police team near TNT Crossing. Their gang leader, Raju alias Bahadur, a resident of Nepal, was hit in the right leg when the cops retaliated.Raju has been arrested along with four accomplices — Raj Kumar, Sandeep, Pawan, and Karan. Leader of another gang, Pawan, is absconding. Three country-made pistols, some live cartridges, two knives, silver jewellery, a woman’s handbag, some cash and two mobile phones have been recovered from their possession.SP (city) Shlok Kumar said: “Raju has 12 cases registered against him. The gang used stolen auto-rickshaws for committing the crime. They changed the number plates before targeting their victims. They primarily targeted people travelling from Noida to Ghaziabad. They had targeted the DU student on March 12. Prior to that, they had committed similar thefts in Indirapuram, Khoda, Noida Sector 58 and Bisrakh. They also targeted locked houses.”Kumar said that during investigation, Sandeep’s and Pawan’s faces were captured in a CCTV camera installed at an ATM in Noida when they were withdrawing money using the dentist’s debit card.Three members of the second gang were caught from near a bridge in Vaishali Sector 1/2 around 4.50am on Tuesday. Kumar said this gang was involved in robbing a 70-year-old retired police inspector after offering him a lift home on March 14. He was robbed of his debit card, mobile phone and Rs 15,000 in cash. The accused have been identified as Kasim, Salman, both residents of Ghaziabad, and Monu, who is from Hapur . They worked in a garage in the day and committed robberies at night, the police said.
