Great Lakes Gurgaon is now AMBA Accredited – PaGaLGuY

3rd April, 2019, Gurgaon: Great Lakes Institute of Management, Gurgaon, one of the premier B-schools of the country, has been awarded the prestigious global accreditation by Association of MBAs (AMBA, UK) for its management programs. The AMBA accreditation is awarded to the best programs globally and stands for the highest standard of achievement in postgraduate business education.

With this global recognition, Great Lakes Gurgaon now joins the league of elite B-schools of the world including top Indian institutions like IIM Calcutta, IIM Lucknow, XLRI, MDI Gurgaon, SP Jain Mumbai, GLIM Chennai, to name a few. Recently Great Lakes, Gurgaon has also been ranked by the National HRD Network (NHRDN) among the top five emerging business schools in the country along with some of the newer IIMs.

AMBA accredits MBA, DBA and Master’s Degree programs at over 240 business schools in over 70 countries. AMBA accreditation establishes international standing for an institute and Great Lakes, Gurgaon managed to achieve this accolade in less than a decade. Great Lakes’ Chennai Campus had previously been the youngest campus in India to receive the AMBA, UK Accreditation.

AMBA follows a rigorous assessment criteria that ensures only highest caliber programs which demonstrate the best standards in teaching, curriculum, and student interaction receive the accreditation. AMBA believes that accredited programs should reflect changing trends and innovation in postgraduate education section. This accreditation further strengthens Great Lakes Gurgaon’s reputation as one of the most innovative business schools of the country.

Expressing his thoughts on the achievement, Dr. Debashis Sanyal – Director, Great Lakes Institute of Management, Gurgaon said, “It is a significant milestone for us. Great Lakes Gurgaon is a new age institution for new age businesses and AMBA accreditation makes our case stronger in establishing ourselves as a globally recognized B-school. We could achieve this through our outstanding faculty, focus on quality of education and innovating to cater for emerging business requirements in areas like Internet Businesses, Analytics, AI and Machine Learning.”

About Great Lakes Institute of Management, Gurgaon:

GLIM Gurgaon, established in 2010, has emerged as one of India’s most innovative business schools pioneering the adoption of cutting edge technology in business decision making. It is the second campus of Great Lakes Institute of Management, Chennai, which is ranked among the top business schools in India (3rd by Outlook & 4th by Business World among one year MBAs, 9th by Business India, 14th by Business Today and 16th by NIRF rankings by Ministry of HRD among top business schools in India in 2017-2018).

The Gurgaon campus has extensive engagement with corporates catering to their human capital requirements while also befitting from the perspectives of senior leaders actively participating in design and delivery of our programs.

Great Lakes, Gurgaon, was the first b-school in India to offer an Analytics specialization in 2013 and to launch a world class executive program in Analytics (PGPBABI) which is now ranked No.1 business analytics program in India for 3 years in a row.

Great Lakes, Gurgaon is also the first business school in the country to offer specialization in Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. The Gurgaon campus offers two full time programs – PGPM & PGDM – apart from executive programs.

With a strategically located residential campus in the corporate hub of Gurgaon, students have access to extensive perspectives from CXOs as well as gaining practical experience through live projects helping them develop into Business Ready managers ready to deliver from Day 1

Stay connected with fellow students on PaGaLGuY for Great Lakes Institute of Management Gurgaon PGPM Admission 2019-20

and for PGDM – Great Lakes Institute of Management Gurgaon PGDM Admission 2019-21

Read More
