Modi responsible for increased militancy in J&K: Azad

Modi responsible for increased militancy in J&K: Azad

RAJOURI, Apr 2: The Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha and veteran Congress leader Tuesday stated that the militancy in J&K increased because Prime Minister Narendra Modi created such situations in the state.

While addressing election rallies in twin border districts, he also blamed the BJP government's policies for the increase in casualties of the armed forces and security personnel in state.

“These days army personnel are dying, the number of casualties of security personnel has increased enormously. Militancy has increased because Prime Minister Modi has created such situations,” said Azad. He stated that his party introduced EVMs but it was the Narendra Modi government which started cheating in the voting machine.

“The Congress had started making use of EVMs because earlier musclemen used to capture polling booths. In our time, EVMs were 100 per cent perfect and reliable. But when Narendra Modi came to power, they started cheating in it too,” said Azad.

He said that the BJP government was responsible for the downfall of politics. “Politics these days is all about abuses. Earlier, the main issues were development related but now Mandir-Masjid has taken over.” Azad also drew parallel between Modi and former Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee to take a dig at the former. Azad was here to campaign for party candidate Raman Bhalla contesting from Jammu-Poonch parliamentary constituency going to polls in first phase on April 11.

In border area of Lam in Nowshera, Azad briefly addressed rally telephonically. He could not attend the rally due to refusal of concerned authorities for landing of chopper in the area. While authorities maintained that permission was not granted due to cross border firing in Nowshera sector, Congress alleged foul play behind denial.

Earlier addressing an election rally of the Congress in Murad Nagar near Ghaziabad, Azad said though the BJP claimed to end terrorism, it was the saffron party's government that released terrorist Masood Azhar and escorted him to Kandahar in Afghanistan.

Azad said not a single leader of the BJP sacrificed their lives for the nation, while the Congress has a long list of such leaders who happily gave their lives for the country.

“BJP claims to end terrorism. On the other hand, the BJP government had released and escorted terrorist Masood Azhar, head of Jaish-e-Mohammed, to Kandahar,” the leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha said.

Taking on the BJP, he said 4 crore 41 lakh industrial units have suffered losses due to ill implementation of the GST and their owners had to shut them down.

“BJP government is anti-farmer due to which cultivators are not getting actual price of their crops. Diesel and petrol prices have been increased and as a result cost of everything has gone up,” Azad said.

“Modi's promise of providing two crore jobs was like painting a rosy picture, the consequences of which the youths are facing today,” he added. The Congress leader said rape cases and other crimes also escalated under the current government and communalism is at its peak.
