Bengaluru has over 90 lakh voters

They have to choose from among 78 candidates in three constituencies

As many as 90.83 lakh citizens from Bengaluru are eligible to cast their vote in the Lok Sabha polls on April 18 at 8,500 polling stations in 1,651 locations across the city.

District Election Officer N. Manjunath Prasad, who is also the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) Commissioner, told reporters on Wednesday that of the total number of eligible voters, 47.33 lakh are men and 43.48 lakh are women. Another 1,540 identified themselves as the other gender.

On April 5, booth level officers will begin distributing voters' slips bearing the photo of the voter, along with the voters' guide (an information brochure). “The guide has information for all voters, such as who is eligible to vote, how to cast the vote, how to locate the polling station where one has to cast their vote etc. Booth level officials have been directed to distribute the slips and guides to voters by April 11,” he said.

There are 31 candidates in the fray in Bengaluru North constituency, 22 in Bengaluru Central and 25 in the Bengaluru South constituency. “Given the number of candidates, we will have to use two ballot units in each polling booth. One unit can accommodate 16 candidates. Additional ballot units have been allotted for the Bengaluru North and South constituencies from other districts. Units required for Bengaluru Central constituency are coming from other States,” Mr. Prasad said.

The three constituencies would require a total of 45,000 poll personnel and 12,000 police personnel. “The first round of training has been completed. The second round will be held on April 11,” he said.

Of the 8,500 polling stations, 156 have been identified as vulnerable and 1,600 as critical. Apart from strengthening security, he said, 1,200 micro observers would be deputed in the critical polling stations. “Web casting facility will be provided to select 400 critical polling stations, apart from videographing the proceedings in others. Preparations towards the same have begun,” he added.

Tie-up with Ola

The election commission had tied up with taxi aggregator Ola to facilitate people with disabilities and help them cast their vote.

District Election Officer N. Manjunath Prasad told reporters on Wednesday that persons with disability can call the helpline (1950) if they want to avail of this facility.

“We will give them a coupon with a phone number. On the day of the polls, they may call that number and fix a time. Ola taxis will come at the designated time, pick up the voter from home, drop them off at the polling station, and take them back home after they have cast their vote,” he said.

He added that during discussions, the cab aggregator offered to provide the service as part of their Corporate Social Responsibility. However, Mr. Prasad said that no decision had been taken on the matter. “Even if the proposal doesn't come through, the entire expense will be borne by the election commission,” he stated.

He also said that at polling stations, ramps would be provided. That apart, one wheelchair will be made available in each of the 1,651 locations. “All arrangements to make the polling stations disability-friendly have been taken,” he added.

Criminal record

As per rules, candidates have to make public their criminal record, if any, thrice before the elections are held.

However, District Election Officer N. Manjunath Prasad confirmed that none of the 78 candidates in the fray had done so.

“We will verify the affidavits submitted once again. If we find candidates with criminal records, we will wait for some time. If they fail to publish their criminal record, we will submit the details to the election commission, which will investigate and initiate necessary action,” he added.

‘99% of licenced weapons have been deposited’

Soon after the model code of conduct came into force, election officials and police appealed to the citizens who possess licenced arms to deposit them with the jurisdictional police.

As many as 8,556 licenced weapons are in possession of citizens, of which 7,528 have been deposited. Some citizens have been exempted from depositing their arms, as per certain provisions, said Police Commissioner T. Suneel Kumar.

“Some of the citizens who have licenced arms have gone abroad. We have not been able to contact them. The remaining 99% of the arms are in our custody,” he said.

He also said that the police had identified some persons with criminal records. “We have taken preventive action against such persons under different sections of the Criminal Procedure Code. They have given us an undertaking and executed a bond stating that they will not indulge in intimidation of voters during the polls,” he said.

Change in counting centres

The counting centres for the three Lok Sabha constituencies are likely to be changed. DEO N. Manjunath Prasad said a proposal in this regard had already been sent to the election commission.

According to the proposal, the counting centre for Bengaluru North constituency will be St. Joseph’s Indian High School; votes of Bengaluru Central will be counted in Mount Carmel College and for Bengaluru South constituency the task will be carried out in SSMRV College. A joint inspection of these locations by the DEO and the police has been completed.
