Dowry case against Goa BJP leader moved to Bandra court

Party State vice-president booked for harassing daughter-in-law

The Bombay High Court has directed the dowry harassment case against the Bharatiya Janata Party’s Goa vice-president Anil Hoble, pending before the Panaji Civil Court, be transferred to the Family Court in Bandra.

Justice Sandeep Shinde agreed that owing to Mr. Hoble’s political clout his daughter-in-law Shweta Miling Hoble (30) might not get justice in Goa. The judge directed both parties to appear before the Bandra court personally or through their advocate on April 22.

In his order, Justice Shinde said, “In my view, the applicant’s wife would be deprived of a fair trial if she is made to contest proceedings in Goa, which is 1,000 km away from her place of residence [Mumbai], given the facts and circumstances of the case.”

In July 2017, a case was registered at the Women’s Police Station in Panaji against Mr. Hoble, his wife Sandhya and son Milind for allegedly assaulting Shweta and harassing her for dowry. Shweta was rescued from the Hoble household and the trio was booked under Section 498-A, 323 (domestic violence causing hurt), 506 (ii) (criminal intention) read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, and Section 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.

‘Assault marks on body’

The complaint had been lodged by Shweta’s mother Suchitra Shirodkar. The complainant alleged that the Hoble family had been making demands for dowry since 2009, when Milind and Shweta got married. The police report stated that Swetha, who has two children, had signs of assault on her body. Mr. Hoble, however, termed the accusations “baseless” in a press conference. He said, “We have done nothing. I will speak the truth at the right time.”

In his order, pronounced on March 29, Justice Shinde said, “She has no independent source of income [at least it has not been pointed out by the respondent husband]. And though the husband is ready and willing to pay the cost of travel and stay, in my view, that itself will not mitigate the inconvenience to the wife, children and witnesses.”

The judge added, “Circumstances brought on the record, like the press conferences held by her father-in-law, and he being head of a political party, and the reasonable apprehension in her mind that she might not get justice cannot be completely overlooked.”

The judge also noted that on December 15, 2017, the Court of Civil Judge, Senior Division, B Court at Panjim had rejected Shweta’s application for maintenance filed in September 2017. Justice Shinde stated in his order that under the circumstances Shweta was forced to move to her parents’ house in Mumbai in January 2018 to take care of her children and their education.

The judge decided to transfer the case to the Bandra court after taking four factors into consideration: Shweta now stayed in Mumbai, which is about 1,000 km away from Goa; she has no place to stay in Goa; two school-going children are under her care; and the local court has denied her plea for maintenance.
