Five leopard cubs charred to death after farmer sets trash on fire to smoke out snake in Pune

Visuals of the charred bodies of the cubs | Photo Credit: ANI

Pune: In a most tragic instance which has come to light from Ambegaon taluka of Pune district in Maharashtra, five leopard cubs were charred to death after a local farmer set a part of his farm ablaze, suspecting a snake. The incident was reported to forest department officials on Wednesday morning following which a team of rangers was dispatched to the spot in Ambegaon taluka.

Officials with the forest department in Pune asserted that the farmer in question suspect a snake in the trash and decided to set that part of his field ablaze. The five leopard cubs were ten days old, said the rangers, adding that farmers usually burn their fields before the harvesting of sugarcane. We have reason to believe that the mother of the cubs could have gone in search of food after leaving them there.

Maharashtra: 5 leopard cubs were found dead in a sugarcane farm in Awasari village near Junnar tehsil of Pune today. Workes say, "We had come here to cut the harvest. Owner told us to burn the trash on field, we didn't know the cubs were there. A woman spotted them later&told us" pic.twitter.com/fSQccuJSoq — ANI (@ANI) April 3, 2019

However, the incident has sparked terror amongst locals who fear that the cubs' mother will return in search for them and may turn violent upon not finding them anywhere. Owing to these concerns, range forest officer of Ambegaon Prajot Palve has deployed rangers for night patrolling in order to watch out for the villagers. Locals have also been asked to be watchful of the mother leopard.

This is not the first time leopard cubs were found in sugarcane fields in the area. In March of this year, two leopard cubs were rescued by forest department from a sugarcane field in the area. Forest rangers said that decreasing forest cover has prompted more and more leopards to deliver cubs in sugarcane fields and leave the spot once the cubs grow up.

In fact, a leopard attacked a five-year-old girl in Pune's Pimpri Chinchwad area less than a week ago leading to her death. The victim was visiting her maternal grandmother's home in Sakori village of Pimpri Chinchwad village when the big cat attacked her.
