Man stabs lover, consumes poison

LUDHIANA: With their families opposed to their relationship, a 26-year-old man allegedly poisoned his 22-year-old girlfriend and then stabbed her thrice in the head at a public park in Moti Nagar and later consumed poison near his house at Hissowal village in Mullanpur on Wednesday.The condition of both woman and man, who are admitted in different hospitals, is stated to be critical.Police said the accused is a baptized Sikh who used his kirpan to stab woman.The woman has been identified as Ravneet Kaur, 22, who is pursuing Bachelor in Dental Surgery at a private dental college in Moti Nagar. Kulwinder Singh, 26, is a pathi in a gurdwara at Hissowal.The woman’s family lives in Hissowal at Mullanpur while she was staying in a PG in Sector 39, Chandigarh road.Assistant commissioner of police (Industrial area A) Harjinder Singh said, “Ravneet and Kulwinder’s families are neighbours at Hissowal. While she was in her 3rd semester of dental course, the accused is a pathi in a gurdwara. The preliminary investigation has revealed that the duo was in relationship for a long time. However, their families were not in fovour of their relationship and thus had strained relations with each other.”“Ravneet was preparing for her exams. As there was no exam on Wednesday, Kulwinder called her and asked her to meet him at a park in Moti Nagar. There the accused first gave her poison and then stabbed her. Accused Kulwinder is a baptized Sikh and he used his kirpan to attack woman. The woman was stabbed thrice on her head,” added the ACP.Thereafter, the accused escaped from the spot. Meanwhile, some safai karamcharis of the municipal corporation saw the woman with froth coming out of her mouth and head injury. They immediately sounded the police that further took the woman to the civil hospital. After a few hours, the doctors referred the woman to Christian Medical College and Hospital (CMCH), Brown Road.ACP Harjinder said, “Kulwinder consumed poison near Sudhar canal near his house at Hissowal. His family rushed him to a hospital.”The police have booked Kulwinder under Sections 307 (attempt to murder) and 328 (causing hurt by means of poison etc with intend to commit an offence) of the IPC.Police have not ruled out a suicidal pact between the duo.
