#PrimetimeWatch: Channels Overlook ‘Seizure’ of Rs 1.8 Cr From Arunachal CM’s Convoy

New Delhi: Arunachal Pradesh police seized Rs 1.8 crore from vehicles that were part of a convoy comprising chief minister Pema Khandu, deputy chief minister Chowna Mein and state BJP president Tapir Gao. The seizure was made on the eve of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s rally at Pasighat.

Congress termed it a “cash for votes” scam and urged the Election Commission to get an FIR registered. But most of the channels ignored this story in prime time.

Here is a look at what they reported and how.

English channels

NDTV 24X7

The channel focused on the war of words between Modi and West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee through a headline “Modi-Mamata showdown in Bengal”.

It said “PM calls Mamata a “speed breaker’” and she responded saying “PM now ‘expiry babu’”.

The channel discussed “Can BJP break into TMC’s bastion”.

In the discussion anchored by Nidhi Razdan, BJP leader Bhaskar Ghosh spoke about how an atmosphere of fear prevailed in the state. He said “many panchayat seats were uncontested” because of this. But with 150 companies of CRPF now in Bengal, he claimed: “Mamata is fearful”. “If there is a free and fair election, we will get 22 seats,” he claimed.

Ghosh also spoke about how the Communist Party of India (Marxist) too had accused the Trinamool Congress of ‘scientific rigging’ in the state.

Sukhendu Sekhar Ray of TMC responded saying that the Centre has been using central agencies against his party’s government and not letting it function properly. “Central forces will not vote for BJP, the party should have some faith in people of Bengal,” he quipped.

Congress spokesperson Shama Mohamed said, “there is hype of BJP doing well in West Bengal”. She noted that the situation was much different on the ground and the Congress would do much better than what was being projected.

India Today TV

Through varying headlines like “Foul by BJP?”, “Cong moves EC against Namo TV” and “Will EC blow the whistle?”, the channel took up the launch of the publicity tool right in the middle of elections.

On the Congress complaint against the channel being referred to the Information and Broadcasting ministry, it also had a headline: “I&B ministry: It is an advertisement platform”.

When anchor Rajdeep Sardesai asked BJP spokesperson about the alleged violation of norms, Gaurav Bhatia said: “The most blatant case of abusing official machinery is Indira Gandhi in 1975 when her election was scrapped.” To this, Sardesai retorted if Congress would use a 44-year-old example to explain present events.

Bhatia then demanded, “let us have faith in EC”. He added that “DTH platform does not require a licence, the matter is with EC – why should we pre-judge and pass a verdict?”

Former chief election commissioner S.Y. Quraishi said “many parties run channels” and in this case, the “candidate isn’t funding it”.

Congress spokesperson Mohammad Khan differed with this. He said the expenses on such channels should be taken into account as PM’s spending on his two constituencies. He insisted that would still be seen “violating the expenditure ceiling”.

The programme also questioned: “Is it okay for DD to telecast chowkidar speech of PM live?”

Times Now

The Newshour discussion centred around “Using ‘valour for votes’”. It took up Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad’s statement calling a few policemen in Kashmir Valley “black sheep” and carrying four fake encounters for money or promotion.

With the heading “Rahul’s aide slanders forces”, the channel said BJP has attacked Azad’s claim saying “it is aimed at provoking anti-forces sentiment in the Valley”.

Anchor Navika Kumar said Modi termed the Congress manifesto a “dhakosla patra” (document of falsehood) saying it tried to harm the morale of the forces.

The channel showed Modi saying “Congress said they will take away the special powers with the forces – they want to tie their hands as they face terrorists and stone-pelters.”

So Kumar questioned: “Who is using valour for votes?” A headline gave away the channel’s stand: “Cong fights polls or forces”.

Kumar further asked leading questions like: “Is it the Congress stated policy that they will do everything in the books to reduce the morale of our forces – yesterday there was the manifesto and today Azad’s statement.”

Political analyst Nishant Verma defended the Congress saying: “There is nothing wrong in rolling back AFSPA, they rolled it back on some parts of Arunachal yesterday too. This is a decision taken on the perception of its requirement. Congress did not say anything anti-national.”

The discussion also featured Major General (Retd.) G.D. Bakshi who said in view of the daily encounters and stone-pelting, “is this the right time, situational context to remove the legal cover our troops require.”

Republic TV

With #RahulScamsterScam, the channel had a story on how “Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Vadra had conducted business transactions with NSEL scam accused Jignesh Shah’s firm when the CBI in UPA-era was investigating it”.

Anchor-editor Arnab Goswami said documents show how the siblings conducted business transactions with one of Shah’s companies involving the ‘Indira Gandhi Farmhouse’ in Mehrauli. He said while the 4.6-acre farmhouse was valued at Rs 9.86 lakh, as per filings in Rahul Gandhi’s 2009 election affidavit, it was rented out to Shah’s firm for a monthly rent of Rs 6.70 lakh.

“Exposed: Rahul income was scam money” and “They loot you, and they paid Rahul” was how the headlines described the deal.

During the discussion, some participants raised questions about the alleged scams involving BJP leaders like Amit Shah, Nitin Gadkari, Piyush Goyal, Jay Shah and others. Responding to this, BJP spokesperson said they have “no substantive point to make”.

But in the case of the Gandhis letting out their farmhouse, he said, while everyone is entitled to let out their property, the question is was it really used or did this happen only to make “under the table payment”?

Hindi channels

NDTV India

Ravish Kumar’s programme took a deep look at AFSPA, stone-pelting and the Centre’s flawed policy on Kashmir. He said in February 2018, 9,730 cases against stone pelters were withdrawn by then PDP-BJP government. Union home minister Rajnath Singh stated that youth were being misled and so the move was seen as a means of opening the way for talks.

However, now when Congress has called for discussion and a soft approach, the channel asked: “Why is BJP accusing it of attempts to break nation?”

Kumar said no one questioned the BJP for breaking the morale of the forces when cases were withdrawn.

The channel also did a fact-check of the situation. It said there has been an increase in killings in the state – 36% of civilians, 96% of forces and 134% of terrorists.

“Clearly, the high escalation policy has not paid off – more are being killed now than before. Simultaneously, the Doval doctrine is being followed and there are no talks with separatists,” the channel said.

It asked: “Is the government applying pressure at wrong points: In 2014 India increased shelling along LoC, this led to escalation. When the border heated Uri and Pathankot attacks happened, India responded with a surgical strike, but then Pulwama happened and India retaliated with Balakot.”

So, the channel said, clearly “the government has no answer or balance on Kashmir”.

Zee News

It played a 22-year-old interview of Field Marshal Sam Manekshaw in which he recalled the events leading to the historic surrender by Pakistani forces in Bangladesh and the events that followed.

“In 11 days I knew they would surrender. I had prepared a surrender document ….. and when the surrender became I dictated it to Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Aurora. I told him this is a very big event for you, when you go to take the surrender, take your wife with you.”

“After the surrender, I wanted to bring the Pakistani soldiers back to India quickly – we feared Bengalis could take revenge and harm them.”

“Then I put them in a camp as I had to look after them – I used to meet them often.”

Manekshaw said he knew “In the end, 93,000 will go home, they will tell everyone ‘see Indians are not so bad, see how well they treated us’.”

ABP News

On a day when the Election Commission issued a notice to UP chief minister Adityanath on his “Modi ki sena” comment, the channel reported him making more provocative statements – this time with a religious overtone.

Adityanath told a gathering in Baghpat “when terror camps are seen burning in Pakistan one is reminded of Hanumanji of Treta Yug”

He said Modi’s name was on every tongue today. “When Modi will become PM then there will be no one left to challenge India”.

He also drew in former PM Manmohan Singh’s statement that Muslims have the first right to nation’s resources and asked: “If Muslims have the first right then where would Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Jat, Gurjar and others go?”

Aaj Tak

It reported EC seeking a reply from Adityanath by April 5 for his “Modi ki sena” statement.

Anchor Saeed Ansari said this notice is “big news”. But correspondent Sanjay Sharma said it may end up “more like a rasam adayegi” (fulfilment of formalities) as finally “EC will either caution or advice him and then let go”.
