Man arrested for harassing, stalking, abducting 17-yr-old

SSLC student

stalking

harassing

.Harassed, the girl told her father about the man, who kidnapped her after she came from the exam hall

The family warned him, made arrangements to keep her away from him as he was disturbing her ahead of her exams –A police officer

The man abducted thewhen she came out after writing an examA man accused ofand finally allegedly kidnapping a 17-year-old SSLC student when she had come to give her exams, has been arrested.The accused, Ranjith alias Gundda, is said to have been pursuing the girl for months now. When the girl told her father about the harassment, the family shifted her to her sister’s house as SSLC exams were round the corner and they need to keep her whereabouts unknown to the accused.Ranjith allegedly looked for her for a while, and then lay low, because he knew she would have to come back to the school to write her exams. When she came to write one of the exams, he allegedly kidnapped her. When the girl’s relative came to pick her up from school after the exams, they could not find her and they immediately approached the police.The Mahadevapura police arrested Ranjith. The victim is a resident of Udayanagar and studies at a private school near her house. The accused is the son of a friend of the victim’s uncle. Ranjith was allegedly coaxing the girl to fall in love with him.“Unable to bear the harassment, the victim reported the matter to her father. The family warned him and also made arrangements to keep her away from him as he was disturbing her and her 10th standard exams were nearing. The harassment is said to have been happening for the last few months,” said an officer.Last Wednesday, the girl had come to school to write the second language exams and was kidnapped.“In a swift operation, the police managed to arrest Ranjith and have rescued the girl. As she did not have any exams the following day, she did not miss any exam. We have found out that he had kidnapped her after she came out of the school. The family have managed to help her write the remaining exams. The victim’s statements are yet to be recorded as she had to give her exams,” the officer added.The police have registered a case of kidnap under Section 363 of the Indian Penal Code.
