Woman gangraped, 3 held

A 45-year-old woman was allegedly gangraped by four auto drivers on two different locations in Gurugram on Saturday.

The woman, a resident of Delhi was first raped in a room located in Gurugram’s Bhangrola village and then in a moving auto. The incident took place on Saturday when she was on her way from Gurugram to her residence in Delhi.

Police on Sunday claimed to have arrested three accused while one is still at large.

“The three accused were produced before a local court on Monday which had sent them to 14 days of police custody,” said a police official. The accused arrested and have been identified as Ankit, Deepak and Mahipal resident of Gurugram.

According to police, the victim in her complaint said that her husband was a contractor in a company but had died in 2013.

“There was some payment due in the company so I had come to Gurugram’s Manesar area on Saturday for a full and final settlement;” she said in her complaint.

“She was waiting for an auto at a Nakhdola chowk on the Delhi-Gurugram expressway. Thereafter a man named Ankit came in an auto along with another man inside. They took the woman to Bhangrola village instead of the company. There the duo committed the crime in a room,” said Subhash Boken spokesperson of the Gurugram police.

The accused forcefully offered liquor to the victim. Later the accused took the woman to Rampura chowk. “There two other men joined the group the duo. They sat near the victim in the auto and started touching her inappropriately. When the woman tried to resist, the culprit threatened her and sexually assaulted her in the moving auto,” Boken said.

Later the accused dropped the women next to the incident place and fled the spot. They also threatened the victim with dire consequence if she disclosed the incident to anyone, Boken said.

On Saturday night, she lodged an FIR at the Women Police station at Manesar. “We have registered a gang rape case against four men and are conducting investigations,” Boken added.
