Kancheepuram priest allegedly murders wife and flees, police launch manhunt

Kancheepuram priest allegedly murders wife and flees, police launch manhunt

The police claim that Maharajan, a resident of Soppanacheri near Padappai in Kancheepuram district, allegedly suspected his wife’s infidelity.

news Crime

The police are on the lookout for Maharajan, a 30-year-old priest from Kancheepuram, who allegedly stabbing his wife to death on Wednesday. The police claim that Maharajan, a resident of Soppanacheri near Padappai in Kancheepuram district, allegedly suspected his wife’s infidelity. Maharajan, a temple priest, married Karuthammal four years ago and the couple has a three-year-old son.

According to reports, the police were quoted saying that the couple had frequent arguments. “In recent months, the couple had arguments following suspicion on the woman’s fidelity. On Wednesday around 9 pm, Maharajan and Karuthammal picked an argument when the man stabbed his wife with a kitchen knife and left her in a pool of blood,” says a police officer to The New Indian Express.

When neighbours rushed in upon hearing the child’s cries, they found Karuthammal in a pool of blood. Maharajan immediately fled the scene and the police have launched a manhunt.

Karuthammal was rushed to the hospital where she was declared dead on arrival. A case has been registered by the Manimangalam police and further investigations are currently in progress.

In January this year, the police found the mangled limbs of a woman in a plastic bag at Pallikarnai dumpyard in Chennai. While two legs and a hand were found at the dumpyard, another limb was recovered from the Adyar river bank.

Upon investigation, police found film director SR Balakrishnan to have committed the crime, and the victim was his own wife. Police sources told TNM that the woman wanted to be an actor but her husband, Balakrishnan, was against it. He also suspected that she was having an extramarital affair.

The gruesome crime shocked many in the city and Balakrishnan was immediately arrested by the police.
