Gangsters assault rival with swords in front of metro station, arrested

Gangsters assault rival with swords in front of metro station, arrested

A A A

Team Udayavani, Apr 5, 2019, 1:20 PM IST

Bengaluru: Subramanyapura Police on Wednesday arrested two gangsters within three hours after they brutally assaulted a rival gang member in front of the Yelachenahalli metro station here

The injured has been identified as Mithun, a daily wage worker while the arrested are Harshith Gowda (20), a resident of Raghuvanahalli on Kanakapura Road, and Sharan R (20), residing at Vodyerahalli on Kanakapura Road.

On Wednesday, Harshith and Sharan arrived at the metro junction at around 6.30 pm and on seeing Mithun they started chasing him. In the melee, Mithun is said to have tripped and fallen onto the pavement when Harshith started attacking him with swords. Two other persons -Krishna and Srikanth – who came to Mithun’s rescue also sustained injuries in the incident.

The assailants threatened the passersby rushing to rescue the victims or capturing the incident. Meanwhile a motorist who witnessed the incident informed the police control room following which a Hoysala patrol vehicle was immediately dispatched to the spot.

Upon seeing the police the duo fled from the spot but the police managed to identify them with help of the video footage captured by a couple who were at the spot. Later the duo was arrested from a farmhouse in Subramanyapura where they had been hiding. They were produced before the magistrate and remanded in judicial custody.

DCP (South) K Annamalai said Gowda has two pending cases against him, including that of murder, while Sharan faces a mobile snatching charge.

Harshith, a rowdy-sheeter in Subramanyapura, was sent to jail in 2017 for murdering fellow rowdy-sheeter Puneeth. He worked as a painter after coming out on bail.

Mithun said Harshith threatened him saying that he would meet the same fate as his brother Puneeth who was murdered. Police suspect that Harshith wanted Mithun to withdraw the murder case.
