Delhi: Man rapes mentally unstable elderly woman in unlit park; arrested

The locals thought that the victim was dead and informed the police eventually (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: Another woman fell prey to the malicious intentions of a man in the national capital. A senior citizen was allegedly raped by a 30-year-old man in the national capital. The alleged incident took place near the Lajpat Nagar metro station in Southeast Delhi. The victim is 61-years-old.

A police official found the victim in an unconscious state. The victim is a resident of a colony situated near East of Kailash. The accused allegedly works as a cook.

The locals got to know about the incident after hearing the continuous barking of dogs. The locals thought that the victim was dead and informed the police eventually. The victim was unclothed when she was found. The victim used to live with her sister. The two sisters used to go to gurudwaras and shops near the area to get food. The victim's father used to own an apartment in Lajpat Nagar.

While talking to the Times of India, DCP(Southeast) Chinmoy Biswal said that the accused was captured while running away in the CCTV cameras installed in the area. The police then rounded up people with profiles similar to the accused. Out of over 50 people, the police zeroed down on around 3-4 people. The police made the suspects run to find the accused. One of the accused allegedly confessed to his crime during investigation.

The accused told the police that he was under the influence of alcohol when he had gone to the park where the incident took place. The accused allegedly dragged the victim to a bench and raped her. The accused escaped easily owing to the fact that the park was not well-lit.

A similar incident surfaced in Greater Noida when a 55-year-old woman was allegedly gang-raped. The victim had been abducted, raped and robbed by five people in Greater Noida. The police arrested one of the accused while efforts were being made to nab the others.


