BJP, Cong ridicule Patnaik's statement on women empowerment

Opposition BJP and Congress Friday ridiculed Biju Janata Dal president and Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik's statement on women empowerment alleging that the state has "completely failed" to protect the interests of women.

The BJP called Patnaik "anti-women" while the Congress alleged that the ruling BJD has "betrayed" the entire women community in the state.

The opposition parties were reacting on Friday after Patnaik's Thursday message on women empowerment. The chief minister had said that women empowerment is the real "double engine" for growth and development of India.

Patnaik, whose regional party has fielded 33 per cent of women candidates in Lok Sabha elections from the state, had also criticised Congress and BJP for "not providing adequate" representation to women in decision making bodies.

He cited success of New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Arden and German Chancellor Angela Merkel as symbol of women empowerment.

OPCC vice-president Arya Gyanedra at a press conference alleged that there has been rise in crimes against women in the last two decade ever since BJD came to power in Odisha.

"Can chief minister justify atrocities against women. At least 4,749 minor girls were raped between 2014 and 2017. This apart, 585 minor girls were gang raped," Gyanendra told reporters.

"Is it women empowerment," the Congress leader asked.

Union Minister and senior BJP leader Dharmendra Pradhan justified his party calling the chief minister as "anti-women".

Pradhan claimed that the BJD has fielded candidates accused in woman atrocity cases. He said BJD has renominated sitting Pipili MLA Pradip Maharathy who resigned from the council of ministers in the face of his "anti-women" activities and remarks.

The ruling party has also fielded a similar candidate in Bhubaneswar, he claimed.

The Union Minister said a woman two days ago attempted self-immolation before the CM's residence opposing candidature of a leader who allegedly physically abused her.

"These instances show Patnaik's style of women empowerment," Pradhan said in the statement adding that a minor rape victim girl at Kunduli in Koraput district committed suicide as she "did not get justice".

The Union Minister said women and children in Odisha's 25 districts are malnourished and 12 minor girls got pregnant while staying in state run hostels.

Referring to Patnaik's statement where he named New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Arden and German Chancellor Angela Merkel, the Union Minister said: "Had the Chief Minister taken names of Union Ministers like Sushma Swaraj and Nirmala Sitharaman, the women of India and Odisha would have got inspiration."



Pradhan claimed these two women Union ministers have emerged as symbol of women empowerment across the world.

Claiming that Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik was afraid of the growing popularity of Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Odisha, Pradhan said: "You may indulge in propaganda against Modi, but the people of Odisha have this time decided to ensure a 'double engine' government in the state.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
