Top news of the day: Congress to contest all 80 seats in UP, Rajkumar Hirani accused of sexual assault, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

2019 Lok Sabha polls: Congress to contest all 80 seats in Uttar Pradesh

A day after it was virtually left out being part of an anti-BJP alliance formed by the Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party, the Congress on Sunday declared it will contest all the 80 Lok Sabha seats in the State on its own.

PM Modi attacks Congress on Kartarpur Sahib, 1984 riots

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday attacked the previous Congress government for its inability to bring Kartarpur Sabib under India during partition. Releasing a commemorative coin as part of the 350th birth anniversary celebrations of 10th Sikh guru Guru Gobind Singh, Mr. Modi also came down on the Congress for the 1984 riots that took place following the assassination of the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.

India, Afghanistan, Central Asian nations agree to cooperate in countering terror

India and five Central Asian countries along with Afghanistan on Sunday condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and agreed to cooperate in countering the menace which poses a threat to people across the world.

They want to build their own empire but we want to empower people: Modi’s dig at opposition

Taking a dig at opposition parties for their efforts to form a grand alliance against his party, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday said the BJP is here to serve the country whereas on the the other side there are “opportunistic alliance, dynastic parties”.

Rajkumar Hirani accused of sexual assault

Bollywood’s biggest MeToo scandal broke on Sunday afternoon with the HuffPost India report on the industry’s biggest director Rajkumar Hirani being accused of sexual assault. The complainant is a woman who has worked on the Sanjay Dutt biopic’s post-production crew between March and September of last year.

Rajasthan Assembly: Gulab Chand Kataria chosen as Leader of Opposition

Senior BJP legislator Gulab Chand Kataria was on Sunday unanimously chosen as the Leader of Opposition in the Rajasthan Assembly by the BJP legislature party during a meeting at the party office in Jaipur.

20 Tamil Nadu fishermen arrested by Sri Lankan Navy

At least 20 Tamil Nadu fishermen were arrested on Sunday by the Sri Lankan Navy for fishing off Neduntheevu, sources said.
