Jamia mosque sealed, Mirwaiz put under house arrest

ISLAMABAD: The Indian authorities on Friday sealed the historic Jamia Masjid (Central Mosque) in held Srinagar and placed Hurriyat Forum Chairman Mirwaiz Umar Farooq under house arrest, the Kashmir Media Service reported.

According to witnesses, heavy contingents of forces had been deployed at Nowhatta in Srinagar to prevent Kashmiris from offering Friday prayers. The action came following massive protests inside the Central Jail Srinagar last night when at least a dozen inmates were reportedly injured due to the firing of pellets and tear gas shells on the protesting prisoners. Three barracks and a building suffered damages amid a number of blasts inside the jail.

The occupation authorities also imposed a curfew in Nowhatta area of Srinagar and placed stringent restrictions in other parts of the city to prevent people from staging demonstrations against the injuring of detainees at the Srinagar jail.

The authorities placed under house arrest Chairman Hurriyat Forum—the Mirwaiz—who delivers weekly Friday sermon at the historic Srinagar mosque. The authorities also reduced the internet speed across the held territory. The Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front in a statement strongly denounced the use of force on prisoners.

Furthermore, Indian troops launched a cordon and search operation in Sopore area of Baramulla district. The troops cordoned off Amberpora Tarzoo area of Sopore and started door-to-door searches. A large number of troops had been deployed in the area and door to door search operation was going on when last reports came in.

Separately, India’s infamous National Investigation Agency issued a third notice to the Mirwaiz, asking him to appear at its New Delhi headquarters on Monday for questioning. The Mirwaiz had refused to travel to New Delhi on earlier two occasions, citing threats to his life due to the charged anti-Kashmiri atmosphere in India following the Pulwama incident.

Meanwhile, three personnel of Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) were injured after a vehicle they were travelling in met with an accident in Chawalgam area of Kulgam district. The injured were taken to a nearby hospital for treatment.
