Drunk men try to enter B'luru PG to force women to 'party' with them, assault owner

Drunk men try to enter B'luru PG to force women to 'party' with them, assault owner

The police have arrested the gang leader Babu and are yet to nab the rest of them.

news Crime

The Bengaluru police on Thursday arrested a man who had allegedly brutally assaulted a paying guest owner for stopping him and other men from barging into the rooms of women.

In the early hours of Tuesday, Babu, a resident of Mangammanapalya, allegedly went to the Green House Ladies PG located in the area along with five others in an inebriated state.

Upon reaching the PG, one of Babu’s associates allegedly jumped the wall and began banging on the doors, demanding to be let in.

The men allegedly wanted to be let in so they could drink more and force the women to party with them. The ruckus woke the PG owner Jagan Reddy (26), who went up to the window and instructed the men to leave the building immediately.

“Babu said he wanted to party with women. When the owner told him that it was a women’s PG and that men were not allowed, he said he wanted to drink with any woman in the PG. When Jagan refused to open the door, the man began smashing the flower pots,” the Bandepalya police said.

Jagan rushed outside to stop the man. However, soon after Jagan opened the door, Babu and the others began verbally abusing Jagan.

“The man, who was smashing the flower pots, picked up one of the pots and smashed it on Jagan’s head,” the police added.

Upon hearing the ruckus, Jagan’s brother Bhaskar Reddy rushed to his rescue. When Bhaskar tried to stop the men, he too was allegedly assaulted. One of the men, who was in possession of a wooden log, allegedly began beating Bhaskar.

“The PG owner’s neighbour Anil then came to the spot and tried to help them but he was also assaulted. When the gang members saw that Jagan was bleeding from his ear and head profusely, they ran away,” the police added.

On Thursday, the Bandepalya Police arrested Babu. However, the police are yet to track down the other unidentified suspects. Jagan is currently undergoing treatment at a private hospital in the area and police say his condition is critical. Bhaskar and Anil, who sustained grievous injuries too, are recovering.

The six men have been booked under sections 307 (attempted murder), 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace), 147 (rioting), 148 (rioting with a deadly weapon) and 149 (unlawful assembly) of the IPC.
