Drunk miscreants attempt to barge into women's PG to 'force girls to party with them', assault owner

A hunt is underway to nab the five others accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Bengaluru: Police in the state capital of Karnataka have arrested a man for assaulting three men while trying to forcibly enter a women's paying guest (PG) accommodation. The arrests were made on the basis of a complaint by the owner of the PG who alleged that the accused, along with his accomplices tried to barge into the rooms of women in the PG in an inebriated state.

The owner of the Green House Ladies PG in Mangammanapalya, 26-year-old Jagan Reddy told city police that the incident took place in the wee hours of Tuesday. As many as six men arrived at the PG in an inebriated state and began creating a ruckus, according to a report by The News Minute. They started to bang on the doors and demand that they are let in and allowed to party with the girls living inside the PG, added Reddy.

When Reddy told them that no men are allowed inside the women's PG, the miscreants allegedly began smashing flower pots outside the building. This prompted Reddy to step outside and confront Babu and his accomplices which is when they allegedly assaulted him. In his complaint, the PG owner has claimed that the miscreants also assaulted his brother Bhaskar Reddy and his neighbour Anil when they came to his rescue.

A police official familiar with the matter said that the miscreants fled the spot only after they noticed that Jagan had started bleeding from his ear and head. Reddy then filed a complaint in this regard with the Bandepalya police on Wednesday which led to Mangammanapalya resident Babu's arrest on Thursday. A case has been lodged against the accused and his accomplices who are yet to be identified and taken into custody.

Bandepalya police have booked the accused under sections 307, 504, 147, 148 and 149 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). These sections correspond to charges of attempted murder, intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace, rioting, rioting with a deadly weapon and unlawful assembly respectively. Meanwhile, Jagan, Bhaskar, and Anil are being treated at a private hospital for severe injuries incurred during the assault.
