In the name of a cause

Delhi

Shefali Shah

India Gate

Rasika Dugal

Hyderabad House

tinderbox

The worst written character inCrimeis not one of the rapists. Richie Mehta’s fictional depiction of the December 16, 2012, gang rape gives the six men a rationale. Jai Singh, the driver of the bus as well as of the crime, gets to speak of his own motivations, however misguided. He had become ‘unstable’ after his wife died, unable to bear the sight of happy couples.As for the five younger men (including his own brother), they saw him as their leader, whose uncontrollable temper they knew not to get in the way of. Mehta and his coscriptwriters resist the temptation to vilify them, instead giving us a remarkably sympathetic sense of their milieu – their poverty, the instability of their working lives, their attachment to their mothers and to family honour, so much so that they would rather be arrested quietly than face a public shaming.A long monologue by the series’ bespectacled philosopher-cop, Sudhir Kumar (Gopal Dutt Tiwari, superb), offers a decent pop-psychological explanation for their actions: socio-economic deprivation set against a growing consumer culture, deep-rooted patriarchal assumptions about women running amok in a swiftly changing urban environment, in the absence of either sex education or gender equality. But Delhi Crimeaffords no such explanation to the protestors.It doesn’t help that the character who represents an entire city in tumult is the daughter of the DCP in charge of the case: a protected, spoilt, clueless teenager with the irritatingly alliterative name of Chandni Chaturvedi. Yashaswini Dayama is a good actor (she plays the funky teenage neighbour in both Phobia and Made in Heaven) but she cannot save this character, made up of so many stereotypes as to be downright unsympathetic.Chandni hates Delhi. She has grown up in it, but doesn’t feel of it. She spends all her time glued to various screens. She is so alienated from her surroundings that her mother Vartika (the show’s DCP protagonist) has requested two weeks’ time in which to show her “the good side of Delhi” so that she stops clamouring to go off to firanglands for college.To make Chandni stand in for the thousands of people who came out onto the streets that fateful December, to march and shout and weep and stand in solidarity with Jyoti Singh and with each other, is to not only support an establishmentarian politics that reads public criticism as a rejection of the city/country, but also to be utterly clueless about what the Nirbhaya protests meant. This cluelessness lies, unfortunately, at the very foundation of Delhi Crime.The show’s dismissive, cynical attitude to protest emerges first in the way that Vartika eyerolls at a knot of students beginning to assemble outside Vasant Vihar police station. “Yeh lo, instudents ko extracurricular activity mil gayi. They’ll sit, soak in the sunshine, in the name of a cause. If they’re lucky, they’ll get on to TV. Aur is sab mein hamari lag jayegi,” says’s character to her subordinate Bhupender. “Yeh log itni jaldi signboards kaise banwa lete hain?” Bhupender responds on cue.Then the two of them chortle, as if they’ve made the funniest joke in the world. But really, if this is how disconnected the police are from the public they serve, then the joke is on them. In another giveaway moment, an unnamed young policewoman working to deal with the gathering crowds atsays to her colleague Neeti (), “Ek case ke liye itna sab? Ho kya gaya hai yaar?” The scene ties the quiet gravity of Neeti’s response to an accident of circumstance: Neeti just happens to be in personal contact with the survivor.If she hadn’t had that chance, the series suggests, she might well have been as baffled as the other young policewoman, untouched by the fervour that had taken hold of thousands of people her age, and her gender. In turning the Nirbhaya case into a police procedural, the makers of Delhi Crime have somehow missed the incredible power of that moment in our national life.The heightened public response that the show seems only to comprehend as a measure of the heinousness of the rape, the baffling crowd that must be dispersed as it gets ‘dangerously’ close to the PMO on a day when there are preparations to receive the Russian president at, was not about “just one case”. True, there was something extraordinary about the violence, but there have been equally terrible rapes before and since (a point the show makes, again in bafflement).But there was much more about the case that made it the symbolic epicentre of a vast spontaneous uprising, the spark that set acity on fire: the young lower middle class physiotherapy student from a Hindi-speaking family who’d gone out to watch an English film, in one of the city’s recently built malls, with a boy who may or may not have been her boyfriend.Each of those who protested that bleak, cold December drew from the not-yet-dead Jyoti Singh’s courage to wage our collective ongoing battles. We congregated in the streets to demand the equal rights to life and love and freedom that our cities will not award us without a fight. If we soaked in any sunshine, it was of our own making.
