Ahmedabad: Man forces wife to watch porn, asks for 'wife-swapping'; booked

Questioning the character of the victim, the accused asked the former and her parents to leave the house (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Ahmedabad: A woman's idea of a happy marriage was smashed to pieces as her own husband assaulted her and even asked her to sleep with his friends. The victim is a resident of Ghatlodia. The couple got married in 2015.

The victim alleged that she had gone to Manali in January with his friends. In Manali, the accused allegedly asked the victim for 'wife-swapping', when she disagreed, the former allegedly resorted to violence. The accused allegedly made the victim watch porn and his parents supported him in the same.

The victim alleged that the accused used to talk inappropriately to her in front of his friends. The accused also used to discuss 'wife-swapping' with his friends in her presence. The victim claimed that the accused and his friends had taken obscene pictures of her in Manali after drugging her. The accused allegedly asked her to sleep with his friends and on being denied, he threatened her with divorce.

According to the Ahmedabad Mirror's report, the victim was held hostage in Manali by the accused. The victim was allegedly made to sign blank papers by the accused. The accused had called the victim's parents before the two returned from Manali. A heated argument took place between the couple where the accused and his friends allegedly hurled abuses at the victim. Questioning the character of the victim, the accused asked the former and her parents to leave the house.

The victim further alleged that the divorce documents were sent to her mother's phone on WhatsApp. Allegedly, the documents bore the signatures of the victim. The documents stated the victim did not want permanent alimony and maintenance from the accused. The police booked the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), Dowry Prohibition Act(1961) and Information Technology Act(2000).
