Maharashtra: Man strangles wife to death after quarrel over domestic issue, accused at large

The body was later sent for postmortem and the police said that the accused on Saturday also beat up his wife following which she received injuries. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Mumbai: In a case reported from Maharashtra, a 38-year-old man allegedly strangled his wife to death after a quarrel over domestic issues in Thane district. The police confirmed the incident on Sunday.

According to a report in PTI, the victim was identified as 35-year-old Rekha Pagare, who used to work as domestic help. Her husband Dileep Pagare, a plumber, did not like her profession, said a police officer. The police further told PTI that the accused also doubted his wife's character and the couple often had fights. The couple, parents to two children were residents of Mukund Nagar in Ulhasnagar township.

Meanwhile, the police added that on Saturday while the family was celebrating the Gudi Padwa festival, the woman went to work and returned home in the evening. The couple had an argument over this following which the accused allegedly strangled his wife with a dupatta.

Reportedly, their 13-year-old daughter tried to intervene and stop her father but the accused pushed her out of the house. The girl then rushed to her grandmother's house located nearby to inform her about the incident. The police further mentioned that the girl and her grandmother came to the accused's house, they saw the victim lying on the floor. She was immediately rushed to a nearby hospital where doctors declared her brought dead.

However, the body was later sent for postmortem and the police said that the accused on Saturday also beat up his wife following which she received injuries.

A case has been registered against the accused under Indian Penal Code Sections 302 (murder), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 504 (intentional insult with an intent to provoke breach of peace) and 506 (criminal intimidation). The accused has been absconding.
