Man takes Deputy CM’s name,assaults cops in Chikkajala station

Chikkajala police station

Deputy CM G Parameshwara

domestic violence

A man barged intoon Thursday, demanded that his friend be released immediately and assaulted policemen doing their duty when they refused. To top it all, he took the name ofand threatened them with transfers. And it took 10 police officials, including two women, to bring him to heel when he was assaulting a constable.On Thursday, Chikkajala police had summoned a certain Manjunath as his wife had charged him with. The police had registered the case under the non-cognisable register and wanted to interrogate him before proceeding with the case.Even as sub-inspector C Thirumalappa was questioning Manjunath, the man, later identified as Kakolu Ravi Kumar, barged in and demanded to know what right the police had to conduct the enquiry. Kumar, 34, claimed to be the leader of an outfit working for the backward communities. Police alleged that he had even assaulted Manjunath’s wife earlier when she had tried to point out the domestic violence case.When Thirumalappa asked him not to create a scene, Kumar allegedly said: “You do you know who I am. I will call Parameshwara immediately and get you suspended.” Thirumalappa has mentioned this in his complaint on the basis of which Kumar was arrested and sent to Chikkaballapura jail.When the police staff intervened, he started abusing them. He told police constable Ravi that he would fix him once he steps out of the police station. He then attacked constable Prasanna and tore his uniform. When the situation was getting out of control, ten police officials, including two women, rushed to Prasanna’s aid. By then Prasanna had sustained injuries due to the assault.An investigating officer said, “Kumar was taking names of politicians and also his organization so our staff was handling him carefully. But he took the advantage of it and assaulted the policemen inside the station.”The ruckus continued for at least 20 minutes before Kumar was arrested.He was produced in court and remanded in judicial custody on the charges of IPC section 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharging his duty), 332 (causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty), 504 (insult with intent to provoke breach of peace and criminal intimidation).
