Lawyer asked me to destroy the gun after Gauri Lankesh ‘event’

Sharad Kalaskar

Sanjeev Punalekar

murder case

Sanatan Sanstha

Sharad Kalaskar whose statement is part of the 9,235-page charge-sheet

says he was asked to meetin his Mumbai office in June-July 2018; experts say if true and proved, it is a serious misdemeanour chargeIn a startling revelation, one of the accused in Gauri Lankeshhas told the Karnataka Special Investigation Team (SIT) that he was asked to destroy the guns used in the murders of rationalists by Sanjeev Punalekar,’s legal advisor.Sharad Kalaskar’s statement is part of the 9,235-page additional charge-sheet filed by the SIT in November before a special court in Bengaluru. It details how he and Vaibhav Raut, a key accused in Nallasopara arms haul case met Punalekar at his office in Fort, Mumbai, in June-July 2018. Kalaskar has told SIT that Rishikesh Deodikar alias Murali, another key member of the outfit and who is still at large, had instructed them to do so after Amol Kale’s arrest in May 2018 (Kale was the commander of the group that was targeting ‘evildoers’. Police say his arrest sparked panic a month the remaining members.)According to Kalaskar’s 28-page statement, Punalekar immediately asked him about the guns and also whether the police had got any links between Kale and Tawde (Veerendra Tawde, a key suspect in Govind Pansare murder and an accused in Narendra Dabholkar murder).Kalaskar, a farmer from Aurangabad, was allegedly recruited by Tawde and later became Kale’s key aide in Belagavi and was also trained in making country-made firearms. He played a key role in arranging the firearm and the bike used in Gauri’s murder.“Destroy guns used for all events (code for murder) along with their barrels. Firearms and bombs that are in Murali’s custody should also be destroyed,” Punalekar reportedly told Kalaskar as per the statement.One of the biggest challenge that the SIT and other agencies probing the murder of four rationalists face is the fact that the firearms have never been recovered.Punalekar, however, pooh-poohed the allegation. “I have met many accused persons. Yes, Raut and Kalaskar came to meet me in June/July. But how can a lawyer ask anyone to destroy the gun? It is a baseless charge. Bengaluru police can come and check CCTV footage and carry out the investigation. I am fortunate that the police are not saying that they came to meet me before committing the crime,” said Punalekar. He also added that even the CBI had claimed that the murder weapon in Dabholkar case was dismantled and thrown into a water reservoir.However, legal eagles say it is a serious professional misconduct on any advocate’s part to instruct his clients to destroy and tamper with evidence as it is the advocate’s duty to study the prosecution’s case and highlight loopholes and inconsistencies to defend the client.“If any advocate indulges in such things then he could be booked under section 201 and 201 of the Indian Penal Code for disappearance of evidence. It is also a serious professional misconduct which could invite action from the legal fraternity,” said Shyam Sundar, a leading Karnataka High Court Lawyer.Sources in the SIT refused to confirm or deny whether they would move against Punalekar on the basis of Kalaskar’s statement.Another statement about Punalekar’s ‘role’Another accused in Gauri case, Vasudev Bhagwan Suryavamshi alias Mechanic from Jalgaon who used to steal bikes that were used by the group for recce and execution of their targets, was also instructed to meet Punalekar at his office in Fort. Suryavamshi told SIT that although he did go to meet Punalekar he was not present in his office at the time and an aide redirected him to another address.Kalaskar’s statement also reveals how Punalekar reassured him when he asked about the Narendra Dabholkar case as he was reportedly involved in it. Punalekar allegedly told him that somebody else had already been charge-sheeted in that case.“You don’t worry about it,” Punalekar told Kalaskar, as per his statement.However, contrary to Punalekar’s alleged assurance, Kalaskar later emerged as a key suspect in the Dabholkar murder case and the CBI suspects that he could be one of the shooters. Kalaskar’s statement to the SIT have him confessing to be ‘involved’ in the Dabholkar event.Punalekar claimed that Kalaskar had retracted his statements when he was produced before a judge in Mumbai about the Karnataka police version.Kalaskar told SIT that after meeting Punalekar, he convinced Murali, Vaibhav Raut and Sudhanva Gondalekar to keep four firearms and then dismantle the rest and dispose of them. He has claimed that he disposed those guns, including the one that was used to kill Gauri, Professor MM Kalburgi and Govind Pansare, from a bridge on the Mumbai-Nashik highway. When the Maharashtra ATS arrested Kalaskar and Raut from Nallasopara, it recovered these four pistols, dismantled pieces of a firearm and explosives.“Why would the gang dismantle its lucky gun and dispose its parts in some water body and keep the remaining unlucky ones with it,” he asked.
