Lawfully yours – Legal implications of marriage in India

Marriage was initially seen as a social institution to curtail unlimited polygamy in men and ascertain paternity of children. The State has over the years made laws to regulate all aspects of human lives and marriage is no exception. In India marriages are regulated in accordance with the personal laws of the religion professed by the parties to the marriage. For inter-religious and inter-nation marriages we have the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 respectively. Thus, we have laws that regulate the essential conditions for a valid marriage, the grounds of dissolution, maintenance of spouse and children, adoption, guardianship, inheritance, succession etc. In addition, we also have some secular laws dealing with matrimonial affairs in the form of Section 125 in the CrPC, Sections 498A of the IPC, Family Courts Act, 1984 and the Domestic Violence Act, 2005.

For Hindus and Christians marriage is a sacrament and there is great emphasis of the performance of customary rules, rites and ceremonies of the parties concerned which may be the saptpadi, saat pheras, exchange of garlands or vows. These ceremonies are necessary for a valid marriage. After the introduction of consent as a necessary requirement for marriage, Hindu marriages are said to have assumed a contractual character. However, the claim stands refuted as lack of consent makes Hindu marriages merely voidable and not void -ab-initio like contracts. Muslim marriages are contractual with emphasis on offer and acceptance in the presence of competent witnesses.

Hindu scriptures regard the wife as ardhangini meaning the other half, implying that a man is incomplete till he marries. Also, wife has been called the grahlakshmi, dharampatni and sahadharmini who is a necessary partner of her husband in discharging his religious duties and spiritual obligations. Hindus had customs that barred widow remarriages and encouraged Sati pratha. Social reformers were instrumental in doing away with such regressive practices.

Among Hindus, marriage is considered to be an eternal union for many lives to come. Thus, concept of divorce was not recognized before the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 came into force. Some references can be found in ancient Hindu texts where Sage Vashistha, Parasara and Kautilya mention certain circumstances when a woman may abandon her husband and remarry. This was permitted in cases where husband is devoid of character or impotent or has become ascetic. However, these texts were never highlighted in a patriarchal society and women were compelled to stay with polygamous husbands as men would often take more wives than one with impunity.

Before 1955 marriages among Hindus were monogamous for the woman alone. Now, with the sole exception of Islam (which permits a man to have four legally wedded wives at any given point of time) all spouses have a right to have a monogamous relationship. With the striking down of Section 497 IPC adultery is no longer a criminal offence but is a ground of divorce available to both the husband as well as the wife. Bigamy, in addition to being a ground a divorce is also a cause for criminal prosecution of the errant spouse under Section 494 of the IPC.

Marriage confers right to conjugal relationship and denial of the same amounts to cruelty, especially when the parties are young and in good health. Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act and Section 22 of the Special Marriage Act of 1954 provide a matrimonial remedy in the form of Restitution of Conjugal Rights to one deserted by his/her spouse. However, this provision which apparently is gender neutral is currently under the judicial scanner for being violative of human privacy, dignity and autonomy.

Women have a right to live in the matrimonial home, where the husband resides. She also has a right to be maintained from the husband’s income. In cases where wife is earning equally well or is well qualified to earn, the court may deny her maintenance from her husband’s income. For men seeking maintenance from their wives, Courts apply the test of ‘able bodied person’ to determine whether he is capable of earning his livelihood or not.

Marriage gives the parties a right to acquire properties in joint names, own joint bank accounts, lockers; nominate each other as nominee in insurance, pension, gratuity papers. Spouses are legally entitled to receive pension in case of death or disability of the other spouse. However, marriage does not give the spouses a share in each other’s self-acquired property. Except Goa, the concept of matrimonial property is not recognized in India, thus upon dissolution of marriage by divorce the parties can stake no claim to the other’s property by inheritance or otherwise. As per rules of intestate succession, upon husband’s death, wife gets equal share in all of her husband’s property along with her children, but husband can get share only in his wife’s own property and not her ancestral property after her death.

According to the guidelines issued by the Central Adoption Resource Authority, married couples may adopt however both spouses must consent to the adoption. Also, no child shall be given in adoption to a couple unless they have at least two years of stable marital relationship. Some religions consider husband to be the natural guardian of his minor wife, however there is a secular Law in place prohibiting child marriages in India- The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006. Now, if an adult male who is above 18 years of age contracts child marriage, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for 2 years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or both. Also, consummation of marriage with a minor bride is no longer protected under the IPC and the Supreme Court by a 2017 ruling, has termed it as marital rape punishable under the law.

Communications between spouses during the subsistence of marriage are privileged from disclosure. Spousal privilege is protected under section 122 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 because it is essential to sustain full confidentiality between a husband and a wife who share the most intimate relationship. This protects all communications made during the subsistence off marriage and the same privilege continues even after the breakup of the marriage, but only for communications that were made during the existence of marriage.

Rights discourse has assumed an overweening presence in contemporary legal sphere and we are neglecting our corresponding duties. Special legislations for women have served to alleviate their sufferings in some areas but we need to safeguard against extremes. Financially Independent and self-assured women are a perceptible threat to male dominance unwilling to accept women as equal, and this creates disturbances in married life. There is rise in awareness among women about their legal rights and in their minds, they are definitely not the weaker sex. In the course of my work, I have come across cases where it was actually advisable for the parties to move on. Instead of being trapped in circumstances where none of them is happy, both are miserable, it is better for them to let go. The anguish affects those around them and those worst affected are children. Everyone deserves to be happy. In marriages when love goes out, law comes in. Law provides an exit point to a failed relationship in the form of divorce. One may find happiness the second or maybe the third time. The hopeless optimist in me wants to believe that there are no bad people, just bad circumstances and time changes everything.

Today as I complete 21 years of matrimony I look back and count my blessings. As one grows the realization dawns that here is no recipe for a perfect marriage. Despite the essential ingredients of mutual love, trust, honesty, respect and communication, every marriage has its fair share of trials and tribulations. What is required is two people who are willing to make it work, who let the other one be by not stifling their growth in any sphere of life be that personal, social, professional or spiritual; and are not willing to give up on one another, no matter what? To reiterate the vow “Till death do us part” -Amen.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
