If Modi Will Not come to Power, India Will have Bin Ladin Culture

If Modi Will Not come to Power, India Will have Bin Ladin Culture – Harikrishna Bantwal

Mangaluru: “In this Lok Sabha elections, BJP candidate Nalin Kumar Kateel will easily win. The possibility of Congress winning the elections is a dream. In 2014, Congress leader Janardhana Poojary lost to BJP’s Nalin Kumar Kateel by 1,43,121 votes. At that time, there was one BJP MLA and seven Congress MLAs. Now, there are seven BJP MLAs and only one Congress MLA. This time, Nalin Kumar Kateel will win by a margin of 2 lakh votes”, said the BJP spokesperson Harikrishna Bantwal in a press meet held at the BJP Election Office, Bunt’s Hostel here, on April 9.

Addressing the mediapersons Harikrishna Bantwal said, “If caste, dharma, religion, language, and country are strong, then it is impossible to make our country ‘tukde tukde’. There are no words such as majority and minority in the BJP dictionary. The BJP will not play caste-politics. Some people say that the BJP is against Muslims. If that were the case, then why did the UAE govt. give PM Narendra Modi the Zayed medal? Recently, India’s Sushma Swaraj was invited to attend the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in Abu Dhabi despite Pakistan’s warning.”

He further said, “Kumarswamy has said that there is no Modi wave and Rahul Gandhi has called Modi a thief. Modi is a political missile. In this country, Modi’s name is like an electric shock. If the BJP does not come to power, there will be a Bin-Laden culture. Congress applauds Pakistan and was unable to give an answer to them. Modi has given a free hand to the army to respond to Pakistan. On May 23rd, two mangoes will fall with one stone. The Congress’s dream of coming to power will fall and Kumarswamy’s Chief Ministership will also fall.”

In West Bengal, BJP karyakartas publicly assaulted a woman who refused to vote for Modi. When asked whether this was not Bin-Laden culture, Harikrishna Bantwal said, “They should have filed a case against the culprits. Wherever Rahul Gandhi campaigns, they shout ‘Pakistan Zindabad’. They ask us to show the proof of terrorists that have died in Pakistan. Does he not trust the Indian Army?”

When asked if questioning the Modi government was equivalent to questioning the Army, he pivoted and said, “We are not saying that. In a democracy, everyone has a right to question. But they must not lie.”
