KCCI demands impartial probe into Shimla attacks

KCCI demands impartial probe into Shimla attacks

SRINAGAR, Jan 1: Condemning assault and vandalizing property of Kashmiri traders by the miscreants in Shimla last week, Kashmir Chamber of Commerce and Industries (KCC&I) today demanded impartial probe into the incident.

“This is highly unfortunate that Himachal police instead of taking actions against goons watched assault on life and property of Kashmiri businessmen in Shimla as mute spectators,” KCC&I President, Sheikh Ashiq said addressing a press conference here.

The business body head while terming the assault on traders as sheer hooliganism asked the government to ensure safety of lives and property of Kashmiri businessmen in Shimla and elsewhere in mainland India.

He also said a formal criminal case must be registered against the miscreants for beating Kashmiri traders to pulp and vandalizing their property for none of their fault.

“There are video footages of the incident which have gone viral on social media platform. We condemn police inaction and at the same time condemn government criminal silence over the brutality meted out to innocent Kashmiris,” he added.

The KCCI head appealed to the civil society, trade community, intellectuals and intelligentsia to raise their voice against the brutality meted out to the Kashmiri businessmen operating throughout India.

He also asked the Governor Administration to depute a high-level team to Shimla for accessing losses that Kashmiri traders suffered during attack on their shops in Shimla.

“We want the Governor Satyapal Malik to depute a team including KCCI members to Shimla so that the losses Kashmiri traders suffered are assessed. We also demand that government should ensure safety of the lives and property of Kashmiris outside state,” he said.

He alleged that selective targeting of Kashmiri businessmen especially handicraft dealers/Pheriwala’s on social media through uploading videos of hate speeches and physical violence must be stopped and those indulging in hate mongering be brought to justice.
