Even Hindus will not accept common civil code, says Asaduddin Owaisi

Hyderabad: MIM president Asaduddin Owaisi said on Tuesday that imposing a common civil code was impossible in India as it has a diverse culture and many faiths. Even Hindus will not accept a common code as they are divided into various schools of thoughts which follow different customs and procedures in conjugal and family affairs, he said.

Mr Owaisi was speaking at the last public meeting ahead of the April 11 elections at Khilwat Maidan. He and his brother Akbaruddin Owaisi said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi would not return to power. Mr Owaisi said that even the Law Commission had opined that imposing a uniform civil code was not possible.

“Mr Modi is speaking about a common civil code to deprive us of our culture. The BJP has a mania for Article 44,” he said. The article in the Directive Principles speaks of a uniform civil code.

He said the BJP has claimed in the Northeast that the reason for poverty among Muslims was that the community practiced polygamy and had more children. The fact is that non-Muslims have more number of wives according to the Census report of 1971. He said, “We give the status of wife to the second woman while in their culture, the second woman is treated as a concubine.” He said Mr Modi had claimed that he would stand by women affected by triple talaq. He said a person who has abandoned his own wife cannot take the responsibilities of other women. “Your home is deserted, think about your woman first,” he said.

Earlier, addressing a ‘Meet the Press’’ Mr. Owaisi said Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be remembered for mob lynching. He claimed that people who had indulged in mob lynching were all supporters of Modi and were confident that no one could harm them as the Prime Minister supports their mindset.

The incidents of ‘Love Jihad’, ‘Ghar Wapsi’, ‘mob-lynching and terrorising in the name of the holy cow had increased after Modi became Prime Minister, he said. He said that yesterday in Assam, 70 year old Shoukat was beaten up for selling the beef. The mod attacked him and forced him to eat pork. He also predicted that AP Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu would be defeated.

Keep yourself updated on Lok Sabha Elections 2019 with our round-the-clock coverage -- breaking news, updates, analyses et all. Happy reading.
