Kurali boy’s kidnapper arrested

editorial@tribune.com

Shashi Pal Jain

Kharar, April 9

The Kurali police have arrested a Haryana resident for the kidnapping of an 11-year-old boy four days ago. The boy was found at Ambala railway station later.

The accused, Sahil Verma, had allegedly kidnapped Ashish Jot Singh, a class VI student, on Saturday night. A resident of Gohana in Haryana, he committed the kidnapping as he wanted to go to Mumbai to work in movies and need money to fulfill his dream.

The boy was kidnapped from outside Chaudhary Hospital in Kurali. A case under Section 363 of the IPC was registered in this connection at the Kurali police station.

Mohali SSP Harcharan Singh Bhullar and Kharar DSP Deep Kamal Singh said while the boy was recovered within 12 hours of kidnapping, they now arrested the accused from Gohana.

They said during preliminary investigation, they came to know that Sahil, aged about 25, was a graduate and unmarried. His father works as a building contractor in Gohana.

The accused had music as a hobby and had been learning it along with his studies. In 2016, he came into contact with Amar and Sonu, both residents of Kurali, during the shooting of a song in Chandigarh. He started visiting them in Kurali after that and stayed at the residence of Parminder Singh, alias Sonu. For the past few months, the accused was staying at a rented room in Paprali village.

According to the police, he met Ashish Jot Singh and two other children outside a stadium on the Singhpura road in Kurali on March 31 and April 2. He purchased burgers for the kids.

On Saturday evening, Sahil went to the vegetable market in Kurali where he met Ashish Jot and the other two children. He purchased them ice-cream from a shop opposite Chaudhary Hospital. Later, he took the victim to his car and they went towards Ludhiana. When Ashish Jot insisted on going back home, the accused said it was too dark to go home at that moment. Later, he took the child to a restaurant and they spent a night in a rented room.

The police said on Sunday morning, Sahil made a call to the victim’s family from his cell phone and demanded a ransom of Rs 2 lakh for releasing the child. However, he later got scared on realising that the police could catch him by tracking the location of his mobile phone. He took the child in a bus to Ambala. Fearing arrest, he left the boy at the Ambala bus stand and threw the SIM of his mobile phone.

Earlier, Sahil had threatened Ashish Jot against telling his name to anyone. He told the child that if asked, he should say that he was kidnapped by four boys who were armed and that they dropped him at the bus stand when he started shouting.

The police said the accused revealed that he had kidnapped the boy to get ransom money as he wanted to work in films. He planned the abduction as he was not having money to fulfill his dream of going to Mumbai.

Kurali City SHO Sandeep Kaur said the accused was being further interrogated. She said he would be produced in a Kharar court on Wednesday.
