Accused of drunken misconduct, woman implicates Bengaluru policeman in false sexual harassment case

Staffers at the pub alerted a patrolling Hoysala about the woman on April 6 (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Bengaluru: Police in the state capital of Karnataka have accused a 25-year-old private company employee of making false allegations against an assistant sub-inspector (ASI).Officials probing the woman's complaint claim that she accused the ASI of sexual harassment in order to derail the police investigation into two cases which were registered against her on April 6 of this year.

The matter came to light after the woman took to social media to accuse the ASI posted with the Koramangala police of sexually harassing her. In her post, the woman tagged not just Bengaluru City police but also President Ram Nath Kovind. Claiming to be a victim on sexual assault, the woman accused ASI Madan of "scarring her body and breaking one of her legs."

In the wake of her allegations, a senior police official refuted her claim by saying that the woman was booked on two charges for her actions on April 6. When informed about the charges against her, the woman wasted no time in levelling allegations against ASI Madan. She even claimed to have proof, including medical reports, to prove her case.

According to what an official told New Indian Express that the woman was at the Boho pub in Koramangala on Saturday. She left her mobile phone at the pub and went back to collect it. Denied entry, the woman began smashing flower pots under the influence of alcohol prompting security guards to alert a Hoysala patrolling in the area. Police officials arrived at the pub and urged the woman to escort them to the Koramangala police station.

However, she not only refused to accompany the police officers but also misbehaved with ASI Madan. She then accused Madan of sexual harassment. This led to Bengaluru police booking the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), including an attempt to assault an on-duty policeman.
