Techie allegedly abducted for the fourth time in Bengaluru by disgruntled employees

Techie allegedly abducted for the fourth time in Bengaluru by disgruntled employees

Sujay, a techie who hailed from Chennai, had opened a company in Bengaluru but has not been able to pay his employees.

news Crime

A techie from Chennai who had opened a company in Bengaluru was allegedly abducted by his former employees four times in the past one month for failing to pay them their salaries. A resident of Cambridge Layout, 23-year-old Sujay SK and had recently opened a new business in the city. The company shut down after a month of its opening and Sujay has allegedly not paid salaries to their employees.

According to the Halasur Police, the techie’s father has filed a complaint with the police alleging that eight of Sujay’s former employees abducted him thrice between March 21 and 26 after Sujay was not able to disburse their salaries since January 2019. Police believe that Sujay was allegedly abducted for the fourth time on Monday as he has been missing since then.

Sujay, along with a few friends, had started the private company, FGL Infotech near Electronic City in January 2019. Sujay had completed his diploma in engineering and had come to Bengaluru from Chennai with hopes of setting up a business. Sanjay, Niranjan, Rakesh, Tanzeem, Darshan, Rashmi, Likith and Vishwa joined FLG Infotech as employees in January this year. However, the firm shut down within a month due to management issues.

Police told TNM that the eight employees began asking for their salaries but Sujay had remained elusive and had not returned their calls. Hence, the employees allegedly planned to abduct him.

According to the police, on March 21, Sujay was allegedly contacted by Likith and Vishwa. The duo allegedly asked him to meet them at a bank near Halasur. When Sujay arrived, they allegedly forced him into Darshan’s car and took him to a secluded area and assaulted him with an iron rod. Sujay was dropped back home on March 23.

Police said that Tanzeem and Sanjay allegedly abducted him once again on March 25 while Sujay was on his way to Tamil Nadu. Once again, he was allegedly beaten up with an iron rod. When Sujay told the duo that he was going to Tamil Nadu to bring back money, his abductors allegedly let him go.

However, when the former employees realised that Sujay had not left for Tamil Nadu, they allegedly abducted him once again and took him to a farmhouse near Maddur in Mandya. “They tied his hands and legs and beat him up. He was later let go the same day near Mysuru Road,” the police added.

Unable to bear the trauma of being abducted and assaulted, Sujay allegedly consumed a lot of sleeping pills on the night of March 26, police said. He was taken to the hospital by his father.

However, once Sujay was discharged on Monday, he was abducted again and has been missing since. The police are trying to track him and the other employees down.

Sujay’s father Shivam C, a former member of the armed forces, filed a complaint with the Halasur police after he could not contact Sujay.

“We took his (father’s) statement and arrested Sanjay, Niranjan and Rakesh. We are tracking down the five others. We believe the same people abducted him,” the police added. The three have allegedly confessed to the abductions.

The Halasur Police have registered an FIR under sections 363 (abduction), 324 (voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapon), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 339 (wrongful restraint) and 34 (common intention) of the IPC.
