Bengaluru: Techie boss abducted for fourth time after he failed to pay salaries

Police officials told TNM that the eight employees began asking him for their salaries but Sujay did not pay heed to their demands and remained elusive. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Bengaluru: In a case reported, a techie who had a company in Bengaluru was allegedly abducted by his former employees four times in the past month for failing to pay their salaries. The victim was identified as 23-year-old Sujay SK and his company was shut down in a month of its opening and he had allegedly not paid salaries to their employees.

According to a report in the web-portal The News Minute (TNM), the Halaspur police said that the techie's father has filed a complaint, mentioning that eight of former employees had abducted him thrice between March 21 and 26. In January 2019, Sujay was not able to pay their salaries. Meanwhile, the police officials believe that Sujay was allegedly abducted for the fourth time on Monday and since then he had been missing.

Reportedly, Sujay had started a new firm near Electronic city in January 2019. He hailed from Chennai and with hopes of setting up a new business he came to Bengaluru. But, due to certain circumstances the company was shut within a month. Police officials told TNM that the eight employees began asking him for their salaries but Sujay did not pay heed to their demands and remained elusive.

Reportedly, the eight employees were identified as Sanjay, Niranjan, Rakesh, Tanzeem, Darshan, Rashmi, Likith and Vishwa. The police told TNM on March 21, Sujay was allegedly contacted by Likith and Vishwa and they asked him to meet at a bank near Halasur. When Sujay arrived he was allegedly forced into Darshan's car he was then assaulted and with an iron rod. On March 23 he was dropped back home.

In a similar way he was again abducted on the night of March 26, police said. Meanwhile, on Monday he was again abducted and had been missing since then. Sujay's father, a former member of the armed forces filed a complaint with the Halasur police station.

A case has been registered under section 363, 324, 323, 339 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code. The police further added that three of the accused have confessed the abductions.


