Drunk realtor bashes up cops on poll duty

Bangalore

By Amit KumarWhen asked what he was doing out late at night, inebriated man assaults copsA realtor, who had one drink too many, bashed up police men on election duty, when he was questioned by them at Begur Main Road on April 7. The officials were on night duty and were checking vehicles ahead of election.When they saw the man, Manjunath (41) roaming suspiciously around, they stopped to question him.Manjunath is a real estate agent and a resident of Roopena Agrahara.When an officials questioned Manjunath why he was out so late, Manjunath who was under the influence of alcohol did not bother to answer the questions. So the police officer questioned him again and that got Manjunath all riled up. He started abusing the cops. When officials tried to restrain him, he assaulted one of the police officials and held him by the collar.When other officers present at the spot intervened, Manjunath assaulted them too and pushed them around. Later Manjunath was taken to the police station.Reportedly Manjunath also created a ruckus inside the police station.An official from the police station toldMirror, “The accused was completely drunk and was not in a position to listen to officials. We were on night patrolling as it is election time. During the time, we spotted Manjunath standing near a local bar late in the late night. He was angry with the officials and even assaulted a couple of officers. He was arrested and produced in front of the court.”An FIR has been registered at Bomanahalli police station under the sections 504 (Criminal intimidation) and 353 (Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty).This is not the first time that officials are being assaulted by common people. Recently four men were arrested for driving through a police barricade at the election checkpost in Sanjaynagar.In another incident, Indiranagar police officials were assaulted by a group of men standing infront of the pub. Not only this, traffic cops were also beaten up by two auto drivers at Tannery road on March 27. There is a demand for a strict action to be taken against people who assault cops.A dance teacher, who is said to have been under depression over debt, has committed suicide. The deceased identified as Sandeep (38), used to run a dance institute at Geddalahalli near Sanjaynagar.Sandeep was not staying with his family and used to stay at dance institute. Sandeep’s wife and son were living in Udupi. On Sunday, Sandeep hanged himself to ceiling fan at his dance institute. Students got to know about this about 48 hours after the incident. A police official told Bangalore Mirror, “Sanjay was depressed about his financial condition and he had taken money from many people. We don’t know how much debt he was in.”The official said that the students discovered the suicide only after a stench was observed coming from the room. They had to break the door to find the body.
