Buffalo celebrates 40th anniversary; displays wild side in ad film

Setting fashion goals since 1979, homegrown brand ‘Buffalo’ has, over the years mirrored fashion for the explorer within an individual, one that represents the spirit of setting oneself free. Added to the fbb portfolio in 2007, the brand has grown creating a wider customer base across India. Known as India’s leading fashion destination – fbb created a nostalgic campaign ‘Setting You Free’ featuring brand Buffalo’s ambassador Varun Dhawan to celebrate its 40th milestone.

Shot in breathtakingly scenic and quaint natural landscapes, the story travels between past and present where the protagonist, Varun Dhawan reminisces his experiences as he sifts through his wardrobe. While he touches and feels all his Buffalo apparels, he is taken on a nostalgic journey of all the stories connected to the same. He is reminded of his spectacular adventures, the people he met, the solitude he experienced and how he let go of his inhibitions and set himself free.

Celebrating the four decade success Rajesh Seth, COO, fbb says, “It’s not every day that we see brands successfully serve for forty years. We celebrate the 40th year of our iconic brand Buffalo with pride and are filled with gratitude for the undying support by our customers. We believe that this is just the beginning and are working towards achieving many more milestones.”

The expressive actor, Varun Dhawan, Brand Ambassador, Buffalo says, “As someone who truly believes in style, I am extremely happy to be associated with a brand like Buffalo which has been creating styles for four decades. Just a glance at the range will make you fall in love with the adventurous, stylish and comfortable collection of the brand. Kudos to Buffalo and I look forward to celebrating many more birthdays with this brand.”



Speaking about the campaign Anand Subbarao, Co-founder AndAnd Brand Partners Pvt. Ltd. said, “When you have Varun as an ambassador for a popular brand like Buffalo, executing the campaign is a seamless process. The brand has a strong yet soft personality that matches with the superstar; which is why the film looks distinctly great.”

The 40th Birthday bash was set at an adventure-soaked vibe in the city’s busiest malls, High Street Phoenix at Lower Parel, Mumbai. The day was packed with a series of stomping dance performances, games and ended with the highlight of the evening, the mega fashion show. The event saw fans thumping with joy as they got a chance to meet their favorite superstar Varun Dhawan in person.

Right from Jeans, Shirts, Cargoes, Shorts to T-shirts the brand has catered to all the fashion needs. Rush to the nearest fbb store to grab your favourite Buffalo style.

Credits

Creative Agency: AndAnd

Creatives: Anand Subbarao and Harpal Singh

Account Management: Shikhar Khandelwal

Production House: Jump Films
