TV Series To Watch This Weekend Based On Zodiac Sign: Game of Thrones, Delhi Crime & More | VOGUE India

If you say you've never spent a Sunday lazing in bed with a bowl full of popcorn watching an entire series like it'll disappear tomorrow, you're lying. Every once in a while, one comes across a show that's so intriguing, we can't help but disappear into its world, falling in love with the characters, feeling emotionally involved in each twist of the plot and eventually telling its story to anyone who will listen. Been a while since you fell in love with a television or web series? Let your zodiac sign determine your next binge-watch.

Your zodiac sign: Aries

Watch: Game of Thrones on Hotstar

Mysterious, surprising, wild... This cult show's description matches your personality to a tee, Aries. You tend to enjoy shows with lots of drama, and once you start favouring a character, you'll watch an entire series just to find out if they succeeded against enemies. If you've never watched a Game of Thrones episode before (honestly, how!), now's a great time to join the party. And if you, like millions of others, are a die-hard fan, gear up for the series' final season, premiering on April 15 on Hotstar. The trailer's got us all holding our breaths in anticipation.

Your zodiac sign: Taurus

Watch: The Marvelous Mrs Maisel on Prime Video

Your feminine, yet sassy nature makes you unique, Taurus, and if there's one silver screen character who matches your vibe, it's got to be Midge Maisel. With her sharp tongue, crazy comedy skills and eye for all things pretty, this not-so-basic Jewish housewife's strength and wit will brighten up your weekend. Plus, given your love for all things beautiful, we already know you're going to be impressed by the pretty costumes and sets in here. Rumour has it we'll see be able to watch Season 3 on Amazon Prime Video soon.

Your zodiac sign: Gemini

It's hard to keep you entertained, Gemini, and the only way to do so is with a show that's fast-paced, full of interesting cross connections and of course, exciting visuals. Cue Made in Heaven, India's latest obsession. Using a backdrop of extravagant Indian weddings and a storyline full of sex and secrets, this Amazon Prime Video show spotlights some of our country's biggest societal issues in a brand new way. And for the Gemini who loves fashion, there's no ignoring the main character, Tara Khanna's wardrobe.

Your zodiac sign: Cancer

Watch: This Is Us

You're a romantic at heart and a homebody IRL, Cancer, and if there's one show that will suit your sensibilities perfectly, it's got to be comedy-drama series This Is Us. Already three seasons old, the show will make a comeback this September on Prime Video, and you can be sure to see much more romance, friendship and those poignant moments that make the heart of the show. Spoiler: If you've already seen this show from the very beginning, make sure to binge-watch on the latest season as it reveals some family secrets you never saw coming.

Your zodiac sign: Leo

Watch: Peaky Blinders

Let's face it, Leo: if you were in a mob, you'd be the head. There's no denying your leadership qualities, or the fact that you love the good life, not unlike the cunning Thomas Shelby from Peaky Blinders. Set at a time just after the first World War, this Birmingham-based gangster family epic on Netflix has everything a Leo can relate to: ambition, power and the promise of luxury. Bonus: the storyline is full of thrilling surprises, bound to hold your attention throughout the weekend.

Your zodiac sign: Virgo

Watch: Our Planet

It's rare to come across a Virgo who isn't a perfectionist, and this zodiac sign is as empathetic and caring as it is systematic and smart. If you've been on the hunt for a show that's going to suck you in, look no further than Netflix's newest addition, Our Planet. This British nature documentary series won't just treat you to stunning visuals that will inspire you to travel the globe, it will also leave you with lots of food for thought. One example comes from David Attenborough's words in episode one: "For the first time in our history, the stability of nature can no longer be taken for granted. What we do in the next 20 years will determine the future for all life on Earth."

Your zodiac sign:Libra

Watch: Sacred Games

Few zodiac signs can compete with your intellect, Libra, and you love storylines that are a bit of a puzzle that you can solve as you watch. Bringing together two stellar Bollywood stars, Saif Ali Khan and Nawazuddin Siddiqui, Sacred Games is the show you need to dive into ASAP, if you haven't already. Mumbai police officer Sartaj Singh's thrilling journey to save the city in 25 days is one that will keep you on your toes, and is perfectly balanced with a little love angle too, which will appeal to your secret romantic side. Season 2 coming soon on Netflix!

Your zodiac sign: Scorpio

Watch: Chilling Adventures of Sabrina

'Intense', 'sensual' and 'mysterious' are some of the words that first come to mind when one thinks of Scorpio individuals. You have a thing for all things dark, Scorpio, but you're feisty when you need to be too. One TV character you'll easily identify with is Sabrina the teenage witch, who's bold enough to take on the Devil himself, and recently returned to the silver screen with Netflix's new series. With its creepy creatures, vintage-Goth aesthetic and witty dialogues, this supernatural horror series was made just for you.

Your zodiac sign: Sagittarius

Watch: Delhi Crime

You're known for being honest to a fault, Sagittarius, and your personality makes it easy for you to identify with straight-forward, no-nonsense kind of on-screen characters. New on Netflix, Delhi Crime, should hit the spot, and you'll find yourself really warming up to DCP Vartika Chaturvedi's character. Split over seven episodes, the drama series is based on the 2012 Delhi gang rape case and will keep you gripped with its storyline.

Your zodiac sign: Capricorn

Watch: The Crown

Traditional, down-to-earth and responsible, you're a bit of an aristocrat in your mind, and you're not wrong to think so. Capricorn, your calm, practical nature matches that of Queen Elizabeth 2 in The Crown, a historical drama web series that's all set to come back with its third season this year on Netflix. Behind those elegant costumes and hushed tones lies a life story full of hardships and sacrifices. As the father of the zodiac, you may just empathise with the main character more than you initially thought.

Your zodiac sign: Aquarius

Watch: Queer Eye

You're so head strong and independent, Aquarius, you'd never let anyone influence your ways. But as one of the wisest signs in the zodiac, you sure could take a few lost souls under your wing, just like the fabulous five in Queer Eye. With your keen eye for fashion and interiors, you're just the kind of watcher to get addicted to this makeover series, which transforms a different male in each episode. Always happy to learn, you'll also be able to take away some key grooming, interior and social tips. Win, win!

Your zodiac sign: Pisces

Watch: Stranger Things

If there's one zodiac sign that can see beyond what meets the eye, it's got to be you, Pisces. Your whimsical, dreamy nature attracts you to books and shows that take you into another world, and with its '80s backdrop, supernatural elements and suspense-filled storyline, Stranger Things is bound to pique your interest. Watch it on a day when you've got no other plans. Thought it may start off a tad slow, this series will suck you in just like the "Upside Down" stole little Will Byers.
