Haryana horror! Drunk father rapes 12-year-old daughter; arrested

The accused got scared and fled when the girl started shouting. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Gurugram: A 35-year-old drunk father allegedly raped his 12-year-old daughter at their house in Manesar on Saturday. The man fled after committing the crime and was arrested on Sunday morning. There was no one in the house when the crime happened. A case has been registered against him at Manesar women's police station.

The survivor's mother left for work at around 8 am on Saturday morning after which the girl and her elder brother went to school, according to a report in Hindustan Times. The girl's mother told that her husband was at home in a drunken state. After the girl fell ill in school, both the children were sent back home by the authorities. However, the accused father sent his son back to school.

Also Read: Senegalese national bites off man’s cheek after minor altercation in Delhi

The girl's mother told the police that after locking the room in which the survivor was resting, he raped her. The police said that he got scared and fled when the girl started shouting. On returning home in the evening, the girl's mother found her daughter crying. The girl confided in her mother about the incident after which the police was informed.

Station house officer, Manesar women's police station, Kanta Devi said that the accused was arrested from the village in a drunken state in the early hours of Sunday. The girl was sent for a medical test and her statement would be recorded before a magistrate, sub-inspector Saroj said. An FIR was lodged against the accused under section 6 (aggravated penetrative sexual assault) of POCSO Act on Sunday.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
