Change through the celluloid screen

A Chennai-based NGO seeks to create awareness about the issue of sexual assault through film screenings

Every Saturday, throughout April, which is internationally observed as ‘Sexual Assault Awareness Month’, AWARE India is screening films that seek to highlight the issue of sexual assault and how to prevent it, at its Center for Social Change in Chemmenchery.

AWARE India is a city-based NGO that promotes the causes of women’s safety and gender equality.

The NGO’s founder Sandhiyan Thilagavathy says film screenings are part of a community project at the Chemmenchery Slum Clearance Housing Board.

The ‘Chemmenchery Holistic Community Development project’, started in 2015, seeks to empower children and women and make the community safe, sustainable and child-friendly.

“Sexual violence against women and child sexual abuse are crimes that happen almost every day. In most cases, the perpetrators are known to the victims. The stigma surrounding sexual violence prevents most victims from speaking out. It is necessary that we teach children and women how to identity and report abuse. It is also important to know how to respond to reports of abuse. Films are one of the many useful resources to start a dialogue on the subject. There are films that focus on sexual assault, with the objective of letting people know how to prevent it, and also address it. Many of these stories are about survival and healing.”

According to him, films tend to have a profound social impact and helps individuals understand and question social constructs and behaviours. Each film screening is followed by a panel discussion with experts who dissect the film, viewing it through the lens of law, media, history and gender politics.

“We just want to keep the conversation going and the films we pick are designed to start meaningful dialogues about sexual assault, consent and coercion,” Sandhiyan says.

The films :

April 13: The Hindi film Pink which explores Indian society’s perception towards culture and morality through the eyes of three young women will be screened.

April 20: The Tamil film Nisabdham which tells the story of a young girl who is sexually abused and how her parents deal with the situation.

April 27: The web series Delhi Crime, based on the 2012 Delhi gang rape, will be screened.

“We choose films that are available on streaming platforms. When non-Tamil films are screened, a volunteer usually pauses the screening in between to explain the plot and sequences,” Sandhiyan adds.

The NGO is open to organising film screenings and hold discussions in residential communities.

Resident welfare associations, educational institutions willing to join the initiative can contact Sandhiyan at 81222 41688.
