Bihar turnout better than 2014, test for NDA to retain all 4 seats

Over 53% of voters exercised their franchise in four constituencies of Bihar, which went to polls in the first phase of the Lok Sabha election on Thursday. It is a marginal increase of about 1% since 2014, when 51.8% turnout was recorded here.

While maximum turnout was registered in Gaya, where 56% people cast their vote, Jamui followed close at 54% and Nawada at 52.5%. These three seats saw an increase in turnout compared to 2014 when 53.92%, 50.01% and 52.18% votes were polled respectively. Aurangabad registered a dip with 49.85% polling as against 51.19% in 2014. Nawada assembly constituency, which also went to polls on Thursday, recorded 52% turnout.

A total of 44 candidates were in the fray from these four constituencies, which has over 70 lakh electors, for whom 7,486 polling centres were set up on Thursday. Interestingly, neither Aurangabad nor Gaya had any female candidates, while Nawada had two and Jamui had one female candidate in the contest.

All four seats fall in Left extremist-affected districts and heavy deployment of forces ensured smooth conduct of polls. No major incidents were reported, except for a few minor clashes between rival party workers, poll boycott call in some areas and recovery of cane bomb from a polling station in Aurangabad.

Voters queued up outside booths since early hours and brisk polling was recorded across these constituencies till afternoon. "The afternoon heat and Chaiti Chhath rituals may have deterred some of the voters to come to the booths, or else the voting percentage would have been even better," said a senior officer at the office of the chief electoral officer of Bihar.

Phase I is a test for the NDA in Bihar as all four seats fell into their kitty in 2014. While Aurangabad, Gaya and Nawada were represented by BJP, Jamui was won by LJP leader Chirag Paswan, who is seeking a re-election from there against RLSP's Bhudeo Choudhary.



It is likely to be a direct contest in Gaya where former Bihar CM Jitan Ram Manjhi (HAM-S) is fighting JD(U)'s Vijay Manjhi, as well as Aurangabad constituency, where BJP MP Sushil Kumar is seeking to retain his seat against HAM-S candidate Upendra Prasad. Nawada, which shifted from the BJP to the LJP's kitty, is witnessing a fight between two Bahubali families -- LJP's Chandan Kumar, brother of criminal-turned-politician Surajbhan Singh, is up against Vibha Devi, wife of rape-accused MLA Rajballabh Yadav of the RJD.

Bihar
