In Ahmedabad, man tries to rape wife, beats her

AHMEDABAD: A 37-year-old woman scientist with a central government organisation, on Wednesday filed a complaint with Chandkheda police alleging that her husband tried to rape her and when she thwarted his attempts, he kicked on her private parts and stomach, at their home on New CG Road in Chandkheda on Monday.According to the FIR , the complainant married the accused, an executive with a private insurance company, in 2002. Before their wedding, she learned that the man had an illicit relationship with another woman, who had filed a complaint in Aurangabad town of Maharashtra. She decided to marry him anyway to avoid “shaming her family”.She further alleged that her husband continued to indulge in extra-marital affairs with other women when he travelled to other towns. Whenever she raised this issue, he would get angry and assault her. Her in-laws also sided with her husband, saying that a man could indulge in adultery.The woman delivered two sons, who are 14 and 10 years old now.Her husband continued his ill-treament of her and would assault her over petty issues. “Even after the birth of our sons, he continued his extra marital affairs. He also had sex with me against my will and every now and then he would attempt to rape me,” the complainant stated.Aggrieved at her husband’s maltreatment of her, she told her mother-in-law to ask him to stop having sexual relations with other women. “When my husband found out that I spoke to his mother about him, he first beat me up badly and then told me that he would show me how a man can take revenge on a woman. He then sat on me and tried to have intercourse with me. As I pushed him away and he fell, he got furious and he kicked me on my private parts and stomach,” the complainant stated.The complainant tried to get away but he kept throwing shoes and glass bottles at her. The complainant then called the police and registered a complaint under sections of the IPC dealing with assault and under the Domestic Violence Act.
