Ahmedabad: Scientist marries man to avoid 'shaming family'; assaulted and raped

The family of the accused allegedly favoured the latter and told the victim that it was normal for a man to indulge in adultery (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Ahmedabad: To save the honour of her family, a woman decided to marry a man even though he was in a relationship with another woman. It was only a matter of months that her life crumbled as her husband assaulted her and raped her at their residence.

A scientist employed with the National Innovation Foundation (NIF) of the department of science and technology, the victim approached the Chandakheda police with her complaint. Allegedly, the 37-year-old victim denied the husband's sexual advances, prompting him to rape her and assault her. The alleged incident took place at the couple's residence on New CG Road in the Chandkheda area. The accused allegedly kicked on the private parts and the stomach of the victim.

The accused is allegedly employed as an executive with a private insurance company. The couple got married in 2002. The victim alleged that before the wedding, she got to know that her husband was romantically involved with another woman. The victim still went ahead with the marriage because she was scared of "shaming her family".

According to the Times of India's report, the accused continued with his relationships when he used to travel to other towns. On being confronted by victim, the accused used to lose his temper. The family of the accused allegedly favoured the former and told the victim that it was normal for a man to indulge in adultery.

The accused allegedly used to raise his hand on the victim constantly. Even after fathering two sons. the accused continued his affairs. The victim also alleged that the accused used to force himself on her and would rape her whenever she denied his sexual advances.

The victim eventually confided in her mother-in-law and told her about the illicit relationships of the accused. When the accused learned about the conversation, he beat up the victim and told her that he will show her how a man can take revenge on a woman. The accused then tried to have intercourse with the victim but when she pushed him away, he kicked her on her private parts and her stomach.

The victim tried to escape but the accused allegedly threw shoes and glass bottles at her. The victim then approached the police. The police booked the victim under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Domestic Violence Act.
