Gujarat HC: Rise to task of tracing ‘love guru’

AHMEDABAD: The Gujarat high court has thrown down a challenge to the CBI to nab the 46-year-old ‘love guru’, Dhaval Trivedi, who has been convicted of rape and who targets teenage girls. In March last year, Trivedi was punished with life imprisonment for rape and abduction after he eloped with two class 11 hostel girls from Padadhari village. He came out of jail on parole and eloped with another minor girl from Chotila town in Surendranagar district The high court has termed Trivedi, a teacher, a “maniac” and ordered the central investigation agency to arrest him immediately and to save the minor girl “at any cost”. While transferring the investigation to the CBI, a bench of Justice J B Pardiwala and Justice A C Rao said, “It is going to be a very challenging investigation for the CBI, but the CBI is known for such challenges and, therefore, this court expects the CBI to live up to its expectation.”The court transferred the probe to the CBI from Gujarat Police on the basis of a habeas corpus petition filed by the minor girl’s father. Gujarat Police have not been able to trace the girl. Police was told that the teacher had taken the girl to Nepal, but no effort was made to send a police party to Nepal, the HC observed. The court said that the investigation in this case “needs to be intensified and to be carried out in more planned and strategic manner”.The court said, “The case, prima facie, is one of human trafficking . The investigation should be taken up by the CBI very seriously.” The court went on to say: “One does not know in what condition the daughter of the writ applicant must be as on date. One is not sure whether she is still alive or has been killed. She might have been forced into prostitution.”The court feared that Trivedi might have detained other girls also. “If there are other innocent girls in his captivity, the investigation in that direction should also be carried out,” the court ordered.The court has ordered the CBI to take up the probe immediately and report after four weeks. The court has also ordered the CBI to take up the issue with the Interpol at the earliest, if it feels it is required.After getting parole, Trivedi assumed the alias of Dharmendra Dave to start English teaching classes. In August last year, he eloped with another student. Trivedi had two failed love marriages and is accused of abducting eight girls since 2010.
