As shop owner’s car set afire in the mall’s parking space, Fergusson College Road’s Sagar Arcade turns battle zone

Illegal hawkers vs mall shop owners



Just a few days ago, an act of arson in the dead of the night on the usually bustling Fergusson College (FC) Road ignited a long-simmering face-off, which pits owners of licenced shops against unauthorised hawkers, both of whom run their businesses on the same commercial premises.After the Innova car, belonging to shop owner Satish Patwekar, was burnt and damaged in a fire on the night of April 7, Deccan police have also registered a first information report (FIR) under section 435 (mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause damage) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), even as more shop owners have rallied in the aftermath and pinned blame on illegal vendors at the spot.Further, they also alleged that despite multiple complaints to the police and civic body, no cognisance has been taken of their tribulations due to “political influence” on their opponents’ side.~~68857078~~The battleground is Sagar Arcade, a three-storeyed mall considered Pune’s first when it was built way back in 1992. Housing some 54 offices and shops, the commercial hub has fallen into slightly harder times over the last five years, with shop owners claiming to be facing constant harassment at the hands of illegal hawkers, who have steadily consolidated their presence in and around the building.Their long-standing dispute came to a head on March 16, when the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) antiencroachment department initiated action against the hawkers. As the parking space allotted to the authorised shop owners had been occupied by vendors’ belongings in giant storage boxes for at least two years, anti-encroachment officials swooped in to empty out this amenity. It was only after this drive that Patwekar began parking his car in the space — but after he left it there at 10 pm last Sunday, he got a phone call from cops later that night, saying his vehicle has caught fire and been badly damaged.The victim told Mirror, “I was the one who had filed a complaint against the hawkers in March. They were not allowing my car to be parked in the allotted space due to their illegal stalls. They had also cordoned off the lot by putting a chain and even threatened to set my vehicle on fire, after which Deccan cops also registered a noncognisable (NC) offence against them. But now, they have gone too far. This time, I lost my car — next time, someone else will lose their vehicle in the parking space.We run our legitimate businesses under a shadow of fear. Our complaints to PMC and police have yielded nought. We are just suffering from hooliganism.” When Mirror visited the location on Friday, the entire premises outside the mall were clearly occupied by varied stalls. The ‘disputed’ parking space, which has the capacity to house around 400 vehicles, is under lock and key. Further, shop owners have alleged that hawkers also shutter them out of the washrooms on all floors, by turning these into storage rooms for their material.One of the establishment owners further alleged that the hawkers abuse and harass women who enter the mall. Sheela Madhumal, who runs a beauty salon on the first floor, claimed, “I have had this salon here for the last 25 years, but my business is collapsing because of hawkers passing vulgar comments about women and speaking to them indecently. My clients are not ready to even visit me anymore because of this. It has caused me great losses. Further, all the washrooms in the building are locked by the goons for their own goods. We own shops here, and yet have no washrooms to use.”Another shop owner said vendors even threaten violence if any hint of complaints being filed reaches them. Jayesh Tanna, who runs a shop for cosmetics, alleged, “Many of these hawkers run illegal stalls to sell cosmetics, but no one takes action against them. When I tried to shoo them away, they came into my shop and threatened my mother and me. They even said they ‘know the road we take to go home’ and could harm me. Also, we have received menacing calls from unknown numbers.”Mall business owners also told Mirror that they fear for the safety of their shops and materials, saying that although the front gate is locked at night, vendors break in from the back and enter the premises. They claimed that a specific group stays back at the mall every night, spreads garbage everywhere, including bottles of alcohol. Since there are not enough closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras around the building, their activities have not yet been recorded.Office owner Vidyasagar Jadhav elaborated, “When we purchased these shops, their cost included construction, land, service and proportionate parking area. Nobody should have been able to prevent us from using the facilities. Yet, we have to struggle to park our vehicles daily, thanks to the hawkers. The building’s entire vacant space is strewn with their stuff.”While unable to substantiate the claim, the shop owners speculated that the hawkers clearly have strong political backing, without which they would not have been able to encroach so openly.Interestingly, PMC anti-encroachment department head Madhav Jagtap was shocked to hear about the car burning incident. He told Mirror, “We have been discussing this issue with the police and making plans already. But this arson is a shocking and serious matter. The authorised shop owners have run their businesses at the location for very long. We always conduct drives against illegal hawkers, but this incident has made us very alert. Apart from complaining to PMC, the shop owners should also file criminal complaints against the vendors for trespassing. If they are running illegal stalls in the parking area or mall premises, it is a clear trespassing into property offence. Now, we will meet with the police commissioner and take strict action against the illegal hawkers.”
