Kerala: Man befriends actress on set; rapes her at her residence

The pictures of the obscene act were allegedly shared by the accused on WhatsApp (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Kerala: An appalling incident surfaced in Kerala after a man allegedly raped an elderly woman. The victim approached the police and alleged that the pictures of the obscene act were shared by the accused. The complaint was lodged with the Kayamkulam police.

Allegedly, the accused entered into the house of the 51-year-old victim and raped her. The victim is a celebrated Malayalam TV serial actor. Allegedly, the incident took place in October 2018. The accused and the victim had befriended each other on the set of a shoot. The victim stated that accused first entered her house and then a hotel in Thottappally and raped her. The accused had allegedly left the country twelve days ago.

The victim alleged that the accused had intitially told her that he was from Mallappuram but had later changed it to Ernakulam. The pictures of the obscene act were allegedly shared by the accused on WhatsApp. The victim also stated that the accused had sent the pictures to her husband and friends.

While talking to the News Minute, a police official at the Kayamkulam police station stated that the accused has been booked under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for punishment for rape and under the IT Act. The accused is allegedly absconding from the country.

Earlier this month, a 65-year-old woman was allegedly gang-raped by three youngsters. The accused were allegedly inebriated when the incident took place. The victim used to work as a house help in Vyasarpadi, Chennai to make both ends meet.

The victim was sleeping alone in her house when a teenager and two of his friends knocked at her door. The accused then entered the house and raped the victim. When the victim raised an alarm, the accused fled from the scene. While the police arrested one of the accused, two others were still absconding.
