Security forces pelt stones at protesters in Delhi's Mayapuri as officials start sealing illegal scrap factories

Clashes broke out between locals in Delhi's Mayapuri and police officials during a drive to seal illegal scrap factories following an NGT order. In a video shared by ANI, security forces can be seen chasing down protesters and throwing stones and bricks at the men running on a road in the area.

Ruling Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) retweeted the video to slam the action against protesters to say, "Horrifying!!! General Dyer Modi's police brutally pelting stones on the citizens in Mayapuri, Delhi."

The tweet is in reference to General Dyer famous for the Jallianwala Bagh massacre in which the British general ordered firing on unarmed Indians gathered at a public park in Amritsar in 1919. Hundreds of peaceful protesters were killed in the firing.

#WATCH Clash broke out between locals & security forces in Delhi's Mayapuri area after MCD officials began to seal some factories in the area following National Green Tribunal's (NGT) order to seal nearly 850 factories. pic.twitter.com/sitlqU116Z ANI (@ANI) April 13, 2019

According to ANI, MCD officials started to seal the polluting scrap factories on Saturday morning following the National Green Tribunal's order to seal nearly 850 such factories.

In the video it can be seen that protesters are pelting stones at the security forces and then being chased down by the personnel who return the stones with bricks and lathicharge.

Horrifying!!!



General Dyer Modi's police brutally pelting stones on the citizens in Mayapuri, Delhi. #GeneralDyerModi pic.twitter.com/vIFP3RUb1Y AAP (@AamAadmiParty) April 13, 2019





Earlier, the National Green Tribunal had slammed the Delhi government for not taking action against illegal scrap industries in Mayapuri that are causing pollution, saying why is the chief secretary feeling helpless in protecting lives of victims.

Reacting to the video of the clashes on Saturday, Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal tweeted, "Beating up one's own businessmen with such brutality is shameful. The business class has always supported the BJP with its money and votes. In return, BJP is beating them up and sealing their businesses. Even during elections you dare to show such brutality with your actions? This makes BJP's intentions clear that they do not want the businessmen's support."

A bench headed by NGT Chairperson Justice Adarsh Kumar Goel directed the chief secretary and the Chairman and Member Secretary, Delhi Pollution Control Committee to respond why they should not be jailed and be prosecuted if illegal activities are not stopped and people remain suffering on account of illegal activities.

The green panel also ordered the officials to appear before it on May 3 with compliance report.
