Hyderabad: Man kills woman after she ask him to marry; accused travels city with body stuffed in suitcase

Meanwhile, on April 4, after making the woman's parents believe that the two were going to board a flight to Muscat for her job interview, Sunil took her to a lodge from the airport. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Hyderabad: In a case reported from Hyderabad, a 25-year old woman engineer who went missing a week ago was allegedly killed by her lover and her body was stuffed in a suitcase dumped into a drain. The police confirmed the incident on Sunday.

According to news agency PTI, the decomposed body was found on Saturday based on the information given by the accused- Sunil. He was arrested by the police and a case registered for murder and causing the disappearance of evidence under the Indian Penal Code.

The PTI report further mentioned that Sunil is also an engineer, and the woman were classmates in college and in love since 2017. Reportedly, the accused killed the woman because she constantly pestered him to marry her, the police told PTI. Meanwhile, on April 4, after making the woman's parents believe that the two were going to board a flight to Muscat for her job interview, Sunil took her to a lodge from the airport.

The police officials added that he allegedly killed the woman the next day, packed the body in a suitcase, travelled with it by a city bus. He then boarded a cab before dumping it into a drain at Medchal locality.

The PTI report further mentioned that as the woman did not return on April 7 as informed by her, her family members lodged a complaint and police cracked the case by tracing her phone call records.

In another case reported, the police arrested a man after he allegedly strangled his wife to death. The accused allegedly murdered his wife because she had been watching movies all night on Youtube. The accused was arrested by the MIDC police, he was a resident of Andheri West.

The accused was identified as Chetan Chowghule and he was unemployed. The woman was survived by her husband and a two-year-old. The incident took place while the two-year-old was at home.
