2 militants killed in Shopian encounter

2 militants killed in Shopian encounter

Killings trigger shutdown, clashes

ANANTNAG, Apr 13: Two Jaish-i-Mohammad militants were killed in a brief gunfight in southern Shopian district on Saturday.

The killing of militants triggered clashes in the area during which over a dozen protesters suffered injuries.

The gunfight erupted in the Gahand village of Shopian early morning after the government forces including army and special operations group (SOG) of police had thrown a ring of cordon around the area after getting credible input about the presence of militants.

Police authorities in the district said the forces while carrying out searches came under fire from the militants who were hiding in the orchard.

"After being fired upon the forces retaliated triggering the gunfight. In the brief firefight both the militants were killed. It was a clean operation without any collateral damage," a police official said.

Police spokesman identified the killed militants as Shahjahan Mir of Amshipora Shopian and Abid Ahmad Wagay of Rawalpora Shopian.

Police also said the slain duo were involved in the killing of woman SPO, Khushboo Jan in Vehil village if Shopian last month.

Besides being involved in many civilian killings and abductions and setting ablaze a Panchayat ghar, police said, one of the slain Shahjahan was also investigations in the killing and weapon snatching of four policemen in Arhama village of the district in 2018.

The killings, local sources said, triggered massive clashes in the area. As soon as the news about the killing of two militants spread in the area, scores of youth, local sources said, hit the streets and clashed with forces by pelting them with stones and bricks.

The forces responded with tear-smoke shells and pellet ammunition to drive away the stone throwing youth.

Local sources said over a dozen youth suffered injuries and were evacuated to nearby healthcare facility for treatment.

Health officials also confirmed injuries to more than a dozen youth.

A health official said the youth with minor injuries were discharged after the treatment where as four youth who had been hit by pellets in eyes and other body parts were referred to Srinagar for advanced treatment.

Meanwhile shutdown amid internet blockade was observed in the area against the militant killings with shops and other business establishments remaining closed. Thousands of people, according to reports, participated in the funeral prayers of two slain who were later buried amid pro-freedom and anti-India slogans.

Reports said that a group of militants also appeared at the funeral venue of their fallen colleagues and offered them gun salute.
