AAP & BJP trade barbs over sealing drive clash

Police personnel are seen following clashes between locals and cops during a sealing drive in Delhi's Mayapuri on Saturday.

Delhi Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia on Sunday demanded a judicial inquiry from Lieutenant Governor of Delhi Anil Baijal into the alleged attack by Delhi Police and paramilitary forces on scrap traders in Mayapuri.

Coming down heavily on the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Sisodia equated Mayapuri violence with Jallianwala Bagh Massacre.

"BJP government is habitual of creating troubles for the people of Delhi. Today, when Mayapuri traders are in problem, BJP had sent paramilitary forces to assault the traders. This episode looks similar to the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre."

Clashes broke out on Saturday between locals and police personnel in Mayapuri after MCD officials began to seal illegal factories following a National Green Tribunal (NGT) order.

West Delhi's Mayapuri is home to the largest scrap market in Asia. Earlier in the day, Hardeep Suri Singh, Union Urban Development minister accepted that junk market of Mayapuri was supposed to be relocated as per a 2015 NGT order. Sisodia questioned Puri, "If today, Mr Puri is referring to the NGT order of 2015, then who was to provide the land? Who takes landrelated agencies? Which is the land-owning agency? Is it the central government or the Delhi government which

was to provide land?" Last year, the DDA had said that the present master plan does not have any provision for a scrap market in the national capital and the existing scrap market may be allowed to continue at its current location.

State Environment Minister Imran Hussain said that some officers of the Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) bypassed him and reached Mayapuri without his approval. "I am writing to the L-G to take strict action against DPCC officers whosoever was involved in Mayapuri violence. How did they proceed to Mayapuri without the approval of the minister?" Hussan wrote.

Vijender Gupta, Leader of Opposition blamed Delhi CM for the incident. Gupta said, "The Kejriwal government has been incapable of finding a workable solution to the traders' problems.

Even the court had instructed the to relocate the scrap industry in Mayapuri in 2015 but the CM kept on sleeping over the matter. Delhi government did not issue notice of action to the traders in prior."
