The Shillong Times

Army Major slips into gorge

Srinagar: An Army Major was injured after he slipped into a gorge in Jammu and Kashmir’s Kupwara district. Police said the officer of 55 Rashtriya Rifles fell in Machil sector of the Line of Control (LoC) on Saturday. He has been shifted to the Army’s Base Hospital in Srinagar, police said. (IANS)

Tiger found dead

Lakhimpur Kheri (UP): A 10-year old male tiger was found dead in the Dudhwa range of Dudhwa Tiger Reserve (DTR) on Sunday morning. ‘The dead tiger had serious puncture wounds on its head, one of its eyes was completely damaged and the claws were injured, which indicated that it had to face a tough fight with some other big cat,” Field Director Ramesh Pandey told PTI. He ruled out any foul play behind the tiger’s death. Pandey also informed that a panel of doctors was formed to conduct a post-mortem examination on the tiger to ascertain the exact cause of its death. (PTI)

‘UP started educating Dalits’

Lucknow: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday said the BJP government in the state had started the process of educating the Dalits. Speaking at a programme held here to celebrate the birth anniversary of Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar, Adityanath said, “Babasaheb used to say that the Dalit society’s uplift will be possible when they become educated…. We have started working in that direction.” He added that prior to the formation of the BJP government, Ambedkar’s photos were not put up at government offices. “When we assumed office, the first thing we did was put up Babasaheb’s photographs at all the government offices,” he said. (PTI)

Carcas of elephant calf found

Chikkamagaluru: A three-year-old male elephant calf was found dead at Bhadra backwaters in Lakkavalli Wildlife Range in the district. Forest officials said on Sunday that it was suspected that the animal died a few days ago. The officers of Lakkavalli Range visited the spot and veterinarians conducted the postmortem. RFO H P Raghavendra said that the calf had separated from the herd. Experts felt that it was in depression after being separated. It had not eaten food for a few days and died of weakness. (UNI)

Former Punjab MLA dies

Chandigarh: Former Shiromani Akali Dal legislator Nand Lal passed away in a hospital in Punjab’s Mohali on Sunday morning after a prolonged illness. He was 73. Lal was a four-time MLA from Balachaur constituency. He is survived by two sons. Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh expressed grief over the demise of Lal. In a condolence message, the Congress leader described Lal as a gentleman politician and leader of the masses with the qualities of head and heart, who worked tirelessly for the welfare of the downtrodden and overall development of his area. (PTI)

Elephant kills 60-yr old pilgrim

Coimbatore: A 60-year old man was killed and two others were injured Sunday in an elephant attack in Poondi reserve forest area, 30 km from here, police said. The victims were part of a group of pilgrims going to Velliyangiri, a hill shrine in the forest area, for Tamil New Year when the incident took place, the police said. Aruchamy, along with some others, had gone to take water from a stream. It was then the lone tusker charged at them. (PTI)
