Naxals targeting Hina Kavre after her father, BJP demands probe into mishap

BHOPAL: The state BJP suspects the hand of naxals in the accident with the convoy of deputy speaker of MP Assembly, Hina Kavre , and demanded a high-level inquiry into the same. State public relations and law minister PC Sharma said that government would order an inquiry into the incident soon."The incident with deputy speaker of assembly Hina Kavre is unfortunate. Government should order an inquiry into the same at the earliest", said leader of opposition (LOP), Gopal Bhargava, here on Monday.Three policemen and another person were killed when a truck hit their vehicle while they were escorting deputy speaker Hina Kavre's convoy in Balaghat district in the wee hours of Sunday. A constable in the escort vehicle received serious injuries in the mishap, said police.Expressing grief over the incident, BJP national vice-president Shivraj Singh Chouhan has demanded Rs one crore each to the next of kin of the jawans killed in the incident and a 'martyr' status to them. Chief minister Kamal Nath has also expressed grief over the death of policemen in the accident.Raising doubts over a sudden spurt in naxal activities in the Balaghat region, national vice-president of BJP's youth wing, Rahul Kothari said that involvement of naxals in the area could not be ruled out after this incident."The accident with the convoy and follow car of deputy speaker Kavre, which killed four security personnel should be investigated by the ATS (Anti-terrorist Squad). It seems that there is a sudden spurt in the naxals activities in the Balaghat region after the Congress government took over the reins in the state", said Kothari.As per the reports, Hina's father late Likhiram Kavre, a former minister in the Congress-led Madhya Pradesh government was killed by Naxals in Kirnapur village of Balaghat district in December 1999. Recently, a naxal group called Sangram Dalam, which claimed to be active in the region had shot two letters to Kavre on January 3 and 8, demanding Rs 20 lakh by January 14, threatening dire consequences if not paid.The letter written by self-proclaimed forest manager of the banned group read, "We had sent you a notice but it seems that you didn't receive the same. This is our forth notice. Do not consider us as fools. We have not received our dosage (amount). We warn you to deliver Rs 20 lakh by January 14 else, January 16 will be your last date. Our address is Baihar Road, Gagul Para Road where you have to keep the said amount and place a black flag as a mark of sign. You must fulfil our demand or this will cost you dear. You are smart", read the letter.A similar letter was also dispatched to Congress MLA from Baihar, Sanjay Uike demanding Rs 20 lakh as ransom. The letters threatened that after the due date, January 14, they (naxals) will knock the door of the MLAs. "I am not taking the letters sent to me lightly given that ultras had killed my father in 1999", deputy speaker Kavre told reporters in Balaghat.Reacting to the accident, state public relations and law minister PC Sharma said that government will investigate the matter as the incident is serious. This has already claimed the lives of our jawans which is very unfortunate."My deep condolences to the departed policemen and others killed in the accident with the convoy of deputy speaker Hina Kavre. The government would order an inquiry into the incident", Sharma told reporters on Monday.
