SDM manhandled, Dr Faesal, Mehbooba reacts

Srinagar

Army on Tuesday allegedly manhandled a sub-divisional magistrate (SDM) and four other officials after an argument with Army personnel on Srinagar-Jammu highway in Dalwach area of Qazigund in south Kashmir.

Reports said that after an argument the army man manhandled the SDM Duroo, Ghulam Rasool Wani along with four other officials when he was on way to Qazigund area of Anantnag district.

Following the incident, scores of the government employees outside Dooru tehsildar office protested against the “physical assault”.

We were informed that our SDM along with four other government officials has been physically assaulted by the army personnel when they were on their election duties. “Till the FIR is not lodged against the erring army men we will continue to protest and even boycott the election duty,” one of the protesting employees said.

The protesting employees also appealed the Election Commission of India (ECI) to note of the incident and sought immediate action against the erring army personnel. They also threatened of office lockdown if their demands are not fulfilled.

“If they didn’t spare Assistant Returning officer (ARO) a high-rank official, what will they do to us,” said another protesting employee. “If we are not safe why would we put our lives in danger,” he added.

Meanwhile, PDP president and former J&K chief minister Mehbooba Mufti said that manhandling civil officers mark a new low. She also said that Kashmir and its people are being choked to a silent death.

“Army thrashing civilians in the state is nothing new. But manhandling civil officers marks a new low. The valley & its people are being choked to a silent death. For how long will you oppress them in their own land? Is this what we deserve for choosing India over Pakistan?,” Mehbooba tweeted.

Seeking action against the erring army men, the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Movement (JKPM) chairman Dr Shah Faesal hoped that AFSPA won’t come in the way of IPC/RPC and the action will be taken.

“News of physical assault on SDM Duroo by Army is very shocking. If true, DC/SSP Anantnag should immediately register an FIR and arrest the erring personnel. It is hoped that AFSPA won’t come in the way of IPC/RPC and the action will be taken,” Dr Faesal tweeted.
