Indian Woman unable to have Children steals 2-Month Baby

She took the chance and fled with the child.

Indian woman Neelam Sanjay Bora, aged 35, from Nashik, Maharashtra, was arrested on Monday, April 15, 2019, for kidnapping a two-month-old child.

According to the police, the woman was upset over not having a child of her own after being married for 10 years. She thought that stealing one would be the only way.

Bora arrived at Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) in March 2019 to carry out her plan.

She targeted 39-year-old Sunita Saund, a labourer from Kalwa. Saund was homeless and regularly stayed in various shelters near the station.

Sunita, who was heavily pregnant, was abandoned at St George’s Hospital, near the CSMT by her husband in February 2019.

She remained at the hospital for a month where she gave birth to a boy. Sunita also befriended a woman named Nanda and later moved into her shanty near CSMT.

However, the shanty was destroyed days later. This forced the two women to seek shelter on the station’s platforms on March 25, 2019.

On the same day, Bora met the two women and quickly became friends with them. The three women and the baby then stayed on platform eight.

During the early hours of March 29, 2019, Sunita went to use the bathroom and left her child next to Nanda.

Nanda was asleep and this provided an opportunity for Bora to execute her plan. She took the chance and fled with the child.

Hemant Bawdhankar, senior inspector of CSMT Government Railway Police stated that CCTV cameras spotted Bora cradling the child as she left the station.

Upon realising that her son had been kidnapped, Sunita filed a police complaint and an investigation was underway.

Bora was aware that the police would be coming to find her and arrest her, so she constantly travelled to different cities in a bid to evade them.

After leaving CSMT, Bora went to Mulund in the north-east of Mumbai.

Bawdhankar spoke about the other locations she travelled to, he said:

“After a while, she went to Kalyan, then Shirdi, then to her in-laws’ house in Madhya Pradesh and finally returned to Nashik.”

Even though she had taken several measures to evade police, the Thane crime branch and CSMT officers were close to tracking her down.

They used CCTV camera footage from all the train stations she visited and the records of the phone calls she made to locate her.

Bora was caught with the child in the Shraddha Park area of Nashik. She was arrested and the child was handed back to his mother.
