Alia Bhatt's mom Soni Razdan SLAMS trolls who questioned her British citizenship when she urged people to vote

With the Lok Sabha 2019 elections round the corner, the Prime Minister of India has been urging every citizen of the country to cast their vote. From aam-aadmi to B-town celebs, everyone takes out time to cast their vote for a better future and better India and in a recent interview, during the promotions of her forthcoming film Kalank, when 26-year-old Alia Bhatt was quizzed if she will vote, the Raazi actress had revealed that she cannot vote because she holds a British Citizenship.

Meanwhile, Alia Bhatt’s mother was recently trolled on social media when she tweeted about Junaid Khan who was stabbed to death on a train near Ballabhgarh in Haryana because she uploaded a misleading picture on Twitter requesting Indian voters to remember Junaid Khan before they cast their vote. While Soni asserted that Junaid was killed for being a Muslim, this, however, is untrue, as the courts have already said that the cause of his murder was the spat over the seat-sharing in a train compartment.

Now, this clearly didn’t go down well with people and therefore she got trolled. Not only that, but she also faced the wrath of Kangana Ranaut’s sister Rangoli Chandel who tweeted saying “These non Indians who are living off this land, using and abusing its people and its resources, lying about intolerance and spreading hatred, time to think about their agenda and not to get carried away with their provocations.” And now, Soni Razdan has come out in the open after all the unpleasant trolling and she took to her Twitter handle to bash all the haters as she wrote, “Urging people to vote against hate has nothing to do with citizenship and everything to do with being a human being. We are all human beings first and citizens of the world we live in. Secularism and democratic principles are values and it’s those that I stand for. #VoteOutHate.”

ALSO READ: Exclusive: Soni Razdan is proud of Alia Bhatt winning awards for Raazi; says she loved her dance in Kalank
