The low-hanging fruit wilts

Marathwada

farmers

protest

ByConsistent droughts may mean that mosambi orchards incould be on the path of extinction.On the night of March 20, we celebrated the festival of Holi by lighting a bonfire. In relative obscurity,in a village of Aurangabad – 350 km from Mumbai – set their orchards on fire instead of the Holi bonfire to register theirMaharashtra is currently suffering from acute water shortage and one of the most severe droughts since 1972. Forty-two per cent of the state’s talukas have been hit by drought, and Marathwada region is among the worst hit with 40 per cent of its 112 talukas suffering from severe water crisis. By the end of September 2018, Jayakwadi dam, which is considered the lifeline of Marathwada, had 46 per cent water stock. At the same time the previous year, it was 88 per cent. The scarcity would only intensify and pinch more, heading into the summers.In a situation like that, it becomes particularly difficult to maintain fruit orchards of sweet lime (mosambi), pomegranates, orange and so on. Aurangabad, the headquarters of Marathwada, is one of the major cultivators of mosambi, along with the districts of Jalna and Nanded. These districts have traditionally been among the foremost suppliers of the fruit to the rest of the country. But consistent droughts may mean that mosambi orchards in Marathwada could be on the path of extinction.Most of the orchards in Marathwada came up in the early 2000s. The trees need to be nurtured for four to five years before it bears fruit, but after that a bi-annual yield is assured for 25-30 years.In a good year, an acre of mosambi throws up 8-10 tonne of harvest. On an average, a tonne of mosambi is sold at Rs 30,000. Even if the orchard works for 10 years, the investment would break even, and the farmers would make profit for the subsequent years.Understandably, it must have been a tempting decision for farmers back then, but it carried its risks as well, considering that the fruit needs 60 litres of water per plant per day in ideal conditions. Pomegranates need 20 litres, which is one-third of what is required by mosambi, but the intensity of the drought renders the nuance useless. An orchard generally has 200 mosambi trees on an acre, which means the requirement is 12,000 litres of water per day.Unfortunately for those who took the plunge, Marathwada reeled under ominous droughts for four years from 2012-15. Most of the trees in the orchards barely survived, and brought all the nurturing during the initial years to naught.The year 2016 was decent in terms of rainfall, but immediately in 2017 a heat wave ruined the production of the fruit. With temperatures consistently ranging around 45 degree Celsius at the end of April and in May, the conditions seared the fruit, resulting in premature fruit drops. The extensive heat weakens the tissue.As much as 30 per cent of the plantations were uprooted in 2013 alone, when over 1.5 lakh acre of mosambi plantation across Marathwada had been affected, with many farmers reportedly keeping their plants alive with sewage water. The better-off farmers spent a fortune on water tankers. But even the ones that were better off are soon losing steam to hold on to their orchards.The state government, in an attempt to help farmers with water conservation, had begun offering subsidies to build farm ponds. But the implementation has been shoddy. Only 13,613 farm ponds were completed in the eight districts of Marathwada in 2016-17, against the administration’s plan to build 39,600 ponds. And of the 13,613 farmers who have built ponds, 4,429 had not received their subsidy.I had visited a few of the orchards on the Aurangabad-Jalna Highway in the summer of 2017. Even the farmers who survived the drought years had planned the phasing out of their orchards, and shifting to food crops that are relatively easier to cultivate in terms of water requirement. Sauntering through the ploughed fields being ready for monsoons, we reached a square of barren trees. Under the trees, lay round, squashed yellow fruits that looked like sucked up lemons. It took me a while to figure out they are mosambis that had dried up completely.The farmer explained he had hired a JCB machine, and wiped out 50 out of the 400 trees he had. “My father had planted those trees,” he had told me back then. “I killed them with a heavy heart.” I called him up yesterday. His orchard no longer exists.
