Congress MP Konda Vishweshwar Reddy booked for allegedly assaulting cops in Hyderabad

Congress MP Konda Vishweshwar Reddy booked for allegedly assaulting cops in Hyderabad

Denying the allegation, Chevella MP Konda Vishweshwar Reddy filed a counter complaint against the police officials involved in the incident.

news Controversy

The Banjara Hills Police Station in Hyderabad booked Congress leader Konda Vishweshwar Reddy for allegedly confining, threatening and assaulting a sub-inspector and constable at his residence-and-office in the city on Tuesday.

According to media reports, the incident took place when Sub-Inspector Krishna and a constable, Srinivas, had visited the office of the incumbent Chevella MP on Road No 12 Banjara Hills, regarding a case related to one Sandeep Reddy. Sandeep had been detained in the run-up to the elections as he was carrying around Rs 10 lakh, and he had informed the police that he was an associate of Vishweshwar Reddy.

“On Tuesday, the Sub-Inspector, along with the constable, went to the office of Vishweshwar Reddy to inquire about the seizure from Sandeep. Incriminating material was seized, along with cash, raising suspicion of Sandeep trying to influence voters. They were later confined in a room on the second floor and threatened by Vishweshwar Reddy and other persons in the office when they revealed their purpose of the visit,” a police official was quoted as saying.

Based on the complaint filed by the two police officers after they returned, a case was registered under Section 332 (Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty), 342 (Wrongful confinement) and 506 (Criminal Intimidation) read with 34 (Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC.

Following this, the Chevella MP visited the police station, denied the allegations and filed a counter complaint against the police officials involved.

"When I started talking to my employee, the police officials pushed me and started arguing with me. After that, I spoke to senior police officials. The cops, who came to my office, served the notice and left. I have not misbehaved with the cops and I did not lock them in any room,” the MP told ToI.

Konda Vishweshwar Reddy is one of the richest politicians in both the Telugu states and had recently declared family assets worth Rs 895 crore in his poll affidavit. He is married to K Sangita Reddy, Joint Managing Director of Apollo Hospitals.

Vishweshwar had joined the Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) during the agitation for separate statehood but had later defected to the Congress ahead of the Legislative Assembly polls held in December last year.
