Engineer pretends to be doctor, extorts and sexually harasses Tinder match for three years

The accused has been arrested by Cyberabad police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Hyderabad: Cyberabad police on Tuesday arrested a 28-year-old man for allegedly sexually harassing a woman for the past three years by claiming to be a doctor. The accused, Gollaladoddi Abdullah was taken into custody by the Cybercrime wing of Cyberabad police on the basis of a complaint by a doctor who accused him of sexually assaulting her for years by pretending to be a doctor himself. It was later discovered that the accused is a BTech drop-out who befriended the complainant through mobile dating application Tinder.

In her complaint to the police, the woman who is a doctor working with a leading hospital in the city further alleged that the accused extorted a sum of over Rs 4 lakh from her in a span of the last three years. Following his arrest, police officials said that Gollaladoddi actually works as a civil engineer with a private electrical firm. However, he claimed to be one Dr G Karthik Reddy employed as an anaesthetist at a leading hospital on his Tinder profile.

According to a report by New Indian Express, the complainant believed the accused and accepted his Tinder request which is when the two started seeing each other. A detailed investigation into the matter is underway and further details are awaited in this regard.

In May of last year, a ghastly series of events transpired in Rajasthan's capital city where a 26-year-old project manager with a mining company was mercilessly murdered by his Tinder match and her two accomplices. The victim, Dushyant Sharma befriended Priya Seth on Tinder where he claimed to be a 'millionaire'. Priya along with two of her accomplices lured Dushyant to a spot in Jaipur and tried to extort his father. Even after his father agreed to pay the ransom for his son's safe return, Priya and her accomplices killed Dushyant, stuffed his body in a suitcase and dumped it along a highway.
