Fact Check: Execution story of US prisoner is not authentic

Positivity, as well as negativity, has a deeper impact on humans. And people do believe in such stories when they come from motivational thinkers. A Facebook post on positive thinking has caught the attention of many on social media.

Facebook page 'Shobha Misra Communication Skills and Personality Development' that posted a story two years back has surfaced again.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found that the post is not authentic. There is no genuine report of any such case available.

Read the excerpts of the story: "In the US, a prisoner was sentenced to death. Some scientists were allowed to conduct an experiment. The prisoner was told that he would be bitten by a King Cobra. He was strapped to a chair and a huge snake was brought before him. Then he was blindfolded. Instead of using the snake, he was pricked by two needles. He died almost instantaneously. The post mortem revealed that he suffered a heart attack and the levels of toxic substances in his blood were similar to those present in snake bite victims. These toxins were generated by his body. This proves that positive and negative energy release hormones and toxins accordingly"

Many users posted and shared the same story on Facebook recently, with a few doubting its authenticity.

The story is also viral in other languages and shared in thousands. A Bangla post by one Facebook user Dipankar Patra mentioned that the incident happened in Boston in the US in 1986.

We found that this same story has been circulating on the internet for years. A blog site 'PHD in spirituality' also posted the same story in 2016, but it mentioned that Russian scientists did this experiment. At the end of the article, blogger 'Krishna' who posted this story, said the reference of this story is "word of mouth. Not sure whether a true or untrue story".

According to Facebook page 'Shobha Misra Communication Skills and Personality Development', the page is run by academic couple Sobha Mishra and Anil Mishra. Sobha is also a national award winner in the field of education. We contacted Anil Mishra who said that they took this story randomly from the internet and did not know the source of it.

Different states in the US have different methods of execution, ranging from lethal injection to electrocution. The details about this can be read here. In a country like the US, where the entire system works in a specific legal framework, fooling a death row convict with snake bite for scientific experiment would require legitimate legal provision. If this incident would have happened in the US, this would have definitely attracted international media attention.

Secondly, if this kind of scientific experiment had taken place in the US, where a patient died of shock but his body showed intense toxicity like snake venom even without being bitten by a snake, this would have also received wide international coverage in scientific journals. We searched the internet thoroughly but no such genuine report confirming these facts are available, which confirms that this is an entirely cooked up viral story.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim A story shared on Facebook about a US prisoner who was fooled into thinking that he would be executed after being bitten a king cobra. This was done as an experiment by scientists. Conclusion There is no such genuine report about the incident available. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
