Gaya weaver's community demands CBI probe into girl's murder, claim police coerced parents' confession

Tensions have been running high in Gaya since the incident came to light (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Patna: The torture and brutal murder of a minor girl is pushing Bihar to the verge of chaos. The body of the victim, a member of the state's weaver community, was found beheaded in Gaya on January 6. Protests had ensued in the district following the discovery of the girl's body with her kin alleging that she was raped, tortured and killed allegedly by her neighbours.

In the latest development to have emerged in this regard, members of Bihar's weaving community are demanding a CBI probe into the matter. Claiming that the Gaya police is trying to shield the real culprits, agitators have maintained that handing over the charge of the investigation in this case to the country's apex investigative agency is the least that can be done to ensure an impartial probe into the matter.

Assistant Deputy General (ADG), law and order, Alok Raj met with a delegation of the weaver's community on Sunday. During the meeting, claimants alleged that the Gaya police tortured the victim's family members in order to extract a confession from them. They also expressed their dissatisfaction with the local law enforcement's official version which had led to the arrest of the girl's kin on the basis of confessions recorded under Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC).

Bihar: A 16-year-old girl was allegedly gang-raped and killed in Gaya's Patwatoli on 12 January. Police say "A detailed investigation will be done based on all inputs. Everything is being verified. We will uncover the truth soon." pic.twitter.com/WX0dF9k3gr — ANI (@ANI) January 13, 2019

It is being reported that a special investigation team (SIT) led by an ASP-rank officer arrived at the conclusion which led police to the girl's parents. Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Rajeev Mishra told media outlets that they were arrested and sent to jail after they confessed to murdering their daughter. However, he made no comment referring to allegations levelled against the city's police department accusing them of coercing a confession.

President of the weaver's body, Prem Narayan Patwa has declared that a delegation of members from his community would voice their demand before Chief Minister Nitish Kumar if the probe into the matter is not transferred to the CBI. According to the latest reports, a team of experts from the Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) arrived in Patna on Monday to collect and examine samples from the spot where the girl's body was found. Statements have revealed that the minor was allegedly tortured and raped before being beheaded. When police officials found her body, her face was burnt with acid and deep cuts were found on her chest.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Uttar Pradesh: Rape survivor commits suicide after police gives accused clean chit
