BJP worker found dead in West Bengal's Purulia, party alleges Trinamool hand

Your sacrifice won’t go in vain: Nadda on killing of 3 BJP workers in Kulgam

BJP in Jammu and Kashmir seeks security after killing of three workers in Kulgam

BJP worker dies in clashes with Bengal police, this is murder says Surya

Pune: PM Modi bust removed from temple built for him by BJP worker; NCP workers stage mock protest

BJP workers to aid vaccination drive on PM's b'day on Sep 17, hope to achieve record numbers

BJP worker found dead in West Bengal's Purulia, party alleges Trinamool hand

India

oi-Madhuri Adnal

Kolkata, April 18: A BJP worker was found dead at Senabona village under Arsha police station of Purulia in West Bengal. His body was found hanging from a tree in Senabona village of Purulia district.

The BJP has identified the deceased as 22-year-old Sisupal Sahis, a BJP Youth Morcha member. Police have rushed to the spot and investigation is on.

Local BJP leaders have alleged that the death is a political murder committed by Trinamool workers.

West Bengal: CPM MP Md Salim convoy attacked in Islampur, blames TMC goons

The case is eerily similar to the murder of a BJP worker, Trilochan Mahato, in the same district in May 2018. Mahato's lifeless body was also found hanging from a tree.

Meanwhile, in February 2019, a Trinamool Congress worker was shot dead in West Bengal's Berhampore area of Murshidabad district. The deceased, identified as Naju Seikh, was the third TMC worker who was killed in a span of 12 hours.

Purulia parliamentary constituency in West Bengal will be voting in the sixth phase of the Lok Sabha election. Besides Purulia parliamentary constituency, Tamluk, Kanthi, Ghatal, Jhargram, Medinipur, Bankura, and Bishnupur are also going to polls in the Lok Sabha election 2019.

West Bengal has generally been seen as a state more prone to political violence, which earlier used to take place between cadres of the Trinamool and the CPI (M). However, as the BJP has continued to make inroads into eastern state, it has faced stiff resistance from the entrenched local political establishment.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Thursday, April 18, 2019, 12:52 [IST]
