Tanushree Dutta Calls Ajay Devgn "Morally Bankrupt" For Working With Alok Nath

In 2018 Tanushree Dutta stood up and spoke out against the harassment meted out to her in Bollywood and with that the #MeToo movement came to India. Tanushree, who accused Nana Patekar of sexually harassing her on a film set a decade ago, spoke up about how she was traumatised by the incident. Many other harrowing tales of sexual harassment and assault soon emerged from the film industry.

One of the them came from writer and director, Vinta Nanda, who accused actor Alok Nath of rape.

I'm disturbed by all the happenings with regards to #MeToo. My company and I believe in providing women with utmost respect and safety. If anyone has wronged even a single woman, neither ADF nor I will stand for it. — Ajay Devgn (@ajaydevgn) October 12, 2018

Vinta’s account clearly did not dissuade some members of the fraternity from working with Alok Nath. One of them is Ajay Devgn, whose film De De Pyar De, features the rape accused actor.

Now Tanushree has written an open letter, calling out Devgn, who had earlier tweeted showing full support to the #MeToo movement. In an open letter to the actor, Tanushree said that while most other directors and actors chose to resign from films that featured any of those accused in the #MeToo wave, Devgn seems to have missed the memo. Tanushree also had a response for Devgn's statement that he shared earlier, saying that the film was shot much before Nath was called out.

Here's what Tanushree wrote:

"Tinsel town is full of showoffs, liars and spineless hypocrites. And it seems by a large public consensus that the sign post is currently pointing at Ajay Devgn. In a surprising and convenient turn of events, he is working with the rape accused Alok Nath, and helping him to make his comeback in Bollywood. Bollywood heroes are truly zeroes! Overrated actors and human beings who have created a clout by clever PR machinery and careful manipulation of public sentiments, old stuffy morons who can't tell the difference between what's right and wrong and what is the need of the hour!"

She added: “So would it be so difficult to just edit out Alok Nath's portions in the film and hire someone else and reshoot those bits even before the film promotions started?? Nobody even knew before the posters and trailers that Alok Nath is in the film so if Ajay Devgan and the makers wanted they could have just quietly replaced him and re-shot his portions (which is barely 10-15 days for character actors in Bollywood)and given Vinta Nanda the respect she deserves as well as several other women who were troubled by this guy but No! they had to keep the alleged rapist in their film and rub it on not only Vinta's but on all our faces as a show of solidarity with all rapists, molesters and harassers of Bollywood and an even greater show of arrogance and defiance against all things morally and conscientiously right."

Lastly, Tanushree concluded by leaving a message for all those in India, who blindly follow and worship actors.

"It's time India wakes up and stops worshipping these morally bankrupt actors, directors, producers and others who clearly put on a facade of being family men just to promote their careers that they build on the tears of women like Vinta and others whom they silence using their muscle power. If you dig deep you will find skeletons in their closets so horrendous that it will totally makes sense why they would stand supporting the accused rapists, harassers and abusers and why their conscience doesn't prick them while doing so and why they give evasive answers when questioned. Birds of a feather always flock together and that's why perhaps it doesn't bother some of these people to work with a guy who has been accused by several women of horrendous behaviour and that's why there's always an excuse."
