16,500 Jet Airways Staff Become Jobless, Vijay Mallya Says PM Modi Is Lying About Debts+ Top News

They had been with the company for years, some even for decades and saw the company in its heyday when it was the largest private airline in India. But late on Wednesday, they received the message that they had dreaded for months now. Jet Airways announced that it is grounding all its flights and temporarily suspending all operations. Read More.

Here's More Top News For The Day:

1) Vijay Mallya Says PM Modi Is Lying About The Recovery Of His Debts, Hits Out At Banks Too

Fugitive former liquor baron Vijay Mallya who is facing extradition to India has hit out Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the banks accusing them of lying. In a tweet, Mallya alleged that the PM in a recent interview has claimed that the banks have already recovered the amount he owed, but the banks have told something different in the UK court. Read More.

2) This Woman Has Come All The Way From US To Campaign For PM Narendra Modi In Kanpur

India is voting to elect its new prime minister and people are doing their bit to campaign for their respective political parties and leaders. Last week, a man had quit his job in Australia to cast his vote in India just to see his favourite leader and Prime Minister Narendra Modi return for a successive second term. A week after, an NRI and IT professional, Manjari Gangwar has come all the way from the United States to campaign for PM Narendra Modi, the Times of India reported. Read More.

3) Newly-Wed Couple Puts National Duty First As Second Phase Of Polls Carried Out Across India

In Jammu and Kashmir’s Udhampur district, a bride and groom clad in wedding attire came to vote for their candidate at the polling booth. On the other hand, in Maharashtra a pregnant woman arrived to get her finger inked at polling booth number 164 in Nehru Nagar of Solapur. Read More.

4) Two Men From Punjab Beheaded In Saudi Arabia, CM Calls It Atrocious And Barbaric

Two Punjabi men were recently beheaded by Saudi Arabian authorities and this has called for widespread criticism from Indians. Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh on Wednesday said he would seek a detailed report from the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) on the matter. Read More.

5) Telangana Now Has A Panel To Look Into Sexual Harassment Of Women Artistes, Something That Other States Can Take Note Of

The Telugu Film Chamber (TFC) had constituted a Sexual Harassment Redressal Panel (SHRP) to look into the complaints from the women artists and made it mandatory for all production houses to constitute an Internal Complaints Committee (ICC). Now, acting upon the demands made by a number of women's organizations, the Telangana Government has constituted a high-level committee to inquire into issues of sexual harassment of women artists in the film and television industry. Read More.
