Lok Sabha polls 2019: 66 per cent turnout as EVM glitches mar 2nd phase

BJP candidate from Mathura Hema Malini interacts with voters at a polling station during the second phase of Lok Sabha elections in Mathura on Thursday. (PTI)

New Delhi: The fate of candidates in 95 constituencies across the country was sealed as the second phase of the Lok Sabha elections ended on Thursday, in which a total of 66 per cent turnout was recorded.

Puducherry recorded the highest voting percentage — of 80.47 per cent — while Jammu and Kashmir saw the lowest turnout of 43.4 per cent.

The turnout in Bihar was 62.52 per cent, which is an increase from the 61.93 per cent in 2014 for the corresponding region. Maharashtra saw a voter turnout of 62 per cent as opposed to 2014, when it was 62.64 per cent.

The polling percentage in Odisha was 64 per cent in comparison to 73.75 per cent in the 2014 polls. Manipur saw 74.3 per cent turnout, against the 75.16 per cent seen in 2014.

Several instances of the malfunctioning of electronic voting machines (EVMs) were reported from across the country, including in Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka.

Violence was reported from several places in West Bengal, where polling was being held in three parliamentary constituencies. The most serious incident was the attack on the car of CPM candidate and sitting MP Mohammed Salim, who is up against the Congress’ Deepa Das Munshi in Raiganj.

Mr Salim claimed that the police did not do anything when his car was attacked in Islampur. His party has accused workers of the state’s ruling Trinamul of being behind the attack.

In Chopra, under Darjeeling constituency, security personnel fired teargas shells and lathicharged agitators, who accused workers of the ruling party in the state of obstructing them from casting their vote.

Agitators who were blocking National Highway 31 also hurled crude bombs at local police personnel and those belonging to the Rapid Action Force.

EVMs were also smashed following a clash between supporters of the Trinamul and the BJP in booth number 112 in Chopra.
