Helpless Syrian Refugee Sets Herself, 3 Kids On Fire Due To Starvation At A Camp In Jordan

Humanitarian aid to refugees of Syrian civil war is very scarce. It is provided by international bodies, organizations and states and is transported via border crossings that are not controlled by the Syrian government.

People displaced by a decade of war were forced to find shelter elsewhere. They are living in miserable conditions that denies them the fundamental right to live with basic amenities.

In a very disturbing incident, a Syrian refugee woman put herself on fire along with her three children because they were dying of hunger for weeks. The incident took place at al-Rikban camp near the Jordanian border.

Photo: Twitter

28 year old Sundus Fathallah set her tent on fire as she could no longer bear the sight of her starving children. Other refugees at the camp later put the fire out and evacuated the woman and her children.

She was later taken to a hospital where the doctors informed that the woman and her infant suffered severe burns. International media reported that the woman has now been transferred to a hospital in Jordan.

Though, there were many differing accounts about the tent catching fire, the woman’s husband appeared in a video where he said that his wife had committed suicide due to poverty and hunger.

ALSO READ: Men Are Not Needed, Our Lives Are Good, Say Self-Reliant Women Of Jinwar Village In Syria

Photo: Twitter

Omar al-Homsi, a spokesman for the civil defense agency at the camp told a Turkish government newspaper, Daily Sabah "Our information shows that the woman's family is very poor and they had nothing to eat for the past two weeks.”

However, this is not the first time that refugees have suffered due to the ongoing Syrian crisis. Last year, at least 20 people due to lack of medical services inside the camp.

The Syrian war started in 2011 though the country is slowly reviving, U.S President Donald Trump’s hasty decision of withdrawing troops might make the country susceptible to the return of ISIS and other militant organizations.
