India: Christian father Anant Ram Gond beheaded by Maoist rebels

Anant Ram Gond, a 40-year-old Christian, was found beheaded in February in Nabarangpur, Odisha in India. At the time of writing, his killers have yet to be apprehended by the authorities. Unfortunately, the likelihood of the attackers being brought to justice is highly unlikely due to collusion between local law enforcement and leaders of the Gond community.

According to heart-wrenching reports, Anant Ram, father of four girls and a boy, was dragged out of his home in Bhenos village around 8 p.m. last February. He was taken from his bed where he was sleeping next to his 6-year-old son, Purno. Despite pleas from the child, the killers dragged the father away into the darkness and threatened the boy not to follow them.

The next morning, Anant Ram’s body was found with his head almost completely severed and crushed by a heavy object.

Family members believe the attack on Anant Ram was an anti-Christian attack. However, police claim that he was killed by politically motivated Maoist rebels.

Pastor Hiran Khosla helped Anant’s wife, Sukhbati, lodge a complaint with the police. The pastor told International Christian Concern (ICC), “Police came to the village and conducted investigations twice, but no arrests have been made [to] date.”

“The events that led to the killing of Anant Ram go back to more than two years when he was being harassed by both police and Naxalites suspecting of being an informer for both sides,” Pastor Khosla explained.

The Naxalites (or Maoists) are a guerrilla group with communist ideologies that is engaged in an armed conflict with government forces in the forested areas of central India.

Caught between the proverbial devil and the deep sea, Anant Ram and his family embraced Christ, and found peace and relief from the stressors of life. They were restless in their hearts and wanted peace for their souls.

Dasrup Das, who discipled Anant Ram in the local church, told ICC, “Anant Ram and his family began attending church more than one year ago, unable to bear all the pressure. But villagers thought that he was getting attached to a new culture and threatened him on a regular basis.”

Recalling the incident, Sukhbati told ICC that in September 2018, just after Nua Khayi (a traditional harvest festival), three men came and questioned her husband as to why he was leaving the Gond caste and embracing a lower caste (Christianity is generally perceived as a religion for low caste people).
