New World Wealth Women's Safety Index Crowns Australia Safest

According to a recent Woman Safety Index published by New World Wealth, Australia is the safest country in the world for women. New World Wealth is a global market research group based in Johannesberg, South Africa. Their researches cover 90 countries and 150 cities worldwide. The women safety index is a part of it’s Global Wealth Migration Review 2019.

The important takeaways from the women safety index as given by the report are:

Australia is the safest country for women worldwide.

Only 58 out of the 195 countries have reliable crime statistics.

In many of the countries of Middle East and North Africa, women get arrested for filing cases against sexual harassment. Women are sometimes arrested for adultery or sex outside marriage if they report rape. This often keeps them from filing complaints and hence the statistics available regarding crimes like harassment etc. aren’t much reliable. There are around 40 countries whose statistics on crime against women are unreliable.

In countries where reliable crime data is available, like USA and Australia, for every 1 rape case reported, 3 of them go unreported. However, in the countries where women are arrested for filing a case against rape, more than 100 cases go unreported for one that is reported.

The report finds it surprising that the International media hasn’t paid any attention towards the countries where women can literally, be arrested for filing a complaint about facing sexual misconduct.

In many of the countries of Middle East and North Africa, women get arrested for filing cases against sexual harassment. This often keeps them from filing complaints and hence the statistics available regarding crimes like harassment etc.

India Not The Least Safe But On The Mid Range In Safety, Says Report

The report also considers the fact that countries like India and South Africa are often considered and quoted as the least safe countries for women. However, according to them, this is a huge mistake. These two countries are only among the 58 countries that have reliable data available on crime against women. In this scenario, we are leaving behind countries which do not even provide appropriate and reliable data for the same. It’s just that these 58 countries are more transparent and India is one of them.

This fact can very well describe why India has been listed at number one in the Thomson Reuters Report of Most Dangerous Countries in the World for Women. Ironically, The Thomson report has stated countries like Syria and Afghanistan as safer than India. In The New World Wealth report, India and South Africa at mid range (80-90) among the 195 countries in Women Safety (page no 42 and 43 of the report). According to the report, This is so because in a country like India, Women are free to report sexual assault cases and hence provide with reliable crime data.

Countries like India and South Africa are often considered and quoted as the least safe countries for women. However, according to the report, this is a huge mistake.

The Connection Between Women’s Safety And Development Of A Nation

According to the report, the top five countries in terms of safety for women are- Australia, Malta, Iceland, New Zealand and Canada. The safest countries for women also have some very positive points attached to them. These countries are the most popular destinations for migrating High-Net-worth-Individuals(HNWIs). This makes the region develop with a much faster pace.

Most of these countries have witnessed strong wealth growth in the past 20 years, according to the report. Crimes included in the report include Rape, Slavery Of Women, Trafficking of women and General Assaults On Women (Physical attacks, acid attacks etc.)

Read More:Poverty Lesser, Inequality Higher In India: UN Report

Anushika Srivastava is an Intern with SheThePeople.Tv
