Juvenile in Issewal gang-rape case to be tried as adult

Ludhiana: The charges against the juvenile, who is being tried as an adult along with other accused in the Issewal gang-rape case, will be framed on the next date of hearing. The accused was produced before the sessions court on Friday.“On Friday, sessions court sent the accused to the concerned court, where the trial of other accused is being held. The accused will be tried as an adult with other accused in the same court,” said Special Public Prosecutor B D Gupta. He added that the next hearing of the case in the court of additional sessions judge Rashmi Sharma is on April 22.Earlier, Juvenile Justice Board on April 10 had ordered that juvenile, who is over 16 years old, be tried as an adult and had sent the file to sessions court. On Friday, the sessions court sent the case to the concerned court with which the main case is pending.The case dates back to February 9, when a group of miscreants had allegedly gang raped a 20-year-old student after holding her and her friend hostage as they had gone to Issewal area to celebrate Chocolate Day. Police had booked 10 unidentified accused in the case. Later, it had arrested six accused, including Jagroop Singh, a private vehicle driver of Jaspal Bangar, Ajay from Tibba who is native of Gonda in Uttar Pradesh and works as driver at Petrol pump and four nomads (two from Ludhiana and one from Nawanshahar) including a juvenile from Jammu and Kashmir.The police had presented chargesheet against the accused in the court of Judicial Magistrate Ankit Airi on April 4.The copy of challan suggested that in the investigation only six accused were found to be involved in the case who have already been arrested. The challan also mentioned that the survivor and her friend had got made sketches of only six accused. The police said with the arrest of the accused, the investigation has been completed. It had however added that if more persons are found to be involved in the case, police will produce supplementary challan into the matter. The police had earlier added more sections including 354 B (Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty), 379 B (snatching), 364 A (Kidnapping for ransom, etc) and 397 (Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt) of IPC, were added in the FIR on March 25.
