Park watchman arrested for sexually harassing 19-yr-old

BBMP park

Nagarabhavi Circle

Bangalore

Guard tells police that the family wants him evicted from the one-room house inside parkA 50-year-old watchman of alocated near National Law School of India University in the vicinity ofwas nabbed by passers-by after a woman said to be from his native alleged him of sexually harassing her 19-year-old daughter. After the woman started shouting at him, it caught the attention of the public who nabbed him. They then called the jurisdictional Jnanabharathi police and handed him to them. Based on the statements of the victim, the police have registered a complaint against him and have released him on station bail. The guard in his statements to the police has stated that the woman who was eyeing the free accommodation provided to him inside the park has made the false allegations.The police have identified the guard as Basavaraj alias Basappa, watchman of the Rani BBMP Park located at NGEF Layout near the premiere law university. Both Basavaraju and the victim are said to be from Yadgir district in North Karnataka. Basavaraj, his wife and two children are staying in the free accommodation inside the park.The victim’s 39-year-old mother in her police statements has said that the accused is known to her family as he is also from Yadgir. She has further stated that the accused who would often meet them near her house under the pretext of enquiring about their wellbeing was trying to become close to her daughter. After coming to know about this, she claims to have warned Basavaraj to maintain distance from her daughter.“On Monday, when the complainant had gone to her workplace, which is near the park, she claims that the girl was in the house. Around 12.20 pm, her brother called saying that a resident staying next to the park told him that the accused had taken the victim inside the park and was sexually harassing her by making her sit on the stone bench. After the phone conversation, the complainant claims to have rushed to the park and found the accused misbehaving with her daughter. The resident who is said to have seen the alleged incident is said to have also come to the park to question the watchman,” said a police official.The woman asked her daughter about the incident and the latter is said to have confirmed about the sexual harassment. A passer-by, after seeing the commotion, called the police control room Basavaraj was taken into custody. The complainant has further stated that the accused would frequently take the victim to the park to harass her.Basavaraj toldMirror that the allegations against him were false and baseless. “The victim’s mother who is eyeing the free accommodation provided to him by the park authorities has made the allegations,” he added.The Jnanabharathi police have registered a case of assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty under section 354 of the IPC.
