'Why wasn't 1984 anti-Sikh riots considered terror?': PM Modi defends Sadhvi, hits out at Rajiv Gandhi, Kamal Nath

'Why wasn't 1984 anti-Sikh riots considered terror?': PM Modi defends Sadhvi, hits out at Rajiv Gandhi, Kamal Nath

He said: “If Amethi's candidate can be out on bail, if Rae Bareli's candidate is out on bail, then why is it a big deal if Bhopal's candidate is out on bail?”

PM Modi lashed out at Sadhvi Pragya Thakur’s detractors and wondered why those who were participants of the heinous 1984 anti-Sikh pogrom were never considered ‘terrorists’.

Speaking to a news channel, PM Modi strongly defended Sadhvi Pragya’s candidature from Bhopal wondering why former leaders who held constitutional posts were not called up for their utterances, He also wondered why it was kosher for bail-accused from Rae Bareli (Sonia Gandhi) and Amethi (Rahul Gandhi) to contest and not even Sadhvi Pragya.

He said: “In 1984, after Indira Gandhi was killed, her son said that if a big tree falls, the earth shakes. Thousands of Sikhs were killed. Isn’t that terrorism? Those that eye-witnesses said led the mobs were given constitutional posts. They became MPs and ministers. Even one was recently made Madhya Pradesh CM. Even when Rajiv Gandhi became PM, did media ask any questions.”

He went on to add that Opposition leaders go and hug people accused by the court (Lalu Prasad Yadav) even when they are in hospital and no one appeared to have any problems.

He said: “If Amethi's candidate can be out on bail, if Rae Bareli's candidate is out on bail, then why is it a big deal if Bhopal's candidate is out on bail?”

He went on to say that being from Gujarat, he knew how the Congress ‘script’ worked and talked about Sadhvi Pragya being tortured in jail. He said: “I know how the script works. They take a blank piece of paper and fill it up. They give it a villain, they give it heroes and heroines. Even Justice Loya died a natural death but they made it seem like it was unnatural.”

He added: "You branded a 5000-year-old peaceful civilisation a terrorist. Sadhvi is a symbol to against those haters."
