From Allahabad to Aamchi Mumbai

Interning at Reliance Infrastructure and living in Mumbai helped Prabhav evolve

I was selected for a summer internship at Reliance Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai, after a rigorous selection process. The selection procedure involved two rounds. First, was a telephonic interview with the assistant HR. The questions were mostly related to our personal goals and objectives as well as how we could contribute by being a part of their organisation.

I was among the students shortlisted for the next round, which was a Skype interview with the HR head. I was asked about the concepts of management, mostly related to HR as the internship was in the HR department. She asked me how I would handle two workers who had a conflict with each other and would I be partial towards one of them, to which I replied that I won’t be partial to anyone as both would be equal assets for our company. Next, I was asked if a worker came to me asking for a week off, how I would make a decision. I replied that I would consider the merit of his reason for taking the leave and in case he can assure me that the work assigned to him would be completed within the specified time, then I might consider giving the leave. Then she asked me a few questions related to my family and my willingness to go to Mumbai for the internship. As I was the coordinator who had brought the company to my college for summer internships, the HR was really impressed and I was selected.

First hand experience

After my exams were over, I started my internship in Mumbai. In the first month, I was given the responsibility of preparing the organisation chart for two divisions — east and south-central divisions of Mumbai as there had been a major shuffling in these two divisions in the past months. Next, I was given the work of manpower handling and to find out the reason of frequent absenteeism of workers. I did my research and prepared a report which I submitted when the internship ended. My report suggested that the major cause of absenteeism was the attitude of workers. They felt that as they had an affiliation with trade unions, they wouldn’t be removed from their jobs easily. I came to this conclusion after carrying out a structured survey of 500 workers across five divisions.

In those two months, I learnt concepts related to the procedure for disciplinary action, the process of filing a FIR against those workers who committed some crime on premises of the organisation, and analysing the psychology of workers as to why they committed various kinds of misconduct. I also got an exposure to how the company uses SAP and other modules for the HR department. I had the chance of conducting inquiries, tackling the trade unions, conducting exit interviews, and even going to labour courts for various hearings. In a nutshell, it was a great exposure in terms of the specialisation that I had chosen to pursue as a career.

Courtesy: Internshala.com
