Chennai: Man rapes 8-year-old at his residence; booked under POCSO

The mother lodged a complaint with the Superintendent of Kancheepuram in relation with the case (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Chennai: An appalling incident surfaced in Chennai when a minor was allegedly raped by a man. The alleged incident took place near Kalavan gate in Kancheepuram. The accused was identified as Kotteshwaran. The complaint was filed by the victim's mother.

The accused works at a roadside eatery near the Kavalan gate area. The victim was allegedly playing near her house when the incident took place.

The victim is a resident of the Valantheeswaran Kovil Thoppu street. The accused allegedly noticed the victim while she was playing outside her residence and asked her to accompany him. When the victim refused, the accused allegedly forced the victim on his bike.

According to the Deccan Chronicle's report, the accused allegedly took the victim to his house and raped her. The victim escaped some time later. The victim's mother noticed that she was exhausted the next day. Though the mother saw some bite marks and bruises on the victim's body, she did not suspect rape.

When the mother tried to talk to the accused, she did not say anything. The mother then took the victim to the doctor and was told that her daughter had been molested. Following this, the victim narrated her ordeal to her mother.

The mother lodged a complaint with the Superintendent of Kancheepuram in relation with the case. The accused was booked for kidnapping assault and physical contact under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) along with the POCSO Act. The police are yet to arrest the accused.

This incident came to light days after two minors allegedly raped a 4-year-old girl in the Basti district. The victim and the accused hailed from the same village. The victim was presented before the court and the victim was sent for a medical examination.

The victim was allegedly playing near her residence when the accused approached her. The accused allegedly convinced the victim to accompany them to a brick kiln and raped her. The accused abandoned the victim and fled the spot.
