Guru, Dhoom 2, Umrao Jaan – 5 must-watch Aishwarya Rai – Abhishek Bachchan films

Aishwarya Rai and Abhishek Bachchan have been the ‘IT’ couple of Bollywood ever since they got hitched in 2007. Apart from making stunning appearances at various events nationally and internationally, the couple has also impressed the audience with their on-screen chemistry. But that’s not all! Apart from having successful film careers, the two are also doting parents to their seven-year-old daughter Aaradhya. While we are sure this powerhouse couple will continue to entertain us in the coming years, for now, we are listing down five of their must-watch films in which they starred together.

Guru (2007) – A masterpiece by director Mani Ratnam, this film impressed the critics and the audience alike. Loosely based on the life of Dhirubhai Ambani, Guru is about a simple villager who is ambitious and comes to Bombay along with his wife Sujata to make it big in the city of dreams. Ash is paired opposite Junior Bachchan in the film and their sizzling chemistry is hard to miss.

Dhoom 2 (2006) – Abhishek and Aishwarya weren’t paired opposite each other in this one. In fact, Abhi played the role of a cop whereas Ash played the antagonist in this action film along with Hrithik Roshan. Despite that, Dhoom 2 was a visual delight for their fans and the whole cat and mouse chase kept everyone hooked to the film which received much praise and adulation from the critics as well.

Raavan (2010) – This isn’t a typical Ramayana tale but is about a bandit Beera Munda (Abhishek Bachchan) who abducts the officer’s wife Ragini (Aishwarya Bachchan) and falls in love with her. Eventually, he lets her go only to realise that she is head-over-heels in love with him as well. On realising this, her husband uses her as a scapegoat to reach the Beera. Even in this film, Abhi and Ash’s chemistry is electrifying.

Umrao Jaan (2006) – This romantic-drama narrates the story about Nawab Sultan (Abhishek Bachchan) who catches the eye of the elegant and the poetic Umrao Jaan (Aishwarya Rai). The two have a passionate romance but unfortunately, Nawab’s father doesn’t approve of it and soon disowns his son. This film is quite complex with all sorts of twists and turns but Abhishek and Aishwarya do justice to their roles.

Dhai Akshar Prem Ke (2000) – This was their first film together and though it didn’t receive a lot of praise, the songs did become very popular amongst the masses.

These are their most known films together and on their 12th anniversary, we wish them a blissful marital life filled with happiness and love. Stay tuned to CineBlitz for more.
