‘Pinarayi impedes unity of secular forces’

‘CPI(M) has opened the door for BJP to make political capital out of Sabarimala issue’

Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) president Mullappally Ramachandran has singled out Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan as the prime impediment to the coming together of secular forces to deny the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) power at the Centre.

He says Mr. Vijayan has exuded a hostility to the Congress throughout his life and his political positioning has worked to the advantage of fundamentalist forces.

Why do you say Mr. Vijayan views the Congress as the principal political opponent?

Mr. Vijayan’s hatred for the Congress harks back to 1977. Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh workers actively campaigned for him when he contested the Assembly elections from the Koothuparamba constituency in 1977. That clandestine understanding still holds good.

It was the post-Emergency era. How can regional political pacts of the past have a bearing on the present Lok Sabha elections?

Left leaders, Sitaram Yechury of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) and S. Sudhakar Reddy of the Communist Party of India, have rallied to the secular cause propounded by Congress president Rahul Gandhi. Such marshalling of secular forces to defeat the BJP is happening everywhere in the country except in Kerala.

The CPI(M) in Kerala is controlled by Mr. Vijayan who is a Stalinist and authoritarian. When it comes to rallying around the Congress to defeat the BJP, Mr. Vijayan acts like a prejudiced leader with a closed mind.

Mr. Vijayan is widely perceived as a secular leader and bulwark against the Sangh Parivar?

That is a misrepresentation. It was under Mr. Vijayan’s watch as party secretary and later Chief Minister that CPI(M) cadres have unleashed violence against politically active Muslim youths with impunity.

Mr. Vijayan had praised Prime Minister Narendra Modi and hosted Union Minister K.J.Alphons who defected to the BJP from the Left. Mr. Alphons still says that Mr. Vijayan is his leader.

Valsan Thillankari, the RSS leader who spearheaded the Sabarimala campaign, had said in a published interview that he was the bridge between the RSS and the CPI(M) in Kannur. No CPI(M) leader has had the moral courage to challenge his contention. The tacit understanding between the CPI(M) and the RSS in northern Kerala is clear and visible.

The Sabarimala issue appears to have given an impetus to Sangh Parivar forces. Will the issue upstage conventional electoral equations in Kerala ?

The BJP has campaigned on a platform of divisiveness in Kerala. The Prime Minister himself had attempted to obliquely raise the issue of faith and religion at campaign meetings. It does not portend well for democracy. The BJP has sought to divide people on caste and communal lines. The Congress has not harped on Sabarimala issue to get votes.

The Oommen Chandy government had drafted the 2014 affidavit that argued for the protection of the custom and traditions of the temple to honour the sentiments of Ayyappa devotees. The CPI(M) had opened the door for the BJP to make political capital out of the issue by revoking the 2014 affidavit and submitting a disruptive statement in its place.

How will the RMP impact the UDF campaign against P. Jayarajan of the CPI(M) in Vadakara?

It will have a positive impact. T.P. Chandrasekharan was a flawless Communist. CPI(M) cadres killed him in 2012 at the behest of their leaders. Revolutionary Marxist Party leaders, including his wife K.K. Rema, embody socialist and secular values. Ms. Rema brings an emotional focus to the United Democratic Front campaign. Families that have lost their sons and husbands and brothers and breadwinners can easily relate to her plight.

Ms. Rema’s message against political violence and targeted street killings by the CPI(M) has resonated strongly in Kerala. The RMP has helped the UDF spotlight the CPI(M)’s culture of using oppression as a political tool to crush democratic dissent.

Does the NSS brook any antipathy towards the Congress?

The CPI(M) had falsely attempted to brand Nair Service Society general secretary G. Sukumaran Nair as a revanchist with a feudal mindset. He is a thorough gentleman who views issues in an unbiased manner. The stance of the NSS on many subjects is well studied, mature, and democratic. The Congress does not disagree with the NSS whatsoever.

What about the SNDP Yogam? Its leadership has quarrelled with the Congress top brass and openly challenged the party’s candidate in Alappuzha.

The Sree Narayana Dharma Paripalana Yogam is no one person’s private fiefdom. It would not augur well for the community if the Yogam is held hostage to the likes and dislikes of any one power centre. The Yogam has contributed mightily towards educating the masses, uplifting them, and freeing them from caste segregation. The organisation should not lose sight of the role set for it by its founders, many of whom were Congress stalwarts.

There are reports of bickering over the conduct of Shashi Tharoor’s campaign in Thiruvananthapuram?

Mr. Tharoor has raised no complaint. However, he ran me through a SWOT analysis of his campaign and highlighted a few lacunae.

Congress general secretary Mukul Vasnik and I conferred with V.S. Sivakumar, MLA, and senior leaders to address the issues.
