Girl found dead at Quality Enclave Apartments in Budhha colony of Patna, police launch investigation

An official with the Patna police briefing media | Photo Credit: ANI

Patna: The mysterious death of a girl whose body was found at the Quality Enclave Apartments in Buddha colony in the state capital of Bihar today has triggered an extensive investigation. A police official has said that the girl's body was found in the Apartments' vicinity, claiming that she died after falling off the building.

Thana area police have detained a few people in connection with the girl's death and footage from closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras is being examined for any clues that might lead investigators to evidence. More details in this regard are awaited pending a detailed police inquiry into the matter. Meanwhile, it is also expected that police officials have sent the girl's body for post-mortem which will enable them to confirm or deny any foul play which may or may not have led to her demise.

Patna: A girl was found dead in Quality Enclave Apartments in Buddha colony, Thana area; Police say, "The girl died after falling off a building. We have detained some people in connection with the case, we are looking for evidence. We've accessed the CCTV footage." #Bihar pic.twitter.com/hc4Yoj3N0x — ANI (@ANI) April 20, 2019

Earlier today, a different part of the state of Bihar was in the news for a gruesome crime where a 17-year-old girl was bathed in acid by her neighbour, allegedly after he failed to molest her. Deputy superintendent of police (DSP) Roop Hargave told media outlets that the culprit along with three of his friends barged into the victim's home on April 19 and tried to molest her while her mother was held hostage at gunpoint. When the victim attempted to resist, the accused bathed her with acid, said Hargave.

In fact, yet another horrific instance of mindless violence had come to light from Muzaffarpur in Bihar where a 17-year-old girl from Sanpura village was shot dead by seven men for allegedly attending school. The victim's brother told Motipur police that he and his wife were held hostage by the accused in their own home for several hours. Going by the latest reports, four of the seven accused had been arrested in connection with the heinous crime.


