With Sadhvi Pragya, BJP discards another layer of the Moksha doll

With Sadhvi Pragya, BJP discards another layer of the Moksha doll

MARGINALIA

Security anxieties with respect to the cross-LoC trade and bus service have existed in the minds of officials for a long time. Whether or not there were enough intelligence inputs to substantiate such apprehensions, the remedy is in gearing up the system of checks and balances not in doing away with an existing facility. The union home ministry has reasoned that the trade route was encouraging smuggling of narcotics and weapons. The LoC trade has been suspended in the past on several occassions but mostly on issues related to facilities at check-points or trading list issues. Though wild allegations and apprehensions of arms smuggling have existed in the past, there hasn't been sufficient evidence to substantiate such claims. Besides such suspicions have not quite come in the way of trade for the last decade and a half since the cross-LoC trade started. So what's new? The answer does not lie in some hidden facts but in understanding the timing of the move.

Coming on the day of second phase of nation-wide elections amidst reports predicting the sagging fortunes of the ruling BJP, the latter in its bout of frustration is trying to pull up another stunt in the name of terrorism and being unsparing in Kashmir. It is so easy to build up terror anxieties when suspicions are linked to Kashmir and Pakistan. The timing is also crucial because the decision to snap a major but symbolic confidence building measure for people of Jammu and Kashmir as well as source of income for many people came a day after BJP decided to field the terror accused Sadhvi Pragya, who is out on bail after being acquitted in the Samjhauta Express case, as its candidate from Bhopal.

The contrast between Kashmir and Bhopal highlights the BJP's peculiar stand on terrorism. While on the one hand, it is going hammer and tongs against Kashmiris by propping up the terrorism discourse merely on suspicions and apprehensions even where no major evidence exists (as in the case of the LoC trade), on the other it is conveniently backing terror accused of another hue. The hypocrisy is in line with the recent outburst of none other than prime minister, Narendra Modi, who rejected the existence of any 'Hindu terror'. Throughout this election, BJP's campaigning has been pivoted around Pakistan bashing or misplaced boasts about fighting terrorism. With Sadhvi Pragya's arrival on the election scene, it is evident that BJP is guided by a different definition of terrorism.

Sadhvi Pragya's acquittal in Samjhauta case does not prove her innocence. She is still facing trial in several other cases including the Malegaon blast. Sadhvi Pragya, whose bike was used for the Malegaon blast and who provided logistical support including men to carry out the heinous act, is one of the main accused in this case of arson that killed six people and left 100 others injured. She was arrested in 2008 and subsequent investigations revealed a link between Malegaon, Ajmer Sharief blast, Mecca masjid attack and the one on Samjhauta Express.

National Investigation Agency's special public prosecutor, Rohini Sailan, said three years ago, that the BJP government was pressurizing her to go slow on Sadhvi Pragya who was given bail in 2017 by Bombay High Court on 'health grounds' after the NIA did let her off the hook partially. Whether or not, the case against her is concocted, as claimed by the BJP, she continues to face charges under sections of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, related to committing terrorist acts. The BJP is lying when it says that Pragya Thakur has been acquitted by the court. Besides, the special court which recently acquitted Pragya along with three other accused in Samjhauta Blast case pulled up the investigating agency for "gaping holes" in the investigation and for botching up prosecution.

By giving Sadhvi Pragya a party ticket for Bhopal, BJP is giving legitimacy to entry of those involved in terrorism into Indian politics and also Indian democratic institutions like the parliament (given that Bhopal is a strong BJP bastion for the last two decades). Police officer Hemant Karkare is a national hero who lost his life at the hands of terrorists during Mumbai terror attack. By justifying his killing, Sadhvi has shown which side her sympathy lies. By maintaining dubious silence over her vitriolic campaign, starting with the targeting of Karkare, an upright police officer cracking down on terrorism, BJP has not only shown contempt for rule of law, it has also given an indication of the pernicious ideology which is likely to be in place if BJP comes to power. Anybody else praising a terror killing, that too where the victim is a man in uniform, would immediately be branded 'anti-national' and face the abusive diarrhea of BJP's troll army, even right-wing mob violence. But not Pragya. Apologists within BJP have only tried to explain her words as the outburst of an anguished and traumatized person.

Compare this to the BJP response towards anguish of the Kashmiri youth who pelt stones or the much ado created over the slogans raised at JNU. Anybody associated with JNU continues to be labelled as 'tukde tukde gang'. Those speaking for human rights in Kashmir are tarnished as "anti-nationals" and "Pakistani agents". Those working on tribal issues get the tag of "urban Naxals". Ever since Lok Sabha election campaigning began in March this year, the BJP has projected itself as party that makes no compromise on terrorism and a party that does not believe in any reconciliation in conflict areas. If any Muslim terror accused were to contest even a local body election, heavens would have fallen and the BJP would have gone raving mad with rage. In the light of what has been seen in the last five years, how does the BJP's stand on Sadhvi Pragya's actions and her explicit views square up? In one stroke, the party has moved a step further from giving tickets to those engaged in hate speeches and communal rioting. Another layer of pretence has been shed, as it advances to the stage of openly patronizing terrorists.

There is a pattern in which BJP is giving a clear message: its fight is not against terrorism but a certain community that can be easily tarred as 'terrorists' while terrorists dipped in shades of saffron can be backed, patronized and lauded. A sample of this clarity comes from none other than prime minister Narendra Modi, who described Sadhvi Pragya as "a saint" who was "subjected to heinous torture" in an interview to TimesNow on Friday. Justifying the party ticket to her, he said, "A civilisation, a tradition that has promoted the idea of 'Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam' (the world is one family) for the last 5,000 years was branded as terrorists by some. Sadhvi Pragya's candidature from Bhopal is a symbol to answer all those who did this and this symbol will prove costly to the Congress."

With Sadhvi Pragya's arrival in the electoral battle as BJP's poster-woman in Madhya Pradesh, the party has lent some clarity on its interpretation of terrorism and what its professed claims on fighting terrorism are really about. Like the Moksha doll, BJP is revealing its inner-self by discarding its many layers one after the other. Is this the end result? Or, are there more inside layers still to be revealed? Whatever the case, the image of a future with terror accused entering the august premises of the parliament, with or without BJP being in power, is not just worrying; it is scary.
