Indian Muslims condemn Easter bombings in Sri Lanka

AMN / New Delhi

India’s prominent Muslim body Jamaat-e-Islami Hind has strongly condemned the deadly serial blasts in Sri Lanka on Sunday and termed them as unforgivable heinous crimes against humanity.

President (Ameer) of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind, Syed Sadatullah Husaini expressed deep sorrow over the tragedy and extended his sympathy with the families of over 200 people killed in the blasts. He also expressed solidarity with over 500 injured people and prayed to Allah for their speedy recovery.

Syed Sadatullah Husaini said that our neighbouring country Sri Lanka was living peacefully after passing through years of internal strife, violence and killings. It is surprising that when there was full peace in the country, this violent incident took place and hundreds of people were killed. This is highly condemnable and tragic.

JIH president said that the series of unjustified killings of humans by humans going on in different countries must stop now in order to keep humanity from further fall. He expressed hope that the government of Sri Lanka will thoroughly investigate these blasts and won’t leave any stone unturned in bringing the criminals to justice so that no one could dare to destabilise peace in the country again.

Welfare Party of India condemns terror bombing in Sri Lanka

Dr SQR Ilyas, National President of Welfare Party of India and the MP candidate from Jangipur Constituency strongly condemned the suicide attack that rocked the island country of Sri Lanka which killed 180 people and injured 300 in 8 serial blasts and called it an act against humanity.

He said this incident which has shocked the entire world was done to cause terror and to rupture the social fabric in that country. He stood by the families of the innocent Christians who were celebrating the Easter and sent his deep felt condolences to the bereaved families of the deceased and the wounded.

He appealed to the international community to stand united and defeat the intention to divide us by those who are behind this ghastly and gory act.

Dr SQR Ilyas called it a complete failure on the part of intelligence where innocent people are falling victims to these insensitive suicide bombers all over the world with the recent ones like Phulwama in India and a mosque attack in New Zealand.

He strongly said terrorist all over the world belongs to no religion or region, they are enemies of human race.

He appealed to international intelligence to liberate the world from terrorism and make our earth a safe haven for the present and future generations.

PFI condemns

Popular Front of India has also strongly condemned the serial blasts on Easter day in Sri Lanka. Popular Front chairman E Abubacker in a statement issued here today expressed solidarity with the people of our neighbouring nation and joined their grief at this hour of mourning.

The details of the serial explosions carried out in churches and hotels are not known. It is hoped that Sri Lankan Government agencies would be able to find out those forces that acted behind these terrorist attacks without any time lapse. Whomsoever be the terrorist masterminded the Colombo mass murders, whatsoever be their motives in acting so heinously, the whole incident is undoubtedly a crime against humanity. E Abubacker hoped that as we have witnessed in the case of recent New Zealand mass firings, the victims of Sri Lankan blasts would receive both domestic and international support by all means.
