Passengers thrashed by Kallada Travels bus crew; case booked

Kochi: Police have booked a case against three staff of a private bus who had attacked passengers of a Bangalore bound bus and threw them out. Maradu police registered a case against the three staff of Kallada Travels bus for the brutal attack unleashed against the passengers.

The bus was going from Thiruvananthapuram to Bangalore. Thiruvananthapuram native Anjay Ghosh, Palakkad native Muhammed Ashkar and Sulthan Bathery native Sachin were manhandled by the staff and asked to get out of the bus. Police booked case as per the details given by Anjay Ghosh.

Ashkar and Sachin are students studying in Erode. They had gone to Thiruvananthapuram to a friend’s house and were returning when the incident occurred. Anjay Ghosh was going from Thiruvananthapuram to Thrissur.

On getting first information about the incident, the Maradu police located the three youth who were thrown out off the bus near Vytilla. Though the three were asked to seek treatment at a government hospital in Thripunithara, they did not oblige. Anjay Ghosh sought treatment in Thrissur. In a complaint lodged after this, Marad SI Baiju P Babu decided to register a case. The SI said that the attackers will be nabbed soon.

A co-passenger in the bus Jacob Philip had posted about the incident that happened inside the bus on his Facebook page and sought help for the three persons. The incident happened on Saturday midnight.

The police version about the incident: When the bus reached Harippad from Thiruvananthapuram, it broke down. When the bus stopped for a considerably long time, the three youth started to question the bus crew. This ended in a verbal duel. Harippad police reached the spot and ordered for another bus to take the stranded passengers. All this took two-and-half hours.

When the bus reached Vytilla, three staff of the bus boarded the bus and attacked the youth. They slapped and hit the two young men and forcefully threw them out of the bus. A video shows a group of men surrounding the two passengers and thrashing them. The incident occurred on Sunday early morning. Police is yet to make any arrests.
