4 JDS workers killed in Sri Lanka blasts. Immense sorrow, says HD Kumaraswamy

A police officer inspecting the explosion area at the Shangri-La hotel in Colombo, Sri Lanka, on April 21, 2019. (Photo: Reuters)

Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy has said four workers from the Janata Dal (Secular) were among the hundreds killed in Sunday's blasts in Sri Lanka. He expressed "immense sorrow" on behalf of his party.

Kumaraswamy said the four victims -- Lakshmana Gowda Ramesh, KM Lakshminarayan, M Rangappa and KG Hanumantharayappa -- were touring Sri Lanka.

"I am deeply pained at the loss of their lives in the heinous attack. They were also committed workers of our party and their death has brought immense sorrow to us," the chief minister said on Twitter on Monday.

I am with their families and pray to the Almighty to give strength for the families and near and dear ones to bear this grief.#SriLankaAttacks H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) April 22, 2019

Kumaraswamy said three others -- H Shivu Kumar, A Maregowda and H Puttaraju -- were missing. "The Chief Secretary’s office is in constant touch with the Resident Commissioner at Karnataka Bhavan, New Delhi, and the families of the victims and the missing persons for further information on them," he said.

He later tweeted that a group from Karnataka that was returning from Kandy would help identify a fifth body.

The Chief Secretary has spoken to High Commissioner of India in Sri Lanka. One group from Karnataka is returning from Kandy. They will help to identify the fifth body. The @IndiainSL will provide information on the other two missing persons as soon as it is received, the CS said. April 22, 2019

Bombings tore through churches and luxury hotels in Sri Lanka on Easter Sunday, killing 290 people and leaving 500 injured.

Police said on Monday that 24 people had been arrested, all of whom were Sri Lankan.

There has been no claim of responsibility yet.

"Such senseless violence, aimed at innocent people, has no place in civilised society," President Ram Nath Kovind said on Twitter on Sunday.

"We stand in complete solidarity with Sri Lanka."

Indians in Sri Lanka can contact the following helpline numbers: +94777903082, +94112422788, and +94112422789.

Inputs from Reuters
