Lok Sabha elections Kerala: Violent end to vibrant poll campaign in Kerala

The public campaigning for the Lok Sabha election ended on Sunday evening with the three fronts taking out road shows to major junctions across the state.The grand finale, however, was marred by widespread violence, injuring many, including UDF’s Alathur candidate Ramya Haridas and legislators Anil Akkara and K D Prasenan. A roadshow of senior Congress leader A K Antony was allegedly blocked by a group of LDF activists in Thiruvananthapuram, forcing the former Union minister to cancel the rally.More than 30 people, including a policeman, were injured at Thiruvalla where the activists of BJP and LDF clashed. Skirmishes were reported at Mannarkkad and Thodupuzha too.On Tuesday, 2,61,51,534 voters—including 2,88,191 first timers—will choose 20 MPs from 227 candidates in the state.In the previous election held on April 10, 2014, UDF had won 12 seats, while LDF bagged the remaining eight.Besides Thiruvananthapuram, which sent Congress’ Shashi Tharoor to Delhi after a thrilling contest with BJP’s O Rajagopal in 2014, NDA is offering a tough challenge to both LDF and UDF in Pathanamthitta and Thrissur this time.BJP general secretary K Surendran and Rajya Sabha MP Suresh Gopi are the candidates in Pathanathitta and Thrissur respectively, while Kummanam Rajasekharan is taking on Tharoor and LDF’s C Divakaran in Thiruvananthapuram.Though UDF and LDF are hoping to better their performance, NDA has worked hard to create history by opening their account in the state. LDF, which was off the campaign blocks ahead of the rival fronts, by announcing candidates—including six sitting MLAsmuch earlier, UDF gained momentum, especially after the announcement of Rahul Gandhi’s candidature in Wayanad.For BJP, the Supreme Court verdict allowing women of all ages to enter the Ayyappa temple at Sabarimala was the biggest campaign issue, and they could succeed in making it a talking point. Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP national president Amit Shah had a special focus on the campaign in the state since they are expecting at least two seats from Kerala this time.The unique factor of this election is triangular fights at Thiruvananthapuram, Attingal, Kollam, Pathanamthitta, Kottayam and Thrissur.UDF is hoping that a minority consolidation would work in their favour. Most poll surveys had predicted an upper hand for UDF and they are hopeful of getting more than 15 seats. They also expect Rahul’s presence to benefit them.The campaign also witnessed some serious allegations against candidates and also saw some leaders at the receiving end of the election commission wrath. The sting operation against Kozhikode Congress candidate M K Raghavan was the first allegation. The comments made by LDF convener A Vijayaraghavan against Alathur Congress candidate Ramya Haridas invited the wrath of the EC. BJP state president P S Sreedharan Pillai and devaswom minister Kadakampally Surendran also received warning from the EC.
