Acid Thrown on Indian Girl for Resisting Rape

"When the girl resisted, they threw the acid on her face."

An Indian girl, aged 17, from Bihar, was the victim of an acid attack after she resisted a rape attempt.

She was attacked by her neighbour on Friday, April 19, 2019, at her home in Bhagalpur.

The man was identified as Prince Kumar and he, along with three others barged into her home and attempted to gang-rape her. The victim’s mother was held at gunpoint.

According to Bhagalpur city DSP Sushant Kumar Saroj, the armed young men were wearing masks when they entered the victim’s home.

She and her mother were in the house preparing dinner when the incident happened.

They grabbed the girl, but when her mother came to help, a shot was fired but missed.

They then held the girl’s mother at gunpoint while they attempted to sexually assault the girl, however, she resisted their attempts.

The failed sexual attack left Prince and the other suspects infuriated. As a result, they threw acid on her face and hands, causing severe burns.

The attackers fled the scene when the girl and her mother began crying loudly for help. As they left, one of the suspects dropped a countrymade pistol.

The victim’s mother told the police that her daughter fell to the floor crying uncontrollably for help and was rushed to the hospital.

She was treated for her injuries at Patna Medical College and Hospital, Bihar.

DSP Roop Ranjan Hargave said: “The culprit, Prince, along with three other persons barged into the victim’s house and tried to molest her while keeping her mother at gunpoint.

“When the girl resisted, they threw the acid on her face. We have recovered a gun from the spot.”

Officers found traces of acid in the victim’s house, which was later collected by a forensics team. They also searched Prince’s home where they found a container filled with an unknown substance.

The police have arrested Prince and his brother Saurabh Kumar.

SSP Ashish Bharti said: “One Prince Kumar, who is a named accused in the FIR lodged by the victim’s father, has been arrested. One of his associates has also been detained for interrogation.”

The SSP added that Prince used to live with his uncle and confirmed that he was a neighbour of the victim.

An investigating officer added:

“Prince’s friends used to come together at his house and pass lewd comments at passers-by, including the victim.”

“She had once complained to Prince’s relatives about his unlawful activities, but no action was taken.”
