Kallada Travels expresses regret over the incident; suspends staff

Thiruvananthapuram: The Kallada Travels expressed their regret over the controversy that has sprang up concerning their bus. In a explanatory statement released by them, they accepted that their staff manhandled the passengers. They also confirmed that suspension order has been issued to the staff who are involved in the violent incident.

At the same time, the Kallada Travels alleged that their staff were also manhandled. They claimed that the three passengers had assaulted one of their crew members on bus and also assaulted one of the night duty staff at the Vyttila office.

Three staff of the Kallada Travels bus had attacked passengers of a Bangalore bound bus and threw them out. The bus was going from Thiruvananthapuram to Bangalore. Thiruvananthapuram native Anjay Ghosh, Palakkad native Muhammed Ashkar and Sulthan Bathery native Sachin were manhandled by the staff and asked to get out of the bus. Ashkar and Sachin are students studying in Erode. They had gone to Thiruvananthapuram to a friend’s house and were returning when the incident occurred. Anjay Ghosh was going from Thiruvananthapuram to Thrissur.

On getting first information about the incident, the Maradu police located the three youth who were thrown out off the bus near Vytilla. Though the three were asked to seek treatment at a government hospital in Thripunithara, they did not oblige. Anjay Ghosh sought treatment in Thrissur. In a complaint lodged after this, Marad SI Baiju P Babu decided to register a case. A co-passenger in the bus Jacob Philip had posted about the incident that happened inside the bus on his Facebook page and sought help for the three persons. The incident happened on Saturday midnight.

Maradu police have arrested two of the three staff of Kallada Travels bus for the brutal attack unleashed against the passengers. Police have taken the bus into custody and asked the owners of the bus, the Suresh Kallada Group, to be present in person at the station for questioning.
