Tourist omnibuses to be put under scanner

Only 50 of the 500 vehicles are registered with MVD in Kerala

The 500 all-India tourist omni buses (AITOB) operating from the key cities of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh to the State are set to come under the scanner of the Motor Vehicles Department (MVD) in the wake of the brutal attack on bus passengers at Vyttila on Sunday. It has been found that only 28 of the 150 multi-axle buses operating as AITOBs by Kallada Travels have been registered with the MVD. Of the 500 multi-axle buses operating as AITOBs, only 50 have been registered with the MVD.

The remaining vehicles have been registered in Puducherry, Karnataka, and Arunachal Pradesh in view of the flexibility provided by these States in registration.

“Even the notices sent to the address of the registered owners of these buses in these States for traffic offences here return undelivered . In the wake of the attack, we have decided to put the RC particulars of these 450 buses under scanner and this will commence after the elections,” an MVD official told The Hindu.

Attempts by the Enforcement wing of the MVD to carry surprise checks had not been successful following non-cooperation of passengers. Replacing these 500 AITOBs with buses from the fleet of the State transport undertaking is not feasible.

Relaxation in producing address proof of the registered owner and the vehicle before the registering authority, non-insistence on speed governors and welfare fund for the crew have been cited as the reasons for the AITOB operators flocking to other States for registration.

At Irinjalakuda

The multi-axle bus taken into custody in Ernakulam on Monday had been registered at Irinjalakuda. It was for the registering authority to take a call on the cancellation of the permit after hearing the owner. “In this case, the inference is that the permit holder has failed in ensuring the security of the passengers,” the official said.

Transport Minister A.K. Saseendran has asked the Principal Secretary, Transport, to look into the registration of multi-axle buses and to talk to his counterpart in Karnataka. The MVD is helpless as AITOBs are being operated with impunity exploiting the thin line differentiating contract carriage from stage carriage services.
