Third phase of polling: Live updates from other states

Polling officer found hanging in West Bengal’s Buniadpur

West Bengal: A polling official was found hanging in his residence at Buniadpur, South Dinajpur, which is part of the Balurghat Lok Sabha constituency. Babulal Murmu allegedly committed suicide Monday night. However, his wife alleged that Murmu was under pressure.

Woman voter dies in Chhattisgarh

Chhattisgarh: A 46-year-old tribal woman collapsed while standing in a queue to cast her vote in Raigarh Lok Sabha constituency in Chhattisgarh and later died at a hospital here Tuesday.

Anjela Toppo was waiting for her turn to exercise her franchise at polling booth No.3 in police line area in the Raigarh district headquarter when she collapsed, said Raigarh Additional Superintendent of Police Abhishek Verma. Toppo was rushed to the district hospital where she died during treatment, he said.

Voter killed in Congress-TMC clash in West Bengal’s Murshidabad

West Bengal: A voter was killed and seven others injured in poll clashes between the Congress and the Trinamool Congress (TMC) in West Bengal’s Murshidabad which is a Lok Sabha segment undergoing polling in the third phase of 2019 general elections.

Violent clashes were reported earlier between the two parties after allegations and counter-allegations of booth capturing, rigging and EVM tampering in various booths across the seat. —Agencies

SP-BSP alliance fields a no-hoper against Modi

Lucknow: The Samajwadi Party (SP) has fielded Shalini Yadav as the joint candidate of the SP-BSP alliance in Varanasi to challenge Prime Minister Narendra Modi in the Lok Sabha elections. A light-weight candidate, Shalini has unsuccessfully contested the Mayoral polls in Varanasi on a Congress ticket in 2017. She is the is the daughter of former Rajya Sabha Deputy Chairperson Shyamlal Yadav.

7 voters die in Kerala during polling

Kerala: Seven voters died during the voting across different polling stations here Tuesday. One voter died after he came to know his name was not in the voter list, while another Marar Venugopala passed away after he returned home after voting.

Veteran BJP leader LK Advani casts his vote

Gujarat: Veteran Bharatiya Janata Party leader LK Advani casts his vote at a polling station at Shahpur Hindi School in Ahmedabad here.

Karnataka voter records himself voting, to face criminal charges

Karnataka: A voter in Uttara Kannada constituency here recorded a video of him casting vote. The video clearly shows whom the voter votes for. As the video went viral in the area, Karwar deputy commissioner K Harish Kumar said that a criminal case will be filed against the voter.

BJP delegation meets EC observer over lathicharge by security forces

Tripura: A delegation of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) met special election observer Vinod Zutshi alleging that the security forces were terrorising voters across Tripura East constituency. The delegation said many of its supporters, including a woman, were injured due to unprovoked lathicharge.

Voters are the real judge: Chhattisgarh CM

Chhattisgarh: “We have said what we had to say in favour of the party and our candidates, now voters will decide. They are the real judge,” said Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel after casting his vote at polling station here.

Stray incidents of violence mar West Bengal polls

Kolkata: An estimated 16.94 per cent of over 80 lakh electorate exercised their franchise in the first two hours of polling in five Lok Sabha constituencies of West Bengal, an election official said, Tuesday. Sixty one candidates are in fray for the five seats.

Barring a few isolated incidents of violence, polling has largely been peaceful in Balurghat, Malda Uttar, Malda Dakshin, Jangipur and Murshidabad Lok Sabha seats, the official said.

Good turnout in Assam elections

Guwahati: An estimated 28.64 per cent of the total electorate of 74,76,062 cast their votes Tuesday till 11.00am in four Lok Sabha constituencies of Assam on Tuesday amid reports of EVM malfunctioning in some polling stations, an election official said.

Voters formed long queues at the polling booths since early morning in some places, to exercise their franchise in Dhubri, Kokrajhar (ST), Barpeta and Guwahati parliamentary constituencies. Women and first-time voters stood outside the booths patiently waiting for their turn to vote, he said

According to the poll official, Dhubri constituency recorded maximum polling till 11.00am at 31.54 per cent, followed by Guwahati constituency at 29.47 per cent.

Glitches in EVMs were reported at some places in the four Lok Sabha constituencies and the faulty machines were replaced quickly, the official said.

Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and his wife Gursharan Kaur are scheduled to exercise their franchise later in the day at Dispur Higher Secondary Government School in Guwahati constituency later in the day.

Ceiling fan falls on polling official in Uttar Pradesh

Uttar Pradesh: The presiding officer at Mohara polling station in Marhara Assembly constituency under Etah Lok Sabha segment here sustained head injuries when a ceiling fan at the polling booth fell on his head Tuesday.

Sri Kishan was referred to a healthcare facility in Agra.

Snake inside VVPAT machine holds up polling in Kannur

Kerala: Voting was held up for a brief while at a polling station in Kannur Lok Sabha constituency here Tuesday after a small snake was found inside a VVPAT machine, triggering panic among officials and voters.

The reptile was, however, removed after a short while and voting resumed.

Sunny Deol joins BJP

New Delhi: Bollywood actor Sunny Deol joined the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in presence of Union Ministers Piyush Goyal and Nirmala Sitharaman here Tuesday.

The actor met BJP national president Amit Shah last week, sparking speculation that the party might field him from Punjab.

EVM malfunction stalls polling, voters boycott election in Tripura

Tripura: Polling was stalled in five polling centres under East Tripura Lok Sabha constituency due to EVM malfunctions here. Meanwhile, around 25 families of North Durgapur village in Khowai under East Tripura Lok Sabha constituency have boycotted the polls protesting the alleged assault on a local youth reportedly by members of the central security force. Congress candidate in East Tripura Lok Sabha constituency, Pragya Debbarman, alleged booth rigging.

Train services between Srinagar, Budgam, Baramulla, Anantnag suspended

Kashmir: The train services were suspended Tuesday for security reasons in the Kashmir Valley, as polling in Anantnag Parliamentary constituency is underway. Voting for Anantnag Lok Sabha constituency began on a dull note and people chose to stay indoors instead of casting their franchise.

Are EVMs really faulty or programmed in this fashion, says Kejriwal

New Delhi: Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal, pointing towards faulty EVMs, asked as to why the votes were being directed to the BJP only.

“Faulty” EVM in Goa also transfers others votes to BJP. Are these really faulty or programmed in this fashion? https://t.co/zI9e6IVFUV — Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) April 23, 2019

“Are these really faulty or programmed in this fashion?” Kejriwal tweeted.

Come out and vote, give your anger a voice: Ex-J&K CM Omar Abdullah

Jammu: In the first two hours of voting in phase three of Lok Sabha polls, not a single vote was cast in Jammu and Kashmir’s Anantnag Lok Sabha constituency, a hotbed of militant activities, while former chief minister Omar Abdullah urged people to ‘vote to give anger a voice’.

To the voters of Anantnag, please don’t reward the death, destruction & deceit of the last 4 years by staying home & boycotting the election. Come out & vote to give your anger a voice. Vote for the best candidate in the field, vote for @masoodi_hasnain — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) April 23, 2019

“To the voters of Anantnag, please don’t reward the death, destruction & deceit of the last 4 years by staying home & boycotting the election. Come out & vote to give your anger a voice,” he tweeted.

Goa records 13% voting in first two hours

I have voted for a new India. #VoteForNewIndia pic.twitter.com/ECclC8GG0a — Chowkidar Dr. Pramod Sawant (@DrPramodPSawant) April 23, 2019

Goa: Nearly 13 per cent voting was reported in the first two hours of polling for both, the Lok Sabha and three Assembly constituencies, here. As per Election Commission of India records, North Goa Parliamentary seat polled 13.14 per cent votes, while in South Goa 13.12 per cent people turned out to the polling booths.

Voting remained peaceful and no long queues were seen in most of the booths. Mandrem Assembly constituency reported 13.05 percent voting while it was 14.47 percent voting in Mapusa Assembly constituency. Shiroda Assembly constituency reported 13.18 percent voting for the first two hours.

Goa Chief Minister Pramod Sawant along with his wife, Sulakshana Sawant, were amongst the first voters.

Police resort to lathicharge as TMC workers intimidate voters in Jangipur

West Bengal: There have been reports of police lathicharge in Suti in Jangipur constituency as Trinamool Congress workers in groups were intimidating voters.

Assam ex-DGP alleges EVM tampering

Assam: Ex-DGP of Assam, Harekrishna Deka, Tuesday claimed that EVMs may have been tampered with. He said that there was some delay when he went to vote and when he finally did, his vote was recorded for some other party. “There is a serious problem in the system. This is a dangerous thing,” Deka said, adding that he complained to the polling officer and feels that EC must go back to the ballot system of voting.

NDA candidate from Wayanad demands re-election after EVM malfunction

Wayanad: Thushar Vellappally, NDA candidate from Wayanad Lok Sabha constituency, Tuesday demanded re-polling after an electronic voting machine (EVM) malfunctioned at a polling booth here.

“Let me draw your kind attention to an important matter. It is reported from booth number 79 – CMS Higher Secondary School, Arappatta in Mooppanad Panchayath that the voting machine is damaged. A vote is not being cast even after pressing twice,” a letter by Vellappally through Chief Election Agent Advocate Sinil Kumar G read.

“Please take necessary steps for re-polling as pressing the voting machine twice can make changes in the voting,” it added.

Not worried about EVM malpractice in Thiruvananthapuram: Shashi Tharoor

Thiruvananthapuram: After reports claiming that votes cast for Congress from Thiruvananthapuram kept showing the BJP symbol, Congress candidate Shashi Tharoor has said that he is not worried. Voting has been stopped at Chowara booth near Kovalam in Thiruvananthapuram constituency, which is witnessing a fierce three-cornered contest featuring Tharoor after voters complained that the lotus symbol of the BJP has lit up after they cast their vote for the Congress.

Over 50 faulty EVMs reported from UP

Uttar Pradesh: Over 50 polling booths have reported EVM malfunction since morning in Rohilkhand region. At least 27 of these were reported from Badaun. Around 14 incidents of malfunction in Bareilly, 11 in Moradabad, seven in Sambhal and five each in Pilibhit and Aonla were reported. Polling got delayed at these booths and election officials are looking into the matter.

Poll Violence in Murshidabad

West Bengal: Three TMC workers were injured after a crude bomb was hurled at them in Domkal municipality under the Murshidabad district.

Presiding officer suspended in WB’s Malda as unknown people enter polling booth

West Bengal: The Election Commission (EC) ordered the removal of a presiding officer in Ratua under the Maldaha Uttar seat after unknown persons were seen assisting voters at the polling booth.

Kerala CM complain against faulty EVMs

Thiruvananthapuram: Numerous complaints of malfunctioning of electronic voting machines (EVMs) were reported Tuesday from across Kerala as the state voted to elect 20 Lok Sabha members.

The malfunctioning was pointed out by none other than Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan who said that election officials appear to have failed to ensure that the EVMs worked properly. Vijayan had to wait longer than he expected to cast his votes.

Polling percentage recorded till 9am

Assam: 12.36%

Bihar: 12.60%

Goa: 2.29%

Gujarat: 1.35%

Jammu and Kashmir: 0.00%

Karnataka:1.75%

Kerala: 2.48%

Maharashtra: 0.99%

Odisha: 1.32%

Tripura: 1.56%

Uttar Pradesh: 6.84%

West Bengal: 10.97%

Chhattisgarh: 2.24%

Dadra and Nagar Haveli: 0.00%

Daman and Diu: 5.83%

BJP chief Amit Shah casts vote in Ahmedabad

Ahmedabad: BJP chief Amit Shah casts his vote in Gujarat’s Ahmedabad. His candidature from Gandhinagar, announced in party’s first list last month, had sparked a major controversy; he had replaced veteran leader LK Advani.

Modi casts his vote

Ahmedabad: Prime Minister Narendra Modi cast his vote Tuesday in the third phase of the Lok Sabha elections at a booth here and appealed to people to come out in large numbers to exercise their franchise. He said the ‘voter ID (identity card) was much more powerful than the ‘IED” (improvised explosive device) of terrorists.

Modi arrived at the polling station set up in Nishan High School, located in the Ranip area here in an open jeep in the morning and exercised his democratic right.

Interesting Facts

New Delhi: Polling in the third phase of Lok Sabha elections has started Tuesday.

Here are some interesting facts about this phase:

116 Lok Sabha constituencies across 14 states and 2 Union Territories headed for polls.

The third phase is biggest as it covers 116 parliamentary seats in a single phase.

Over 18.85 crore voters to decide fate of 1640 candidates and over 2.10 lakh polling stations in place for smooth conduct of polls

Anantnag parliamentary constituency in Jammu & Kashmir would be going to polls in three parts in Phase III, Phase IV and Phase V of Lok Sabha elections, the only such constituency in the country. The four districts to be covered in Anantnag are Anantnag, Kulgam, Shopian and Pulwama.

Fearing law and order problems the election to Tripura (East) parliamentary constituency were postponed from April 18 (Phase 2) to April 23.
