Female neighbours accuse political leader of assaulting them following tiff over his pet dog

A case has been registered in this regard (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Hyderabad: With the 2019 Lok Sabha elections underway, a local politician from Peddapalli in Telangana has landed in the fray after he was accused of assaulting two female neighbours following an altercation between them over his pet dog. The incident took place at Peddapalli which is close to 200 kilometres from state capital Hyderabad.

The matter came to light when two female complainants accused district secretary of the Indian National Congress (INC) party, Katkuri Sandeep, of assaulting them. The complainants, Perika Kalpana and Medipalli Laxmikasturi claimed that they took up the matter of the pet dog with the accused several times in the past but he failed to resolve their grievances which resulted in an escalation of the situation.

We told Sandeep about the dog several times in the past but he failed to act, said the women. According to a report by Deccan Chronicle, the dog defecated in the complainants' home on Monday which prompted them to approach Sandeep and make their grievances heard. However, they claim that the accused began abusing and assaulting them instead of addressing their complaints. A family member of the women also claims to have recorded the assault on his cell phone camera.

Other residents of the colony in Peddapalli sided with the complainants and alleged that the accused is at fault. As a result, other residents of the colony also lodged a complaint with the police along with the two women who were allegedly assaulted by the accused. An official complaint against Sandeep has been registered with the police. While a probe into the allegations against him is underway, no arrests have been made in this regard as of yet. More details are awaited.

A similar instance had come to light from the national capital in January of this year when a 30-year-old man was shot dead in northeast Delhi's Welcome Colony by the owner of a dog he allegedly threw stones at. Delhi police asserted that the dog began barking at the victim, Afaq, which is when he threw stones at the animal. This angered the dog's owner, Mehtab to the extent that he shot Afaq.
