Man hacked to death outside booth during polling in WB

A 55-year-old daily wage labourer, claimed to be a Congress activist, was hacked to death outside a polling booth in Murshidabad Lok Sabha seat, a senior official at the Election Commission said.

The Congress alleged that it was the handiwork of the Trinamool Congress but the ruling party denied the charge.

Three other persons were also injured in the incident, sources in the CEO's office said in Kolkata.

Police sources here said Tiyarul Sheikh went to vote at the booth under Bhagwangola police station limits when a group of men attacked him with sharp weapons following an altercation.

"One Tiyarul Sheikh met with sharp cut injuries when two groups clashed with bamboo and pelted stones at each other outside a booth at Bhagwangola in Murshidabad Lok Sabha constituency. He was later declared dead," state CEO Ariz Aftab said in Kolkata.

His daughter Hira Bibi lodged an FIR naming six persons for the killing, the CEO said.

Though the political affiliation of the accused was not mentioned in the FIR, Sheikh's son Mehtab Hossain told reporters that TMC activists were behind the crime.

Hossain also said his father was a daily wage labourer and not associated with any political party.

Asked whether this could be described as poll-related violence, the CEO said, "The incident happened outside a booth and we are trying to find out what actually happened. We are trying to find out whether or not the people involved in the incident have political identity. The FIR did not describe the incident as poll-related violence."



So far three persons were arrested, Aftab said.

The EC sought a report from the Murshidabad district magistrate, the source at the CEO's office said.

Congress candidate of Murshidabad Lok Sabha seat, Abu Hena, claimed, "Tiyarul was our party worker. TMC goons killed him when he went to cast his vote. The TMC men were indulged in malpractices inside the booth when Tiyarul reached there. There was an altercation between them following which he was attacked."



Abu Taher Khan, TMC candidate of the constituency, "I am shocked at the incident. Our party is not involved in it. Even his family member has not mentioned anything of that sort in the FIR. However, I want proper investigation into the matter."Khan claimed that three of his party activists were injured in the attack and are undergoing treatment at a hospital.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
