Bilkis Bano: Supreme Court orders compensation; Fight was never about revenge, it was for justice, says Bilkis

Bilkis Bano

CJI Ranjan Gogoi

fundamental rights

National Human Rights Commission

SC to Guj govt: Rs 50 lakh, job, and house for, who was gangraped and her family massacred during the 2002 riots.For the media-shy and unlettered Bilkis Bano, the fight was never about revenge. “It was a fight for justice,” says the 35-year-old whose gang rape and family’s massacre during the 2002 communal riots in Gujarat had shaken the country’s collective conscience.Justice was delivered on Tuesday when the Supreme Court directed the Gujarat government to pay her Rs 50 lakh as compensation—as against the state’s offer of Rs 5 lakh—a government job and accommodation at a place of her choice. After Bilkis’ lawyer said she was living a nomadic life and was dependent on the charity of people, a bench ofand Justices Deepak Gupta and Sanjiv Khanna said: “In today’s world, money is the best healer. We are not sure if it can heal her, but what else can we do for her? …Ask for whatever compensation you want and we will pass orders accordingly.”Bilkis said the SC’s order established her contention that the 2002 riots were afailure of the state. “Policemen in uniform are not individuals but are State representatives. My case is about an abysmal failure of the State in protecting its citizens. It is the violation of myembedded in the Constitution,” she told Mirror soon after the judgment was out. “The SC has reaffirmed my faith in the judiciary and democracy. It has now been clearly established that the state is accountable for the 2002 riots.”She alleged that in the past 17 years, she was forced to change her home 20 times. She is now back in her village in Dahod. “I have been threatened and several attempts were made to lure me, but I never gave in. There was constant pressure and I was singled out.”She credits her army of supporters-—family, friends, activists, her community and even the CBI—for seeing her through her ordeal. “They stood by me through thick and thin. I am already too busy with five children. So, I have not thought about a government job,” she said.Gagan Sethi of Janvikas, an Ahmedabad-based organisation that helped Bilkis fight the legal battle, Vadodara activist Yusufbhai Sheikh, Delhi-based writer Farah Naqvi lauded the CBI’s “excellent” investigation as well. “This is Bilkis’ victory. She never avoided the media but did not run to the media for everything either,” said Sethi. He also credited the efforts of former Gujarat DGP PGJ Nampoothiri, who was the emissary of theduring the Gujarat riots that monitored the aftermath of the tragedy, and retired police officer Vivek Dube, who headed the investigation into the case. “They did an excellent job which made our primary case very solid.”Naqvi said despite her travails, Bilkis’s faith in Constitution never shook. “It is a big day for the rights of all citizens.” She said the case will serve as a precedent for all victims of State violence and conspiracies.Yakub, Bilkis’ husband, said his faith in the judiciary, too, has been reaffirmed. “My family went through a very difficult time. We had to keep moving to protect ourselves. There was a constant threat to our lives.”A19-year-old Bilkis was five months pregnant with her second child when she was gang-raped by a mob, which also killed 14 members of her community and extended family, including her mother, two-year-old daughter Saleha and a cousin, at Randhikpur village near Dahod on March 3, 2002. “I have had nightmares every night since that day; I see uniformed policemen all around in them. I see Saleha being smashed [against the wall] and killed. I don’t know if my nightmares will ever stop,” said a traumatised Bilkis. Saleha’s body was never found.The daughter she was pregnant with, Shamima, is now 17 years old and studies in Std XI. “I want to educate her more,” said Bilkis. Shamima, shy like her mother, wants to become a lawyer, ateacher or an activist to help people.On January 21, 2008, a special court convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment 11 men for raping Bilkis and murdering seven of her family members, but acquitted five policemen-—Narpat Singh, Idris Abdul Saiyed, Bhikabhai Patel, Ramsingh Bhabhor and Ramanbhai Bhagora—and doctorcouple Arun Kumar Prasad and Sangeeta Kumar Prasad. “The five policemen claimed in court that I was not gangraped because four months later, I gave birth. I am illiterate but I knew they were doing injustice to me. The government-appointed doctors tampered with the evidence,” said Bilkis.Her first ray of hope came on May 4, 2017, the Bombay High Court convicted the five policemen and the doctors under sections 218 (framing incorrect record or writing with the intent to save aperson from punishment or a property from forfeiture) and 201(tampering with evidence) of the IPC.On July 10, 2017, the SC dismissed the appeals of two doctors and four policemen, including an IPS officer RS Bhagora, challenging their conviction by the HC, saying there was “clear-cut evidence” against them. One of the officers did not appeal.The convicts had challenged the order on three grounds—that all evidence was fabricated by CBI; that Bilkis gave birth after the incident, and therefore she could not have been gangraped; and the failure to find the bodies of some of her family members that proved that they were not killed.Bhagora has been demoted by two ranks and the three policemen, who retired from service, have not been granted pension as disciplinary action following conviction by the Bombay HC in 2017.The CBI also filed an appeal in the HC seeking death penalty for three of the convicted persons on the grounds that they were the main perpetrators.
