64% polling amid reports of violence; man hacked to death in WB

NL Correspondent

Bengaluru/Ahmedabad, Apr 23

Third phase of the mammoth general elections recorded 64.66 per cent voting, the Election Commission said on Tuesday evening.

As many as 117 constituencies across 13 states and two union territories voted on Tuesday amid reports of violence and EVM malfunctioning from some parts of the country.

According to the latest data available from the Election Commission, an estimated 61 per cent polling was recorded in Odisha, 78.97 per cent in West Bengal, 71.47 per cent in Assam, 54.91 per cent in Bihar and 77.28 per cent in Tripura. There were reports of violence, hurling of crude bombs, intimidation and EVM failure in the state. A 52-year-old man claimed to be a Congress worker was hacked to death outside a booth during polling in Bengal’s Murshidabad Lok Sabha constituency, a senior state police officer said.

In the third phase of the general elections, polling is being held across six Lok Sabha seats in Odisha, four constituencies in Assam, five seats each in Bihar and West Bengal and a lone constituency in Tripura. The polling process was also briefly hampered with reports of EVM malfunctioning in some states, and the arrest of two polling agents of the ruling BJP in Tripura, an election official said.

Bombs were reportedly hurled outside a booth in Balurghat seat of West Bengal, leading to commotion, he said, adding, central forces also allegedly lathicharged a mob in Suti area of Jangipur.

Among the prominent candidates in the fray in Odisha are BJP national spokesperson Sambit Patra and Odisha Pradesh Congress Committee President Niranjan Patnaik, while in Bihar, Loktantrik Janata Dal (LJD) chief Sharad Yadav and state minister Dinesh Chandra Yadav are contesting the polls.

The electoral battle in West Bengal for the third phase is between sitting MPs and TMC candidates Arpita Ghosh from Balurghat and Mausam Benazir Noor from Maldaha Uttar, and Congress leader Pranab Mukherjee’s son Abhijit from Jangipur and BJP’s Humayun Kabir.

In Assam, noteworthy among those in the fray are two sitting MPs AIUDF chief Badruddin Ajmal in Dhubri and Independent Naba Sarania in Kokrajhar – BPF candidate and state social welfare minister Pramila Rani from Kokrajhar and Congress MLA Abdul Khaleque from Barpeta.

The solitary East Tripura Lok Sabha seat is witnessing a contest between BJP candidate Rebati Mohan Tripura, sitting MP Jitendra Chowdhury of the CPI(M) and Pragya Dev Burman of the Congress.

Gujarat recorded an average 70.90 per cent voting in two Lok Sabha seats in Goa by 5 pm, election authorities said Tuesday evening. Chhattisgarh recorded 64.68 per cent voting till 5 pm.

An estimated 60.42 per cent voter turnout was reported tentatively in 14 Lok Sabha constituencies of Karnataka until 5 pm.

A provisional voter turnout of 73.06 per cent was recorded Tuesday in the elections to the 20 Lok Sabha seats in Kerala which by and large was peaceful.

Maharashtra’s 14 constituencies that voted recorded an average 57.01 per cent turnout by 5 pm.

Uttar Prdesh recorded 60.52 per cent turnout in the third phase of polling for 10 seats, Chief Electoral Officer said.

Kerala

An estimated 73.06 per cent of the 2.61 crore voters cast their franchise as of 6 pm when the polling time officially ended but this was likely to go up when the final figures are tabulated, official sources said.

It was a do-or-die battle for both the ruling CPI (M)-led LDF and opposition Congress-headed UDF in most of the 20 Lok Sabha seats this time in the state, known for its decades-long bipolar politics.

The BJP-led NDA posed a formidable challenge to the two traditional fronts in at least three constituencies-Thiruvananthapuram, Pathanamthitta and Thrissur.

A senior election official told a newswire agency that since there were a large number of people standing in queues in some places, they would be allowed to vote.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi, who contested from Wayanad in addition to Amethi in Uttar Pradesh, his party colleague Shashi Tharoor, BJP leader Kumanam Rajasekharan (both Thiruvananthapuram) and Union Minister Alphons Kannamthanam (Ernakulam) were among the prominent candidates in the fray.

Kannur Lok Sabha constituency recorded the highest voting percentage of 78.16 per cent at 6 pm while Ponnani recorded the lowest 68.31, according to preliminary Election Commission figures.

The hilly Wayanad recorded a voting percentage of 76.21 per cent.

Thiruvananthapuram, where Tharoor is locked in a fierce triangular battle involving Rajasekharan and CPI’s C Divakaran, registered 70.86 per cent polling.

Pathanamthitta, where the Sabarimala Lord Ayyappa temple is located and witnessed to volatile protests against the state government’s decision to implement the September 28 verdict permitting women of all age groups into the shrine, recorded 71.39 per cent.

Two elderly persons collapsed and died while waiting to cast their votes in polling booths at Vadakara and Pathnamthitta constituencies, while another person, who returned home after voting, complained of uneasiness and died shortly thereafter, police said.

A 21-year-old man was arrested after his complaint of EVM malfunction in a booth where he cast his vote in the Lok Sabha elections here Tuesday turned out to be false, police said.

In the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, the UDF had won 12 seats and LDF 8.

A total of 2.61 voters have to chose from 227 candidates, including 23 women, who are in fray in the state.

The strength of first time voters in Kerala is 2.88 lakh in the age group of 18-19.

West Bengal

A man believed to be a Congress worker was killed and two other persons were also wounded at a polling booth in Murshidabad in an attack that the Congress blamed on workers of the ruling Trinamool Congress.

“One person was killed in poll violence in Murshidabad,” ADG (Law and Order) Siddihathnath Gupta told.

The victim, identified as Tiyarul Sheikh, went to vote at a booth in Baligram Primary School under Bhagwangola police station limits when a group of men attacked him with sharp weapons following an altercation, police sources said.

When taken to hospital, he was declared brought dead.

“Two other persons were also injured in the attack.

They were admitted to hospital,” the sources said.

The Election Commission sought a report from the Murshidabad district magistrate, a senior official said.

Congress candidate of Murshidabad Lok Sabha seat, Abu Hena, claimed: “Tiyarul was our party worker. TMC goons killed him when he went to cast his vote. The TMC men were indulged in malpractices inside the booth when Tiyarul reached there. There was an altercation between them following which he was attacked”.

Meanwhile, Chief Minister and Trinamool Congress supremo Mamata Banerjee accused the central force personnel of influencing the electorate to vote for the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and said an “official complaint” has been lodged with the EC against the offenders.

Addressing an election meeting at Arambagh, Hooghly district, Banerjee alleged that the central force personnel tried to influence voters after entering two polling booths under the Malda South constituency.

Some unidentified bike-borne miscreants hurled crude bombs outside polling stations at Tiktikipara in Domkal, Murshidadbad, and Kaliachawk in Malda South. Both Domkal and Kaliachawk are known for their history of political violence.

In Domkal, a Trinamool Congress councillor’s husband was also allegedly beaten up by Congress-backed goons.

In South Dinajpur district, a BJP leader sustained serious injuries when he was attacked with a sharp weapon allegedly by Trinamool backed goons at Tapan, while the saffron outfit’s Balurghat candidate Sukanta Majumdar was threatened. In Kusmandi area, Trinamool activists allegedly thrashed BJP supporters.

A former Trinamool lawmaker Mahmuda Begum was seen intimidating police personnel for heavy security deployment at a booth in Balurghat’s Kumarganj.

Opposition parties-the Congress and the CPI-M-alleged that Trinamool supporters threatened their agents and voters in many booths in Murshidabad’s Bhagobangola and Jalangi areas.

Aerial firing by miscreants purportedly owing allegiance to the Trinamool to threaten Opposition agents was also reported in Murshidabad’s Kumripur.

Faulty Electronic Voting Machines stalled voting in a few polling stations in Malda North seat.

A total of 80,23,846 people will vote in 8,528 polling stations to decide the fate of 61 candidates, six of whom are women.

A total of 324 companies of Central Force personnel have been deployed in the state, covering over 92 per cent of the polling stations across the five constituencies.

The deployment has been highest in Murshidabad district (96 per cent) followed by Malda (91.4 per cent).

The Balurghat seat is witnessing an intense battle between outgoing Trinamool MP Arpita Ghosh, BJP’s Sukanta Majumdar and Ranen Barman of the Revolutionary Socialist Party (RSP), a constituent of the Left Front.

In Jangipur, former President Pranab Mukherjee’s son Abhijit Mukherjee of the Congress faces a tough battle as he seeks a hat-trick of wins from the constituency, which sent his father to Parliament twice.

In the multi-cornered battle for the seat, the TMC has fielded Khalilur Rahaman against the CPI-M’s Zulfiqar Ali and the BJP’s Mafuja Khatun, the party’s only Muslim woman candidate in this election.

The tussle in Malda North is between cousins Isha Khan Choudhury of the Congress and incumbent MP Mausam Noor, who won on a Congress ticket in 2014 but defected to the Trinamool in January.

The BJP candidate from Malda North is another turncoat, Khagen Murmu, who crossed over from the CPI-M. The party has nominated Biswanath Ghosh.

In Malda South, Congress veteran and outgoing MP Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury, Isha Khan Choudhury’s father, is up against Trinamool’s Md Moazzem Hossain and BJP’s Sreerupa Mitra Choudhury. The CPI-M has not fielded a candidate here and is supporting Abu Hasem.

In 2014, the Congress bagged Malda North, Malda South and Jangipur constituencies, while the Trinamool won Balurghat and the CPI-M got Murshidabad.

The subsequent phases of the polls will be held on April 29, May 6, May 12 and May 19. Votes will be counted on May 23.

Karnataka

An estimated 60.42 per cent voter turnout was reported tentatively in 14 Lok Sabha constituencies of Karnataka, for which polls were held in the second phase Tuesday, with the Congress-JD(S) alliance and BJP locked in a fierce contest.

Shimoga,where state BJP chief and former Chief Minister B S Yeddyurappa’s son B Y Raghavendra is pittedagainst another former Chief Minister S Bangarappa’s son Madhu, recorded the highest turnout of about 68.39 per cent, poll officials said.

The lowest was reported in Raichur with 51.75 per cent, they said, giving the polling percentage till 5 PM, which is expected to go up further in the final tally.

In Gulbarga, a key constituency where Congress leader in Lok Sabha Mallikarjun Kharge is pitted against Umesh Jadhav of BJP, 52.18 per cent voting has taken place so far.

Uttara Kannada, where Union Minister Ananth Kumar Hegde is locking horns with Anand Asnotikar of JD(S), reported 65.58 per cent turnout, while Bijapur, where another union Minister Ramesh Jigajinagi is contesting against Sunitha Devanand Chavan, a political greenhorn, recorded 53.85 per cent.

Voting took place in 28,022 polling stations in the second phase that are mostly in the northern part of the state, covering the entire Hyderabad-Karnataka and Mumbai-Karnataka regions, as also a couple of central districts and coastal Uttara Kannada.

The BJP, which has a considerable presence in the region, aims to improve its tally, banking on the “Modi wave” and the support of the dominant Lingayat community, considered its vote base.

For the Congress-JD(S) alliance, it is a high stakes battle as their performance is likely to have a bearing on the coalition government in the state.

As Congress sought votes hoping to cash in on the alleged anti-incumbency against sitting BJP MPs and policies of the Modi government, BJP raised the Lingayat issue intending to further consolidate votes of the community, which is already considered as its strong vote base.

BJP accused the Congress of trying to divide the community for political gains, pointing at the grand old party’s support for demand to accord religious minority status to Lingayats.

Then Congress government’s decision to recommend the status to Lingayat community is said to be one of the reasons for the party’s debacle in the May 2018 assembly polls and BJP aimed to capitalise on it, using the issue once again.

Of the 14 constituencies that went to polls in the second phase, BJP is contesting all the seats.

Congress and JD(S) have fielded their candidates in 12 and two constituencies respectively under their seat sharing arrangement.

While the Congress currently has its hold on only four of the 14 seats that went to the polls, BJP has its sitting MPs in 10 seats.

For veteran Congress leader Kharge, a nine-time MLA and two-term Lok Sabha member, who has never tasted electoral defeat, this poll is said to be a tough battle in Gulbarga against Jadhav, who quit as rebel Congress MLA and joined BJP.

In Belgaum, where Congress is hit by dissidence with rebel MLA Ramesh Jarkiholi hinting about quitting the grand old party, 58.72 per cent polling was registered till 5 PM.

Jarkiholi, against whom the Congress has moved a disqualification petition to the Speaker, according to reports, had asked his followers to favour BJP during the polls.

He had also stayed away from campaigning and Rahul Gandhi’s events in the district recently.

Officials said Chikkodi recorded 64.59 per cent, Bagalkot 63.78per cent, Bidar 56.90, Koppal 60.66, in mine rich Bellary 61.83 per cent, Haveri 63.22 per cent, Dharwad 61.95 per cent and Davangere 66.38 per cent.

As many as 2,43,03,279 voters were eligible to choose from among 237 candidates in the fray in the second phase.

Among the 237 candidates, 227 are men and 10 women.

Belgaum, with 57, has the maximum number of candidates, while Raichur, with five, has the lowest in the second as well as the first phase.

In the first phase on April 18, 14 constituencies in the southern part of the state covering old Mysuru region and a couple of coastal districts had gone to the polls, recording an overall voter turnout of 68.81 per cent.

Chhattisgarh

Elections for seven seats in Chhattisgarh were largely peaceful. Although it started sluggishly, voting picked up as the day wore on.

“An estimated 64.68 per cent voting has been recorded till 5 pm. The final turnout figure may go up as we are still compiling the data,” the official said.

Queues of voters were seen at several booths even after the 5 pm deadline in the Lok Sabha constituencies covered under the third and last phase of polling: Raipur, Durg, Bilaspur, Korba, Janjgir-Champa (SC), Surguja (ST) and Raigarh (ST).

The turnout was 55.29 per cent till 3 pm, up from 30 per cent till noon and 12 per cent till 9:30 am, the official said.

Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel, BJP leader and Rajya Sabha MP Ramvichar Netam and former Assembly speaker Gaurishankar Agrawal, among other prominent leaders, cast their votes in the state.

In many places, newly married couples, in wedding attire, reached polling booths to exercise their franchise, the poll official said.

As many as 123 candidates are in the fray in the seven seats where the main fight is between the ruling Congress and the BJP, which lost power in last year’s state polls.

Altogether 1,27,13,816 voters-64,16,252 men, 62,96,992 women and 572 members of the third gender -were eligible to exercise their franchise in the seven seats, where a total 15,408 polling booths were set up, the official said.

Raipur and Bilaspur seats have the maximum number of candidates (25 each) followed by Durg-21, Jangir-Champa-15, Raigarh-14, Korba-13 and Surguja-10.

Around 60,000 security personnel consisting of state and paramilitary forces were deployed for smooth conduct of voting.

No major incident of violence was reported from anywhere in the constituencies that voted in the third phase.

Chhattisgarh has a total of 11 Lok Sabha seats.

In the 2004, 2009 and 2014 Lok Sabha polls held after the formation of Chhattisgarh in November 2000, the BJP won 10 of the 11 seats every time.

This time, the Congress, buoyed by its victory in the Assembly elections last year, is hoping to improve its tally in the state.

Voting for the 11 Lok Sabha seats in the state was scheduled in three phases.

The Naxal-hit Bastar (ST) constituency went to the polls in the first phase on April 11, while voting in three other seats-Rajanandgaon, Kanker (ST) and Mahasamund -was held in the second phase on April 18.

Gujarat

The polling across 1,652 polling stations began at 7 am and will continue till 6 pm.

According to data released by the Chief Electoral Officer, North Goa Lok Sabha constituency witnessed 72.97 per cent turnout by 5 pm, while in South Goa, the polling percentage was 68.90.

The state is also having by-elections to three Assembly constituencies.

Mapusa Assembly constituency registered 75.17 per cent polling till 5 pm, Shiroda 75.72 per cent and Mandrem 75.99 per cent.

Maharashtra

Maharashtra’s Kolhapur Lok Sabha constituency recorded 65.70 per cent voting till 5 pm, followed by Hatkanangale at 64.79 per cent, according to the state election office.

The voting figures in other constituencies at 5 pm were as follows: Jalgaon 52.28 per cent, Raver 56.98 per cent, Jalna 59.92 per cent, Aurangabad 58.52 per cent, Raigad 56.14 per cent, Pune 43.63 per cent, Baramati 55.84 per cent, Ahmednagar 57.75 per cent, Madha 56.41 per cent, Sangli 59.39 per cent, Satara 55.40 per cent and Ratnagiri-Sindhudurg 57.63 per cent.

State BJP president Raosaheb Danve (Jalna) and NCP chief Sharad Pawar’s daughter Supriya Sule (Baramati) are among the prominent candidates in the fray. Agencies
