Bilkis Bano: Supreme Court order Gujarat government to pay Rs 50 lakh as compensation

Bilkis Bano

Ranjan Gogoi

democracy

Vadodara

Farah Naqvi

For the media-shy and unlettered Bilkis Bano, the fight was never about revenge. “It was a fight for justice,” says the 35-year old whose gang rape and family’s massacre during the 2002 communal riots in Gujarat had shaken the country’s collective conscience.Justice was delivered on Tuesday when the Supreme Court directed the Gujarat government to pay her Rs 50 lakh as compensation—as against the state’s offer of Rs 5 lakh—a government job and accommodation at a place of her choice. After Bilkis’s lawyer said she was living a nomadic life and was dependent on the charity of people, a bench of CJIand Justices Deepak Gupta and Sanjiv Khanna said: “In today’s world, money is the best healer. We are not sure if it can heal her, but what else can we do for her? …Ask for whatever compensation you want and we will pass orders accordingly.”Bilkis said the SC’s order established her contention that the 2002 riots were a failure of the state. “Policemen in uniform are not individuals but are State representatives. My case is about an abysmal failure of the State in protecting its citizens. It is the violation of my fundamental rights embedded in the Constitution,” she told Mirror soon after the judgment was out. “The SC has reaffirmed my faith in the judiciary and. It has now been clearly established that the state is accountable for the 2002 riots.”She alleged that in the past 17 years, she was forced to change her home 20 times. She is now back in her village in Dahod. “I have been threatened and several attempts were made to lure me, but I never gave in. There was constant pressure and I was singled out.”She credits her army of supporters-—family, friends, activists, her community and even the CBI—for seeing her through her ordeal. “They stood by me through thick and thin. I am already too busy with five children. So, I have not thought about a government job,” she said.Gagan Sethi of Janvikas, an Ahmedabad-based organisation that helped Bilkis fight the legal battle,activist Yusufbhai Sheikh, Delhibased writerlauded the CBI’s “excellent” investigation as well. “This is Bilkis’ victory. She never avoided the media but did not run to the media for everything either,” said Sethi. He also credited the efforts of former Gujarat DGP PGJ Nampoothiri, who was the emissary of the National Human Rights Commission during the Gujarat riots that monitored the aftermath of the tragedy, and retired police officer Vivek Dube, who headed the investigation into the case. “They did an excellent job which made our primary case very solid.”Naqvi said despite her travails, Bilkis’s faith in Constitution never shook. “It is a big day for the rights of all citizens.” She said the case will serve as a precedent for all victims of State violence and conspiracies.Yakub, Bilkis’ husband, said his faith in the judiciary, too, has been reaffirmed. “My family went through a very difficult time. We had to keep moving to protect ourselves. There was a constant threat to our lives.”A19-year-old Bilkis was five months pregnant with her second child when she was gang-raped by a mob, which also killed 14 members of her community and extended family, including her mother, two-year-old daughter Saleha and a cousin, at Randhikpur village near Dahod on March 3, 2002. “I have had nightmares every night since that day; I see uniformed policemen all around in them. I see Saleha being smashed [against the wall] and killed. I don’t know if my nightmares will ever stop,” said a traumatised Bilkis. Saleha’s body was never found.The daughter she was pregnant with, Shamima, is now 17 years old and studies in Std XI. “I want to educate her more,” said Bilkis. Shamima, shy like her mother, wants to become a lawyer, a teacher or an activist to help people.On January 21, 2008, a special court convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment 11 men for raping Bilkis and murdering seven of her family members, but acquitted five policemen-—Narpat Singh, Idris Abdul Saiyed, Bhikabhai Patel, Ramsingh Bhabhor and Ramanbhai Bhagora—and doctor-couple Arun Kumar Prasad and Sangeeta Kumar Prasad. “The five policemen claimed in court that I was not gang-raped because four months later, I gave birth. I am illiterate but I knew they were doing injustice to me. The government-appointed doctors tampered with the evidence,” said Bilkis.Her first ray of hope came on May 4, 2017, the Bombay High Court convicted the five policemen and the doctors under sections 218 (framing incorrect record or writing with the intent to save a person from punishment or a property from forfeiture) and 201 (tampering with evidence) of the IPC.
