Muslim youth brutally tortured by cops ahead of his wedding; two personnel suspended

Bengaluru, Apr 24: The family of a Muslim youth, is battling kidney complications after brutal custodial torture by the police, has demanded strict action against the accused. They allege that constable Ayyappa flagged down Mohammed Tanveer, 23, and his friend Danish on the night of April 9 near Lavanya Bakery at M.M. Layout for a traffic violation.

Both men were taken to the police station where Tanveer was allegedly beaten with lathis for many hours before being released the next day. The family alleged that Tanveer’s kidneys had been damaged because of the brutality of the beating and that he has to undergo dialysis.

On Sunday, the DJ Halli police booked an FIR against Ayyappa who had allegedly assaulted Tanveer during the initial confrontation and at the station, and sub-inspector Santosh. They have been charged under Sections 323 (punishment for voluntarily causing hurt), 324 (voluntarily causing hurt with a dangerous weapon), 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace) and 149 (unlawful assembly) of the the Indian Penal Code. Before the FIR was registered, the duo was suspended following an inquiry by the police commissioner.

At a press conference on Tuesday, the victim’s brother Mohammed Musaveer said that the police had been charged under bailable offences. “Such inhumane acts must be taken seriously. My brother is fighting for his life in the hospital because of them. The police must receive a punishment that is in accordance with their crime,” he said.

Tanveer had been stopped by the police for talking on his phone while riding his bike.

According to Musaveer, he and Danish were going to a drug store to buy medicines for his neighbour’s father. He was taken to the police station along with Danish where he was allegedly stripped, assaulted, abused physically and verbally, and humiliated. He fell unconscious in the police cell.

The police booked a petty case against Tanveer and allegedly made him apologise for his actions. He had to allegedly write “I’ll not do this mistake again” a hundred times in Kannada. His family allege that the police made Danish slap him.

His family had to seek the help of a social worker to secure his release.

When he was brought home, he started complaining of stomach pain, which did not subside even after two days. When it became unbearable, he was admitted to a private hospital where he is now being treated for kidney complications.

The family has also approached the Karnataka State Human Rights Commission seeking action against the police and suitable compensation for Tanveer so that he can lead a normal life. “He was scheduled to get married on May 3, but because of his condition, it has been postponed,” Musaveer added.
