Is killing, pelleting, suppressing Kashmiris the only way to look at Kashmir?

Is killing, pelleting, suppressing Kashmiris the only way to look at Kashmir?

To

Mr Narendra Modi,

Prime Minister of India

Dear Modiji,

Kashmir as a political dispute has remained in news from the day one when your goodself assumed the chair of Prime Ministership. It is the highest executive position that few chosen ones have the privilege of assuming charge. The position is accompanied by a number of responsibilities and expectations. Kashmiris too had their set of expectations from your goodself. Despite the fact that in Jammu region, BJP campaigned for the elections on the plank and issue of abrogation of Article 370, decimating the resistance leadership of Hurriyat and annihilating the insurgency. In Kashmir, the political parties that participate in elections rendered the masses fearful by invoking the anxiety that 'if they are not voted to power, the communal and fascist BJP will snatch their rights and special status guaranteed by the constitution'. The result was that in Valley the mandate got divided while in Jammu and Ladakh, BJP appeared triumphant. Overall the electoral results resulted in a fractured mandate. Acknowledging the fractured mandate, Peoples Democratic Party (PDP), then led by Mufti Muhammad Sayeed aligned himself with BJP at the cost of his political future and voters. This coalition was described as the unity of north and south pole.

So as happens with antagonistic and hostile ideologies the coalition witnessed hiccups from the day one. The voters particularly in South Kashmir that is the bastion of PDP, were resentful of the coalition particularly the voters of Jamaat-e-Islami who support PDP candidates in some constituencies. The coalition may have stabilised but the death of chief minister Mufti Sayeed on January 7, 2016 put everything out of gear. The resentment against the coalition was depicting on ground so it took Mehbooba Mufti, daughter of deceased Mufti Sayeed few months to assume charge. She may not have taken that step but the internal rebellion from her party coerced her for the same.

Then came July 8, 2016 when the poster boy of post militancy phase Burhan Wani and his two associates were killed. The killing and the subsequent mass repression using the brutal state machinery against the unarmed civilian protesters changed the perception to reality among youth, that Indian army and Kashmir police are occupational forces not our own because they behave and operate like one. Hundreds were killed, thousands injured as pellet guns (banned for the use even on animals) created havoc and thousands were illegally detained, tortured, maimed and also booked under the draconian laws like Public Safety Act (PSA) that Amnesty has described as "Lawless Law".

Mehbooba Mufti instead of trying to rein in the security forces and assuming the role of a 'mother' retrograded to filicide. To add insult to injury she provoked youth further and justified their killings with the sacrcastic rebuke "were they out buying milk and toffees?". She failed to understand this fact that army and police are being witnessed as enemies by common Kashmiris. The vicious cycle of civilian killings and protesters continued during 2016. The roots of the current rage in youth can be traced to these events of 2016 as the state oppression left an indelible mark on the minds and souls of youth. The year 2018 started with the rape and murder of Kathua girl by the Hindu goons to terrorize the Muslim nomad community in the area. Your party leaders of BJP openly supported the rapists and murderers by participating in various rallies. Even Jammu Bar Association is communalized as they tried to block the filing of charge-sheet against the accused in the court. The resentment against your coalition partner PDP and Mehbooba Mufti was growing but she continued with the coalition and suppressing the civilians in the Valley.

Then on June 19, 2018 all of a sudden BJP announced its exit from the coalition. PDP was shell shocked. PDP and Mehbooba had two occasions when she could have called off the coalition as cited above but she continued only to be betrayed in the end. The betrayal has cost PDP and Mehbooba dearly. PDP is now balkanized as most of her ministers and supporters have left her. It sent a clear message that BJP which represented India cannot be trusted again. On the collective memory of Kashmiris another stab of distrust has been imposed by India. Unlike, Atal Bihari Vajaypee, Narendra Modi proved a complete opposite and your image as a Muslim basher, murdered and killer of Gujarat got reinforced again in the minds of youth and masses.

The Doval doctrine that your government upholds believes that by suppressing and killing the Kashmiris, the resistance movement in Kashmir will be over. You had wrongly assumed that the massive suppression and oppression of the state will kill the political aspirations of Kashmirirs. Further your goodself had presumed that Congress had indulged in Muslim appeasement in Kashmir too, so an Iron first policy will decimate the resistance. Instead of decimating the resistance, it has further strengthened, radicalized and armed it. By discrediting Hurriyat leadership and imprisoning them by using NIA as a tool, has paved way for the elements like ISIS to take root in Kashmir. If there is no Hurriyat with whom are you supposed to talk? Your goodself must be happy and elated because ISIS will help you legitimize the annihilation of Kashmiris. It will win you world sympathy as your government will be contributing to the global war on terror. If you continue to choke the space of dissent, criticism and non-violent political resistance then armed and violent means will only be left for youth. That will serve your state discourse.

I am aware that your policy makers, military and security establishment have developed vested economic interests in Kashmir conflict. Billions of rupees are pumped for anti insurgency operations and I firmly believe that if insurgency is absent the state will create and invent one. But in this process, the youth and civilians of my state as being consumed as cannon fodder. Do the military, police and para military forces have to behave essentially as an occupational army even against the civilians? Is there always a need to raze down the house where insurgents are holed up? For how many hours can insurgents fight? How many magazines, bullets and hand grenades does an insurgent carry? How much time will it take to exhaust them? Can't they be made to surrender and encounters prolonged? Instead of using heavy weapons, different gases can be used to make them unconscious rather than kill them and damage the property? Or is it just because each killing offers money in millions and promotions to army and police that they surely have to be eliminated?

Mr Prime Minister you must remember that with each killing you not only alienate the family of the insurgent or civilian victims, but the destruction of the private property alienates the family too. Also your goodself must remember this fact that it takes three generations to forget and come out from the feelings of revenge, resentment and anger. So each destruction and killing is alienating and radicalizing the next three generations. Further every police station and army camp has been turned into a torture centre where youth are humiliated, tortured and illegally detained. So this cycle of death has to stop. Further each lynching of an Indian Muslim, reinforces the fact among Kashmiris that their future is not safe with India.

Also, the process of abrogating the already eroded special status of Kashmir, through judicial process is further helping deepen the resentment against India. Instead steps should be taken to restore the original sanctity and dignity of Article 370. I would like to end my letter by quoting historian Kalhana who in his magnum opus Rajtarangni stated, "Kashmiris can never be conquered by military power but only through spiritual forces".

Regards

Mushtaq Ul Haq Ahmad Sikander

(M.H.A.Sikander is Author-Activist based in Srinagar, Kashmir and can be reached at sikandarmushtaq@ gmail.com)
