Chennai photographer arrested for allegedly harassing Russian model in the city

Chennai photographer arrested for allegedly harassing Russian model in the city

The 30-year-old Russian, a model and an aspiring actor, came to Chennai a few months ago looking for work opportunities.

news Sexual Harassment

The Cyber Crime Wing of the Central Crime Branch on Tuesday arrested 26-year-old Rupesh Kumar, model and photographer, on charges of sexually harassing a Russian woman in the city. Rupesh also runs an advertising agency in Chennai.

According to reports, the 30-year-old Russian, a model and an aspiring actor, came to Chennai a few months ago looking for work opportunities. Rupesh befriended the woman and allegedly began harassing her soon after, forcing her to have sexual relations with him.

A report in The Times of India states that in the guise of a photoshoot, Rupesh allegedly clicked inappropriate photos of her. When she turned down his repeated attempts for sexual favours, he allegedly used the photos he had clicked and threatened to post them on social media if she did not comply with his requests.

Following this, the woman lodged a complaint with the Police Commissioner by submitting a petition on April 14. The police then instructed the Cyber Crime Wing police to arrest Rupesh.

After being questioned, Rupesh was booked under Sections 354 (Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty), 506(i) (Punishment for criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code and 67 of the Information Technology Act (Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form) and Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act, and remanded to judicial custody.

In December last year, a 30-year-old man from Thanjavur was arrested by the South Goa police for sexually assaulting a foreigner in a beach in Goa. According to news reports, the 48-year-old woman was a tourist who used to visit Goa frequently. The South Goa SP told Times of India that CCTV footage from shops in the area near the spot of the crime helped them nab the accused.
