Rohit Shekhar Tiwari death: 'Wife Apoorva Shukla smothered him with pillow, destroyed evidence in 90 minutes'

Rohit Shekhar Tiwari, son of former UP CM ND Tiwari, was murdered by his wife, Delhi Police said

New Delhi: In a shocking twist to the murder case of Rohit Shekhar Tiwari, the Delhi Police on Wednesday arrested his wife, Apoorva Shukla Tiwari. Rohit, who was the son of former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister ND Tiwari, was found dead under mysterious circumstances on April 16 but the autopsy report later confirmed that he was smothered to death.

Police said that Apoorva had strangled her husband and choked him to death with a pillow, following a heated row. The cops stated that after committing the crime Apoorva also destroyed all the evidence in the room and that the entire sequence of event happened within one-and-a-half hours.

Apoorva, a practicing Supreme Court lawyer, was being interrogated by the police for the last three days. During the investigation, she confessed to her crime and revealed that Apoorva and Rohit had a “turbulent marriage” and had frequent fights, the Delhi police said.

"On the night of the incident, the couple had a fight over a relative. Rohit had been drinking all the way from Uttarakhand to Delhi and was not in a condition to resist. During the fight, she pounced on him and smothered him," Rajeev Ranjan, additional commissioner (Crime), told reporters.

The senior police official said that as per initial probe, it did not seem that the murder was planned. "The background was there that they had a turbulent marriage and Rohit Shekhar and his family were thinking of separation. After interrogation, it was found that Apoorva Shukla Tiwari and Rohit had a turbulent marriage. All her hopes with the marriage were belied,” he said.

Apoorva killed Rohit Shekhar in his room at around 1 am, the police officer said, adding, “She later destroyed the evidence. All this happened within one-and-a-half hours. "

Earlier, Rohit's mother Ujjwala had claimed that Apoorva wanted to acquire the property of her two sons - Rohit and Siddharth. She had said, "Apoorva and her family wanted to usurp the property of my sons- Rohit and Siddharth because the property was close to the Supreme Court where Apoorva does her practice."

On April 16, a servant found Rohit unconscious in his room with a nosebleed. He was rushed to Max Hospital but was declared brought dead. Rohit Shekhar Tiwari had successfully fought a six-year-long legal battle to prove that he was the son of ND Tiwari, a senior Congress leader and former chief minister of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand.
