Jammu and Kashmir: 69 terrorists killed this year, including 25 from JeM

KJS Dhillon, GOC 15 Corps: We have targeted Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) leadership, the situation now is that no one is… https://t.co/uJRM5RKwkB — ANI (@ANI) 1556104027000

SSP Baramulla, Abdul Qayoom: His name is Mohammad Waqar, a resident of Mohalla Miana, Mianwali, Punjab, Pakistan. H… https://t.co/HWA3cbvXeF — ANI (@ANI) 1556105253000

(With agency inputs)

This year 69 terrorists killed including 25 from JeM: Security forces

NEW DELHI: Sixty-nine terrorists have been killed and 12 have been apprehended in Jammu and Kashmir by the security forces, this year, according to KJS Dhillon, GOC 15 Corps.DG Jammu and Kashmir Dilbagh Singh , IG Kashmir SP Pani, GOC KJS Dhillon, IG CRPF Zulfikar Hasan held a joint press conference in Srinagar on Wednesday and said that the law and order situation has improved in the state.Dhillon said that post the Pulwama terror attack, 41 terrorists have been killed, out of which 25 belonged to Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) and 13 of them were Pakistanis.He added that the operations against the terrorists will continue with full vigour and that they will not let terrorism rise. "We have targeted the JeM leadership. The situation now is that no one is coming forward to take over the leadership of JeM in the valley. Even after Pakistan 's best efforts, we will continue to suppress JeM, specially after Pulwama," he said.The Jammu and Kashmir DGP said that the recruitment of local youth continues to be low which is a healthy sign. "272 terrorists were eliminated in the state during 2018 and a large number were apprehended," he said.During the press conference, the SSP Baramulla said one terrorist Mohammad Waqar, a Pakistani was arrested from Sopore. "He came to India in July 2017 by crossing the border and was operating in Srinagar for over a year. His plan was to resurrect terrorism in Baramulla," he added.On February 14 this year, 40 CRPF personnel were killed in a JeM-orchestrated terror attack in South Kashmir's Pulwama district The incident took place when a CRPF convoy, consisting of around 2,500 personnel, was attacked by a suicide bomber who rammed a car laden with explosives into one of the buses on the Jammu-Srinagar highway.
