Pak terrorist arrested, was operating in Srinagar to revive militancy in Baramulla: SSP

SSP Baramulla, Jammu and Kashmir Abdul Qayoom on Wednesday said that Mohammad Waqas, a Pak national has been arrested. Waqas was held by security forces in Pattan area of north Kashmir’s Baramulla district on Monday.

A resident of Mohalla Miana, Mianwali in Punjab, Pakistan, Waqas came to India in July 2017 by crossing the border and was operating in Srinagar for over a year.

"His plan was to resurrect militancy in Baramulla," the official added.

Meanwhile, Lt Gen Kanwal Jeet Singh Dhillon, General Officer Commanding (GOC) of the Srinagar-based 15 Corps, earlier in the day, briefed the media and stated that the Indian forces have "targeted Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) leadership".

SSP Baramulla, Abdul Qayoom: His name is Mohammad Waqar, a resident of Mohalla Miana, Mianwali, Punjab, Pakistan. He came here in July 2017 by crossing the border, he was operating in Srinagar for over a year. His plan was to resurrect militancy in Baramulla. pic.twitter.com/BWUEkdQj50 — ANI (@ANI) April 24, 2019 ×

"The situation now is that no one is coming forward to take over the leadership of JeM in the valley. Even after Pakistan's best efforts, we will continue to suppress JeM, especially after Pulwama," he said.

KJS Dhillon, GOC 15 Corps: Total 69 terrorists have been killed and 12 have been apprehended this year. Post Pulwama 41 terrorists have been killed and out of them 25 belonged to Jaish-e-Mohammed, 13 of them were Pakistanis. pic.twitter.com/IYkBLXs1TR — ANI (@ANI) April 24, 2019 ×

Dhillon informed that as many as 69 terrorists have been killed and 12 have been apprehended this year. "Post Pulwama 41 terrorists have been killed and out of them 25 belonged to Jaish-e-Mohammed, 13 of them were Pakistanis," he added.

"Operations against the terrorists will continue with full vigour and we will not let terrorism rise up," the top official said.

On February 14 this year, over 40 CRPF personnel were killed in a JeM-orchestrated terror attack in South Kashmir's Pulwama district.

The incident took place when a CRPF convoy, consisting of around 2,500 personnel, was attacked by a suicide bomber who rammed a car laden with explosives into one of the buses on the Jammu-Srinagar highway.
