Sri Lanka attack: Suicide bomber studied and lived in Britain, minister reveals

Sri Lanka: Bomber identified as Abdul Lathief Jameel Mohamed

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Police have identified eight of the nine suicide-bombers who carried out the horrific attacks against hotels and churches on Easter Sunday. One of them is believed to have spent almost one year in south-east England, according to Ruwan Wijewardene, Sri Lanka’s Deputy Defence Minister. He said: “We believe one of the suicide bombers studied in the UK and then, later on, did his postgraduate in Australia, before coming back to settle in Sri Lanka.”

Mr Wijewardene didn’t name the suspect, but security sources said he was in Britain between 2006 and 2007. The Deputy Defence Minister added one of the suicide bombers was a woman. Speaking in the country’s capital city, Colombo, Mr Wijewardene also said most of the attackers are believed to be “well-educated, come from middle or upper-middle class” and “financially quite independent”. “Some held law degrees,” he added. READ MORE: Sri Lanka attacks: Inside bomb factory responsible for Easter Sunday massacre - PICTURED

Ruwan Wijewardene, Sri Lanka’s Deputy Defence Minister, said one of the attackers studied in the UK

Among the bombers identified by police is millionaire businessman Inshaf Ahmed Ibrahim, who owned the factory Colossus where investigators believe the bombs may have been made. Ibrahim planned an attack with his brother, Ilham, and destroyed the Shangri-La and Cinnamon Grand hotels in two separate attacks. Later on Sunday, Ibrahim’s wife Fatima also blew herself up with her unborn child and her three young sons as police tried to raid her family home, Indian intelligence sources have told Indian news website Firstpost. Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe said Islamic State (ISIS) may be linked to the blasts, but the terrorist group hasn’t provided evidence it was actually connected to the massacre.
