Gaya police in Bihar book three Buddhist monks for sexually assaulting minor girl

Gaya SSP Rajeev Mishra | Photo Credit: ANI

Patna: Bihar police have registered a first information report (FIR) against three members of the Buddhist-Thai Bharat Society for sexually assaulting a minor girl multiple times since January of this year. While confirming the same, senior superintendent of police (SSP), Gaya, Rajeev Mishra said that a case has been registered and the minor girl has been sent for medical examination pending further inquiry into the matter.

The matter came to light when a social worker filed a petition in this regard in a local court. On the basis of her petition, the court instructed Gaya police to lodge an FIR and launch a probe into the allegations. Those booked have been identified as monks, AC Lama, Rataneshwar Chakma, and Chhota Bhante.

#Bihar: FIR was registered under relevant sections of IPC,POCSO Act&SC/ST Act on Apr 18, against 3 persons of Buddhist-Thai Bharat Society for allegedly sexually molesting a minor girl since Jan.SSP Gaya says,"Case registered. The minor girl has been sent for medical examination" pic.twitter.com/ZgYXiZPdND — ANI (@ANI) April 24, 2019

According to a report by news agency ANI, the minor girl's statement was recorded before a judicial magistrate on Tuesday under section 164 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC). Police officials probing the matter told Hindustan Times that the accused monks, who have been living in Bodh Gaya for the past several years, have now gone into hiding and extensive efforts are underway to trace them.

It was also brought to the attention of the police by the petitioner that the monks visited the girl's home outside of Bodh Gaya several times since January and paid her parents money to buy their silence. A senior official probing the matter has said that the inquiry will be expedited once the girl's medical reports confirm the allegations. Meanwhile, the social activist who filed the petition prompting the investigation said that the girl's parents are monetarily weak and cannot afford a good prosecution but have the support of social workers and NGOs. No comment has been issued concerning the matter by the Buddhist-Thai Bharat Society as of yet. More details in this regard are awaited.
