Bangalore crime news: ‘Sadist’ classmate attacks dental student at his house

Matters had gone so bad that the principal had intervened and told the both of them to make peace

sadist

Angry that his classmate had complained against him, the accused barged into the student’s house and beat him up

The victim, who was left with bruises all over his body, filed a complaint with the cops

Indian Penal Code

Both accused and victim are Iranians, studying dental surgery at a city collegeA 22-year-old foreign national from Iran, who is pursuing his Bachelor of Dental Surgery from a city-based college, was assaulted at his flat on Shampura Main Road in DJ Halli police limits. Behshad Yadollahi was attacked by his classmate, who also is from Iran, and four associates, all of who are foreigners.Yadollahi has stated in his complaint that his classmate, Farhad, would always insult him on the college premises and the matter had reached the college principal. The principal is said to have intervened and asked the two persons to settle the issue.Farhad is said to have been furious that the matter had reached the principal and so he and his friends barged into Yadollahi’s flat last week and beat him up, using chains. The victim has filed a police complaint and the accused have managed to obtain anticipatory bail.Yadollahi stays in an upscale apartment on the Shampura Main Road and is in the final year of his degree. He came to India on a student visa around four years back.“Farhad is aand keeps insulting me for no rhyme or reason. Unable to bear the insults, I reported the matter to the college principal who had persuaded us to reach a compromise. But he continued with his antics and finally displayed violent behaviour by getting his friends and beating me inside my flat. There are witnesses and other evidence to the incident. After the incident, Farhad has stopped coming to the college to evade arrest,” Yadollahi told BM.The gang is alleged to have ransacked the victim’s house and also destroyed furniture and other valuable items. Since the other residents witnessed the assault, the matter was reported to the police. By the time the police arrived, the accused escaped. The victim was later taken to the hospital where he was treated as an out patient. There are bruises all over his body.“After the complaint was filed, the complainant’s classmate obtained anticipatory bail. He and four others were involved in the attack. But the victim knows the identity only of Farhad. We have found out that both the parties have decided to settle the issue again. We have asked both the parties to give consent in this regard and give their statements. Since the case has been registered, they have to resolve the matter in the court,” said an officer.The police have registered a case of causing hurt (IPC 323), house trespass (IPC 448), intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace (IPC 504), criminal intimidation (IPC 506) along with other sections of theThe DJ Halli police have registered a case.
