Telangana Intermediate results: 19 students commit suicide

HYDERABAD: Three more Intermediate students, including two girls , committed suicide reportedly due to failure in their exams across Telangana over the past 24 hours. With this, the number of students, who committed suicide since the past few days, has gone up to 19. This is among the highest number of suicides recorded post Inter results, in the state, over the last four years.Rights activists alleged that due to negligence of the officials who released the Intermediate results in a hurried manner and without proper checks, students were either committing suicide or slipping into depression.In 2018, six student suicides were reported after the results were announced. While there were no such suicides in 2015 and 2016, one Intermediate first-year student killed himself by jumping in front of a train in 2017.Also, unlike other years, when most of these cases were recorded within the first two to three days of the results being announced, this year, there have been suicides through the week. Intermediate results in Telangana were announced on April 18.On Tuesday late afternoon, a 17-year-old girl, S Jyothi, set herself ablaze at her home at Tirumalpur under Shadbad police limits while her parents were away.A student of commerce-economics-civics (CEC) at the Vivekananda Junior College, Jyothi failed in second year civics paper. “While neighbours, on hearing her screams, rushed to her rescue and tried to douse the fire, she had already suffered 80 per cent burns by then. She died by the time they could shift her to the hospital,” said M Ravi Kumar, sub inspector, Shadbad police station. Though Jyothi, daughter of an agriculturist, did not leave any suicide note, cops suspect she committed suicide because of failing in her exam.In another case reported from Bommalaramaram police station limits, a 19-year-old second-year Intermediate student, Mithi, who had failed in physics and zoology, hanged herself at her house late on Tuesday night. “She took the extreme step after her parents went to sleep. They noticed it only on Wednesday morning,” said K Venkatesh, sub inspector, Bommalaramaram police station.In the third case of suicide, an 18-year-old boy, C Raju, who failed in economics and civics papers, was found hanging from a tree on a school premises in Madur village under Shankarampet police station in Medak district. Cops said Raju’s family members found him missing from home when they woke up on Wednesday morning. During a search, along with locals, they found him hanging from a tree inside the school, located 200 metres from his residence.Alarmed at the spate of suicides, especially this year, teachers said there was an immediate need to reduce the pressure that is being mounted on students from various quarters. “Majority student suicides reported in the last many years is due to immense pressure put on them by college managements, especially corporate colleges, and parents. The race to secure better ranks and marks burdens the average student who is forced to match up to the standards of high-performing students,” said Madhusudan Reddy, president of the Telangana Government Junior Lecturers Association, adding how even the grading system has failed to take the pressure off students as thought.
