Christian Michel complains to UN, alleges torture by India

Michel was arrested by ED on December 22 last year after his extradition from Dubai | Photo from ANI

Indian agencies have refused to accept allegations made in a plea before the United Nations saying that Christian Michel is being ill-treated by Indian authorities and his arrest is unlawful.

Michel, who was extradited from Dubai on December 4 last year, according to the petition, is being tortured and ill-treated by the Indian investigative agencies, who are probing his role in the AgustaWestland bribery case.

The lawyer of Christian Michel, who is presently lodged in Delhi's Tihar Jail, has filed a complaint before the United Nations against India and UAE demanding his immediate release.

The plea has been filed in London by the Guernica 37 International Justice Chambers with the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention and the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The plea alleges that Christian Michel was unlawfully extradited to India by the UAE authorities, which violates the international rules for extradition.

The plea also alleges that Michel has been kept in a dreadful condition in Tihar and was forced by the Indian investigative agencies to give a scripted statement as the case is "politically motivated.

However, sources have told India Today TV that Michel was extradited to India and a legal process was followed at every step. Michel fled India in 2013, after which probe agencies approached Interpol and requested that a Red Corner Notice be issued against him.

His lawyers claim before the UN statutory bodies is false because Interpol had vetted all the documents and only then issued an RCN. His extradition trial in UAE went for two years, a top government official told India Today TV.

The officer said that once Michel was extradited to India, he had access to his lawyers and officials of British High Commission. Even his close aide and lawyer, Rosemary Patricia was allowed to meet him.

Refuting the allegations, sources in the Tihar Jail told India Today TV, that as alleged in the plea Michel has not been kept with 45 inmates but in solitary confinement because of security risk. He has also been granted permission to make international calls to his family members.

Case against Christian Michel

Christian Michel is one of the three alleged middlemen being probed by the Enforcement Directorate (ED) and the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) - the others being Guido Haschke, former consultant for the Finmeccanica group, and Carlo Gerosa, an Italian and Swiss national, believed to be a main player in the bribery scam. Michel was arrested by the ED on December 22.

In a chargesheet filed against Christian Michel in June 2016, the ED alleged that he received 30 million (about Rs 225 crore) from AgustaWestland.

The CBI alleged in its chargesheet that there was an estimated loss of 398.21 million (about Rs 2,666 crore) to the exchequer in the deal that was signed on February 8, 2010, for the supply of VVIP helicopters worth 556.262 million.
