Deforestation: Villagers firebomb elephants driven into the path of humans

Distressing photos show how a village turned on an elephant and her calf in remote India, hurling firebombs and rocks at the confused pair.

An elephant and her calf have been brutally attacked by a group of angry villagers in a remote Indian town this week.

The mother and infant were attempting to cross a road in a village in Bishnupur, when a group of men approached them with flaming torches and firebombs.

Heartbreaking photos, captured by Biplab Hazra, show the terrified pair run from the men as the firebombs were hurled at them.

The confused elephants run from villagers hurling firebombs at them.

It comes as confused animals, with no place to call home following deforestation, wander onto crops in search of food and shelter.

A report by Caters news claimed the angry mob turned on the family to stop them from “damaging their crops and property”.

But the vile attack, captured by photographer Biplab Hazra, has enraged people around the world, sparking calls for the abolishment of deforestation.

The terrified elephants were chased away by locals using firebombs. Picture: Caters

Mr Hazra told news outlet Caters that deforestation across India has caused many animals to encroach on human habitats in search of food and shelter.

These displaced animals often end up wandering through villages or across crop fields, trying to find a place to call home.

In response, villagers have begun using extreme tactics to drive them away from their homes and save their livelihoods.

“This happens because the villagers have to save their crops,” Mr Hazra told Caters.

“There are many elephant corridors in human habitations. I’m trying to show this and spread my photos to increase public awareness on the matter.”

A group of men chase away a herd of wild elephants with flaming torches.

Mr Hazra’s photographs then show the mother elephant and her calf escaping to a nearby railway line that had been built straight through their habitat.

A mother elephant and her calf try to navigate the railway tracks constructed through their habitat.

The attack has enraged online communities, with many taking to social media to condemn the heartless attack.

Others called on authorities to arrest and charge the men responsible for the attack.

Some sympathised with the villagers for protecting their livelihoods, but could not condone violence against the innocent animals.
