Man held for threat e-mails to CM Arvind Kejriwal's daughter

A 24-year-old man, arrested for allegedly sending e-mails to Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal's office threatening to abduct his daughter, wanted to draw the attention of a high-profile person in order to get better treatment for his psychiatric issues, police said on Tuesday.

The man was arrested from Rae Bareli in Uttar Pradesh on Tuesday. Police said that the man had gone for treatment at Safdarjung Hospital and was not satisfied with the treatment following which he wanted to draw the attention of a high-profile person in order to get better treatment.

The accused, Vikas Rai, a resident of Samastipur in Bihar, was preparing for the SSC CGL exams in the national capital, they said, adding that he had been staying in Delhi for over a year now. After sending the e-mails, Rai had left for his sister's place at Rae Bareli in Uttar Pradesh. The police traced him and asked him to join the investigation.

"On January 9, the Chief Minister Office had received an anonymous e-mail allegedly threatening to abduct his daughter, which was forwarded to Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik. Following the incident, the man was traced in Rae Bareli in Uttar Pradesh and the man was asked to join the investigation," said a senior police officer.

Police said that Rai was arrested after they took permission from the court since the FIR was registered for non-cognisable offences.

"During interrogation, Rai revealed that he had some neurological problem following which he had gone to Safdarjung Hospital. However, after the scans, doctors declared him fit and asked him to live a healthy life. Meanwhile he felt he needed better treatment facilities and the doctors could have done better," said the officer.

The police have seized the phone he allegedly used to send the e-mail. Further details are awaited as his questioning is underway.

Police had provided a Protective Service Officer for Kejriwal's daughter's security by the North district police following the threat.

Rai had sent three e-mails from his ID. The first one threatened to abduct the chief minister's daughter, the second one said the first e-mail was not fake, while the third one said it was a fake e-mail and should not be taken seriously, the officer said.

Rai was traced with the help of Google, which searched for the IP address from which the e-mail was sent.

The accused used to stay with his maternal aunt at Pul Prahladpur in the national capital. His family has also told the police that he was "mentally disturbed".

"He has said that he did not have any intention to harm Kejriwal's daughter and it seems so till now. So far, we have not found any previous criminal record in his name. We are probing further and examining all the aspects," the officer said.

Rai's father works in Mumbai, while his mother stays in Bihar.

IP ADDRESS TRACED

Vikas Rai had sent three e-mails from his ID. The first one threatened to abduct the chief minister’s daughter, the second one said the first e-mail was not fake.

While the third one said it was a fake e-mail and should not be taken seriously. Rai was traced with the help of Google, which searched for the IP address from which the e-mail was sent.
