DSP rank officer arrested for kidnapping and robbing lawyer, arrested in Satara

The accused police officer Abhijeet Patil was posted as sub-divisional police officer in Phaltan. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: The Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) of the Maharashtra police has arrested a police officer of the rank of deputy superintendent for allegedly kidnapping and demanding a bribe from a lawyer in Satara district.

The accused police officer, Abhijeet Patil, posted as sub-divisional police officer in Phaltan, assaulted the lawyer Rajkumar Chavan after he came to know that the lawyer secretly was recording their conversation.

According to a report in Times of India, The matter relates to a case of cheating Patil was investigating. The police officer had offered to mediate in the case where the lawyer Chavan was representing three victims of the fraud.

The victims, who were involved in making gold coins, had invested Rs 1.25 crore with a couple, who duped the businessmen. The victims then lodged a police complaint with Khandala police in Satara in January this year.

Acting on behalf of the alleged cheaters, Abhijeet Patil called the lawyer to say that the couple was willing to pay Rs 1.1 cr amount as part of settlement. The accused officer handed over two demand drafts of Rs 8 lakh each to the lawyer issued by the couple, but demanded a bribe for further cheques and demand drafts in future.

Later, the lawyer contacted the Anti-Corruption Bureau and lodged a complaint against the police officer. The ACB laid a trap on April 17 when Chavan was scheduled to meet Patil. The ACB pinned a digital recorder pinned to Chavan’s shirt and also sent a witness to accompany him.

Patil called Chavan into his official police van and asked the witness to stand away. The police officer asked Chavan to get Rs 1.75 lakh in 15 minutes. In the meanwhile, ACB was listening the conversation between Chavan and Abhijeet. When Chavan reappeared, Patil the lawyer away to Phaltan, 8 km from the actual place.

The police officer became suspicious and searched the lawyer and took away his cell phone. He also found the pinned digital recorder from Chavan’s shirt. Angry, the police officer slapped Chavan and checked his phone calls and text messages. Patil also destroyed the phone. Later, he dumped the lawyer on the spot, but he was rescued by ACB officials tailing him. Patil was later arrested by ACB officials and recovered damaged phone and torn cheques.
