Asaram Bapu son Narayan Sai held guilty of rape, sentencing on April 30

A court in Gujarat's Surat pronounced Asaram Bapu son Narayan Sai guilty in a rape case. He was arrested in December 2013 from Haryana’s Pipli village following the rape allegations.

File photo of Narayan Sai, son of self-styled godman Asaram who was accused of rape by two sisters in Gujarat's Surat district.

Self-styled godman Asaram Narayan Sai on Friday was convicted by a local court in Gujarat’s Surat city in rape case charges. Narayan Sai was arrested in December 2013 from Haryana’s Pipli village near Kurukshetra after 2 victims had levelled rape allegations against him and his father Asaram. According to the reports, one woman had accused Narayan Sai of repeated sexual assaults, when she was living in Asaram’s Surat ashram between 2002 and 2005.

The other victim had levelled the same charges against his father Asaram. Making allegations, she had said that she was raped while she was living in outskirts of Ahmedabad at Bapu’s ashram between 1997 and 2006.

The sentence of punishment for Narayan Sai will be announced on April 30, 2019, said reports.

Gujarat: Narayan Sai, son of Asaram found guilty in a rape case, by Surat Sessions Court. Sentence to be pronounced on April 30 (file pic) pic.twitter.com/zKLosJBOoG — ANI (@ANI) April 26, 2019

The two sisters had lodged separate complaints against Sai and Asaram for allegedly raping them, after which, Police had booked Asaram and his son Narayan Sai on charges of rape, sexual assault, illegal confinement and other offences.

Hearing the matter, the court had produced more than 50 witnesses against Narayan Sai in the case, prompting him to go underground when the case was registered.

Narayan Sai was accused of trying to bribe jail officials. Reportedly, Narayan Sai had offered Rs 13 crore to the police officers, but he managed to get a bail in the bribery case.

Timeline of the rape case against Narayan Sai:

The sexual assault case was registered in Jahangirpura police station against Narayan Sai on October 6, 2013. Along with the self-styled godman, his four other aides were also booked in the case. On October 9, 2013, the victim was deposed before the judge under CRPC section 164. A few days later, police raided Asaram’s Ahmedabad ashram in search of Narayan Sai and his aids. On November 16, 2013, when all of them were absconding, police announced a cash prize of Rs 5 lakh over information on Narayan Sai and Rs 1 lakh on aides Hanuman and Jamuna

On November 21, 2013, the court cancelled Narayan Sai’s anticipatory bail plea and he was arrested on December 4 from Punjab-Haryana border.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
