Ghaziabad: Private school teacher accused of sexually assaulting minor; parents association extends support

And after the incident came to light, they posted the video statements of the girl’s mother on social media, along with her complaint and the private doctor’s medical report. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Ghaziabad: In a case reported from Ghaziabad district of Uttar Pradesh, parents of a three-year-old girl accused a woman teacher of a private school of sexually assaulting their child. The local police have registered a non-cognisable report under the Indian Penal Code section for voluntarily causing hurt.

The survivor's mother mentioned that the incident happened on April 24. It came to light when their daughter, an LKG student, complained of pain in her private parts after she returned from school. According to a report in the Hindustan Times (HT), the mother mentioned, the girls started her school two weeks ago and her class teacher was rude and the teacher used to often take her clothes off and beat her up.

She further told HT that an injury around her private parts was seen after she returned from the school and the medical report stated mild redness to the body. Her child is in a state of shock and fears of going to school, she added. Shlok Kumar, superintendent of police (city) told HT that they have registered a report for voluntarily causing hurt and a medical examination of the child was also done.

They are investigating the case and if it reveals anything else that happened, they will add more sections to the FIR. Meanwhile, the members of the parents association have extended support to the family. And after the incident came to light, they posted the video statements of the girl’s mother on social media, along with her complaint and the private doctor’s medical report.

To which, Kumar told HT that it is a clear violation of the Supreme Court orders and they will be taking legal action against people who posted the video and complaints on social media. However, the spokesperson of the association told HT that they will take down the complaint and the survivor's identity from social media accounts.
