Congress spreads lies, I too was accused of many things: PM Modi on Sadhvi Pragya's candidature

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday defended 2008 Malegaon blast accused Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur's candidature in the 2019 Lok Sabha election, saying he too was accused of "many things" when he was the Gujarat chief minister.

PM Modi, in an interview to Aaj Tak, accused the Congress of "running a modus operandi" to spread lies about others.

When the prime minister was asked about fielding a terror accused (Sadhvi Pragya) in the Lok Sabha elections despite saying that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has zero tolerance on terror, PM Modi accused the Congress of spreading lies.

"Congress follows a procedure to spread lies and accuses others without any proofs and substance in their accusations," he said.

He said, "I have been accused of many things. If you search social media, you would find lakhs of pages against me. As an effect, even the United States of America denied me a Visa. When the truth was revealed, the US itself sent me an invitation."

"So, Congress has been running a modus operandi to spread lies and the habit does not go."

IT RUINS LIVES: PM MODI

"Recently, Kapil Sibal organised a press conference against the Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) in the United Kingdom. Congress has spread lies on demonetization too. They released a video of someone on demonetisation. That was modus operandi. It levelled accusations without any proof. It ruins lives," PM Modi said.

PM Modi said that he "suffered a lot" in Gujarat when he was the state's chief minister. "They approached the court against Sadhvi Pragya and the court said that she can contest the Lok Sabha election."

"Congress maligned the country's image by coining the term Hindu terrorism. It [Congress's allegations and accusations] should be challenged from the front. They called me a chowkidar and I took the challenge to shut them up," the prime minister said.

Meanwhile, responding to the PM's comments, Sadhvi Pragya said that both PM Modi and she had been "tortured" at the hands of the Congress.

In an exclusive interview to India Today TV, Sadhvi Pragya said, "Congress is responsible for the injustice perpetrated against me and PM Modi. When Narendra Modi was Gujarat's chief minister, Congress accused him of various crimes but he was later proved innocent. In the same way, Congress has tortured me for nine years. Both Modiji and I have been tortured."

Intensifying her attack on the Congress, Sadhvi Pragya said that both Narendra Modi and she are the "symbols of how Congress has tortured and oppressed people".

"They [Congress] have always crushed patriots and branded them as terrorists. This is why the public will oppose them [in the 2019 Lok Sabha election]," Sadhvi Pragya said.

Also Read | Rigid poll rules have taken the festivity away from elections: PM Modi
