‘Salute’ Yasin Malik for choosing death over bowing before Delhi: Farooq Abdullah; PDP calls him ‘hypocrite'

National Conference (NC) leaders Farooq Abdullah and Omar Abdullah | Photo Credit: IANS

Srinagar: National Conference president Farooq Abdullah saluted Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) chairman Yasin Malik for “choosing death over bowing before New Delhi”.

Addressing an election rally in Kulgam district Abdullah congratulated Malik for his strong willpower and praised his unwillingness to sell self-respect of Kashmiris.

Reacting to Farooq’s statement Mehbooba Mufti's Peoples Democratic Party said that it was Farooq who forced youngsters like Yasin Malik to pick up the gun.

Peoples’ Conference Chairman Sajad Gani Lone also called out the "hypocrisy" of former Jammu and Kashmir CM and blamed him for torturing Yasin Malik and putting a bounty on his head.

Taking to his Twitter handle Lone tweeted: “Dr Farooq congratulating Yasin Malik for his sacrifice after Delhi imprisoned him. Dr Farooq did U not arrest him and torture him post 1987. Did u not put a bounty on his head post 1987And y doesn’t ur son go on hunger strike. Y should other people’s sons sacrifice their lives.”

In 1987 Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly election various anti-establishment outfits including Jamaat-e-Islami joined hands to form a Muslim United Front (MUF), the main opposition to the National Conference and Congress. The 1987 election was a watershed moment in the history of the state that led to widespread discontent and social unrest.

In 1987 rigged elections Yasin Malik was polling agent of MUF Candidate Muhammad Yousuf Shah when Dr Farooq Abdullah ordered Police to arrest ,torture him. Let’s not forget that Dr Farooq Abdullah forced youngsters like Yasin Malik to pick up the gun. pic.twitter.com/UrIY15X9jO — Tahir Syeed (@TahirsyeedK) April 26, 2019

Malik’s Islamic Students League had joined the MUF but never contested as the outfit did not believe in the constitution. The group, however, campaigned for the MUF in all the constituencies of Srinagar. After the 1987 polls, Malik was arrested with no charges pressed and no trial.

After his release and subsequent training in PoK camps, Malik became a hardened terrorist.

In 2014, Mohammad Yousuf Bhat, a longtime associate of Abdullah, accused the National Conference patron of turning Kashmir into hell and forcing the youths to pick up arms.

He also claimed that Farooq Abdulla was defeated by MUF candidate Abdul Khaliq Sofi in 1987 elections by a huge margin and added that the only thing which matters to him is to maintain his family’s power and position in the political landscape of the state.

Dr Farooq congratulating Yasin Malik for his sacrifice after Delhi imprisoned him. DrFarooq did U not arrest him and torture him post 1987. Did u not put a bounty on his head post 1987And y doesn’t ur son go on hunger strike. Y should other people’s sons sacrifice their lives. pic.twitter.com/PhEZz4GX27 — Sajad Lone (@sajadlone) April 26, 2019

Speaking to the local media, Lone blasted Abdullah for 1987 election rigging and for the rise of militancy in the valley as the youths had lost faith and now preferred bullet over the ballot.

The Narendra Modi-led BJP government launched a massive crackdown against JKLF and Jamaat-e-Islami Jammu & Kashmir and declared it an unlawful association under the provisions of Section 3 (1) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 after the ghastly Pulwama attack in which 44 CRPF jawans lost their lives.

So far, 16 JKLF leaders and activists have been arrested from different parts of the valley

The Centre’s ‘Zero Tolerance Policy’ against terrorism has received support from the people while the political parties in the valley have opposed the move.
