Cop who tried to foil trap booked in bribery case

In a cat-and-mouse chase similar to one in a Bollywood thriller, the Anti-Corruption Bureau’s (ACB’s) Pune unit was left baffled when Abhijit Patil, a deputy superintendent of police (DySP) from Satara district, around 65 km from Pune, not only abducted a complainant but even allegedly destroyed evidence in a bribery case. ACB had laid a trap to nab Patil on April 18 for his alleged demand of a bribe of Rs 2.50 lakh from a lawyer. The agency is now evaluating Patil’s wealth to also book the officer for his alleged disproportionate assets. Patil, a 2011 batch DySP in Maharashtra Police, had taken over the charge of DySP of Phaltan in Satara district in July 2018.A routine trap by ACB took a dramatic turn, with Patil trying to sabotage the trap, leading to his arrest in hot pursuit.More importantly, DySP Patil was on duty, in his uniform and carrying his official weapon, when he tried to sabotage the trap. He was supposed to go for a bandobast to Koregaon Bhima on the same day.Elaborating on the incident, ACB superintendent Sandeep Diwan told Mirror, “We laid a trap to arrest Patil where he had decided to meet the complainant. The ACB team was waiting 2 km away from the spot. The complainant first went to meet Patil and negotiate the amount to Rs 1.75 lakh. Our team deputed for the mission was hearing the conversation through a digital recorder attached on the complainant’s belt. While the complainant went back to get the sum, Patil, unfortunately, got a whiff of the trap.”Patil, whose office was just some 2 km away from the parked car of the ACB officials, is suspected to have sent his men to do a recce of the spot, or had informers who informed him about the presence of ACB officials there. When the complainant went to hand over the money, Patil asked him to step in his car and sped away.Diwan added, “He took the complainant in his official car with his guard and driver and stopped the vehicle near Fauji Hotel under the pretext of getting tea. He frisked the lawyer, snatched his mobile phone and checked his call register to see if there were any calls to ACB officials. Patil also removed the digital recorder from his belt, physically assaulted him by slapping him several times and left him mid-way. A few metres ahead, Patil also destroyed the mobile phone and dropped it in the bushes.”“This is probably the first case in the state where a government officer under a trap tried to not only foil the arrest but also kidnapped, robbed and destroyed evidence so audaciously,” he added.Following the statements of the police driver and guard given to ACB, the agency also recovered the broken mobile phone from the bushes. After allegedly destroying evidence and attacking the complainant, Patil went to Koregaon Bhima for his bandobast duty. However, ACB officials arrested the errant cop right from the bandobast spot.Patil, however, did not stop there. He allegedly complained of chest pain after his arrest and was admitted to a hospital in Satara, Patil’s shelter since past nine days.While conducting a search at Patil’s residence in Satara, ACB also came across a few properties at his native village, and recovered cars, jewellery and cash, all of which are under evaluation.According to the anti-corruption agency, Patil was asking for bribe from the complainant, a lawyer representing victims who were duped of Rs 1.25 crore, in a case registered at Khandala police station in January 2019.Patil, while making a settlement for the accused in the above case, had supposedly lured the lawyer, stating that the alleged fraudsters would pay Rs 1.1crore as settlement amount.He had also handed over two demand drafts of Rs 8 lakh each to the lawyer and demanded a bribe for handing over cheques of the remaining amount. ACB also recovered a torn demand draft from the official, which the complainant had given to him.ACB officials stated that Patil will also be booked under the disproportionate assets case after they finish the evaluation. ACB had booked him not only under the Prevention of Corruption Act, but also under sections 392, 365 and 201of the Indian Penal Code for robbery, abduction and destroying evidence.
