IT executive’s kidnap bid linked to fake call centre cash

Noida: The alleged abduction of an IT firm’s manager last week has been linked to running of sham call centres in Noida and a dispute over a share of $25,000.Paritosh Gaurav, a manager with Metro Info Solutions, was allegedly abducted at gunpoint by at least six assailants who barged into the Sector 63 office on the intervening night of April 18-19. The accused had allegedly pushed Paritosh into a car and fled the spot after asking the firm’s owner to hand over Rs 10 lakh if they wanted to see him alive. The gang had dumped Paritosh on a road in Delhi after being chased by a police team.On Friday, four of the accused — Arun Yadav (30), an MBA graduate, Surya Singh (22), Sunil Tanwar (22) and Vipin Bhati (29) — were arrested. Two cars — a Brezza (UP14DV5050) and a Skoda (DL8CNA4800) — that were used in the alleged abduction were also recovered. Police said they were looking for a few others in connection with the crime.Police said that Akash Srivastava, Paritosh’s colleague who had lodged a complaint after the latter’s abduction, had earlier worked for a bogus call centre owned by Delhi resident Sahil Verma. Sahil was arrested in October last year for allegedly cheating “hundreds of Canadians and citizens of other countries” through his call centre.“Arun, too, ran a call centre in the same building as Sahil. After Sahil’s arrest, Arun shut down his call centre and left without informing anybody,” said Dharmendra Sharma, in-charge of the Star I police team.Arun was then linked to a fake call centre in Kolkata, where the operators had asked him to arrange for a US-based account where money could be parked. Arun, in turn, contacted Akash, who got in touch with Scott — an agent in the US. “Arun deposited $25,000 in the US-based account. However, Akash did not return the money to Arun after deducting his share,” Sharma said. Police said Arun hired a few persons to abduct Akash. Instead, they abducted Paritosh and threatened Akash.
