Baba Ramdev Throws His Weight Behind Ravi Shankar Prasad

Patna: Baba Ramdev who does not mind blending his spiritual self to the political or business side of his personality when the situation demands, at a press conference in Patna on Friday, said that the result of this year's Lok Sabha election would determine the future of India for the next 20-25 years.

The yoga guru who was in Patna to lend support to the candidacy of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) nominee from Patna Saheb Ravi Shankar Prasad, said that it was a shame that some people were casting doubts on the character and integrity of the 'Chowkidar' who, he said, was pure in his heart.

Of course, Baba Ramdev was referring to Prime Minister Narendra Modi who has called himself the 'Chowkidar', or the sentry, of India.

Rhyming 'pure' with 'sure', the yoga expert, while talking to reporters at Nala Road, said that the PM's heart was pure and his re-election was a sure thing.

'Prime Minister Narendra Modi has raised the profile of India on the world stage. Every country is looking at India now. He has no agenda except the agenda of development. He doesn't have a family, or a wife, or any children. He works 18-20 hours a day to make the country stronger and prosperous and that is all he cares about. The opposition is taking help from foreign countries to remove Modi from power but if 2014 was the time of Modi wave, 2019 is the time of Modi tsunami," the Baba said amid applause from the audience.

Taking a shot at leftist candidate and former JNU students' union president Kanhaiya Kumar who is going against BJP's Giriraj Singh in Begusarai, Ramdev said that while Kumar was quite adept in hurling abuse, in the end it will be Giriraj Singh who will prevail.

On the issue of Pragya Thakur, the BJP candidate from Bhopal, Baba Ramdev said that she was a nationalist and had been implicated in a made-up case of terrorism.

"She was brutally tortured in the jail that led to cancer in her body. You have to understand her state of mind in order to understand why she said what she said about Maharashtra IPS Hemant Karkare," he said.

The yoga guru, who has had cordial relationship with Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) president Lalu Prasad Yadav in the past, avoided a question on whether Yadav was a victim of the NDA's politics of vendetta and if he believed he was being tortured in the prison as alleged by his family members.
