Made in Chelsea star Charlie Mills apologises for ‘tasteless’ rape joke

Made in Chelsea star Charlie Mills (Photo by David M. Benett/Dave Benett/Getty Images)

Made in Chelsea star Charlie Mills has apologised after making ‘tasteless’ rape joke while on a night out in London.

The 25-year-old uploaded a drunken video to his Instagram story, including himself and two friends. In the video he was in the back of a taxi with a female friend and British polo player Josh Cork. The clip sees the banking heir introduce Josh, followed by showing the young woman in their company.

While the camera panned on to her, Mills said: “This is our sexy b**ch who we are going to f****** rape tonight.”

Read more: Debut of new Made In Chelsea cast like ‘mating of the tigers in India’

The made in Chelsea star then uploaded a second video, in which he commented to the same female, who looked visibly uncomfortable: “What are you doing, you’re a s**t.”

LONDON, ENGLAND – JANUARY 31: Charlie Mills attends Bunga Bunga Covent Garden’s 1st birthday party on January 31, 2018 in London, England. (Photo by David M. Benett/Dave Benett/Getty Images)

After posting the video to his 37,000 Instagram followers, Mills was inundated by female charities blasting him for his inappropriate comments.

Mills has since spoken to The Sun, making a grovelling apology for the videos. He said: “I made a tasteless comment. What I said was unacceptable, and I sincerely apologise for the offence caused by my childish and insensitive remark.”

The former model has now deleted his Instagram account.

Read more: Spencer Matthews apologises after ‘wooden’ Good Morning Britain debut

Channel 4, who broadcast Made in Chelsea, have said socialite Mills will no longer be a part of the show after a series of concerning drunken incidents since joining the programme in 2017, including being arrested for suspicion of drink driving.





His ancestor founded a bank in the 1700s called Glyn Mills and Co, which has since been bought out by Royal Bank of Scotland, thought the company still trades in several businesses with offices in London and Nottinghamshire.

Made in Chelsea, or MIC as it is affectionately known by fans, started in 2011, chronicling the lives of the young and rich of the West London areas of Knightsbridge, Kings Road and Belgravia. The show is currently on it’s seventeenth series.
