Tortured, threatened and abused: TMC goons coerce Birbhum tribals not to vote for BJP - EXCLUSIVE

Voters in West Bengal's Birbhum district accuse TMC of threatening them not to vote for the BJP | Photo Credit: Times Now

Bibhum: With less than 48 hours left to go for the fourth phase of polling in Lok Sabha Elections 2019, Mamata Banerjee’s Trinamool Congress (TMC), which has often accused the BJP of tinkering with democratic institutions, was allegedly found abusing its power in order to influence tribal voters in the state.

A Times Now investigation uncovered a TMC ploy of coercion and intimidation of tribal electors in West Bengal’s Birbhum constituency in order to cement its position in the ongoing elections. TMC cadre threatened tribal voters in Bharatpur village, which lies under the Ilambazar police station, of consequences if they vote for the BJP.

The voters who spoke to Times Now said they were too scared to go to the police which have failed to provide them security against the threats. The intimidation isn't just limited to Bharatpur, similar instances were reported from Moralpur village as well which again is a tribal-dominated area. A BJP worker was threatened at gunpoint in nearby Parui.

Many such voters in these tribal-dominated areas were beaten and tortured allegedly by TMC workers after they had attended PM Narendra Modi's recent public meeting in Birbhum just two days back.

Villagers told the channel that people wearing masks and covered faces entered their village late last night and assaulted them. TMC goons threatened the people by going from village to village and telling them to vote for the TMC and not the BJP.

“TMC goons come at night and threaten us. They say you can't vote for BJP. They threaten,” one of the villagers said.

It is to be noted that the Indian Constitution makes special provisions for administration of the tribal-dominated areas in various states. A large section of population in Birbhum belongs to tribal communities of Santal, Munda, Kol, Ho, Oraon, Paharia, Mahali, Lohar among others.

The TMC-BJP rivalry in the state is not new. Several BJP workers have turned up dead in the state in the past year. Both the sides accuse each other of perpetrating violence against their cadre.
