BJD's Maharathy gets conditional bail in EC squad attack case

BHUBANESWAR: BJD’s candidate for Pipili assembly constituency and former minister Pradeep Maharathy , who was arrested in connection with the attack on election commission officials on April 22, got conditional bail from a special designated court dealing with election matters here on Saturday.Arup Chanda, lawyer of Maharathy, said the special court granted the bail to the BJD leader on three major conditions. “He shall appear before the investigating officers as and when required. He should refrain from tempering with evidences and not to terrorize the witnesses of the case. Violation of these conditions will lead to cancellation of the bail,” he added.He said Maharathy was charged with serious offences including 307 (attempt to murder), 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty), 147 (rioting), 148 (rioting, armed with deadly weapon) and other sections. Puri police on Monday arrested Maharathy for allegedly assaulting election commission flying squad magistrate Rabinarayan Patra and other members at the latter’s farm house in Pipili area of Puri district on Sunday night. Patra had alleged that the MLA candidate and his supporters had brutally assaulted him.Though the BJD man had applied for bail citing illness at the additional district and sessions court here on Monday, the judge had sent him to judicial custody at Jharpada special jail. He failed to cast his vote on Tuesday.Maharathy was admitted into Capital Hospital here for his treatment. He had denied his involvement in the attack on the election officials.According to the affidavit he submitted during the filing of nomination papers, he has declared five criminal cases pending against him. He was forced to resign from the ministry four months ago following his controversial remarks in favour of two brothers acquitted by a court in connection with the 2011-12 ‘rape and murder’ of a 19-year-old girl in Pipili. The MLA had hailed the acquittal.
