Builder’s mom and neighbour thrashed for objecting to a kitten being kicked

Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act

animal rights activists

Pedder Road

Clockwise from above left Maya Mohanani and Geeten Dudhani who were assaulted; Maya Mohanani’s son builder Vijay Mohanani managed to click a picture of one of the three assailants before they managed to run away. Police say investigation under way

Nisarg Heaven Co-operative Housing Society

Bombay Animal Rights

Vijay Mohanani says Gamdevi cops dithered over FIR and didn’t know aboutA top builder’s mother and her neighbour, both, were beaten up by three men onon Thursday evening after the woman confronted the trio for kicking a kitten.Maya Mohanani, 65, whose son Vijay Mohanani is a resident of Peddar road, sustained only minor injuries, but her neighbour Geeten Dudhani fractured his wrist and will undergo a surgery today.Though the assailants managed to escape when Vijay Mohanani rushed down from his apartment in Vimla Mahal after his mother called him, he managed to click a picture of one of the accused and also snatched his phone away.The Gamdevi police have shared the picture with other police stations in the city and are also checking the seized mobile phone for possible clues to the identities of the accused.Feeding cats and dogs is a perennial flashpoint in Mumbai between animal lovers and those who see strays as a nuisance. A 32-year old woman, who fed stray dogs in Vikhroli, was abused by an auto driver on September 25 last year. A case was registered at the Vikhroli police station and the accused was arrested. Earlier this month, the same woman was attacked and molested by three men at a construction site, where she was feeding dogs.In October 2017, two sisters were beaten up by members of their housing society in Dindoshi for feeding stray dogs. The police arrested three residents for molesting and assaulting the women.More recently, two members of a housing society in Kandivali were fined Rs 3.5 lakh by their housing society ---- for feeding stray dogs. During an annual general body meeting held in May last year, members of the housing society had decided to levy the fine to curb what they described as “stray dog menace.”Vijay Mohanani told Mumbai Mirror that he and his mother are part of a group calledthat feeds strays across the city. He said late on Thursday evening, his mother noticed a man kicking a kitten. When she objected, the man began arguing with her and pushed her. “Our neighbor Geeten Dudhani, who witnessed this, tried to intervene. This is when two more men joined the first one and assaulted Dudhani,” Mohanani said.When Mohanani rushed downstairs after receiving a call from his mother, the assailants tried to escape. Mohanani gave chase and managed to grab one of them. In the ensuing scuffle he managed to take the man’s phone away and click his picture. “All this happened between 8.30 pm and 9 pm. Pedder Road is full of cars and pedestrians around this time. But nobody stepped ahead to help my mom and Geetenbhai,” he said.Mohanani said that not only did the police arrive an hour after they were intimated about the clash, the officer-in-charge initially kept insisting on registering a non-cognisable offence. “The cops also had no idea about the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act,” Mohanani said.Sub-inspector Amit Shirvadkar, who is investigating the case, said: “The incident took place just a day ago. We are checking CCTV footage from cameras in the area.”
