CBI begins probe into Pollachi rape and sexual assault case

Follow us on Image Source : PTI/REPRESENTATIONAL Representative Image

A month after the government bowed to public pressure into Pollachi mass rape and sexual assault matter to the CBI, the investigative agency began its probe in Coimbatore. Girls were lured, tortured, threatened before being molested and raped. The gang then used to make a video of the entire cruelty and circulate it on social media. These videos were then used by the members of the gang to further molest the girls.

Last month, lakhs took to streets in South India to protest these horrible mass rape and molestation of women and girls. Shocking videos doing the round on social media showed how working women and college girls were subjected to rape and molestation by a gang in Pollachi.

The CBI has now registered two cases and started investigation in Pollachi rape and sexual harassment case in Tamil Nadu in which a college girl alleged that two of her friends along with two other associates sexually assaulted her and clicked a video, threatening to upload it on the internet, the agency said on Saturday.

Lakhs of people have marched in South India to protest mass rape and molestation of women and girls in Tamil Nadu’s Coimbatore district. Shocking videos doing the round on social media showed how working women and college girls were subjected to rape and molestation by a gang in Pollachi. CBI is now probing the case after huge pressure from the public and on social media.

CBI's first FIR is based on the sexual harassment and snatching of gold chain reported in Coimbatore district on February 12. The second FIR is related to the assault on victim's brother on February 26 towards near the town.

The victim on February 24 complained to Tamil Nadu Police that Thirunavukarasu, Sabarirajan, Satheesh and Vasanthakumar forcibly removed the clothes from her upper body part in a car and clicked a video, the CBI FIR said.

As per the FIR, the victim alleged that they also snatched her gold chain and forced her to make physical relation with them, threatening her to upload the video on the internet.

The second FIR is based on the statement of the victim's brother who had complained to the Tamil Nadu Police that Senthil, Babu, Mani and Vasanthakumar on February 26, two days after his sister lodged a complaint, assaulted him when he was going on a two-wheeler near his house in Pollachi.

The agency registered the FIRs on Friday under various charges, including sexual harassment, assault or use of criminal force on woman, sections related to the IT Act and criminal intimidation.

In the two first FIRs, the CBI named eight persons identified as Sabarirajan, Thirunavukarasu, Satheesh, Vasanthakumar, Senthil, Babu, Mani and Vasanthakumar.

Earlier, Tamil Nadu Police registered two separate cases -- one on February 24 and other on February 26.

The CBI took over the cases on the direction of the Centre following a request from the Tamil Nadu government.

Latest India News
