Rape, sex abuse survivors speak out in dignity march

BHUBANESWAR: Anita (name changed), a resident of Madhya Pradesh, said the ordeal of fighting for justice after being raped was more painful than having the crime done unto her. “After I escaped from the clutches of the rapist, police did not accept my complaint for four days. By the time the complaint was lodged, and I went for a medical examination, the proof had been washed away,” said Anita.“Then, in court, the defence lawyers asked me how everything happened. Where the rapist touched me and how he committed the act. As if this was not enough, my husband, parents and children all left me to die alone. But I won’t die and I will fight till I get justice,” she said.Like Anita, at least 60 survivors of rape and sexual violence and their family took part in the Rashtriya Garima Abhiyan ( Dignity March ) that started from Mumbai on December 20 and reached Bhubaneswar on Tuesday after covering eight states. The march aims at ending the culture of shame and fear among survivors and to mobilize support for speedy trial and 100 per cent conviction in such cases.Sources said the Dignity March had come across as many as 110 cases of minor rapes in which the survivors had got pregnant. “The recent case of a Class VIII student giving birth to a baby in a government residential school in Odisha indicates how we have failed as a system and a society. It is high time that we report the incidents and convict the culprits,” said Ashif Shaikh, convenor of the Dignity March.The incidents of crime against children have increased by a staggering 686 per cent from 418 in 2012 to 3,286 in 2016, while crime against women has increased by 49 per cent from 11,988 in 2012 to 17,837 in 2016 (as per NCRB data). The rate of conviction is a dismal 9.2 per cent and 6.2 per cent in cases of crime against children and women, respectively.“There is need for stronger action to deter perpetrators. In the absence of any legal action, the survivors do not report the matter. Cent per cent conviction will lead to fear among the culprits and deter them from committing such crimes,” Sheikh added.He said the Dignity March was begun after a national survey, ‘Speak Out’, revealed that an alarming number of people had faced sexual violence but 95 per cent of the incidents were not reported. The participants of the march are planning to meet chief minister Naveen Patnaik and submit a memorandum to him requesting speedy trial of cases of sexual assault in the state.The 65-day national march will travel 10,000 km in 200 districts of 24 states and is expected to reach New Delhi on February 22. “After reaching the national capital, we will form a national alliance and work for this cause in association with various stakeholders,” Sheikh said.
