Former IAF wing commander's wife found dead at home in Delhi's Dwarka

New Delhi:

A former Indian Air Force (IAF) wing commander's wife was found dead at her house in Delhi’s Dwarka, police said. The deceased, identified as 52-year-old Meenu Jain, was a resident of Air Force Naval Officers' Enclave in Dwarka Sector-7.

According to a senior police officer, Meenu's father HP Garg, a retired IIT Delhi professor and currently working on a research project at the institute, said that his son Darpan informed him on Thursday evening that Meenu was not keeping well.

He left his office for Meenu's residence at around 7.45 pm. On the way, as he called his daughter, she said she was fine, the officer said.

The deceased also told her father that she had eaten cashew nuts, which had led to some reaction.

Garg still went to her daughter's house on Thursday.

He called her again at around 7 am on Friday but her phone was not reachable following which, he, along with her brother, went to Meenu’s house.

The main door to the house was open while another wooden door was closed. They knocked on the door. When there was no response, Darpan entered the house from the neighbour's balcony, the police said.

He broke the glass and entered the house to see Meenu lying unconscious in her room.

Jain's maid, who had a pair of keys to the house, came there at around 8.30 am. She tried to open the door but it was jammed. Subsequently, the door was broken open, the police said.

Meenu was rushed to a nearby hospital in Dwarka Sector-10, where she was declared ‘brought dead’, officials added.

The police were informed about the incident at around 9 am and a case under sections 302 (murder) and 392 (robbery) of the Indian Penal Code was registered.

The police suspect that the accused entered the house with the intention of robbing her as the family members claimed that two mobile phones, the jewellery she was wearing, Rs 5 lakh in Indian currency and Rs 2 lakh in foreign currency were missing from the house.

The police seized three pillows and a towel with blood stains from the room. Three vessels and five cups, used for making and drinking tea, were also seized from the kitchen.

The post-mortem of the body had been conducted and the exact cause of death would be known once the report came, the police said.

The husband of the deceased, VK Jain, a retired Indian Air Force (IAF) wing commander and currently working as a commercial pilot with IndiGo, was informed about the incident. Jain, who was on duty at the time of the incident, reached the house on Friday night, the police said.

With PTI Inputs

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
