Why It Won’t Be A Cakewalk For Dimple Yadav In Samajwadi Stronghold Kannauj

“Even this new court complex was built by Akhilesh Yadav’s efforts,” a lawyer said, wishing not to be named. “We lawyers would otherwise sit in tents in summers in 40-41 degrees. Now there is a building with proper facilities.”

It was indeed 40 degrees the day we were at the Kannauj court premises, and heat of the debates that ensued there rivalled the high mercury.

“The gathabandhan is not going to work as there is not going to be Dalit-Muslim unity as there has long been a Dalit-Muslim conflict in the area,” Prashant Mishra said. He gave the example of an incident in a village in the district in which a Dalit girl was allegedly raped by a Muslim and the village strongman, a Yadav, had sided with the alleged rapist.

Prashant was 16 and was not thus eligible to vote, but he told us that he was quite politically aware and he knew what he was speaking.

Abhishek Mishra, who had been intently listening to Prashant, stood up and declared that the BJP would at least win by a margin of one lakh votes.

Mishra was quickly shouted down by others around him, mostly Yadavs. They were quick to point out that no incidents of either caste-based or religion-based violence had been reported in the area. The only case in recent times, they pointed out, was one involving people from the BJP, including the party’s Lok Sabha candidate Subrat Pathak. ( Pathak and others have been acquitted in the case mentioned here .)

Shibhu Yadav said the margin of an SP-BSP victory would at least be of 1.5 lakh as both the SP and BSP voters would combine. Shyam Bahadur Yadav nodded in agreement from a nearby bench.

As we moved away from this group, we met one advocate, Mohammad Nouman Khan, aged 61, who said it did not really matter to him who won since all the winning candidates would be Hindus and it would be a government of Hindus in any case.

‘Hame maar hi khaani hai aur jaan hi bachaani hai, bas ye hai ki kitni kam khaaye aur kitni zyada bachaye. Chott to lagti hi hai par eint pathar se zyada gulguli hoti hai (We are only going to be beaten, and are somehow going to save our lives. The only thing is that how lesser we are beaten, and how more we save our lives. Everything hurts but a brick hurts lesser than a stone),” he said.

We also witnessed farm distress among farmers who were in the court for various matters.

Rakesh Singh Sachdeva from Jariyan village in Kannauj’s Tirwa Vidhan Sabha constituency said he was going to vote for the Samajwadi Party as Akhilesh Yadav was committed to bring an agricultural mandi to Kannauj.

“Akhilesh Yadav was developing a mandi here which Yogi Adityanath took to Gorakhpur,” Rakesh said. “There is also the issue of stray cattle. They destroyed four bighas of my maze.”

Hridesh Verma agreed with Rakesh and said he too would vote for the SP for similar reasons.

Gaurav Yadav, who was passing by, heard the conversation and joined us. He said, “Their [Yogi government’s] farm loan waiver is a farce. I received a waiver of 61 paise! They have also reduced the weight of a bag of urea from 50 kilograms to 45 and have increased the rate.”

Moving on, Arvind Singh from the Chhibramau Vidhan Sabha constituency said, “Kannauj is connected to Lucknow via the Agra-Lucknow Expressway. We have an engineering college, a medical college, a government hospital, and a world class pathology lab, and all of this has been built by Akhilesh Yadav. Kaam dikhta hai unka (their work is visible).”

When we moved from there to a different section of the court, we came across a lawyers’ chamber in which three people were sitting idle.

Ashok Rathore said he was going to vote for the BJP in rashtra-hit (national interest). Rana Pratap Singh nodded. They agreed that it was Narendra Modi who was the factor behind their decision to vote for the BJP and not their local candidate.

“It’s rashtravaad over jaativaad for us,” they said.

Mohammad Chouhan disagreed. He said his vote would go the SP in the name of development that they have done in Kannauj.

In another chamber, Mohammad Umar, from Tirwa’s Aher vilalge, was at the court regarding a case concerning his car. Regarding the election, he said, “There is definitely farm distress, but it is not really an electoral issue, as people will mostly vote along caste lines.”

His lawyer, Piyush Mishra, agreed with Umar.

Umar added, “Those who are thoughtful about benefits they have received from central schemes, such as Ujjwala and Ayushman Bharat, have been weaned away from jaativaad and are deciding their votes on issues other than jaativaad.”

He also said that the usual caste affiliations may be further affected as some upper castes (traditional BJP voters) that he knew were miffed with the central government’s stance over the SC-ST Act whereas some Dalits that he knew were appreciative of it. This, he said, could sway voters either to or away from the BJP.

When we asked him about the state government’s crackdown on illegal slaughterhouses, Umar said, “It’s not wrong as legal slaughterhouses have not been closed. Only illegal slaughterhouses have been closed. They are bound to be closed as they are illegal.”

About their impact on elections and people, he said, “There is not much impact, other than the fact that there is now awareness among people about the legality of the business. People now know that illegal slaughter was also going on and that there is legal and illegal slaughter.”



In walked another advocate, named Hari Shyam Saxena, who said, “Ye jeth ka maheena hai aur ham jeth hain aur Dimple hamari bhabhi. Unko jitana hamara dharam hai.” (This is the month of jyeth and I am Dimple Yadav’s jeth [older brother-in-law] and Dimple is my sister-in-law and it is thus my duty to make her win).”

As we concluded our visit to the court and set off to leave the premises, we came across Sarafat Hussein, 48, from Gursaiganj in Kannauj’s Tirwa, which is known for bidi-making.

“Enough work has not happened in last two decades. I now want change in Kannauj, and I wish everyone else wants a change as well. We are almost there where we were two decades ago,” Hussein said, criticising the SP that has represented Kannauj for two decades now.

The change, Hussein subtly said, could be Subrat Pathak.

We left the district court for the district’s commercial quarters that housed its famous perfume industry. Kannauj is known as ittr nagri, the city of perfumes, as it is one of the oldest perfume-producing hubs of the country. Trade insiders say up to 80 percent of the city’s population is directly or indirectly related to the trade in one way or another. The cold storage, directly related to the agriculture, is the other major industry in the city.

An owner of one of the oldest perfume-manufacturing units in the city told Swarajya that theirs is a traditional trade. The centuries-old industry that produces organic ittr against synthetic perfumes still runs on ages-old traditional methods, employing earthen boilers and wood and cow-dung for fuel, the person said, on the condition of anonymity.
