Violence mars voting in Bengal

MUMBAI/KOLKATA: India’s battleground state of West Bengal took the centre stage in the fourth phase of a staggered general election on Monday after clashes broke out between supporters of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s party and a regional bloc.

A voter turnout of 64 per cent was witnessed at 72 Lok Sabha constituencies spread across nine states which went to the polls on Monday in the fourth phase.

The turnout in 2014 in these seats was 61.48 per cent.

The polling percentage improved in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Bihar while it was less in West Bengal and Odisha and marginally less in Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand compared to the last election. It was somewhat better in Rajasthan.

In West Bengal, the eastern state where Modi is trying to gain seats to offset likely losses in northern India, security forces chased away people wielding sticks after workers from Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) took on those from regional Trinamool Congress, police said.

An official with the Election Commission of India said paramilitary forces fired a blank round inside a polling station in another constituency in the state after a scuffle between voters and troops, who were demanding that mobile phones be kept aside while voting, as rules state.

There were no immediate reports of any poll-related injuries in West Bengal, where at least one person was killed and three injured during the third phase of voting last week.

The election, the world’s biggest democratic exercise with about 900 million voters, started on April 11. The last phase of voting is on May 19. There are a total of 545 seats in parliament’s lower house.

Maidul Islam, a professor of political science at Kolkata’s Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, said the stakes were high for both parties with Trinamool hoping to be part of a federal government coalition.

In Jammu and Kashmir state’s Anantnag constituency, which is voting in three phases due to security concerns, paramilitary forces fired teargas and pellets to disperse youth throwing stones at them, a police officer said.

More than 128 million people are eligible to vote in this round of the seven-phase election held across 72 seats in nine states.

Modi’s coalition won more than 75 per cent of the seats in the nine states in the previous election, in 2014.

First-time voter Ankita Bhavke, a college student in Mumbai, said she voted for economic development.

“I want the country to be at par with the best in the world,” she said. “There’s been some progress in the last five years.” India’s financial markets were closed on Monday for the election.

Modi has played up his record on national security after he sent warplanes into Pakistan in late February in response to a suicide bomb attack by an Islamist militant group based there that killed 40 Indian police in the disputed Kashmir region.

In recent days, he has evoked the deadly Easter Sunday bombings in neighbouring Sri Lanka to remind voters of the dangers India faces.

In Mumbai, the Bachchans, the Roshans, the Khans, the Devgns and a stream of other Bollywood celebrities voted in the fourth phase and urged others to step out and make their vote count.

Megastar Amitabh Bachchan stepped out with wife Jaya, son Abhishek and daughter-in-law Aishwarya to cast their votes.

Filmmaker Rakesh Roshan also turned up with his wife Pinky, daughter Sunaina and son Hrithik in tow. Hrithik’s former father-in-law Sanjay Khan came out to vote with his son Zayed and daughter Farah Khan Ali.

Actress Kareena Kapoor Khan brought along her two-year-old son Taimur Ali Khan to cast her vote.

Adding some colour and drama to a polling booth here was Ranveer Singh, who sported eclectic sunglasses and bright clothes.

Kangana Ranaut wore a sari, and even Urmila Matondkar, the Congress candidate from the Mumbai North seat, chose a desi avatar to cast a vote.

“This is the moment that matters ... Every vote is a voice that counts,” tweeted Priyanka Chopra-Jonas along with a selfie showing off her inked finger.

Actress Divya Dutta urged: “Vote, not because just your life depends on it. Vote because an entire nation does. One vote can make the difference. Be your change.”

Filmmaker Prakash Jha, who has had a tryst with politics, went to vote with his daughter.
