Saffron Terrorism: Myth or political conspiracy against Hindus and Modi?

Follow us on Saffron Terrorism: Myth or political conspiracy against Hindus and Modi?

The shocking blasts of Malegaon and Samjhauta were projected as ‘saffron terrorism'. Recently PM Modi also said in Wardha that Samjhauta verdict exposed conspiracy to defame crores. This term was deliberately coined by the then UPA government. Why and how the political conspiracy was webbed against the RSS and other Hindu organization is revealed by author/Journalist Dr. Praveen Tiwari in his recent book, 'The Great Indian Conspiracy', which is published by the Bloomsbury India.

Saffron Terrorism is a term which is not only hurting the sentiments of Hindus but is also a threat to fight the real terrorism nurtured in Pakistan and Islamic states. This term was deliberately imposed by UPA government for the sake of vote bank politics. There are some facts that can surprise you to the extent that the dirty vote politics can break all the barriers of ethics and national security. Malegaon and Samjhauta blasts were not the only disguise by UPA government but the 26/11 Mumbai attack also headed towards the same theory. The extent of the attack and a war like situation forced the politicians to hold back this conspiracy.

Kasab and his fellows came well-disguised into our borders. What could a mass murderer gain by trying to look like a Hindu or a Muslim? Would the wrist bands of terrorists tell a different story for Mumbai attacks and Karkare’s murder, if we had not captured Kasab. The police had reached the same conclusion in 2006 Malegaon blasts when it arrested SIMI activists. Then, we suddenly saw Aseemanand’s confession after several years. These accused were eventually acquitted. Chidambaram unabashedly declared not to oppose their bail. This was a glaring example of communal politics. The mud could not stick in 26/11 attack case, but some serious terror operations were painted in saffron.

The assumption that only Hindus could have planted bombs in Muslim majority areas endangered social amity. Now, the same probe agencies are giving clean chits to the accused of ‘Saffron Terror’ cases. NIA is exposing the loopholes of the ATS investigation. However, will the real masterminds go scot-free? Should the manipulators of Samjhauta Express bombings not be held accountable? Should we not investigate those who had exonerated Pakistan of its guilt? This book is an extensive research on this dirty communal politics. How the UPA government was trying to stop Narendra Modi from being the Prime Ministerial candidate for NDA government. Even the Gujarat riots and Ishrat Jahan encounter was also deliberately portrayed in a wrong way. This vote politics was the greatest conspiracy ever done in the history of Indian politics. You’ll get exclusive interviews and some shocking evidence to prove the saffron terrorism theory as the Great Indian Conspiracy.

This book contains many exclusive interviews like Dr. B. D. Pradhan, Former Director Joint Intelligence Committee, B. M. Mohan, Former Director Karnatka Forensic Science Laboratory (Where the narco test of Simi Terrorist were conducted after the Malegaon blasts), RSS veteran leader Indresh Kumar and many other journalists and investigating officer who were involved in the investigation of the entire issue. This book will also tell you about the horrifying life of Sadhvi Pragya during investigation and the jail period. This book is also available in Hindi with the title Aatank Se Samjhauta.

Latest India News
