In India, we dance every day, says academic

International Dance Day

MYSURU: Although a global celebration of dance is an import from the occident, the joy of expressing oneself through dance is a daily ritual in our country, said Prof Shruthi Bhandopadhyaya of the Vishwabharathi University, Kolkata.Shruthi, who inaugurated the International Dance Day celebrations organised by the Karnataka State Gangubai Hangal Music and Performing Arts University here on Monday, pointed out that Indians had used dance as a form of expression to show solidarity with one another for aeons. “International Dance Day marks the birth anniversary of Jean Georges Noverre, who is credited with pioneering the method of Ballet d’action. The International Theatre Institute of Unesco initiated the celebrations. But in the eastern part of the world, particularly in India, we celebrate every day as dance day. Eastern India has seen many pioneers in the world of dance. We have dancing to preserve unity in society,” she said.Globally renowned dancer from Egypt Karima Mansour told the audience that the beating heart set the rhythm for dance. “We should dance to the rhythm of the heart. Indians have been doing this for many centuries. Even Nobel Laureate Rabindranath Tagore visualized dance on macro and micro scales,” she added.Director of Nupura Artists Cultural Trust Prof K Ramamurthy Rao said that dance, as a form of art, was not bound by barriers, and brought people closer. Rao said that celebrating International Dance Day helped draw the government’s attention to the plight of artistes , who he said were neglected by society. “We have many issues plaguing us too. Celebrations such as these afford us an opportunity to voice our demands. Just like International Yoga Day, Dance Day too must be celebrated across the world,” Rao added.Students of various dance schools in Mysuru set the stage ablaze on the occasion.The music university’s in-charge vice-chancellor Prof Nagesh V Bettakote and registrar R Rajesh were among those present at the inauguration.Born in Paris on April 29, 1727, Jean Georges Noverre, whose birth anniversary is celebrated as International Dance Day, is credited with transforming the traditional French Ballet. Noverre started his career as a dancer very early in his life, and gave his first public performance when he was still in his teens. By the time he was 20, he had performed in many countries across Europe. But it is for his lasting contribution to Ballet that Noverre is remembered to this day. As someone who believed art to be a transcendental activity and not an ornamental form of expression, Noverre was keen to infuse Ballet with his staunch belief. Inspired by the writings of the celebrated 18th century philosopher Denis Diderot, who was scathing in his critique of the form of Ballet practiced in his day, Noverre pioneered a method wherein movement took precedence over dialogue. Passionate movement became the vehicle of the narrative in Noverre’s Ballet, and use of dialogue considerably reduced. However, it was Theophile Gautier, who in the 19th century gave the name ‘Ballet d’action’ retrospectively to the form pioneered by Noverre.
