Painter gets 7-year jail for sexually assaulting minor

TNNLudhiana: A local court has sentenced a painter to seven years of rigorous imprisonment for sexually assaulting a minor girl.A fine of Rs 40,000 has also been imposed on the convict. In case of default in fine payment, he will have to undergo another one year of rigorous imprisonment. The court directed that Rs 30,000 of the fine amount be paid to the minor as compensation.On June 19, 2014, the police had booked the accused, a resident of Ludhiana district, under Section 376 (rape) of the IPC and Section 8 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act after he tried to rape the minor girl, who was then 9-year-old.As per prosecution, the girl had told that that day, she had gone to a gurdwara to pay obeisance. When she was on way home, the accused caught hold of her and took her along on the pretext of showing her the cattle he had purchased. The accused took her to a cattle shed and attempted to rape her. The girl raised the alarm and somehow freed herself from his clutches. She ran back home and apprised her parents of the incident.Her parents approached the police and the accused was arrested.After a charge-sheet was submitted in the court on April 6, 2018, the accused pleaded not guilty.The additional public prosecutor sought punishment to the accused on the basis of prosecution evidence, including statements of the complainant and her father and the medical report. The defence counsel, however, argued that no independent witness was made to join the case.Turning down the contention of the defence counsel, the court observed, “The necessity of examination of any independent witness depends upon the context of the case, manner, nature and commission of the offence.”Referring to the Supreme Court’s observations in similar cases, the court observed, “One cannot turn blind eye to the fact that ordinary people are always reluctant to join as witnesses in the legal matters pertaining to other individuals in order to avoid getting entangled in legal cobwebs.”While putting aside the request for leniency, the court observed, “Court is not unmindful of the consequences upon the convict, if he has to languish behind the bars… but the convict who dared to indulge in such acts cannot be heard praying for leniency on the ground that they have a family to support.”The court added, “The draconian effect of sexual assault or an attempt to defy the physical dignity of a child creates a shadow of fear in the social fabric shattering the reposition of trust and faith in the fellow beings. Sexual assault or its attempt in any of its manifestations is degrading, humiliating and monumental blow upon self-esteem, dignity, respect, honour and confidence of a child victim. The scars of such traumatic experience haunt the victim for life. Sexual assault on minor children is gross and blatant violation of their fundamental, constitutional and human rights.”
