Sri Lanka plotters planning more attacks: US ambassador Teplitz

Amid heightened security alert in Sri Lanka over a week after the suicide attacks, US ambassador to Sri Lanka Alaina Teplitz said she believes some of the Easter attack group may be still at large in the country.

"Tremendous progress has been made towards apprehending those plotters but I don't think the story is over yet," Ambassador Alaina Teplitz said in an interview.

"We do believe that there is active planning underway (for more attacks)," Teplitz added.

Earlier, Lankan intelligence reports claimed that terrorists were planning fresh attacks before the start of the holy month of Ramadan even as the government lifted the ban on social media platforms such as Facebook, WhatsApp and Viber. The ban was put in place immediately after the attacks to prevent the spread of rumours.

The government has also banned the wearing of face veils of any kind under the emergency law imposed last week.

Authorities believe local terrorist organizations - National Thawheedh Jamaath (NTJ) and Jammiyathul Millathu Ibrahim - carried out the attacks, even though the Islamic State(IS) terrorist group has claimed responsibility for the bombings.

Lankan authorities have said Zahran Hashim, the founder of NTJ, was the mastermind and one of the nine suicide bombers.

Meanwhile, India's national investigation agency(NIA) arrested a man, Riyas A, alias Riyas Aboobacker, 29, after he reportedly admitted that he wanted to carry out an attack in Kerala.

During the interrogation, he allegedly "disclosed that he has been following speeches/videos of Zahran Hashim of Sri Lanka for more than a year", an NIA said.

Riyas will be produced in court today.

India had warned Sri Lanka that suicide attacks were possible weeks before suicide bombers carried out the attacks in which at least 253 were killed.

The NIA said that it arrested Riyas "for conspiring to commit a terrorist act" in connection with a 2016 case against a wanted man, along with others, for leaving India to join IS abroad.


