Gujarat court sentences Asaram's son Narayan Sai to life imprisonment on charges of rape

Narayan Sai (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Ahmedabad: A court in Gujarat has sentenced Narayan Sai, the son of self-proclaimed godman Asaram Bapu, to life imprisonment after finding him guilty of rape. On Friday, the court convicted Sai on charges of rape, unnatural sex, assault, and criminal intimidation among others. The case against Narayan Sai dates back to 2013 when two Surat-based female devotees accused him and his father of sexually assaulting them. Lawyers familiar with the case had told media outlets earlier that the quantum of the punishment was to be announced today.

In their complaint, the two women had claimed that they were raped by Asaram and his son Narayan Swami. While the elder sister had accused Asaram of raping her at his ashram in Gujarat's state capital Ahmedabad between 1997 and 2006, the younger sister accused his son Narayan Sai of raping her at his Ashram in Surat between 2002 and 2005. Based on an official complaint by the two sisters, police arrested Narayan Sai in December of 2013.

(Asaram Bapu and Narayan Sai)

The court also slapped a fine of Rs 1 lakh on Narayan Swamy. Meanwhile, three others, identified as Ganga, Jamuna, and Hanuman have been awarded ten years' imprisonment along with a fine of Rs 10,000. The latest reports indicate that Ramesh Malhotra, another accused in the case has been sentenced to six months in prison by the court. The sessions court also ruled that one of the two sisters are liable to receive monetary compensation of Rs 5 lakh.

In 2018, a court in Rajasthan convicted Narayan Sai's father Asaram for the rape of a minor girl in Jodhpur and sentenced him to life imprisonment. He is currently serving a life term even as the case against him by the Surat-based female devotee is still being heard by a sessions court in Gujarat.

Narayan Sai's father Asaram rose as a religious leader in the early 1970s after he established close to 400 ashrams across India and started delivering sermons in major cities. While he was termed as a 'fake sadhu' by the Akhil Bharatiya Akhara Parishad which is considered the apex body of Hindu saints, Asaram's reputation took a major hit when a court in Jodhpur sentenced him to life imprisonment for the rape of a minor girl in April of 2018.

More details in this regard are awaited.
