VHP ups the ante in Ram Janmabhoomi issue in Ayodhya

Ahead of the dharm sansad in Prayagraj, the Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP) has reiterated it's demand for a law on the construction of the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya and have expressed dissatisfaction over the matter getting delayed in the Supreme Court (SC).

Addressing a press conference, the VHP international general secretary Milind Parande said, "The Supreme Court is not giving priority to the Ayodhya title suit case. The people belonging to the Hindu community are angry as the hearings on this issue have been done only for a few minutes and seconds in the Supreme Court. We, therefore, demand that the Centre should enact a law for the Ram mandir construction."

"Prominent sants have called a dharm sansad in Prayagraj on January 31 where a decision on the Ram mandir construction will be taken. We will accept what the sants decide," Miliand Parande said.

Parande also said that neither the government nor the Supreme Court has any right to intervene in Hindu traditions.

"The Sabrimala issue is a matter of faith. The Supreme Court and the government should not intervene because it's a religious issue. Crores of people offer prayers at the temple every year. However, the Pinarayi Vijayan government is assaulting Sabarimala devotees in order to escalate tension. The policewomen in civil clothes are being made to enter the temple as a part of conspiracy. We will be rebelling in Kerala against such attempts," Milind Parande said.

Meanwhile, speaking to India Today TV about the Ram Mandir issue, senior BJP leader Uma Bharti said, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has already said that an ordinance can only be brought for Ram mandir after the Supreme Court’s verdict. However, Rahul Gandhi and the Congress party is totally responsible for the delay in the hearing. The sants should also approach every political party for support."

Also Read | Sadhus to march to Ayodhya for Ram Mandir if hearing continues to be delayed: Sakshi Maharaj

Also Read | Misleading photos used to showcase saffron surge in Ayodhya

Also Read | Congress wants Ayodhya issue to continue, will milk it for votebank politics: Yogi
