AAP pushes for full statehood, says Modi is killing democracy

Welcomes Madras HC verdict on Puducherry L-G

Welcoming the Madras High Court’s observation that Puducherry L-G Kiran Bedi “cannot interfere” in the day-to-day affairs of the elected government of the Union Territory, the Aam Aadmi Party pressed for its demand of full statehood.

“AAP is of the clear view that the only solution to end the decades-old injustice for Delhi and Puducherry is to grant these full statehood,” AAP chief spokesperson Saurabh Bharadwaj said.

July 4 verdict

He said that the Madras HC verdict is a reiteration of the July 4, 2018 landmark judgment by a five-judge Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court on the elected Delhi government’s powers.

“The July 4 Supreme Court Constitution Bench judgment and today’s Madras High Court verdict in unambiguous terms make it clear that the L-Gs are bound by the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers,” he said.

On July 4, a five-judge Bench of the Supreme Court on Wednesday unanimously held that the L-G of Delhi is bound by the “aid and advice” of the Arvind Kejriwal-led AAP government and both have to work harmoniously with each other.

At loggerheads

The AAP-ruled Delhi government and the current and previous L-Gs, appointed by the Central government, have been at loggerheads over a range of issues and the former have been accusing the BJP of stalling development works in Delhi through the L-G.

“BJP government is trying to intentionally kill democracy. And Supreme Court’s and Madras High Court’s decision has made it clear how the Modi government has tried to kill democracy,” Delhi Labour Minister Gopal Rai told The Hindu. He said that there is not a single work in which the L-G does not oppose the elected government.

“Elected governments in Delhi and Puducherry, though governed by separate laws, have been subjected to severe injustice by the Narendra Modi government at the Centre under the garb that since these are not full-fledged States, therefore the ultimate control is of the Central government. Modi government had no respect for federal structure of the Constitution and its slogan of cooperative federalism was a farce and a lie,” Mr. Bharadwaj said.
