Hajipur rocked by rape, grisly murders

Hyderabad: Rachakonda Police Commissioner Mahesh M Bhagwat on Tuesday said the police are carrying out scientific investigation into the killing of girls in Hajipur village.

Scientific evidence is being collected to ensure that the suspect Marri Srinivas Reddy get death penalty, he said.

Addressing a press conference at Neredmet on Tuesday evening, the Police Commissioner said the suspect had confessed to his involvement in three rape and murder cases of minor girls, Kalpana, P Sravani and Manisha.

Till now in their investigation they had found that Srinivas Reddy was solely responsible for the three murders.

The suspect would be taken into police custody after he was produced before the court.

This is to help the police interrogate further, he said. Mahesh Bhagwat said that the suspect was involved in five cases.

The accused had confessed that he was a habitual rapist- cum-murderer and since 2015 he had killed three minor girls and a woman after sexually assaulting them.

He said the police had found that he had visited Adilabad and Vemulawada frequently and an inquiry would also be conducted into his visits to these places.

Narrating the sequence of events, the Police Commissioner said Srinivas Reddy had abducted 11-year-old girl Kalpana, a resident of Maisi Reddypalli village, in 2005 while she was on her way to home from Hajipur village.

Later he took her to a nearby isolated place and sexually assaulted her.

To conceal the crime, he killed her by smothering, stuffed her dead body in a gunny bag and dumped it in the well.

A case was filed in Bommalaramaram, but it went undetected till now.

He had confessed to the crime, he said. The body was exhumed on Tuesday.

In the second case, the accused on September 28, 2015, by making obscene gestures and tried to advance towards D Suvarna (38), when she was grazing the cattle in the agriculture fields and absconded from the spot when she raised hue and cry.

A case under section 509 IPC was filed against him in Bommalaramaram police station in 2015.

Later in third case in 2016, he went to Kurnool for fixing the lift on behalf of Planet Elevators Company and he along with four co-workers were residing in the rented house and brought an unknown prostitute to their room and after sexually assaulting her, killed her and dumped her dead body in the water tank and vacated the house.

Kurnool II Town Police arrested all the five accused in 2017 under sections 302, 201 IPC.

In fourth case on March 9, 2019, in broad day light he abducted one girl by name Maneesha (17), a BCom computers second year student, while she was going to college in Keesara from Hajipur on the pretext of giving her lift on his motor cycle and took her to an isolated place and sexually assaulted her and to conceal his crime he killed her by smothering and dumped her dead body in well and buried.
