Kherwadi Police to act against cops who hit teen for not stopping at check-post

The Bombay High Court has disposed of a petition after the Kherwadi Police assured the court that it would record the statement of the complainant and accordingly, register a First Information Report (FIR) against erring police officials, who allegedly assaulted a class 12 student. The student had allegedly not stopped at a nakabandi patrolling stop, in March.

A division bench of Justice Ranjit More and Justice Bharati Dangre were informed by the prosecution that if a cognizable offence is made after recording the statement then an offence will be registered while hearing a petition filed by Chandrakant Shivram Karambale, father of the 18-year-old Satej.

Advocate Jayant Bardeskar appearing for the petitioners argued that on January 7, the victim had taken his father's two-wheeler to college. During his return, as he was not wearing a helmet, he was stopped by the police at a nakabandi in front of Mahatama Gandhi Vidyalay and State Bank of India. However, when he halted after the said Nakabandi, one or two police constables hit him on his head two to three times with a wooden rod."

The plea stated that due to the assault Satej fell unconscious and was rushed to the Holy Family hospital, where he was kept in the Intensive Care Unit for two days. Karambale, on the same day, approached the Kherwadi Police to lodge an FIR against the accused policemen but no action was taken by senior police officers.

Bardeskar said, "The petitioner has approached the court to attain justice for his son as none of the authorities are granting him and his family justice." The petition states that the victim is a young boy, and his life has come to a standstill due to undesired actions on part of the police. Further, not only have they flouted their duties, but they have also taken undue advantage of the same. Thus, the petitioner wishes that the misbehavior of these persons is met with justice and equity.

The petition prays for directions to the Kherwadi Police to register an FIR against the concerned police personnel who assaulted Satej and direct the SBI to hand over the CCTV footage captured on three cameras installed by it.

Earlier, the court had ordered the SBI to preserve the CCTV footage.

Misuse Of Power
