SHOCKING! Delhi woman tells men in restaurant to rape girls for wearing short dress

New Delhi:

Having education degree don’t teach you rationality! In a country that records having an almost 104 rape cases per day, is the rape culture so deeply embedded in the society that it is now even as a term for a mere admonition? In yet another shocking cases, a video of a middle-aged woman who allegedly asked seven men at a restaurant to rape a group because of the length of their dresses is leaving the society and womanhood in particular, baffled.

‘’You’re recording no? Hello guys. These ladies want to wear short to short dresses to encourage all to see them. All these ladies wear short dresses or get naked to [get] raped’’ these are the words the middle-aged woman is reported to have told the young girls.

The video starts off with the group of groups of girls who claims that the middle aged-women told a girl that she should be raped because of her dress. We then see the girls following her in a home-furnishing store for an apology which she adamantly refused and instead told the girl filming the video to "go to hell".

Seeing the discussion in the store, a bystander who was visiting stood up in support of the girls and asked the woman to apologise. A mother herself, the woman middle-aged woman reiterated that women should not wear short dresses.

After about eight minutes of being followed, the woman spoke up. "Hello guys, these ladies want to wear short to short dress to encourage all to see them. Theek hai? Wow, very good. All the ladies wear the shorter dress or naked to (be) raped. Hi all, if you are the parents, please control the girls (sic)," she declares, looking into the mobile phone camera.

The video which was first posted on Instagram had gathered more than 1 million views on Instagram but was later taken down as it violated its community guidelines. The video which is however available on Facebook has over 556, 884 views with many netzines praised the young women for standing up to the women and later conducted a poll on Facebook asking people to support her statement.

For all the Latest Offbeat News News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
