Amritsar: On witch doctor's advice, woman kills pregnant neighbour and pulls out foetus

The accused was allegedly helped by her husband and her family members in committing the alleged crime (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Amritsar: After constant failed attempts to conceive a child, a woman strangled her neighbour to death. The neighbour was seven months pregnant. The accused allegedly slit open the womb of the deceased and pulled out the foetus. The accused was unable to conceive after she had a tubectomy.

It was alleged that the accused committed the crime after a witch doctor asked her to do. The incident took place in the Gurdaspur district of Punjab. The accused was identified as Ravinder Kaur.

The accused pulled out the foetus because she wanted to nurse it as her own. The foetus died within minutes of the incident. The accused was allegedly helped by her husband and her family members in committing the alleged crime. The accused buried the foetus at her residence.

The accused hails from the Kala Nangal village of Gurdaspur Batala. The deceased's body was kept in a box after the incident. The accused was planning on disposing the body later. The incident came to light after the deceased's husband lodged a missing complaint with the police.

The deceased was murdered the day she went missing. The accused, her husband and her in-laws were booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). The witch doctor who had advised the accused was also booked under the same sections.

According to the Indian Express' report, the police stated that the accused got married for the second time four years ago. The accused had four children from her first marriage. Before divorcing her first husband, the accused allegedly went through a tubectomy.

The witch doctor was identified as Deeso. Deeso allegedly advised the accused to murder a pregnant woman and claim her foetus as her own. Following Deeso's advice, the accused invited the deceased to her house and allegedly murdered her. Five out of seven of the accused have been arrested.
