Raped by drunken labourer, three-months pregnant goat dies in Bihar's Parsa Bazaar area

The poor animal was found dead outside her owner's residence in rural Patna (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Patna: A bone-chilling incident has come to light from the state of Bihar where a man has been arrested for raping a pregnant goat under the influence of alcohol. Going by reports, the horrific incident took place in Parsa Bazaar in rural Patna on Tuesday evening.

A probe was launched into the matter after a complaint by the goat's owner, a local woman who claimed that the animal was raped by one Mohammed Simraj. Based on her complaint, police officials brought in the accused who is a resident of Madhepura. Latest reports assert that the accused confessed to his crime and has been charged with relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Wildlife Protection Act, 1971.

A daily wage labourer by profession, the accused allegedly consumed alcohol before he abducted the goat who was three-months pregnant at the time from outside her owner's residence. He then sexually abused the animal which led to her death. The goat's dead body was found lying outside her owner's residence later that day. Police have now sent the body for post-mortem and other medical examinations which will enable them to build a case against the accused in court.

A similar incident of sheer bestiality had come to light in July of last year when eight men had allegedly gang-raped a pregnant goat in Haryana's Mewat district. The animal's owner had filed a complaint against the accused men and arrests were made in this regard soon after. Reports at the time had indicated that the accused abducted the poor animal and consumed alcohol before gang-raping her at the Madora village on July 25 of last year.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: GHASTLY! 7-year-old burnt alive after petty dispute over goat
