Pirates abduct Indian seafarers from merchant ship in Nigeria

HYDERABAD: Pirates have abducted five Indian seafarers after taking their ship MT Apecus at Bonny Outer anchorage in Nigeria. The families of the abducted sailors in India have no clue for the last 13 days as to where they are.It was only on Wednesday that the High Commission of India in Abuja, Nigeria, responded to the family of a sailor about the issue. Bhagyasree Das of Odisha, wife of Sudeep Kumar Choudhury, a 3rd officer in Merchant Navy has tweeted to union external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj and the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) asking to rescue her husband.“Mission is in very close touch with Nigerian Navy and police for the last 10 days as per SOP. Concerned parties have made initial contact. Caution is of utmost importance for everyone’s safety,” the High Commission of India in Abuja said in response to Bhagyasree Das’ seeking early intervention. It is already more than 12 days and yet no exact updates on how and where they are. When can we talk with our family members? All the families are eagerly waiting to listen to their voice. I am eagerly waiting to hear my husband’s voice,” Bhagyashree said in response to the High Commission providing the information it had.According to a media reports emanating from Nigeria, pirates had attacked the product tanker and kidnapped six crew members, including the Indian seafarers. The Nigerian Navy was notified and an investigation was being conducted into the abduction.The Palau-flagged oil products tanker ‘MT Apecus’ is said to manage by Petronav Carriers. According to the IMB Piracy Reporting Centre, the incident occurred at Bonny Outer Anchorage, Nigeria. “An anchored tanker was boarded by unauthorised persons who kidnapped six crew and escaped. The remaining crew reported safe. Nigerian navy notified and investigations are ongoing,” the centre said in a report.The ship in recent months had traded between Tema Ghana, Lome Togo , and Logos and had arrived at Bonny anchorage from Lagos. The Automatic Identification System (AIS) of the ship was switched off.There had been another instance of an attempt by pirates to get into a ship in the Bonny river area but they were unsuccessful because of the intervention of Nigerian Naval guards who were said to have engaged with them.Capt Sanjay Parashar, chairman of International Maritime Federation told TOI that he was in touch with the families of the seafarers who had been abducted in Nigeria to provide them with all the assistance that was required.
