Alleged rapist beaten by minor victim’s family in Gujarat’s Rajkot, dies

A 20-year-old man accused of raping a minor girl rape succumbed to his injuries in Gujarat’s Rajkot on Wednesday, a week after the victim’s father and relatives had assaulted him, police said.

The girl’s father and four other relatives have been taken into custody, they said.

The family had accused the man of taking the girl to a guest house in nearby the pilgrimage town of Chotila in Surendranagar district and forcing her into a physical relationship. Before that, they filed a complaint against him on April 13, saying he had taken the girl to a vacant flat on Kotharia Road and coerced her into a sexual relationship.

Rajkot Police had registered a case against Divyesh for rape and abduction under various sections of the Indian Penal Code as well as the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act after the complaint.

The man, police said, was taken to a factory in Balaji Industrial Estate-II area on April 23 soon after he and the girl returned from Chotila and thrashed by her family.

“Divyesh Gondaliya, a resident of Kotharia area in Rajkot, was on ventilator since April 23. He was brought to the hospital after he was severely beaten by the five people, including the father and relatives of a 12-year-old girl whom he had allegedly raped twice,’’ said a spokesperson of Aji Dam police station.

According to police, Divyesh worked in a watch factory in Rajkot and had come in contact with the girl through Facebook. The complaint by the girl’s family said that the two had exchanged phone numbers and began meeting each other.

“A case of assault and attempt to murder was registered against father and other five relatives of the girl. A section for murder will now be added to the same, following the death of Divyesh. All the five accused have been taken into police custody,” police said.

A third complaint against 37 people, including BJP councillor Mena Jadav, was also registered by police for rioting, assault and obstructing on-duty officials.

“The mob led by Jadav had stormed inside Aji Dam police station on April 26 demanding action against the father and other four accused of beating the youth,” a police official said.
