Telangana: Man Arrested for Rape and Murder of 3 Minor Girls

New Delhi: Days after remains of two minor girls were unearthed, Telangana police on Tuesday arrested a 28-year-old man who allegedly raped and killed them and another minor girl, burying their bodies in abandoned irrigation wells.

M. Srinivas Reddy, a resident of Hajipur village in Yadadri Bhuvanagiri district, fled after the body of one of his victims was found in an abandoned irrigation well. He was nabbed in another village. He confessed to killing killing the girl and two other minors, one in March this year and another four years ago.

According to reports, Srinivas, a lift mechanic, was arrested in 2017 for killing a sex worker in Kurnool district of Andhra Pradesh, along with four others. He was released on bail.

Explaining Srinivas’s modus operandi, police said Hajipur does not have proper bus connectivity, and many girls who were returning from school would wait to be offered lifts by passers-by. The man would apparently offer to give rides to girls and later attack them, sexually assault and kill them. He then threw their bodies into abandoned irrigation wells and bury them. Police said the same modus operandi was likely used to kill the three minor girls. They added that he was addicted to child pornography.

Also Read: A Closer Look at Statistics on Sexual Violence in India

In the latest instance, when a girl disappeared on April 25, the police found her school bag near an abandoned well. A dog squad picked up her scent and led them to the body buried in the well. The police found that the well belonged to Srinivas.

The skeletal remains of a 17-year-old girl who went missing in March were also found in the same well. Srinivas confessed to raping and killing the girl.

During questioning by police, Reddy also confessed that in April 2015, he had abducted an 11-year-old girl and sexually assaulted her. He said he killed her and dumped her body in another well in the village, Rachakonda police commissioner Mahesh Bhagwat said. Police are trying to exhume the remains of the girl.

Reddy’s house was ransacked and set on fire by residents of the village. His family had already fled the village, though none of them were apparently aware of the crimes. Despite the presence of police personnel, the thatched front portion of the house was set on fire and articles inside the house ransacked. According to reports, the residents wanted the police to hand Srinivas over to them. Additional forces were deployed in the village.
