7 in 10 Indians feel safe in PM Modi's regime, up from 2014; 94% Indians confident in military might: Report

Gallup World poll tracks important issues worldwide. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Even as the country is witnessing its biggest political event and issues like safety, gender gap, national security make regular appearances on prime time television - what with the parties building their manifestoes over these - a recent report by Gallup World Poll states that nearly seven in 10 Indians feel safe walking alone at night in the areas they reside. This is up 17 percentage points from when Prime Minister Narendra Modi took charge of the office in 2014.

Gallup World poll has been tracking important issues worldwide, such as food access, employment, leadership performance, and well-being since 2005. The Gallup survey, conducted in India in October-December 2018, emphasises on the fact that safety perceptions in the country are relatively higher despite individual security concerns.

The Gallup survey also attributed a government survey, published in 2016, stating that the crime rate increased marginally during the first few years of PM Modi's time. The survey pointed to an increase in the number of kidnappings and abduction and a decline in murders. Notably, a total of 1,000 reported terrorist attacks took place in the country in 2017, third most in the world behind Iraq and Afghanistan.

Differences in regional demographics

The Gallup survey also mentioned that urban and rural Indians have similar perceptions of safety. But, the biggest differences are regional - so while 78 per cent of residents in eastern India and 75% in southern India feel safe while walking alone in the night, only 60 per cent of northern India feels the same. This also includes Delhi, which had the highest incidences of murder, rape and abduction among 19 cities with populations more than 2 million, according to the National crime data for the year 2016, released in November 2017.

Gender Gap in perceptions of safety

While 73 per cent men feel safe walking alone at night, 65 per cent women feel the same. The report suggests that the gap is not unusual since even in countries like Norway, Finland and Rwanda - rated highest in gender equality - see lesser number of women than men saying they feel safe walking alone at night.

Currently, Indian women in urban areas are more likely to feel safe - 75 per cent - than women in rural areas - 64 per cent. The lower percentage in rural areas can also be attributed to the fact that sexual violence is less likely to be reported in rural areas.

Confidence boost in security sector

94 per cent Indians also expressed near-universal confidence in their military in 2018 - second highest of any South Asian country. Even when the military has a positive evaluation from the citizens, local police has had no such luck. In 2014, 66 per cent Indians said they are confident in the local police. This, however, increased to three-fourths of Indians expressing confidence in their local police in 2018.

Despite some improvements, there is room for improving safety conditions for women in the country. While the majority of the urban woman feel safe walking alone where they live, many women in rural areas still lack a basic feeling of safety.




