Two arrested for rape, sexual assault on three minor girls

SURAT: Two complaints of rape and sexual assault on three minor girls were registered in Khatodara and Katargam police stations on Tuesday.In one of the cases, the accused is a school teacher who allegedly assaulted his 12-year-old student. Police arrested the teacher Rakesh Sahu, 24, a resident of Amba Nagar on Udhna Magdalla Road. Sahu was recently appointed as vidhya sahayak in a municipal school of Oriya medium where the survivor studied.Sahi lived in the locality neighbouring the girl’s. On April 28, when he was passing from near her house, he noticed the girl was alone and entered inside on the pretext of asking for water. When the girl went inside to get water, he closed the doors and windows and grabbed the girl. He then started touching her inappropriately. The terrified girl somehow managed to escape from his clutches.Initially, the girl was too traumatized to reveal anything to her family members. When she persistently refused to have food, her family members got worried and inquired with her. On April 29, she narrated her ordeal. The family informed school authorities but they refused to take any action. Finally, they approached Khatodara police on Tuesday.In another case, police arrested a 29-year-old man for allegedly raping a six-year-old girl and sexually assaulted another 10-year-old. The accused was identified as Shiv Shankar alias Shiva, a resident of Kubernagar in Katargam Darwaja. Shiva used to show them objectionable videos on the mobile phone and committed the crime in the past three months.The crime came to light on Tuesday evening when one of the girls did not return home from a nearby open ground where she had gone to play. Her aunt also could not find her in the ground. After sometime, when she noticed Shiva with the girl. The girl ran towards her aunt while Shiva started leaving in hurry.When her aunt inquired, the girl narrated that she and the six-year-old minor were offered chocolate or ice-cream by Shiva and taken to an isolated location. She also revealed about the sexual assault and rape. The family members soon contacted police control room after which cops nabbed Shiva.
