15 cops killed in Naxal ambush in Gadchiroli

Maoists

Gadchiroli

IED

Kurkheda police station

.

By Abhishek SharanAttack comes a year after 40were killed in two encounters inIn one of the deadliest attacks on security personnel in Gadchiroli in a decade, 15 men of the district police’s Quick Reaction Ream (QRT) and a civilian were killed in an(Improvised Explosive Device) blast set off allegedly by the banned Communist Party of India (Maoist)’s operatives on Wednesday afternoon. The QRT personnel, in a private vehicle whose driver is among the deceased, were on the way to reinforce theunder whose jurisdiction suspected Maoists had torched 27 vehicles at a construction site barely 10 hours ago. The private vehicle was blown into smithereens at around 12.30 pm, the police said. No advance Road Opening Party (ROP), whose job is to sanitise a stretch/area before security men move in Maoist-affected zones, was sent ahead of the vehicle carrying the personnel, confirmed sources.When asked if the lack of an advance ROP was a breach of mandatory SOP (Standard Operating Procedure) in Left-Wing-Extremism (LWE) theatre like Gadchiroli, a police officer said, “ROPs are usually sent when a large number of vehicles are on the move; in this case, there was only one vehicle, so it was not a violation of the SOP.” He also said, “ROPs are part of SOP, which are dynamic and change as per tactical requirements.” However, he also emphasised the fact that “had the ROP been sent, the attack could have been averted”. Police sources meanwhile suspect that the arson incident earlier in the day could have been staged as the ‘bait’ for the subsequent ambush hours later, wherein the IED bomb was planted at a spot on the National Highway.At around 2 am on Wednesday, suspected Maoists had set ablaze 27 vehicles/machinery, belonging to a construction contractor, at Dadapur in Kurkheda taluka, after which the 15 QRT men were sent from a neighbouring police station to strengthen the Kurkheda police. A police source said, “Either two squads or ‘dalams’ of the Maoists orchestrated both the arson and the IED blast or it could be just one set of people. Laying-a-bait-to-ambush strategy has been in vogue in other LWE areas like in Chhattisgarh and erstwhile Andhra Pradesh.” The police will verify if the Maoists had any prior information on the vehicle’s movement, said sources.Police sources said the Maoists may have timed the attack as a ‘revenge’ for the death of 40 of their operatives in an encounter a year ago, on April 22-23 of 2018, by the Gadchiroli police. The local police had received intelligence that the Maoists had allegedly distributed pamphlets in remote, forested villages in the district, calling for a ‘week-long bandh’ to protest against the April 2018 encounter deaths, said sources. “As a result of intelligence inputs, security was on high alert and the police was carrying out combing operations. While on a combing operation, a team of commandos of the specialised counter-Maoist force of the district police, C-60, came under attack by Maoists on April 27. In the ensuing exchange of fire, two suspected female Maoists, Ramko and Shilpa, had died,” the source said.Terming it a “dastardly attack”, Maharashtra’s Director General of Police, Subodh Jaiswal, told Mumbai Mirror, “All possible counter-measures, available legally, are being taken and the police will not take it lying down. Precious lives have been lost in the attack.” He said, “I don’t think the attack was due to any intelligence failure but it will be probed if that was the case. Since SOPs keep changing as per tactical requirements, this factor will be kept in mind while ascertaining if anything went wrong.” As the attackers may have slipped away into neighbouring states, the Maharashtra police could take help from their counterparts to nab the killers, said sources. Jaiswal assured that all corrective measures will be taken.Investigations into the blast, which was undertaken with help from a forensic team that examined the site, should also reveal if the Maoists had taken away some weapons carried by the 15 QRT men. The probe will also explore whether the IED blast was triggered “with wires, a remote device, a cell phone or a camera flash, said sources. “The IED could have been triggered by a team hiding in close proximity but in a safe zone or a cell phone may have been used from a distance,” said the source.
