Telangana cop held for allegedly killing female colleague, burning her body

Telangana cop held for allegedly killing female colleague, burning her body

The police said that the accused Prakash, who was already married, was having an affair with the woman and killed her when she asked him to marry her.

news Crime

In a horrifying incident, a police constable in Telangana's Sangareddy district killed his female colleague and set her body ablaze over a failed relationship, the state police said on Wednesday. Mandarika was strangulated by Prakash near Venkatapuram village late on Monday. He later poured petrol on the body and set it on fire.

The woman constable's father, Sadanandam, approached the police on Tuesday as she did not return home after duty. After a case was registered, Prakash was one of the suspects who was picked up and the police said that he admitted to killing Mandarika during interrogation.

Prakash, already married, fell in love with Mandarika while both of them were serving at the Sangareddy police station a few months ago. The affair had continued even after they were transferred to two different police stations. He was transferred to Hatnoor police station in Sangareddy district while she was attached to the RC Puram police station at the outskirts of Hyderabad.

The police said that Mandarika was putting pressure on Prakash to marry her and they had a fight over the issue. He then planned to eliminate her. He took her out in a car late on Monday and strangulated her under the jurisdiction of the Sadasivapet police station.

Superintendent of Police, S Chandrashekar Reddy also visited the crime spot and promised swift action against the accused.

The police have registered a case of murder against Prakash and further investigation is ongoing.

Just last month in Hyderabad, the body of a 25-year-old woman techie was found stuffed in a suitcase near a school in Medchal at the outskirts of the city. The police later said that the woman was allegedly killed by her boyfriend Sunil, who wanted to end their relationship.

The body was dumped in a drain near a school in Suraram Colony, Medchal. Locals who noticed the abandoned suitcase alerted the authorities, who later cracked the murder case.
