At least 7 injured after country-made bomb explodes in Andhra

At least 7 injured after country-made bomb explodes in Andhra

The police said that the incident took place when some unidentified people were making the bombs to hunt wild boars.

news Accident

At least seven people were severely injured in a freak mishap after country-made bombs accidently exploded in a rented house in Andhra Pradesh’s Srikakulam district on Wednesday. The impact of the explosion was such that the structure partially collapsed, injuring the people inside the house.

The police said that the incident took place when some unidentified people were making the bombs at Yatapet village in Etcherla mandal, reportedly as part of a plan to hunt wild boars.

The explosion immediately alerted locals who gathered around the spot and called authorities. The police rushed to the spot along with personnel of the Andhra Pradesh State Disaster Response and Fire Services Department and pulled out the victims from the rubble.

They have been admitted to the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS) in Srikakulam, where they are presently undergoing treatment.

In July 2018, three brothers were killed in a blast near Andhra Pradesh's Kurnool town after a country-made bomb was triggered. The incident occurred near Nandyal checkpost on the outskirts of Kurnool when the three brothers, including two real estate developers, were surveying a piece of land which they had purchased sometime back.

According to the police, the blast occurred when some waste material was set on fire by some workers. While two brothers died on the spot, another succumbed at the Kurnool Government Hospital. The police suspected that country-made bombs were kept in the garbage.

In August 2017, around 20 passengers in an RTC bus in Andhra Pradesh had a close shave after explosives, reported to be country made, went off in an RTC bus.

The blast occurred near Damuku area under Anantagiri Mandal in Visakhapatnam's Agency area when the bus was travelling from Visakhapatnam to Araku, and the bomb shattered the glass panes of a few windows, and also damaged the rear end of the bus. While no casualties were reported, a few passengers suffered minor injuries in the incident.
