Police constable murders female colleague, sets her body ablaze over lovers' tiff

The accused has confessed to the crime, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Hyderabad: In a classic case of lover's tiff gone awry, a police constable in Telangana murdered his female colleague and set her body ablaze following an argument over their relationship. Identified as Prakash, the accused strangulated Mandarika before pouring petrol on her body and setting it ablaze near Venkatapuram village late on Monday night.

When she did not return home after duty, Mandarika's father Sadanandam approached the police on Tuesday and lodged a missing person complaint. A case was registered and a search was launched to track down the victim whose father is also a constable with Telangana police. During the course of the investigation, police officials detained Prakash for questioning and he reportedly confessed to killing Mandarika following an argument.

Investigators later found out that Prakash, who was married at the time he met the victim, strated seeing Mandarika when the two were posted at the Sangareddy police station last year. Despite being transferred to different stations, the two continued to see each other regularly. According to a report by The News Minute, the victim was insisting that Prakash leave his wife and marry her instead. The accused decided to get rid of Mandarika and asked her to join him for a car ride on Monday.

An official familiar with the investigation said that the accused took the victim out to an area which falls under the Sadasivapet police station where he strangled her to death before pouring petrol on her body and setting it ablaze. In the wake of his confession, police lodged a case of murder against Prakash and are in the process of investigating the matter further. Top officials, including the superintendent of police (SP) S Chandrashekhar Reddy also examined the scene of the crime and assured media personnel that stringent action will be taken against the accused.
