Girl, 12, 'gang-raped and beaten to death with rocks during visit to temple'

The girl was allegedly attacked when she visited a temple in Bhopal, in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh

Girl, 12, 'gang-raped and beaten to death with rocks during visit to temple'

A 12-year-old girl was allegedly gang-raped and murdered by two men as she visited an temple in India with her young aunt.

The victim was visiting a temple in Bhopal, in Madhya Pradesh, with her 16-year-old aunt on Tuesday.

The accused approached her, took her to a secluded spot nearby and raped her, before smashing her head with stones, and leaving her dead police say.

Officers suspect that one of the men accused was the victim's aunt boyfriend and that she was involved, Times of India reports.

Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images)

The two men and the victim's aunt - who all live in the same neighbourhood - were arrested the following day.

Government opposition party BJP's Bhopal candidate, Pragya Thakur, hit out at the Kamal Nath-led Congress government.

She tweeted: "Law and order is in disarray in the state. Kamal Nath has been reduced to being the Chief Minister of Chhindwara. Beti (daughter) we will take revenge."

Image: REX/Shutterstock) REX/Shutterstock)

Last July, a seven-year-old was abducted outside her school in the same state's Mandsaur district by two men who raped, tortured and then later slit her throat.

The case led to nationwide protests, the gruesome details of which sickened and angered several thousand people, including political leaders, who sought death penalty for the perpetrators, NDTV reports.

Then-state opposition leader Kamal Nath had tweeted: "MP is infamous state in the country for recording the largest number of rapes in the country already. When such incidents would stop? When our sisters-daughters are going to get a secure environ (sic)?"

Incidents of rape have risen in Madhya Pradesh - The state reported the highest number of rape cases in both 2016 and 2017, based on government records.
