Group of four girls stalked, harassed and assaulted at hotel in West Bengal

A gang of four girls were allegedly assaulted, harassed and stalked at the hotel in Digha (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Kolkata: The girls, all in their late 20s, had planned a trip to Digha and their trip turned into a horrible experience when they were allegedly molested and beaten up at the Asha Hotel. They even were forced to cut their trip short and return home. A group of four girls were allegedly assaulted, harassed and stalked at the hotel in Digha which they had checked in. As per the reports, the incident took place when the girls checked into Hotel Asha in Digha on Friday morning.

The girls complained about a faulty air conditioner and leakage in washroom taps to the staff. Soon after, random people started knocking on their door, asking for a matchbox. The girls further claimed that initially, they ignored the noise of the people who knocked at their door, but as time passed, people started banging on their door from the outside after dark.

One of the girls who works as a junior executive told Times of India that they were so scared by the incident that they stacked a table and chairs against the door and spent the entire night huddling on the bed wide awake. Meanwhile, when they narrated the incident to the hotel manager the next morning and asked him to trace the CCTV footage, they were ignored. Not only this, the staff manager of the hotel even threatened them when the girls said that they would file a police complaint.

The girls then called two other friends who were at another hotel in Digha. The hotel manager pushed their friends out of the hotel and assaulted them. When they tried to record the behaviour of the hotel manager, he allegedly snatched their phones. One of the girls said, “I was assaulted by four hotel staffers and three women also came around and kicked me in the abdomen."

However, two other hotel guests recused them after which they went to the police station to register a complaint against the hotel manager and staffers. The girls claim that they received no help from the local police. An officer said that there is "no need” of lodging a complaint but if the girls would insist on a complain then they had to spend several days in Digha.

The girls were so horrified by the incident that they decided to leave the city. One of the girls among four told the national daily that she still has bruises on her face and tremendous pain in the abdomen. On Tuesday, girls sent a written complaint by post to senior officers of Kolkata and Howrah police and a copy to the chief minister's office in Nabanna.

On the contrary, the hotel's owner told TOI that the women staffers of the hotel pushed them out but did not assault anyone. He further mentioned that they went to the police station where the officer made them sit and resolve the matter but the girls refused and are creating an issue over such a small case.

Meanwhile, Bipradas Chakraborty, the secretary of Digha Shankarpur Hotel Owners Association told that strict action would be taken against the hotel as this was the second time that such a complaint has been registered against the Asha Hotel.
