In Mysuru, chain snatchers strike five times in 90 minutes

MYSURU: Two unidentified bike-borne miscreants went on a chain snatching spree in the city relieving five women of their gold chains in a span of 90 minutes in the early hours of ThursdayThe chain of incidents has instilled fear among women, especially the elderly, in Mysuru as one of the victims was injured in her face and neck region.According to police, five women were robbed of their gold chains in the early morning ambush by two-bike borne youths. Both were dressed in white shirts and blue jeans and sported black helmets. They committed the crimes between 6.20am and 8am. Gold chains worth Rs 3.5 lakh have been robbed by them, police added.They targeted lone women on the streets, except in one case. Since there is not much movement of public in the early hours, miscreants chosen that particular time to strike. This perhaps was the first case of serial chain snatching in Mysuru in 2019. In two cases, women could save some part of their chains, police said.Deputy Commissioner of Police (Law and Order) M Muthuraj said, “We suspect they may be part of the Irani gang, however, a probe has been launched.”Jayamma, 60, was the first to be targetted near Link Road in Vidyaranyapuram around 6.20am. She was on a morning stroll with her friend. Due to the impact she fell on the ground and suffered injuries. A 22-gram chain was yanked off from her neck.Minutes later, Jayalakshmi, 65, was targetted on Akkamahadevi Road. She, however, resisted the attempt, but lost a part of her chain.Nazarbad police said Suvarnadevi, 79, lost her 40-gram gold chain when she was returning after fetching milk from a booth. An officer said the incident happened minutes after the Garuda vehicle left the spot in Ittigegud. Bhagyamma, 55, too, resisted their attempt around 7am. She was entering her house after drawing rangoli in Gokulam under VV Puram police limits when one of the miscreants approached her on the pretext of asking an address and tried his luck. He could snatch away about six grams, a part of her mangalsutra.The last incident was reported from NR Mohalla wherein Lalithamma, 80, was robbed of her 40-gram gold chain at Unnathinagar colony.Though some police officers suspect the miscreants to be members of the Irani gang, some say they’re not, going by the physical features of the miscreants. Most of the Irani gang members are slim, but the miscreants were heavily built, an officer claimed. Police recovered the footage of movement of bike-borne youths robbing women at two places, but the visuals are not clear.Soon after the first incident was reported, police swung into action, but couldn’t track them as they committed the robberies without a break and fled. Cops claim the miscreants may have left the city soon after, going by the incidents and timings. The last case was reported in NR Mohalla.
