Mumbai: 30-year-old man sets 3 kittens on fire for 'fun'; out on bail

a 30-year-old man from Mira Road was apprehended on Wednesday for allegedly setting three-month-old kittens on fire | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: In an appalling case of cruelty to animals reported from the commercial capital of the country, a 30-year-old man from Mira Road was apprehended on Wednesday for allegedly setting three-month-old kittens on fire by placing them inside a burning carton.

The kittens were rescued by the accused's neighbour and are undergoing treatment at a hospital. Reportedly, one of them is in a critical situation. The accused was identified as Siddesh Patel, a resident of Ajmal Rama CHS, Bhakti Park. The accused confessed to the police that he burnt the kittens for 'fun'.

According to a report in the Hindustan Times (HT), senior inspector Kailash Barve said that the accused mentioned that he burnt the kittens for fun.

A resident of the housing society, Alen Fernandes told HT that there are around 50 stray cats in the society premises and most residents are animal lovers. Fernandes added that the incident came to light when one of the residents found the three kittens lying with severe burn injuries in the building lobby on Sunday morning and they were immediately rushed to a nearby a veterinarian.

Meanwhile, on checking the CCTV footage of the society, the residents were shocked at around 2:30 am, Patel entered the building lobby and lit a carton in which the kittens sleep. He placed the kittens into it one by one. He did not show any sympathy and walked away after watching the kittens burn, reported HT.

After the incident came to light, the society residents approached Zara Merchant, an animal rights activist. Merchant approached the police and a complaint was registered. The police have registered a case under Section 429 of the Indian Penal Code and Section 11 of the Animals Protection Act, 1962. Patel has been released on bail.

One of the residents of the housing society is currently taking care of the kittens.
