Consensual sex or false promise of marriage?

High Court

false promise

consensual sex

concerned with increasing number of such cases and allegationsThe High Court has said that increasing number of cases where women are enticed to have sex on theof marriage is a cause for concern. The court termed false complaints about alleged promise of marriage and such incidents as a ‘menace to society’. While deliberating on a petition in which an accused sought release, the court decided to place on record its views.Justice BA Patil in a judgement on April 26, said, “I want to place on record that in recent days, such incidents are in increased rate and the said type of offences are menace against the society. It is observed in many catena of decisions of Hon’ble Apex Court as well as this Court that whenever the innocent victim is sexually assaulted, then under such circumstances, it not only leads to physical assault, but also mentally and even her privacy is affected as contemplated under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. It is also noticed that when once such physical contact has been made under the false promise, it degrades and defaces the soul of the helpless victim and it also reduces the strength of the saved victim in the society.”The court also said that it is necessary to carefully consider whether the complaint of forced sex is a false complaint or whether there is a proof of false promise of marriage.“The victim would be the ultimate sufferer in the society. In order to prevent such type of activities and harassment, the Court has to take into consideration all the facts and circumstances of the case together then come to the conclusion, whether there is any false complaint or there is any materials to show that with a false promise, the physical contact has been made by the petitioner/accused.”The alleged victim and the accused are MBBS students in the Rajarajeshwari Medical College. The accused approached the High Court after a case of rape and cheating was registered against him. He feared arrest.The accused allegedly forced the victim girl to attend his birthday celebrations. He took her to a hotel, promised to marry and had sex with her. Subsequently “under the pretext of marriage many a times, he had physical contact with her.” When she asked him to marry her, he allegedly threatened to kill her.The advocate for the petitioner submitted to the court that the girl had paid the bills at the various places they visited but she had obtained the bills in his name. The issue was one ofand they were going together for nearly two years. There was no complaint at any point of time. They were MBBS students and both knew the consequences of having physical contact with consent. The government advocate argued that “if physical contact is there and subsequently, if the petitioner/accused refused to marry, that itself amounts to rape.”The HC in its judgement said that though it is argued “that it is a consensual sex, nothing has been substantiated to show that it is a consensual sex.”The victim was in the first year of MBBS and the accused in the final year and the complaint showed that the latter had forced the victim to attend his birthday party.The court said that there was ample material to show the conduct of the accused which establishes the alleged crime. He was also absconding and not available for investigation or interrogation, which “itself shows that his submissions are not fair and he has not assisted the investigation”.The court therefore dismissed his petition.
