Delhi doctor murder case: Made a 'big mistake'; prime suspect tells family

After his cellphone was unreachable, the police started treating him as the prime accused in the case. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: The prime suspect, in the murder case of the Delhi doctor murder case whose body was found on Tuesday night, last spoke to his family before his mobile phone got switched off in east Delhi's Mayur Vihar area. Reportedly, police officials said that the prime suspect- Chandra Prakash Verma sought forgiveness from his family members after telling that he had committed a 'big mistake'. His family had reportedly panicked after he refused to explain.

The deceased was identified as 25-year-old doctor, Garima Mishra, who was found dead with multiple stab wounds at a rented apartment in Central Delhi. She was found by her cousin Shivendra Pandey and landlord- Gautam Khurana at around 10:30 pm on Tuesday. Pandey had come to check on the deceased after she had stopped answering his calls.

#UPDATE: Inter-state crime cell has arrested a Dr Chandra Prakash Verma from Roorkee, Uttarakhand. https://t.co/KZkgSI4KIr — ANI (@ANI) May 3, 2019

According to a report in the Hindustan Times, police officials said that after Verma told his family that he had committed a big mistake, his family insisted that he elaborate but he disconnected the call and switched off his phone around 10 pm. The last call was recorded somewhere near NH-24, the officer added.

Deputy Commissioner of Police Mandeep Singh Randhawa told HT that six teams have been forced to probe the case and they are looking for the accused in various cities across Uttar Pradesh. The police suspect that Verma murdered Mishra by allegedly slitting her throat with a kitchen knife that was later found in a broken condition at the murder site, after having an altercation.

The HT report further mentioned that Verma left Delhi after switching off his phone and the police believe that he boarded the bus from Anand Vihar or Ghazipur area.

Reportedly, the police have collected CCTV footage from the bus terminals and the footage is being analysed in order to gather clues about the accused.

A police official added that Verma's photograph is being shown to bus operators, drivers and helpers to ascertain if he was seen in any of these areas. After his cellphone was unreachable, the police started treating him as the prime accused in the case.
