Delhi woman doctor's murderer was hiding in Roorkee, nabbed after 48-hour operation

New Delhi:

Two days after a female doctor was found dead with her throat slit at her rented flat in central Delhi’s Ranjeet Nagar area, the inter-state crime cell arrested Dr Chandra Prakash Verma from Roorkee in Uttarakhand. The victim was identified as 25-year-old Dr Garima Mishra. Originally from Uttar Pradesh’s Gorakhpur, Dr Mishra lived in the Capital and was preparing for her upcoming MD exams. According to Dr Mishra’s landlord, Gautam Khurana, she stayed in a single room on the third floor of the apartment and the adjacent room was shared by two other male doctors namely Chandra Prakash Verma and Rakesh. The rent was shared among the three and they had access to a common kitchen. The two were missing since the murder came to light. A broken kitchen knife with bloodstains was found from the spot, the police said.

Chandra Prakash Verma, suspected to be involved in the case, was missing since Tuesday night and was captured in CCTV leaving the flat at 8.45 pm with a bagpack. The police conducted raids at several locations and finally nabbed Verma from Roorkee. The police said Dr Verma was trying to commit suicide by jumping to a canal in Roorkee when they caught him. He was traced using his call records and based on his WhatsApp activities. Dr Verma has confessed to the killing and will be questioned further in Delhi, the police.



Rakesh, who was detained for questioning by the police on Wednesday, was released by them later in the evening after which he returned to the rented flat, he said.

"After seeking permission from police, the room where Rakesh and Verma stayed was opened. However, Rakesh is not here and seemed under depression. He left for his relative’s place today," Khurana said.

Dr Mishra’s body was been sent to the Lady Hardinge Medical College. And the post-mortem was conducted once the parents of the victim reached Delhi and was then handed over to her.

Landlord Gautam Khurana said Verma was seen active on WhatsApp regularly and they intimated police regarding the same. On Thursday morning, police officials again visited the Ranjeet Nagar flat for general enquiry. Verma was last seen active on WhatsApp at around 1.32 pm Thursday.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
