Kerala: 9-year-old girl sexually harassed by painting teacher in Thiruvananthapuram

After an FIR was registered in the case, the accused was apprehended by the Kerala police. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Thiruvananthapuram: In a case reported from Kerala's Thiruvananthapuram, a nine-year-old girl was sexually assaulted by her 39-year-old painting teacher, who also works as a graphic designer. The accused is a native of Tamil Nadu.

Mirror Now reported the case came to light after the minor's parents noticed changes in her behaviour. The police official said that the minor's parents reported a case against the accused and he has been booked under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act. After an FIR was registered in the case, the accused was apprehended by the Kerala police. And further investigation in the case is underway.

After noticing behavioural changes in the minor, her mother reached the State Child Welfare Child Council and addressed the changes. However, further investigation in the case is underway.

In a similar case reported from Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh police found the body of a 12-year-old girl, the minor was allegedly raped before being killed. Three people including the victim's aunt were taken into police custody.

The girl's body was found at Manuabhan in Lalghati, a small hillock which is also a popular tourist spot. Director Inspector General (DIG) Irshad Wali has revealed that scratch marks were found on the victim's body, adding that rape is yet to be confirmed awaiting a post mortem report. A search was launched for the minor after her parents approached Koh-e-Fiza police station on Tuesday evening claiming that she had not returned home after her tuition classes.

Reportedly, an officer familiar with the investigation said that city police have detained the girl's aunt and two youngsters who live in the same neighbourhood as the victim and her family. The two arrested boys were acquaintances of the girl's aunt.

The investigation in the case is underway.
