SAD worker booked for assault, leaders seek probe claiming false implication

Ludhiana: A day after police booked a Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) worker and his accomplices for allegedly thrashing an egg vendor and snatching Rs. 1200 from him, the SAD leaders on Friday approached Commissioner of Police for an inquiry into the allegations. Claiming it to be a false case, local leaders stated that SAD worker Sandeep Shukla was implicated as he had recently joined the party.

SAD district president (Urban), Ranjit Singh Dhillon, who along with workers met commissioner of Police Sukhchain Singh Gill, alleged that Congress workers were forcing Shukla, who has joined SAD last month, for joining Congress. When Shukla refused they implicated him in a forged case.

Dhillon said, "Shukla was in the party rally at South constituency at the time when he has been accused of assaulting the complainant. Besides, Shukla has been an independent candidate and he has recently joined the party. Local Congress leaders have been pressuring him to join their party, to which he refused. Now the Congress workers retaliated by implicating him in forged case", he claimed.

Meanwhile the Investigating Officer, Balwinder Singh, said that the police have registered a case following the complaint of Rama Shankar of Sundar Nagar, who sells boiled eggs in Daba area. On Thursday night, Sandeep Shukla along with his 25 accomplices turned up at his vend and allegedly thrashed him following an old rivalry. When he raised an alarm the accused flashed a countrymade gun and threatened him to keep mum and fled after snatching Rs. 1200 cash from him, the complaint said.

The Daba police has now registered a case under sections 379-B (snatching), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 506 (criminal intimidation), 148 (Rioting, armed with deadly weapons) and 149 (every member of unlawful assembly guilty offence committed in prosecution of common object) of IPC and sections 25/54/59 of Arms act, against Shukla and his accomplices.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
