Woman raped by 29-year-old on pretext of giving job, police investigation underway

The accused, in this case, is yet to be arrested (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Gurugram: Police in the city of Gurugram in Haryana are on the lookout for a 29-year-old man who is currently absconding, in connection with a case of rape of a 24-year-old woman. In her complaint, the woman has alleged that she met the accused in 2014 and he helped get her sister a job in the year 2018. The incident took place at Kukrola village in Manesar district of Haryana, added police officials.

A preliminary investigation has revealed that the woman's husband was out for work when the incident took place. The woman has alleged that the accused visited her home and forced himself on her on the pretext of discussing a job-related matter. He then fled the scene of the crime, she added in her statement to the police. Station house officer (SHO) Satyendar told media outlets that an official complaint in this regard was filed by the woman on the same evening as the day of the incident.

Based on her complaint, a case was registered in this regard on Thursday and an investigation into the matter is underway. Officials familiar with the matter told Hindustan Times that the suspect is employed by a private company in Sector-3 of IMT in Manesar. The accused has been missing since the matter was first brought to the attention of the police. More details in this regard are awaited, investigators told the national daily.

Quite similarly, a woman was arrested by Delhi police for plotting the murder of her husband along with her paramour. The incident took place in Usmanpur area of the national capital. The victim, a 42-year-old, was found on his bed at his residence. Neighbours rushed the Usmanpur-resident to a nearby hospital where he was declared dead upon arrival. An initial investigation led police to the wife of the victim, who under questioning, confessed to her role in plotting the murder.
