Labourer to spend 5 yrs in jail for rape bid on minor

Ludhiana: A local court has sentenced a labourer to five years of rigorous imprisonment for trying to rape a minor.

A fine of Rs 40,000 has also been imposed on the convict. In case of default in fine payment, he will have to undergo another year of rigorous imprisonment. The court directed that of the fine amount, Rs 30,000 be paid to the girl as compensation.

On August 28, 2014, police had booked the accused under sections 376, 511 (attempt to rape) of the IPC and sections 7 and 8 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act after the minor’s parents lodged a complaint.

As per prosecution, the accused lived in a rented accommodation in the same building where the minor, then 14-year-old, resided along with her family. On the afternoon of August 27, 2014, the accused barged into the minor’s room and tried to rape her. On hearing her cries, her mother rushed to her room and the accused escaped.

The family then approached the police and the accused was arrested.

The additional public prosecutor sought punishment to the accused, a labourer, on the basis of prosecution evidence, including statement of the minor and her mother, among others.

The defence counsel submitted that the accused has been implicated and the deposition of prosecution witnesses does not inspire confidence. The court, however, turned down the plea of the defence on the basis of on-the-record evidence.

The court observed, “The draconian effect of sexual assault or an attempt to defy the physical dignity of a child creates a shadow of fear in the social fabric shattering the reposition of trust and faith in the fellow beings. Sexual assault or its attempt in any of its manifestations is degrading, humiliating and monumental blow upon self-esteem, dignity, respect, honour and confidence of child victim. The scars of such traumatic experience haunt the victim for life. Sexual assault on minor children is gross and blatant violation of their fundamental, constitutional and human rights. Adequate sentencing is better statutory armour against gender outrage than the long clauses of complex sections with all the protections writ into it. The need for every person to know the legal ramifications of his vicious act is indispensable.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
