Four minor boys confess to raping 8-year-old girl after watching pornographic film

The boys were produced before a court and have been sent to a juvenile remand home (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Jaipur: A shocking case has emerged from Sriganganagar in Rajasthan where police have arrested three minor boys in connection with the rape of an eight-year-old girl. Officials familiar with the matter said that the minor boys, who are neighbours of the victim, were addicted to pornography and committed the heinous crime after watching a pornographic film.

The matter came to light earlier this week when the girl's mother approached Mahila police station on May 1 and registered a complaint in this regard. In her complaint, the mother claimed that three minor boys raped her daughter while showing her videos which were pornographic in nature. On the basis of her complaint, police officials arrested the boys aged 8, 10 and 12 years.

Deputy superintendent of police (DSP) of Sriganganagar city circle, Ismail Khan told Hindustan Times that the victim and the accused are residents of a housing colony which falls under the Sadar police station area. One of the accused boys was addicted to pornography and watched it on his father's cell phone, added Khan. Police officials familiar with the case said that the girl complained to her mother of abdominal pain and was taken to a doctor who told the mother that the minor girl had been raped. As per the latest reports, the minor boys have confessed to the crime and were produced before a court which sent them to a juvenile reform home.

A similar instance had come to light from Surat in Gujarat earlier this year where four boys, all aged under 14 years, were accused of sexually assaulting a three-year-old girl in Hazira. The toddler was found bleeding in the bushes and had to undergo surgery following the mind-numbing crime. It was later revealed that the accused boys were sons of contract labourers working in local industries in Bihar. A 15-year-old boy was arrested in Moradabad district of Uttar Pradesh for allegedly raping a four-year-old girl.
