Nirbhaya case blown out of proportion by media, says former Delhi CM Sheila Dikshit

Sheila Dikshit claimed her government had no role to play in the security and that "law and order was under the purview of the central government". (Photo: PTI)

Congress leader and former Delhi Chief Minister Sheila Dikshit has said that the 2012 Nirbhaya gangrape case was "blown out of proportion" by the media.

"There are so many cases like this taking place today," Sheila Dikshit said in an interview to Mirror Now.

Sheila Dikshit claimed her government had no role to play in the security and that law and order was under the purview of the central government.

Dikshit said there were several cases of rape across the country which people ignored.

"Sometimes you ignore rapes, just a little thing in the newspaper...little children being raped...and one was made into a political scandal," Sheila Dikshit said.

She was also asked about women’s safety by ensuring proper street lighting and CCTV installations, to which she responded that it was not her government’s responsibility as the Delhi government comes under the central government.

The United Progressive Alliance led by the Congress party was in power at the Centre when the gangrape took place in 2012.

On December 16, 2012, a 23-year-old paramedic student (named Nirbhaya by the media) was gang-raped and beaten up by six men in a moving bus in south Delhi. Her body was brutalised and thrown out of the bus, as was her male companion.

After being treated in a Delhi hospital for 11 days, she was flown to Singapore for specialised treatment but died two days later on December 29, 2012.

When asked about the measures taken for women's safety, Sheila Dikshit said, "The solutions are with the government of India and Parliament."

When asked about a solution as a party candidate for Lok Sabha, Sheila Dikshit said that she had no solution to it.

Sheila Dikshit served as the chief minister of New Delhi for 15 years from 1998 to 2013. She is contesting the Lok Sabha elections from North East Delhi. All seven seats in Delhi will vote on May 12.
