2 months after Balakot airstrikes, Wg Cdr Abhinandan Varthaman interacts with colleagues in J&K – Watch

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman | Photo Credit: ANI

Srinagar: Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman interacted with his colleagues in Jammu and Kashmir on Saturday. A video of his short interaction with his colleagues in Srinagar has since gone viral on social media. In this 1.59-second video, the Wing Commander can be seen talking to his colleagues who are congratulating him and taking selfies with the IAF pilot.

In a short speech to his colleagues, Abhinandan says, “These photographs are not for you but for your families. I have not been able to meet them. I am standing in front of you today because of their prayers and well-wishes.”

#WATCH Viral video from Jammu & Kashmir: Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman interacting with his colleagues in Jammu and Kashmir. pic.twitter.com/rLwC4d1GUA — ANI (@ANI) May 4, 2019

After coming back from Pakistan Abhinandan was hospitalized as he had sustained injuries during his captivity in Pakistan. He was admitted to the Army’s Research and Referral hospital in Delhi after which he returned to his squadron in Srinagar, despite being advised a four-week sick leave by his doctors.

The IAF pilot was captured by the Pakistani Army after his MiG 21 Bison was shot down while chasing a Pakistani fighter jet during a dogfight. Before that, Abhinandan had successfully brought down PAF’s F-16 fighter plane.

Later, Pakistan PM Imran Khan announced that the captured pilot would be returned to India as a peace gesture and after spending 60 hours in Pakistan, Abhinandan was back in India.

While remaining in captivity in Pakistan Varthaman was praised for his attitude, grace and the way he handled himself in that challenging situation

Abhinandan was recently transferred by the IAF out of Srinagar due to a possible threat from Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) which had carried out the ghastly Pulwama terror attack.

The Wing Commander will now be deployed outside Srinagar.
