Arvind Kejriwal slapped by man during roadshow, cops say attacker an AAP supporter

Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal slapped during roadshow on May 4

NEW DELHI: Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal was assaulted by a man while campaigning for Aam Aadmi Party 's New Delhi constituency candidate Brijesh Goyal at Moti Nagar on Saturday. The assailant, Suresh Chauhan, climbed on the bonnet of the Maruti Gypsy that Kejriwal was on and appeared to slap him. He was caught by AAP supporters and thrashed before cops deployed for the event rescued the man and admitted him to hospital.AAP expressed outrage at the laxity in the security around the CM. Kejriwal is entitled to Z-category security cover and is accompanied by a detail of 25 police personnel and a pilot car.While deputy CM Manish Sisodia tweeted, "Do Narendra Modi and Amit Shah now want to get Arvind Kejriwal assassinated?", party spokesperson Saurabh Bharadwaj alleged that Delhi Police "lowers its guard while protecting the CM". AAP MP Sanjay Singh, too, alleged a conspiracy behind the attack.More controversy followed when Delhi Police claimed that their probe showed Chauhan, 33, was an AAP supporter and was in the reception group at Moti Nagar and as such the incident could not be blamed on police carelessness. They also said his name was on the list submitted by AAP before the event. Bharadwaj refuted the contention that Chauhan was an AAP supporter, and claimed that the attacker's wife, Mamata, had herself told the media that her husband was a "Modi bhakt".Later Anil Mittal, addititonal PRO, Delhi Police, said, "An enquiry by a DCP-level officer has been ordered to enquire as to how this person was allowed to be in the reception group."The incident happened around 5.45pm, when Kejriwal was passing through the Karampura market between Moti Nagar and Kirti Nagar. Chauhan, wearing a red shirt, climbed onto the bonnet of vehicle and tried to slap the CM before he was pulled away by Goyal.Police said that Chauhan owned a scrap shop at Kailash Park in the neighbourhood. They said he was a member of the welcoming group of AAP workers stationed at Moti Nagar to receive Kejriwal when he arrived for the roadshow. They claimed he was wearing an AAP cap and a scarf but had taken them off when the roadshow had started.Facing flak, Delhi Police additional PRO Anil Mittal said proper police arrangement from both the CM's security unit and local police had been put in place for the event in consultation with the organisers.While police are awaiting an official complaint to file an FIR again him, Chauhan is believed to have claimed that he had regularly attended AAP's rallies and meetings but had lately got disenchanted with the party. His wife, Mamata, too claimed that a few days earlier her husband had got into an argument with the local MLA because he was being asked to join the AAP roadshow. "He gets violent when talking about politics," she said.Chauhan's brother-in-law, Hansraj, who reached the police station after the incident, said that the man had stopped attending AAP's party programmes in recent days. "He was earlier one of the organisers of party activities in the area," said Hansraj.This is the not the first time that the CM has been attacked at a public rally. In 2014, a man had climbed on to his jeep and slapped him when Kejriwal was campaigning ahead of the Delhi assembly elections. In November 2018, a man had entered the Delhi Secretariat and attacked Kejriwal with chilli powder. The AAP leader was also attacked with ink and a shoe during public functions before assuming office as chief minister.
