Nirbhaya case 'blown out of proportion': Sheila Dikshit

NEW DELHI: Former chief minister and North East Delhi candidate of Congress Sheila Dikshit walked into a controversy on Saturday by suggesting that the Nirbhaya gangrape case in 2012 was "blown out of proportion" by the media in an interview with Mirror Now.After making the point that Delhi government had no role to play in making the city safe for women and emphasising that she was saying this as far as the role of the police was concerned, she agreed with the interviewer that the Nirbhaya case was "blown out of proportion". Earlier in the interview, she had called for "uniformity" in reacting to such crimes, saying that one became a "political scandal" while others were ignored.Sheila repeatedly pointed out that the police comes under the Centre and that the Delhi government couldn't even post anyone. She clarified that she didn't wish to blame anyone but was just pointing out the "situation". She compared the limited jurisdiction of Delhi government in matters of women's security to the limited role of media "which can write about these crimes but cannot take action which has to be taken by police."On being asked that being a candidate in the parliamentary elections , what solutions will she offer on the issue of women safety, Sheila said: "I have no solutions for things that are not under my purview. I will speak about this issue in Parliament because I will be representing Delhi".There was outrage over her remarks. Delhi Commission for Women chairperson Swati Maliwal described it as a "shameful interview" in a tweet, observing that "no wonder Delhi is the rape capital of the world". LGBT activist Harish Iyer said he was shocked by the comments. "Party affiliation aside, in the spirit of democracy and free voice that Congress espouses, I strongly condemn Sheila Dikshit. I regret that rape survivors have to hear this," he tweeted. Another activist, Seema Joshi, said that "people should choose parliamentarians who understand, empathize with gravity of problem and have some seriousness and solution for issues like women's safety."This is not the first time that Sheila has touched on this topic. In her autobiography, 'Citizen Delhi: My Times, My Life', she had written: "Even as I quietly reached out to Nirbhaya's family to extend them every possible help, my statement that law and order did not fall within our government's jurisdiction was viewed as being an insensitive attempt at passing the buck." She, in fact, blamed the Centre - UPA government led by Congress - for its "unresponsive stance" immediately after the incident as "deliberate as it shifted focus entirely on the Delhi government".She wrote that since the Centre didn't want to let the blame fall on it directly decided to take it on herself. "Someone had to take the blame."On December 16, 2012, Nirbhaya, a 23-year-old paramedic student, was beaten, tortured and gangraped by six men in a moving bus in south Delhi. Her body was brutalised and thrown out of the bus as was her male companion. It led to widespread public outrage and constitution of Justice Verma committee to change anti-rape laws
