Minor battles for life after gang rape, 5 held

Ludhiana: In a gruesome reminder of the Nirbhaya case of Delhi, a 16-year-old Ludhiana girl was repeatedly raped by five men, including four minors, for two days and later attacked with bricks, leaving her battling for life.

While police had arrested four accused on Friday night, the fifth accused was nabbed in the early hours on Saturday.

Meanwhile, the minor girl is yet to gain consciousness and her condition is said to be serious.

Inspector Pargat Singh said four out of five accused are minors and three of them, including a 21-year-old labourer, are siblings.

He said the accused have confessed that the labourer was the first one to rape the girl in a park on April 30. The next day, his friends and brothers raped the minor when the labourer had gone to work. Thereafter, the accused took the girl to another isolated place in Kohara and raped her again.

“There the girl tried to escape and attacked the accused with stones and bricks, but the accused overpowered her and hit the girl with a brick. She sustained severe head injury and started bleeding heavily,” the inspector added.

The accused got scared and took her to a private clinic near the locality. However, finding the case suspicious, the doctor asked them to go to the civil hospital. In the civil hospital, the accused admitted the girl with fake name, saying that she has met with an accident.

The father of rape survivor said, “My daughter works as domestic help and she leaves at around 8am. She returns between 10am to 12pm. However, on April 30 she did not return. Then we enquired from her employers and found out that she had not even gone to the house. We immediately went to a police station and lodged a missing complaint.”

“When the accused took our daughter to a clinic near our locality, the doctor who was known to me informed me about it. He also said he had asked them to take her to the civil hospital,” he added.

“When we reached the civil hospital, we could not trace our daughter as the accused had admitted her with a fake name. After searching for some time, we found her. The next day, when the accused came to the hospital to check if she had survived, we nabbed them,” the father added.

Youngest among her siblings

The 16-year-old rape survivor is youngest among four siblings. For the past two days, her parents and siblings are sitting by her side in the civil hospital, waiting for her to gain consciousness.

Her father said, “Her head injury is severe. Her feet have swollen and injured. Her face has swollen too. She is unconscious, but restless. I feel that she wants to say something, but her body is not supporting her. Being a father, I can feel her pain.”

“I am not educated enough to know what the maximum punishment is for this crime. All I know is that I want justice for my daughter. I want strict punishment for all accused,” he added.

Gruesome crime

April 30 | The girl goes missing. She is raped by a 21-year-old man at a park

April 1 | After the man leaves for work, his brothers and friends rape her again. Thereafter, they take her to another isolated place and rape her again

April 2 | The girl tries to escape and attacks her assaulters with stones and bricks. But the accused overpower her and hit a brick on her head. They take her to a local clinic and later admit her to the civil hospital with a fake name, claiming that she has met with an accident

April 3 | The accused reach hospital to see if the girl has died, but are nabbed by girl’s relatives. The accused are handed over to the police



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
