Mutiny in Awadh between the BJP and the Mahagathbandhan

mahagathbandhan

Mayawati

Babri Masjid

Mulayam Singh Yadav

(L) At Ayodhya, the siege within; (R) Mayawati with Akhilesh Yadav at a rally in Pratapgarh. The visible comfort level between the two leaders signals a transfer of vote

Akhilesh Yadav

Satish Mishra

SP and BSP voters at a rally in Barabanki

Transporter Brajesh Singh (right) who supports Modi, and his childhood friend Ramapati Yadav who is a gathbandhan supporter at Faizabad

Akhilesh Yadav with Mayawati’a chief aide and one of the architects of the gathbandhan, Satish Mishra

With 80 seats at stake in Uttar Pradesh, the fate of 2019 hinges on the battle between BJP and the. Here’s how things are shaping up.There remains something of the ancient about Ayodhya. It’s an intimate town with temple spires, blooming mango orchards, and on a scalding hot afternoon, becalmed streets.It’s only in the mind’s eye — and only if you are of a certain vintage — that one can recall a different lay of the land and a different year.The barricading, less than threefeet-wide, caged from the top to keep off gambolling monkeys, begins several hundred metres away from the disputed site. Seen from afar, it resembles a humongous prison. On both sides of the barricades, gun-toting para-military personnel stand erect. The state, conspicuously absent on December 6, 1992, is now imposingly present. We wind our way through the narrow confines, book-ended between pilgrims from Nepal and Karnataka, to reach a mound where an idol of Ram lalla has been installed in a tiny makeshift alcove. He sits there, a God besieged: it’s a strikingly powerful image. A temple here would turn it ordinary.The government’s failure to construct the Ram Temple is a non-starter in the 14 constituencies of Awadh that go to polls tomorrow. In Ayodhya itself, the mood unambiguously favours the BJP. Brajesh Singh, a transporter in the twin town of Faizabad, is a bhakt, not just of Ram lalla but also the incumbent Prime Minister. Such is his faith, that he will brook no argument, heed no logic. But that’s not why you are reading about him. One of Singh’s closest friends is Rampati Yadav, a Samajwadi Party campaigner who swears by the gathbandhan (alliance) between the SP and’s Bahujan Samaj Party. Both men wear their political colours on their sleeve, and yet remain amicably disposed towards each other when they meet every day over tea to discuss politics. These old courtesies that constitute the Ganga-Jamuni tehzeeb of UP are increasingly coming under strain though.Yadav, who has been quietly listening to Singh’s boisterous espousal of Modi, later corrals me outside to assert that it’s actually the gathbandhan that will sweep the polls.If 2014 was a wave, 2019 is a silent undercurrent, making it difficult for journalists to ascertain who will float and who will sink. Still, travel is conducive to a prognosis. Ours is that a mutiny is undeniably underway in Uttar Pradesh.When the dust had still not settled on the rubble of, SP patriarchand Mayawati’s mentor Kanshi Ram had forged an alliance in 1995 with the winning slogan: “Mile Mulayam-Kanshi Ram/Hawa mein udd gaye Jai Shri Ram.” Twenty-four years on, another slogan is hitting the sweet spot among gathbandhan enthusiasts: “Lathi, haathi, saat sau chhayasi”. The lathi refers to the Yadavs, the elephant to the Dalits under BSP, and the 786 to the Muslims. The combined vote share of the three communities in UP is about 49 per cent, and it is this combination that is now challenging the BJP juggernaut.Seemingly, the alliance flies in the face of ground reality. Over the long years of an SP rule, the Yadavs became landowners while the majority of the Dalits continue to be their labour. Mutual resentments never subside. “This is a top-down alliance being pushed down on the cadres. It’s to be seen how deep it takes root,” says a top retired bureaucrat who has served under several chief ministers across parties, includingand Mayawati. But their years out of power, he says, have left both parties restive; they grasp this as their last chance at political relevance.The gathbandhan may have been the brainchild of Akhilesh’s uncle Ramgopal Yadav and Mayawati’s consigliere, but it’s Akhilesh Yadav who is being credited with its implementation. “Mayawati has been through so much in life, she suffers from tremendous insecurity. But Akhilesh has consistently put his ego aside, agreeing to all her demands, be it seat-sharing or be it him always going to her house for their meetings. Much of the credit for the improved optics is his,” says social historian Badri Narayan. “Over time she, too, has softened and regained her confidence.”Mayawati remains one of India’s most enigmatic politicians. She is also its most powerful Dalit leader. Fiercely ambitious, fiercely secretive and fiercely suspicious, she’s been known to ask Satish Mishra to first take a turn in a car before sitting in it herself. When she first became chief minister in 1995 at the age of 39, she scandalised bureaucrats with her salty tongue. “Mayawati is from Western UP, where the Hindi is not so sophisticated, and it’s kosher to address people as ‘tu’. In Lucknow, the language is so much more refined,” says the senior bureaucrat who does not wish to be named. But that aside, he credits her with being a meticulous administrator, even scrupulous when it comes to matters of governance. “Well before Narendra Modi, it was she who completely empowered the bureaucracy.”A close supporter and long-time acquaintance who, again, does not wish to be named, says she has an acute sense of symbolism and of her place in history. “The massive Ambedkar parks are her legacy. When the parks were being designed, she changed the configuration of the stone slabs to make them thicker so that they can withstand time, just like the structures built by the Mughals.”There is symbolism even in her arrogance. Often, on a political dais, Mayawati sits alone on an oversized throne while the others take a backseat on regular chairs. Such is her control over her flock that one word from her can result in a vote change, as was seen in the by-elections of Gorakhpur, Phulpur and Kairana last year when the entire Jatav vote was transferred to Samajwadi candidates.At a gathbandhan rally in Barabanki [immortalised in Hindi literature by Krishna Chandar’s Ek Gadhe Ki Atma Katha, in which the protagonist meets Pandit Nehru and introduces himself thus: ‘Mr. Donkey (written in Hindi as ‘dunkey’) from Barabanki”.] there is a terrific din and festivity as thousands of supporters line up to hear Mayawati and Akhilesh speak. Notably, this time there are two thrones kept side by side for the two leaders. In ceding some space to Akhilesh, Mayawati also understands that she needs to appeal to younger voters. The rise of young leaders like Akhilesh, Tejaswi Yadav and — to a much-lesser extent Chandrashekhar Azad and Jignesh Mewani among Dalits — has signalled a generational shift. Mayawati feels the lack of a political heir acutely.In addition, astute caste polarisation by the BJP has been undercutting her vote bank. There are 62 sub-castes among the Dalits of whom Mayawati can only rely on the Jatavs who are her community. “The RSS has fully saffronised sections of the Dalits like Kori, Dhobi, Passi, Khatiq to the extent that these people no longer want to even talk about social justice, which was the bedrock of the Ambedkarite movement,” says professor Ravikant who teaches Hindi at Lucknow University, and who recently came in the crosshairs of the Yogi government for his critical social media posts.He provides an account of how this social re-engineering is carried out. “At the height of the Babri Masjid movement, word was spread that the city of Lucknow was named after Lakshman. Much later, when the BJP started consolidating OBC votes, it was said that Lucknow was named after a warrior called Lakhan Passi (Passis are a subcaste), while most recently, Yogi Adityanath closed that loop to assert that Lakhan Passi was actually an avatar of Lakshman himself.”In a similar bid to appeal to the numerically-powerful Passis, the RSS has mythologised a medieval warrior called Suhel Dev Passi. In highly-polarised Bharaich, the mazar of warriorsaint Salar Masood Gazi has long drawn pilgrims, both Hindus and Muslims. In the last few years, the RSS and their cohort have been organising an annual mela and a wrestling competition in the memory of Suhel Dev Passi whom Wikipedia describes as a ‘semi-legendary’ king who defeated Masood Gazi. The wrestling competition, an all-male affair, is followed by a dinner of khichdi, where people from all sub-castes share a communal meal which is then followed by a story-telling session. The story bears repetition here. A beautiful Hindu princess was travelling in a palanquin when she was abducted by a Muslim Nawab. A goatherd (symbolising the depressed classes) who witnessed this abduction, gave chase and valiantly fought off the Nawab’s men, rescuing the princess and restoring Hindu honour.The OBCs are divided into four strata: Doodh (comprising the Yadavs and Pals), Paani (comprising the Nishad community who are traditional boatmen), Kisani (they are Kushwahas, Kurmis, Patels and Rajbhars) and the Baniyas. In Amit Shah’s bid to consolidate the OBC vote, the BJP in UP raised the slogan: “Do ko chhod, subko jod” (Except for two i.e. the Muslims and Dalits, unite the rest). Though he is deeply unpopular in Lucknow, the ascension of Yogi Adityanath as chief minister fulfils the BJP’s aspiration to expand its urban base into the villages. His bigotry is the natural expression of a deeply-polarised majority.This churn in the depressed classes has made significant inroads into both Akhilesh and Mayawati’s vote bank, forcing her, in particular, to move entirely away from Babasaheb Ambedkar’s idea of annihilation of caste.The move from ideology to identity politics limits her severely, and this is where the tie-up with Akhilesh Yadav, who as chief minister was known for his development work, benefits her. At the Barabanki rally, Akhilesh makes much of the fact that while his government disbursed laptops to students, the state is at present saddled with a chief minister who can’t even operate one. “Chowkidar aur Thokidar (referring to Yogi’s encounter spree) dono ko hataana hai,” he says to rousing applause.With UP’s unemployment rate of 8.1, higher than the national average of 6.7 as per CMIE data, jobs are seen as the single biggest issue of this election. But, in fact, these elections are equally about the tussle between the issues of social justice and polarisation.A mutiny is well under way in Awadh. Will it follow or create history?
