Arvind Kejriwal slapped during roadshow at Moti Nagar

BJP Delhi president Manoj Tiwari condemned the incident and said the AAP might have “scripted” the incident.

A man climbs atop the open jeep and slaps chief minister Arvind Kejriwal during a roadshow in Moti Nagar on Saturday. Mr Kejriwal was campaigning for New Delhi Lok Sabha seat candidate Brijesh Goyal. (Photo: PTI)

New Delhi: Delhi chief minister and AAP supremo Arvind Kejriwal was once again physically assaulted during his road show in New Delhi’s Moti Nagar area on Saturday afternoon. The incident took place when Mr Kejriwal was campaigning in favour of his party’s candidate Brijesh Goyal who is contesting from the New Delhi seat.

A man climbed atop the open jeep and slapped Mr Kejriwal across the face before the AAP workers pulled him off the jeep. According to deputy commissioner of police (West) Monika Bharadwaj, the man has been identified as Suresh (33), a scrap dealer in Delhi’s Kailash Park area.

Deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia slammed the BJP after the incident. “Do Modi and Amit Shah want Kejriwal to be murdered?” Mr Sisodia tweeted, attacking the Prime Minister and the BJP chief. He said the BJP could not break the morale of Mr Kejriwal and could not defeat him in elections in five years despite putting in all its might. “Now you want him removed form your way like this. You cowards! This Kejriwal is your end,” he said in a tweet in Hindi.

BJP Delhi president Manoj Tiwari condemned the incident and said the AAP might have “scripted” the incident.

“We do not support violence and condemn such action by anyone. But I doubt as to why such incidents happen to Kejriwal in election time only. I doubt this incident may have been scripted by Kejriwal himself,” Tiwari alleged.

Delhi Congress spokesperson Jitender Kochar alleged that the incident was stage-managed by Mr Kejriwal for gaining sympathy of Delhiites.

Preliminary interrogation revealed that Suresh has been a supporter of AAP and used to work as an organiser of the party’s rallies and meetings. As per his version, over a period of time he got disenchanted due to behaviour of its leaders.

Keep yourself updated on Lok Sabha Elections 2019 with our round-the-clock coverage -- breaking news, updates, analyses etc all. Happy reading.
