Azim Premji Univ student allegedly assaulted, stripped and robbed in Bengaluru

Azim Premji Univ student allegedly assaulted, stripped and robbed in Bengaluru

Police have registered a case of robbery, assault and criminal intimidation.

news Crime

In a horrific incident that has come to light, a 21-year-old student of Azim Premji University in Bengaluru was severely assaulted after being abducted by three unidentified assailants. The three men also took away his clothes and valuables. The incident took place in Sarjapur on Monday at around 7pm, reports said.

The survivor Baibhav* (name changed) is the son of a Wing Commander in the Air Force. According to his statement to the police, he had missed the university-run bus and was walking towards the bus stop on Sarjapur Road, when the three men bumped into him.

“He tried to escape, but they overpowered him and dragged him to an isolated spot nearby,” police told The Hindu and when he fought back, the trio gagged him and branded him with hot plastic. They also allegedly hit him with a belt after tying him to a tree. After this, they took away his clothes including his shoes, phone, two smartwatches, and a wallet. The ordeal did not end there, the three men spat and urinated on him. By that time, he had lost his consciousness.

Speaking to Deccan Herald, the survivor said, “I noticed three men coming towards me, one of them tall. All three were swaying and walking, as if they were under the influence of narcotics or alcohol. One of them bumped into me, and started randomly abusing me. Then, they all started assaulting me for no reason whatsoever.”

He added, “There was no provocation or even resistance from me. I was trying to remain calm and looking for a chance to flee. The tall man whom the others called Shiva, and another short man, turned really aggressive and dragged me to a field nearby. The trio abused me in a mix of Kannada and Hindi. While Shiva was being aggressive, the other two men were having fun watching my plight.”

When he regained consciousness, he found himself lying naked in a field. He tried to take refuge in an under-construction building but was shooed away by security guards there. Following this, help came from a Good Samaritan, who helped him with his jacket and informed the police.

He was dropped back to the hostel by a beat police official. Police have registered a case of robbery, assault and criminal intimidation. He was treated in a hospital on January 15.
