PM Modi's rule most traumatic, sad story of governance, accountability failure: Manmohan Singh

Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said on Sunday that his successor Narendra Modi's five-year rule has been "most traumatic and devastating" for India's youths, farmers, traders, and every democratic institution. Manmohan Singh also said that PM Modi should be shown exit door as his five-year tenure has been a sad story of "governance and accountability failure".

In an interview to news agency PTI, Manmohan Singh said that the Central government does not believe in inclusive growth and only worries about its political existence at the altar of disharmony. Manmohan Singh also dismissed that there was a wave in favour of PM Modi. He also asserted that people have made up their minds to vote the government out.

"Five years of Modi Government is a sad story of governance and accountability failure. In the year 2014, Modiji came to power on the promise of 'acche din'. His five years rule has ended up being the most traumatic and devastating for India's youth, farmers, traders, businesses and every democratic institution," he said.

In one of his most fierce attacks on the Modi dispensation, Singh alleged that the past five years only witnessed "stench" of corruption peaking to "unimaginable proportions", adding demonetisation was perhaps the "biggest scam" of independent India.

Attacking the BJP, the former prime minister said that the saffron party has been searching for new narratives every day which "reflects bankruptcy of national security vision".

Manmohan Singh also said that PM Modi's policy on Pakistan was a "slipshod" and is marred by a series of "flip flops" - from going to Pakistan uninvited to inviting "rogue" ISI to the Pathankot. He felt that the country is headed for an economic slowdown. He also accused PM Modi's regime of leaving the country's economy in "dire straits".

"Let's not forget that Narendra Modi's slipshod policy on Pakistan has been marred by a series of flip-flops- from going to Pakistan uninvited to inviting the rogue ISI to investigate the Pathankot Air Base terror attack. Does it not speak volumes about the strategic failures of the Modi Government on the national security front," he asked.

On the Bharatiya Janata Party's focus on the issues of nationalism and terrorism in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, he sought to question Modi's commitment towards the nations.

Manmohan Singh said it was "distressing" to note that PM Narendra Modi was "filming movies" in the Jim Corbett National Park instead of chairing any meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) in the immediate aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

On incidents of terrorism in the Modi regime, Manmohan Singh said that it has seen a quantum jump.

"A lie spoken a hundred times does not become the truth," Manmohan Singh said. He also added that in the past five years, terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir alone have gone up by 176 per cent and ceasefire violations at the border with Pakistan up 1,000 per cent.

(With PTI inputs)
