After loss of seniority, Major Gogoi will now be shifted out of Kashmir valley

After loss of seniority, Major Gogoi will now be shifted out of Kashmir valley

India

oi-Deepika S

New Delhi, May 05: Major Leetul Gogoi, the Army officer involved with using a human shield on his military jeep during the 2017 Srinagar bypoll, will be shifted out of the Kashmir Valley as a punishment for "fraternising" with a local woman in a Srinagar hotel in May 2018.

The court martial had found Major Gogoi guilty of "fraternising" with a local in violation of official orders on the subject and for "being away from the place of duty while in operational area".

The proceedings of the court martial were confirmed by the Army headquarters after which it was decided to shift him out the valley, the officials said, adding that the final orders were received very recently.

Major Gogoi faces loss of seniority

Gogoi and Malla's summary of evidence was completed in early February, followed by the initiation of the court martial proceedings, they said.

The statements of the both the accused as well as other witnesses were recorded by the Army court and the punishment, which has been vetted by the Army headquarters, has been given, they added.

Major Gogoi and his driver were detained by Jammu and Kashmir Police following an altercation with the hotel staff when he was allegedly trying to enter it with an 18-year-old woman on May 23 last year.

The woman had expressed her unwillingness to depose during the court martial proceedings and informed the Army authorities that she had given a statement before a magistrate and the same should be treated as her final stand.

The woman had also stated that she had gone out with Major Gogoi on her own will, besides disclosing that she had become a friend of the Army officer through his fake Facebook profile, where he had named himself Ubaid Arman.

Immediately after the incident came to light last year, Army chief Bipin Rawat had said that exemplary punishment would be given to Major Gogoi if he was found guilty of "any offence".

"If any officer of the Indian Army is found guilty of any offence, we will take strictest possible action," General Rawat had said.

Major Gogoi hit the headlines after he tied a man to a jeep purportedly as a shield against an unruly mob which was hurling stones during a by-poll at Budgam, forms part of the Srinagar Lok Sabha seat, on April 9, 2017.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Sunday, May 5, 2019, 18:41 [IST]
