BJP writes to EC blaming TMC for bombing in Bongaon PC, alleges Bengal police complicit in violence

TMC supremo Mamata Banerjee during a public meeting I Photo credit: PTI | Photo Credit: PTI

Kolkata: The round five of the general elections in the state of West Bengal was yet again marred by violence in all the constituencies where polling was conducted on Monday. Bombs were hurled by miscreants outside two polling booths in the Bongaon parliamentary constituency with reports of violence at other places. BJP blamed the TMC for bombing in Bongaon.

West Bengal BJP moved the Election Commission alleging “rigging in hundreds of booths, blatant false voting, bombing and arson, destruction of EVMs, brutal attacks on BJP candidates, attack on media persons and attack on peaceful voters at large”.

In the letter addressed to West Bengal’s Chief Election Officer and marked to two special observers Ajay Nayak, IAS, and Vivek Dubey, IPS, the BJP state unit raised the “issue of wide spread violence”.

“In all the Lok Sabha constituencies which were having poll today have seen wide spread violence including rigging in hundreds of booths, blatant false voting, bombing and arson, destruction of EVMs, brutal attacks on BJP candidates, attack on media persons and attack on peaceful voters at large,” the BJP wrote in the letter to EC.

BJP also complained of “brutal attacks” on BJP’s Barrackpore nominee Arjun Singh in in booth number 241 and 242 in Noapara which lies under Titagarh police station.

“While he was entering the booth 241, the miscreants belonging to the ruling party (TMC), attacked him to prevent his entry to the booth,” the BJP said in the complaint.

The BJP even alleged that the local police was complicit in the attack on Singh. “Most unfortunately the local IC of Tittagarh PS Shankar Chowdhury was actively involved in physical attack on the candidate.

The saffron party complained that its Hoogly nominee Locket Chatterjee, Srirampur candidate Debajit Sarka, and Bongaon constituency candidate Santanu Thakur was also attacked brutally in Jagadishpur area.

The BJP also alleged that the state police supported “TMC goons” in perpetrating violence. “In all most all the booths state police were seen taking an active role, whereas it was instructed that "no State Police would be within close proximity of any booth".

The party said it will submit a list of booths where re-polling should be conducted.

Out of the seven states where polling was conducted in the fifth phase of the Lok Sabha election, West Bengal saw maximum turnout at 74.06%.
