Thane: Former rape convict sentenced to 2-year imprisonment for molesting minor

The accused inappropriately touched the girl while she was sitting outside her house in Bhiwandi. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Thane: A court in Thane district of Maharashtra has sentenced a 57-year-old man to two years of rigorous imprisonment for molesting a girl in his neighbourhood.

The convict, Arif Ahmed Memon, who worked as a labourer, was found guilty under Indian Penal Code section 354-A (physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures). The judge also imposed a fine of Rs. 500 on the convict. The court examined three witnesses including the victim, her mother and the investigating officer in the case.

The accused inappropriately touched the girl while she was sitting outside her house in Bhiwandi, the prosecution told the court. According to a report in PTI, the man was earlier convicted in a rape case in 2017 and served 7 years in jail. While, pronouncing the verdict, the court observed that the accused was a repeat offender.

On May 4, a Mumbai court sentenced a 62-year-old man to 10 years rigorous imprisonment for raping a 5-year-old girl in Kurla area in 2018. The convict Banarasi Gupta has been found guilty under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act and section 307 of the Indian Penal Code.



The incident occured in 2018 when the victim and her brother were at their aunt's house in Nehru Nagar in Kurla. There the accused, who is a neighbour, took the girl to his home on the pretext of giving her ice cream and raped her.

The crime came to light after the victim told her aunt about pain in her private parts. Later, a case was registered against the accused at the Nehru Nagar police station.

In January this year, a school van driver was sentenced to life imprisonment by a Hyderabad court for kidnapping and raping a 14-year-old girl at Hayathnagar in 2014.

According to a report in The Hindu, the convict acquainted the girl, who was a student of class 9, and kidnapped the victim and raped her multiple times.
