Top news of the day: Clean chit to CJI Gogoi in sexual harassment probe, grenades lobbed at polling booths in Pulwama during Phase 5 polls, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

Justice Bobde panel gives clean chit to CJI in sexual harassment probe

The Justice S.A. Bobde-led in-house inquiry panel examining the sexual harassment allegations against Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi on Monday gave the top judge a clean chit. A short statement issued by the Supreme Court on its website on Monday said the committee, also comprising Justices Indira Banerjee and Indu Malhotra, found “no substance” in the allegations levelled by a former apex court employee against the CJI.

General election, Phase 5: Suspected militants lob grenades at polling booths in Pulwama

Suspected militants lobbed grenades at polling booths in two places in Pulwama. One failed to explode, while the other was destroyed by a bomb disposal squad that was immediately rushed to the spot.

CBSE Class 10 results declared; 13 students share top rank

Of the 17.6 lakh students who appeared in the Central Board of Secondary Education’s (CBSE) Class 10 examinations, 91.1% have passed. This is 4.4 percentage points higher than last year’s pass percentage of 86.7%.

A changed Rafale order of April 30 leaves the CJI 'completely perplexed'

Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi on Monday admitted his “complete perplexity” at a mysterious sleight of hand that altered the contents of an April 30 judicial order concerning the Rafale review hearing.

Modi conducts aerial survey of cyclone Fani-affected areas

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday conducted an aerial survey of Puri and Khurdha districts to get first hand information about the devastation caused by extremely severe cyclonic storm Fani.

‘Game of Thrones’ season 8 episode 4 one of my favourites: Kit Harington

Game of Thrones star Kit Harington says the fourth episode of the eighth and final season of the HBO series is one of his personal favourites. The 32-year-old actor, who plays fan favourite Jon Snow in the epic fantasy show, said the latest chapter is very Shakespearean as it has certain “twisted and uncomfortable” elements in it.

Schools re-open in Sri Lanka amid tight security

Schools in Sri Lanka resumed classes on Monday with few students arriving in classrooms, two weeks after the devastating Easter Sunday bombings forced the authorities to close educational institutions.

SC dismisses plea challenging J-K order restricting civilian traffic on national highway

The Supreme Court on Monday dismissed a plea challenging the Jammu and Kashmir government’s order restricting civilian traffic for a day in a week on a stretch of the national highway from Udhampur to Baramulla for the movement of security forces.

Couple set on fire over inter-caste marriage in Maharashtra’s Ahmednagar

A newly-wed couple was set on fire in a village in Ahmednagar district earlier this month, following opposition to their inter-caste love marriage.

IPL 2019: Patchy CSK banking on home advantage to outwit MI in Qualifier 1

Handed a reality check in their last league fixture, defending champions Chennai Super Kings would bank on home advantage to seal their place in the IPL final when they take on a confident Mumbai Indians in the Qualifier 1 of the IPL here on Tuesday.
