Swara Bhasker terms Pragya Thakur’s candidature shameful, calls her Hindu terror accused

Swara Bhasker terms Pragya Thakur's candidature shameful, calls her Hindu terror accused: Actor Swara Bhaskar has always been vocal about her opinions on the ongoing issues of the country. She is one of the leading Bollywood actors who maintains distance from the diplomatic answers and stands strong on her stance. The actor on Monday noted that if people believe that there is Islamic terrorism then there can be Hindu terrorism too.

Swara Bhasker terms Pragya Thakur’s candidature shameful, calls her Hindu terror accused: Actor Swara Bhaskar has always been vocal about her opinions on the ongoing issues of the country. She is one of the leading Bollywood actors who maintains distance from the diplomatic answers and stands strong on her stance. The actor on Monday noted that if people believe that there is Islamic terrorism then there can be Hindu terrorism too. She elaborated her statement saying violence, crime and terrorism are sins and people from any religion could commit it. Be it Hindu, Muslims, Christians, Buddhists, or Jews, people from all these religions have committed crimes in the past.

When asked about the BJP’s Pragya Thakur’s candidature, the Veere Di Wedding actor replied saying that the fact that the saffron party had fielded her from Bhopal was shameful. Pragya Thakur is one of the keys accused in the Malegaon blasts case and is currently out on bail. The actor also said that Pragya Thakur is a Hindu and was accused of terrorism which makes her a Hindu terror accused. Pragya Thakur is contesting against Congress’ Digvijaya Thakur from the Bhopal constituency.

Swara also praised the Congress saying that she had gone through the party’s manifesto and it is commendable as it talks about the issues of the country.

A few days back, Swara was seen campaigning for Left candidate Kanhaiya Kumar who is contesting from the Bihar’s Begusarai constituency. The actor shares a close relationship with Kanhaiya as both of them have studied from Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU).

Addressing media during Kanhaiya’s rally, Swara said she feels aligned to Kanhaiya’s views as a rational and patriotic citizen of the country. She added if Kanhaiya wins, it will be a victory for Indian democracy.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
