Southern railway forms five teams to nab train thieves in Salem

SALEM: Alarmed by the rising frequency of thefts on moving trains in Salem region, DGP (Railways) C Sylendra Babu inspected the Mavelipalayam stretch on Sunday night.On Monday, Sylendra Babu held a meeting with Railway DIG S Balakrishnan and senior Southern railway officials on ways to curb the menace. Talking to reporters after the meeting, Sylendra Babu said the police suspected the role of a gang from Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. “We have formed special teams to nab them,’’ he said. The railway police have also sought the assistance of the district police from Salem and Namakkal. The railway police have also increased security in trains crossing the section and have posted armed personnel.On Friday night, a three-member gang struck four running trains on the Sankari-Salem stretch, robbing five passengers of a total of 24 sovereigns gold. The thefts were reported in Dhanbad-Alleppey Express, Cheran Express, Mayiladurai Fast Passenger and Mangalore Express. “The three boarded the trains at Mavelipalayam area when the train was travelling very slow.”Trains were operated only at 20kmph due to the ongoing track works in the stretch.Similar thefts were reported in various trains in the stretch over the past fortnight and cases have been registered in Salem and Erode creating panic among the train passengers.Balakrishnan said that five special teams have been formed to nab the culprits. “The gang involved in the train thefts will be arrested soon,’’ he said.The gang has been giving nightmares to the passengers as at least 10 cases of thefts were reported in the last one month. In one of the cases, the gang had hurled stones on a railway cop before fleeing. Eyewitnesses said the gang would get into the moving train near Mavelipalayam, snatch chains from women and jump out within minutes.Assuring the passengers not to be scared, Balakrishnan said they have increased visible policing in trains and railway stations. “We have recommended installing CCTV cameras in trains to deter anti-social elements,’’ he said.The railway police also urged the public to inform the cops on board if they spot suspicious people in the train.
