Court acquits 3 in tussle over pet cats

Judge rules that evidence doesn’t support Vijay Navdikar’s allegation of being assaulted by the Shastares, cites previous cases with NCP MP Vandana Chavan while noting that the felines are indeed causing trouble for residents



The tussle among neighbours of the Yashodhan Park Society over alleged nuisance of pet cats has again seen the light of the day after the Pune district court acquitted three residents of the society in an assault case filed against them by Vijay Navdikar, owner of the eight felines which roam the apartment complex.



Vijay Navdikar and his pets had become the talk of the town when Nationalist Congress Party’s Member of Parliament Vandana Chavan, who used to reside in the society, had filed a case over the alleged nuisance caused by the cats. Back in November 2016, one of the cats had pooped at the front door of the Shastare family.



The latter had then approached Navdikar, who had cleaned up the mess. Navdikar alleged that the Shastare mother-son duo, with their maid Anupama, got into a heated argument with him and later physically assaulted him. Navdikar had then filed a complaint against the trio for allegedly trespassing into his house and manhandling him.



Nikhil Shastare (24), his mother Sushmita Shastare (44), who are both residents of the society in Navi Peth, and their maid Anupama Sayyed (28) were facing charges of trespassing and voluntarily causing hurt under sections 452, 323 and 427 of the Indian Penal Code.



Meanwhile, during the trial, evidence produced by the prosecution did not support Navdikar’s allegations and the court noted that the pets are indeed a nuisance for the society members.



Advocate VS Karkande, who represented the accused, furnished multiple incidences which had occurred over the years at the hearing. During cross examination of Navdikar and his daughter Medha, he said the cats roam the society and enter their neighbour’s houses.



Advocate Karkande further canvassed the argument that with eight pets to take care of, it must become difficult for the Navdikars to tackle them. He said that even the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) had directed the family to move the cats from the society, but the Navdekars had not complied.



The court, while giving the judgment, cited all the previous incidences that took place in the society and the cases filed between Navdikar and MP Chavan against each other since 2016.



MP Chavan, who has filed two cases against Navdikar, was also examined by the prosecution lawyer during the trial. Speaking to Mirror, Chavan said, “Society members are facing harassment because of the pets. Despite filing multiple complaints we are not getting any help from the authorities. I had to leave the society and move elsewhere. Navdikar has been giving his cats and street dogs glucose biscuits which cause hair fall and diabetes in the animals. The pets are making the premises dirty and the entire society is suffering.”



“They are keeping these pets in their house just to harass the neighbours. All of us had even met the police commissioner but no action has been taken yet,” Chavan added.


