Karan Oberoi Of ‘Jassi Jaissi Koi Nahin’ Fame Arrested For Rape & Blackmail

Remember Raghav from Jassi Jaissi Koi Nahin? Of course, you do! Karan Oberoi rose to fame courtesy this beloved soap opera that took over our television screens during the early years of the new millennium. Karan is making news again, but not for the right reasons. According to news reports, serious charges of rape and blackmail have been levelled against the actor. Allegedly, Karan raped a woman, filmed the whole act, and then blackmailed her for money. Shocking, right?

Mumbai:TV Actor Karan Oberoi arrested by police in connection with an alleged rape case. More details awaited. — ANI (@ANI) May 6, 2019

As per police officials: “Oberoi not only raped the woman and filmed the act but also demanded money from the victim threatening to release the video if she did not pay up.” The case has been registered at the Oshiwara police station, and the actor was arrested on Sunday under Sections 376 and 384 (rape and extortion) of the Indian Penal Code, according to Senior Inspector Shailesh Pasalwad. It’s been said that the actor allegedly raped the woman under the pretense of marrying her. Karan has been sent to police remand and will stay there till 9th May.

S Pasalwad, Sr Insp, Oshiwara police station:On basis of complaint from a woman against actor Karan Oberoi,a case has been registered u/s 376 (punishment for rape)&386(Extortion by putting a person in fear of death) IPC against him. He has been sent to police remand till 9th May. pic.twitter.com/nCzpHlsvhT — ANI (@ANI) May 6, 2019

Karan is the same guy we have been crushing on since the days of A Band Of Boys, which was formed two decades ago. Post the success of the music group, Karan acted in popular shows like Jassi Jaissi Koi Nahin and Inside Edge.

Thankfully, the #MeToo wave has not only hit the Indian film industry, but also the Indian television industry--where exploitation often goes unchecked. While it might come as a shock to his fans, we are only left with one question--how many more? Will this era of rampant sexual misconduct ever come to a stop?
