Protests erupt in Alwar following gang-rape of woman in front of her husband

Locals have taken to the streets in protest, alleging police inaction (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Jaipur: Massive protests have erupted in Alwar district of Rajasthan, with protestors demanding the immediate arrest of five men who allegedly gang-raped a woman in front of her husband earlier this year. Going by reports, the incident took place on April 26 when the woman was riding pillion on her husband's motorcycle.

In her complaint to the police, the woman claimed that they were waylaid by five local boys. The boys then dragged both of them to a dirt track on the side of the road where they took turns to rape the woman in front of her husband. The accused reportedly shot the entire act on their cell phone cameras and threatened to post it on social media in order to silence the couple.

Terrified at the possibility of the accused circulating videos of the act on the internet, the couple decided to remain silent. However, they approached the police and decided to lodge an official complaint on Thursday. Police officials have registered cases under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and SC/ST Prevention of Atrocities Act against the accused who have been identified as sons of influential local families.

Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot on alleged gang-rape in Alwar: I'm taking this case seriously, state DGP himself is monitoring the case & culprits will be punished. pic.twitter.com/qifcf3twpR — ANI (@ANI) May 7, 2019

Superintendent of police (SP) of Alwar, Rajiv Pachar said that a first information report (FIR) has been registered against the accused and teams of officers have been formed to nab the accused. Protesting locals have alleged police inaction in this regard. More details in this regard are awaited pending further investigation. Similar incidents have come to light from different parts of the country in the past.

Kapil Garg, DGP Rajasthan on alleged gang-rape in Alwar: A case has been registered against 5 people, one person has been arrested out of those five. 14 teams are working on the case. pic.twitter.com/3exuKiDifs — ANI (@ANI) May 7, 2019

One such instance was reported from Bulandshahr in Uttar Pradesh in 2016 when highway bandits apprehended a family at Dostpur village of Bulandshahr on Delhi-Kanpur highway. The victims were travelling to Shahjahanpur on National Highway (NH) 91 when they were halted by the assailants. Reports at the time had claimed that the men of the family were tied up by the accused who then took turns to rape the mother and teenaged daughter for over three hours.
