Gujarat ATS' all-women team captures wanted criminal with 28 cases against him from Botad's dense forests

The all-women squad with the captured criminal (Photo Courtesty: @MihirBhatt99) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Ahmedabad: An all-women team of the Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) has managed to nab a notorious history-sheeter who has managed to law enforcement agencies the slip more than once and was reportedly absconding since June of 2018. The four-member team comprising police sub-inspectors Aruna Gameti, Nitmika Gohil, Santok Odedara, and Shakuntala Mal nabbed dreaded criminal Jusab Allahrakha Sandh from the dense forest areas of Botad district on Saturday.

Sandh is currently wanted for 23 crimes, including eight murders. He was last seen in June of 2018 when he skipped parole. Officials familiar with the history sheeter's movement said that he murdered a senior citizen in Rajkot soon after skipping parole. He then began hiding in remote forest areas with no road connectivity in Botad district and managed to elude capture by shifting his location once every two days. He was finally nabbed from a hiding spot near Deodhari village where he set up camp after moving between Junagadh, Amreli, Ahmedabad, Rajkot and Botad.

Speaking to Ahmedabad Mirror, PSI Santok Odedara said that a source tipped off PSI Jignesh Agrawat about Sandh's location which led to his capture. The police sub-inspector who was part of the team which managed to put an end to Sandh's criminal spree said that they trekked for nearly 30 kilometres in order to reach the history sheeter's location. She also claimed that the team managed to capture Sandh in his sleep. This criminal committed crimes and hid in the forest without the need for a proper house or food which made him difficult to track, added the PSI.

Gujarat ATS superintendent of police (SP) Himanshu Shukla told the publication that the formation of the squad was unplanned and came together since all of the four members had served well in different teams which prompted top officials to assign them to carry out this onerous task. The target of their search, Sandh, began his crime spree in December of 2012 with the murder of a priest in Junagadh. Shockingly, he committed the crime barely days after being released from prison for the alleged murder of his own brother-in-law.
