Britain should reform, not leave, the European Union

I refer to Sholto Byrnes's opinion piece Brexit is a shambles, but Britain has no realistic option but to leave the EU (May 7). I for one have no problem as a UK citizen with the notion of ever-closer integration with the European Union, providing there is a proper constitutional basis to achieve this. The concept of European citizenship has existed for more than a decade. It is something to be built on, not discarded.

Reform to achieve better representation for the citizens of member states is the way forward. This has implications for the political parties ­currently wedded to competing only within national boundaries. The writing is on the wall not only for Britain as a member of Europe, but also for the political parties that supposedly defend our interests.

Stephen Worsley, Dubai

Modi has lowered the bar of dignity in Indian politics

I write in reference to your article Violence in Kashmir as India holds fifth round of voting (May 6). You correspondent eloquently describes how Indian Prime Minister ­Narendra Modi labelled the father of his opponent, Rahul Gandhi, as a corrupt person. Mr Modi lowered the bar of dignity in politics by commenting: "Your father's life ended as Bhrashtachari No 1" (the most corrupt).

Mr Gandhi’s father, Rajiv, was a former Indian prime minister, who was assassinated in 1991 by LTTE terrorists. What is the need to bring him into this election battle, 28 years after his tragic and ­untimately death? This is in very poor taste from Mr Modi.

Rajendra Aneja, Dubai

Could infrastructure projects be the key to ballot victory?

I write in reference to your article India elections 2019: Developments and economy draw voters to Narendra Modi (May 5). Ramola Talwar Badam's article on the current Indian elections elaborately explains the pulse of the people on the development of new roads and high rise-buildings, and other projects designed to push India into the future. As Ms Badam has rightly mentioned, the allegations continuously being levelled at the main opposition Congress party will help Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Outsiders will hopefully begin to understand the realities on the ground as this election continues. But ultimately, it is up to the Indian people to decide whether or not to give Mr Modi another chance.

K Ragavan, Bengaluru

Hope for stability and peace worldwide this Ramadan

I write in reference to your article Abu Dhabi residents break fast on first day of Ramadan at Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque (May 7). Ramadan Kareem to The National and all the people in the world. May this holy month usher in peace, happiness and stability in these deeply turbulent times.

Nazim Hasan Khan, India
