Delhi: Enraged neighbour stabs couple and their son over trivial issue as bystanders play mute spectators

Veeru and Akash are said to be in critical condition in hospital. However, Sunita died after the attack (Representative image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: In an appalling incident reported from the national capital, a man was repeatedly stabbed by his neighbour identified as Mohammad Azad (40) on Wednesday. The neighbourhood watched the heinous crime as the victim's intestines came out hanging. Instead of stopping Azad, many people from the crowd shot the vicious attack on their phones.

The visuals recorded by the neighbours show Azad repeatedly stabbing a 41-year-old Veeru near his home in West Delhi's Khyala, according to a report in NDTV. Azad had also attacked Veeru's wife Sunita (35) and their son Akash, aged 18. Veeru and Akash are said to be in critical condition in hospital. However, Sunita died after the attack.

According to the police, Azad and Sunita got into a minor argument after her daughter's bottle fell from the balcony and hit Azad four days ago. They fought again on Wednesday evening over a trivial issue. Sunita and her husband Veeru came out of the house to find an angry Azad holding a knife.

Also Read: Rajasthan: Seeking justice, woman sits on dharna against men who chopped off her nose

When Azad attacked Akash, Sunita and Veeru tried to rescue their son. Then, Azad stabbed the couple. The accused kept stabbing them in front of the children. Azad's family escaped from their house fearing the consequences of the crime.

The video that was shared online shows neighbours shouting and talking as the accused commits the brutal crime, however, nobody came forward to stop it. The police arrested Azad after he surrendered himself and the murder weapon at a nearby police station and confessed to the crime.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
