Senior citizen rapes 25-year-old mentally challenged woman in Mumbai

Woman was inconsolable at railway station when railway police reached out to her | GettyImages photo for representation

A 25-year-old mentally challenged woman was allegedly raped by a senior citizen in Mumbai, Maharashtra.

Initially the police were not taking up the alleged rape case and tried to save the 77-year-old accused but due to pressure and intervention of higher authorities, the police, after two days, filed an FIR and arrested the old accused.

The accused identified as Mohammad Mushtakin Khan was produced in the court today and was remanded to a police custody by the court.

The accused is a real estate agent by profession and with his money and power was trying to influence Mumbai Police.

The 25-year-old woman and her uncle exclusive spoke to to India Today TV.

The woman stays with her uncle and aunt in Central Mumbai area. The woman is mentally challenged. Her parents stay in Tamil Nadu and from childhood she has stayed with her uncle and aunt.

The accused knows woman's uncle very well.

The accused used to visit their house often. He even brought things to eat for the woman.

On Saturday, the accused called the woman to Sion station in Mumbai.

He booked a cab and on the pretext of Mumbai darshan (sightseeing) and delicious food, he took her to Grant Road area. There he booked a lodge and allegedly raped her.

The mentally challenged woman spoke to India Today TV and said, "He on the pretext of Mumbai darshan took me to a room and raped me. He later told me to get down at Sion station."

As the woman is mentally challenged she did not know anything.

Instead of getting down at Sion she reached Dombivali station which is in the outskirts of Mumbai.

She was inconsolable at railway station when railway police reached out to her.

The woman's uncle and aunt reached Dharavi police station to file a complaint but no FIR was registered.

In fact, accused Khan was brought to police station but was let off after a warning.

After pressure and intervention from senior cops the Dharavi Police filed an FIR and arrested Khan.

The woman is 25 years old but her brain still acts like that of a 10-year-old, the officials said.
