Alwar gangrape takes political turn, BJP alleges Gehlot govt suppressed case due to polls

The Alwar gangrape case has snowballed into a major political controversy in Rajasthan.

A young Dalit woman was allegedly gang-raped before her husband in Thanagazi, Alwar on April 26.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), in the desert state, has alleged that the state government suppressed the matter of the woman being gangraped to prevent its political fortunes from getting adversely affected as elections in the state were due on May 6.

The husband and wife were traveling on a bike in Thanagazi area on April 26 when they were stopped by the accused. The couple was forced to remove their clothes and were beaten up badly.

The woman was allegedly gang-raped by five accused and a video of the incident was also recorded.

The accused even tried to extort money from the victims and threatened to circulate the video on social media. The video was allegedly circulated on the social media after the accused could not get the money they asked for, .

"Five people took turns to rape my wife in front of my eyes and one evil even returned for the second time," complainant's husband said.

Madan Lal Saini, BJP Rajasthan president, while speaking to India Today TV, alleged that the Rajasthan government suppressed the matter in a planned manner.

"The incident is a horrific incident which weakens the society and it becomes even more serious when the criminals are not caught... The incident happened on the April 26. The police were aware. On May 3, an FIR was registered and they [government/authorities] kept the incident under wraps till yesterday [May 6]," Madan Lal Saini said.

"It was kept a secret because elections were going on. If this incident would have come to light, then it would have affected the Congress adversly in the elections. That is why, the government and the home department concealed the matter in a planned manner - that it not be published and action not be taken on it," he added.

ALWAR GANG RAPE AND INVESTIGATION

"When the case was registered, as per the procedure, along with the statement of the victim, medical examination, etc, the process of collecting evidence to nab the accused was initiated," Kapil Garg, Rajasthan DGP, said.

Rajasthan Police has so far claimed that one person has been arrested in the case.

The force has formed 14 teams for the arrest of the remaining four accused.

"A case of gang rape was registered in Thanagazi on May 2," Kapil Garg said.

The police have so far arrested one of the accused -- Inderaj Gurjar -- in the case. Accused Inderaj Gurjar is a truck driver and is a resident of Pragpur village.

ASHOK GEHLOT CONDEMNS THE INCIDENT

Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot has accused the BJP of politicising the matter.

Ashok Gehlot, while speaking in Delhi, said, "I am taking this case very seriously and will monitor it. The BJP is raising the issue as election is going on."

Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot on alleged gang-rape in Alwar: I'm taking this case seriously, state DGP himself is monitoring the case & culprits will be punished. pic.twitter.com/qifcf3twpR ANI (@ANI) May 7, 2019

Ashok Gehlot on Tuesday condemned the incident of gang rape in Alwar district and directed officials to take stern action against the accused.

"The state government is committed for women safety. Nearly a dozen police teams have been formed to arrest the accused and one arrest has been made. The victim and her family are given protection," Gehlot said in a statement.

The chief minister said action would also be taken against the police officials if any lapses were found.
