Nitish Kumar: Nitish with us, NDA will get 15% more votes than oppn: Sushil Kumar Modi

Bihar’s deputy chief minister and senior BJP leader Sushil Kumar Modi said that the NDA will secure at least 15% more votes than the opposition alliance in this general election. In an interview to Bikash Singh, he said that the social alliance stitched by the NDA is much bigger and wider and that the stage is set for the NDA securing two-third majority in the assembly election slated for next year. Excerpts:In 1999, BJP-Janata Dal (United) alliance won 41 seats (out of a total of 54 seats before Jharkhand became a separate state). Similarly, in 2009, BJP-JDU alliance bagged 32 seats. Without JDU, in 2014 the BJP won 31 seats. In 2014, there was 10% gap between the UPA and NDA in vote share and this time, with Nitish Kumar-led JDU fighting together, we will corner at least 15% more vote share.In 2014, we were not in power in the state or at the Centre. We were present across the country in fivesix states. Now, we are in over 16 states. Our social combination is bigger and wider now. We had joint campaigns and there is perfect synergy among the allies; there is no internal bickering. In 2014, people had seen Prime Minister Narendra Modi from a distance; people knew him as the chief minister of Gujarat. However, in last five years, people have seen the way Modi is functioning and how he has heralded a new era of development in the country.The Mahagathbandhan (grand alliance) is disintegrating, Congress is nonexistent in Bihar. In 2015 assembly polls we saw smaller parties like Hindustani Awam Morcha (Secular) – which contested 20 seats – could only win one or two seats. There is no fight between us and them. In the last Lok Sabha election, even when Lalu Yadav was campaigning, RJD won just four seats. People have seen the track record of Lalu Yadav, and even in adverse conditions we did reasonably well in past.See the development we have initiated. We have taken electricity to every village and tremendous work has been done on the sanitation front. Just recall what was the condition of roads and how rapidly it has improved. Opposition is not talking about roads, water, electricity. What is the opposi- tion parties’ campaign? Lalu Prasad Yadav is imprisoned, Constitution is in danger and BJP will take away the reservation of the backwards. They are also talking about Vijay Mallya moving out of the country. The opposition is issue-less.In 2010 assembly polls, the BJP won 91 seats and the JD U won 122 seats. With our natural ally Nitish Kumar we will get more than two-thirds majority in assembly polls next year.See, crime takes place – it happens in Delhi and Mumbai. What was dangerous in Lalu’s regime was that the government patronised criminals; kidnapping of businessmen and doctors was the order of the day. During elections in those days, 671 people died. In panchayat election in 2001, around 196 people were killed, thousands of booths were captured. Those were the days when polls were marred by violence, repolls had to be done and polls were countermanded. Even polls in Patna and Purnia were countermanded. RJD goons threatened people. There was a time when there was repoll in as many as 2000 booths.We have seen that despite imposing import duty on goods there are attempts to smuggle. So does that deter us from imposing import duties? Bihar’s society has accepted prohibition. Some intellectuals and journalists are against this prohibition.
