Daylight robbery in Hyderabad, Rs 58.9 lakh stolen from ATM cash van

Daylight robbery in Hyderabad, Rs 58.9 lakh stolen from ATM cash van

An iron chest containing the money was being guarded by a lone security person.

news Crime

The Hyderabad police are on the lookout for a 6 to 8-member ATM robbery gang who stole Rs 58.9 lakh from a cash van on Tuesday. The police said that the gang diverted the attention of the security guard in charge of the ATM chest to make the heist.

The incident took place around 10:20 am on Tuesday when the cash van was parked before the Axis bank ATM at Panama junction, Vanasthalipuram. The driver of the vehicle was filming the cash being loaded into the Axis bank ATM by two technicians, even as an iron chest containing Rs 58.9 lakh meant for other ATMs was being guarded by a lone security person, the police said.

“A few members from the robbery gang approached the lone security guard in the cash van and told him that his team had dropped a few notes while on their way to the ATM. This was to divert his attention. The security guard got down from the vehicle while other members of the gang stole the iron chest carrying the money from the middle seat of the van,” said Inspector A Venkataiah from the Vanasthalipuram Police Station, under the Rachkaonda Commissionerate.

The police are yet to get clarity from the bank on what denominations the stolen notes were in. “We have obtained CCTV footage and are on the lookout of the suspects. this was executed by a team of six to eight members. We are confident we will catch them soon,” the police officer added.

The police have registered a case of armed robbery and are on the lookout for the gang that escaped in an auto.

Last year in August, a three-member gang wearing masks stole Rs 13.40 lakh from an ICICI ATM kiosk at Tara Nagar in Seriligampally. The trio had used gas cutters and made off with the cash in 30 minutes. The CCTV footage of the crime scene had revealed that the criminals were wearing hand gloves and were wearing masks. The police are still investigating the case. The professional ATM robbery gang of three had reportedly committed similar crimes in Sangareddy district.
