Is popularity of Modi Waning?

Omkar Dattatray

Is charisma and popularity of Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of India declining? Nothing specific can be said about this at the moment. Different experts differ on this subject. Some opine that Modi’s popularity graph is declining day by day while others are of the opinion that Modi’s charisma and magic is intact and rather it is increasing & it is equal to what his popularity was in and after 2014 general elections. But no one can deny the fact that there is some magnetic influence of his personality and that is intact even today. He is the big crowd puller being a good and eloquent public speaker & orator. He keeps audience spell bound by his Jugglery of words and this is the reason that one witnesses big crowds in his election campaigns and road shows. Modi is a big marketing and advertising strategist as he believes in advertising his achievement to public.

However, inspite of all this, his popularity and magic is declining. Accoding to Nilagan Mukhopadhay, PM Modi’s charisma has been declining. According to him leaders like Narendra Modi run the danger of being their own nemesis.

PM Modi’s charisma has been declining since mid 2017. The moot question is if or not he can reverse the slide by playing several cards in which he is adept. Paradoxically the onset of the fade-out of Modi charisma coincided with the beginning of the makeover of Rahul Gandhi. The Gandhi scion is no more a presumptive leader, he has emerged Prime Ministers Prime challenger. Regardless of how the political narrative concludes, Modi will surely rue his role in the emergence of the congress president as a credible politician. A narrative is being built to show that Shivraj Singh Chouhan & Narendra Modi’s popularity is still intact. Narendra Modi’s popularity as PM dips to 34% and Rahul’s rises to 24 %. It implies that 34% prefer Modi as PM & 24 % want Rahul. Modi’s popularity in 2014 was 26%, Rahul’s was 16%.

The Narinder Modi wave may have declined across India but it is still powerful enough to ensure the BJP strongman another five years in office.. India’s nationwide poll suggests PM Narinder Modi’s popularity waning. The potential benefits accruing to Indian Prime Minister Narinder Modi ruling alliance from a spike in nationalist sentiment following recent clashes with arch rival Pakistan might be waning, results of a nationwide poll suggested. Tension with Pakistan soared high after a suicide bomber in Kashmir’s Pulwana killed 40 Indian paramilitary policemen. The bombing was claimed by Pakistan’s militant group (RTRS). Modi’s popularity is waning in rural India and experts say it could put a dent in BJP’s vote bank in 2019. No doubt there was a wave in 2014 but farmers and youth are disenchanted with Modi now. Indian farmers voted overwhelmingly for PM Modi in the 2014 general elections that swept him to power. He cannot count on them doing so again, as a crash in commodity price & surging fuel costs stoke anger in the country wide.

Now facing criticism for not improving living standards in the rural areas where 70% Indian live, analysts & farm economists said Modi would find it difficult to retain the charisma of 2014 and the voting strength of that extraordinary election which gave BJP more than absolute majority. Another most important segment of the society which consists a sizeable number of voters is youth and they are only disenchanted and annoyed with the Modi ‘s policies as he could not translate into action his electoral promises and assurances of providing 2 crore jobs to Indian youth and thus they are unlikely to vote for Modi’s BJP this year. The small businessmen are also unhappy with Modi’s way of working as the double attack of demonetization & GST has robbed them of their earnings and thus are they unlikely to support Modi in 2019 general elections but in spite of all this there is likelihood of 272 in the Lok Sabha in the 2019 elections. Therefore though Modi charisma and magic has waned but still he will be able to reach Delhi throne once again for next five years.

(The writer is Senior Journalist).
