Indian tourist Hardeep Singh who sexually assaulted woman on plane from Mumbai to Manchester jailed

Hardeep Singh, 35, originally from India, has been jailed after sexually assaulting a woman on a plane from Mumbai to Manchester

An Indian tourist who sexually assaulted a woman on a plane while all the other passengers were asleep has been jailed for a year.

Hardeep Singh, 35, was due to visit the UK on a six-month tourist visa from his native Hoshiarpur.

He got on a plane from Mumbai to Manchester in February this year and was sat next to a woman in her twenties.

Singh tried to engage her in conversation but the female passenger began to feel uncomfortable because his English wasn't very good.

When the lights went down most of the cabin fell asleep, including the victim, who was horrified to wake up to him sexually assaulting her.

He was today jailed for a year at Minshull Street Crown Court and will be deported back to India when he finishes his sentence.

The court heard how he had asked whether the woman sat on the other side of his victim was her mother and - while she was watching a film – removed her headphones and tried to talk to her again.

When she got up to use the toilet, Singh refused to move aside so she could get to the aisle comfortably, forcing her to squeeze past him, the hearing was told.

After the lights on the aircraft were turned down, due to the time of the flight, the woman and the other passengers around her went to sleep under their blankets.

When she woke up, she tried to push him away but he persisted, forcing his hands underneath her clothing and underwear and trying to kiss her.

Everyone else around her on the aircraft was asleep, so she was unable to call for help.

Officers were waiting for Singh when he got off the plane at Manchester Airport (pictured)

She repeatedly told him to stop and tried to remove his hands and move away, but Singh hooked her legs off the ground so she couldn't get up.

She said she felt isolated and vulnerable as everyone else was asleep and she couldn't see any cabin crew around to help.

The assault lasted for around 15 minutes before the she was able to struggle free and move to the back of the plane where she reported Singh to a member of cabin crew.

He was moved away from the woman for the remainder of the flight and cabin crew contacted police.

Officers were waiting for Singh when he got off the plane at Manchester Airport.

Singh was arrested on suspicion of sexual assault and initially denied the offences. Detective Constable Catherine Evans of GMP's Airport Team, said: 'From the outset of the flight, Singh's behaviour was despicable.

'After checking the woman was unaccompanied, he began to invade her personal space, pestering her and making unwanted physical contact, despite the passenger making it clear she did not want to engage him in conversation.

'Waiting until the woman and surrounding passengers were asleep, Singh subjected the woman to a prolonged sexual assault, forcibly restraining her when she tried to move away.

'Numbed with fear, it was only after she summoned the strength to overpower him that she was able to run away and raise the alarm.

'Thanks to the swift actions of our officers at Manchester Airport, justice was waiting for Singh as soon as he landed.

'We're pleased with today's sentence and hope the woman can move forward knowing that he's behind bars.

'We hope the courage of this woman and this positive court result encourages other victims to come forward and report incidents of sexual assault to police.'
