Woman sold for Rs80K, cops nab one

Ludhiana: The police have arrested a 55-year-old woman in connection with the trafficking of a city-based woman. Police said the accused Baljinder Kaur allegedly abducted and sold the woman for Rs80,000 to a man in Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh. Police arrested her, following a complaint from the victim’s husband at Shimlapuri police station on Wednesday. The accused woman was produced before the court on Thursday, and remanded to police custody for five days. The arrested woman has been identified as Baljinder Kaur, a resident of Barota Road of Shimlapuri. Meanwhile, a team has been sent to Bareilly to rescue the abducted woman.

In his complaint, Shamsher Singh (52), of Guru Gobind Singh Nagar of Shimlapuri, said he had been physically challenged for the past three years after he met with an accident. Since then, he has been unemployed, and his wife Sunita Rani (50) had been working as a domestic help to run the family. The duo had already got their children married. Shamsher added that on April 4, his wife left home, claiming she was going to Samrala for work and would return after 15 days.

However, since that day, her mobile was switched off. Around 10 days ago, Sunita called her daughter and told her that Baljinder Kaur had sold her to a man in Bareilly for marriage. Later, their daughter received a call from a man who said he had bought Sunita from Baljinder for Rs80,000. If they wanted her back, they would have to pay that money back to him. After this, the family lodged a police compliant. ASI Jarnail Singh, in-charge at Basant Park police post, said immediately after registering a case, the police arrested Baljinder, who confessed she had sold Sunita in Bareilly for money.

Sunita was known to Baljinder, as she used to help her in getting work. The ASI added that a team had been sent to Bareilly to rescue the victim. The police would also arrest the man who had bought Sunita. A case under sections 370 (trafficking of persons) and 120-B (criminal conspiracy) of the IPC has been registered against the accused.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
