Alwar gang rape: Want all 5 rapists hanged, says Alwar rape survivor

Rajasthan police arrest last two accused

Alwar: Rape survivor recalls her three-hour ordeal

THANAGAZI: The longest three hours of her life will haunt her for years but the Alwar gang-rape survivor refuses to give up the fight for justice. The traumatized survivor now wants a death sentence for all the five accused. Right now in Class XII, the survivor plans on continuing her studies.“I want that all the five men who raped me, videotaped me even when I pleaded with them not to and changed our lives forever in ways which I will have nightmares about, should be hanged. If there is any worse sentencing than that then it should be given to these five,” said the rape survivor to TOI.Visibly frail, the 20-year-old Dalit woman was horrified with the way the local police initially reacted to her complaint and even refused to lodge a separate FIR in Thanagazi when one of the accused made the assault video viral on May 4.“As soon as the video went viral, we went to the police station but were told that case cannot be registered because there was no staff. In fact, the police also said that on May 5 and 6, no work will be done in the matter because of election,” said the husband.Talking about the fateful day, the husband added, “Just 10 minutes after leaving my in-laws house, these five men started following us and stopped me to stop. They dragged us down the ravine and asked us to strip. When we resisted they started tearing off our clothes till we had to take them off. What followed was three hours of living hell. Initially we shouted for help but gave up soon realising that it was futile.”The threats and extortion calls continued even after the case was registered. “We did not report the matter initially because these men threatened to harm my parents and family. However, we realised that we needed to lodge a complaint so no one faces the same brutality that we did,” said the survivor.Both the survivor and her husband, though healing from the physical trauma are determined to continue their fight for justice without being cowed down by the higher community in the area since all five rapists are from Gujjar community.“Now, I am not scared of anyone. We will continue the fight. Just getting them arrested is not the ultimate aim but it is to see them being given death sentence,” the husband asserted.Looking at the positive aspect, the survivor’s mother says that she is glad that accused made the video so they could be identified. “They were so sure of not getting caught that they made the videos but these clippings were there downfall,” she said.The Rajasthan Police on Thursday arrested the remaining two accused in the Alwar Dalit woman gangrape case. Later in the evening, the government appointed IPS officer Paris Deshmukh as the new SP of Alwar. Jaipur Range IGP S Sengathir told TOI that total six accused have been arrested in the gang-rape case.While five of them have been arrested for gang rape, the sixth has been held for uploading the assault videos on social media, he added. “Hansraj Gujjar was arrested from Mathura in Uttar Pradesh and Chhote Lal Gujjar was nabbed from Paragpura near Jaipur on Thursday. The duo was the only two remaining accused in the case since their accomplices had already been arrested on Tuesday and Wednesday,” Sengathir said.
