After Alwar, three more gang rape cases reported in Rajasthan

After the Alwar gang rape case, three more cases of gang rape have surfaced from Nagaur, Jhunjhunu and Bikaner districts of Rajasthan. Also, one case of rape has surfaced from Ajmer, police said.

In Nagaur, a 25-year-old woman lodged a complaint on May 8 that two men raped her on March 4 in a hotel in Kuchaman city after they took her on the pretext of completing formalities for a gas connection. The two came to her again on May 6 and tried to rape her but she escaped, she said in the complaint.

“We have registered an FIR and begun investigation,” said Nagaur superintendent of police Gagandeep Singla.

The woman has named Mukesh Jat and Kishor Swami and accused them of taking her to a hotel where she was drugged and raped. The duo told her that they had made a video of the act, police said.

Makrana deputy superintendent of police is investigating the case. The medical examination of the woman was conducted at government hospital in Nagaur on Wednesday evening.

In Jhunjhunu, a 30-year-old woman said she was gang-raped five months back, after the accused filmed her while she was bathing and sought sexual favour for not circulating the video. Jhunjhunu superintendent of police Gaurav Yadav said the accused are absconding. One of the accused is the woman’s neighbour and two others also live in same locality. “We have sent teams to nab the accused,” SP said.

Yadav said the statements of the victim had been recorded and police had got some video evidence. The medical examination of the victim was done at government hospital in Jhunjhunu on Wednesday.

In Bikaner, a woman was allegedly abducted and gang-raped for four days by three accused who took her to different locations in Ajmer, Beawar, and Suratgarh.

The victim, resident of Jasarasar village of Bikaner, in her complaint in Jasarasar police station, named three persons - Mahendra Meghwal, Ramniwas Meghwal and Rajuram Meghwal for allegedly abducting her while she was returning home after morning chores on April 27.

The victim is a Dalit and was known to the accused, police said.

Additional Superintendent of Police (Rural) Raj Kumar Choudhary said in her complaint, the woman said that she was forcibly taken away by three men in their vehicle. The woman was driven away and her three abductors raped her in a hotel at Ajmer. The accused took her to Beawar, then Suratgarh and again raped her in hotel.

After raping her for four days they abandoned her near her home on April 30. She reached the police station on Wednesday evening and filed her complaint.

An FIR has been registered. Police have detained Ramniwas and Rajuram and probe is on, police said.

The deputy superintendent of police (Nokha circle) Mukesh Soni has been entrusted to investigate the incident, he said, adding that a search had been launched to nab the missing culprit.

In Ajmer, a 32-year-old woman, native of Jaipur was allegedly raped by a tourist guide, police said on Thursday.

The station house officer of Civil Line police station Narendra Kumar Meena said that the victim had come to Pushkar on Tuesday for sightseeing.

Meena said, “The victim in her complaint said that on March 8, while sightseeing, she met a guide identified as Jeevan Mali, who took her around the city. In the evening, he took her to a hotel in front of Ajmer bus stand and raped her.”

“Mali threatened to kill the victim if she shared her ordeal with anyone. Mali also forcibly took Rs 18,000 from the victim. The accused is absconding,” the SHO added.

The medical of the victim has been done and the police have inspected the spot.
