#Mentoo: Woman who accused Karan Oberoi of rape gets arrested

/tv/stars/karan-oberoi/mentoo-woman-who-accused-karan-oberoi-of-rape-gets-arrested/eventshow/69266047.cms

01

The woman, who accused television actor and singer Karan Oberoi of raping her, has been arrested by Oshiwara police on June 17, 2019 - Photogallery

The woman, who accused television actor and singer Karan Oberoi of raping her, has been arrested by Oshiwara police on June 17, 2019. The woman is arrested for filing false complaint after she planned attack on herself on May 25 when she has was taking morning walk. As planned, two youths on bike slashed her with paper cutter and threatened to put acid on her and threw a paper chit that was scribbled saying "take back the case". Two days later with the help of CCTV capture of the bike police nabbed four youths in the attack. One of them, who was lawyer's cousin, spilled the beans that the woman’s lawyer introduced them to her and planned the attack and paid him Rs 10,000. The youths were arrested on May 27 while the lawyer was arrested three days later. The lawyer after his surrender to cops confessed that the woman hired his cousin for attack on herself. However, the woman before her arrest has refuted the allegations and said that she is innocent and is framed by her ex-lawyer. Earlier, Karan Oberoi was granted bail by the Bombay high court in an alleged case of multiple rape and extortion on June 7, 2019. The court granted bail to Karan on a surety of Rs 50,000. A Mumbai court had rejected the bail application filed by singer-actor Karan Oberoi after listening to extensive arguments from both sides on May 17, 2019. He was arrested on the basis of a complaint by a woman, who has accused him of rape. Karan had moved a bail application at a Sessions Court in Mumbai on May 10, 2019, a day after he was sent to judicial custody on charges of raping and blackmailing a tantric and healer. Karan was sent to 14-days judicial custody by an Andheri Court in connection with an alleged rape case against him. An FIR was registered at Oshiwara Police Station in Mumbai under sections 376 (rape) and 384 (extortion) of the Indian Penal Code against Oberoi. According to the police, the actor allegedly raped and blackmailed the woman on the pretext of marrying her. “Oberoi not only raped the woman and filmed the act but also demanded money from the victim threatening to release the video if she did not pay up,” they said quoting the FIR. Meanwhile, Karan Oberoi’s close friend Pooja Bedi along with the members of his music band ‘A Band Of Boys’ urged that the law that are exciting to protect the voice of rape victim, should be used in responsible manner by the women. Talking to IANS during a press meet, Pooja said, “Taking the history of our country in consideration and the patriarchal society that we are living in, there is a situation where a rape victim goes to the police station and her complaint does not get registered, which is wrong. So we need laws against rape and such violence; but at the same time, if a severe number of women are misusing the law if they are not respecting the law that are meant to protect them rather taking advantage of it, we need to think about how to protect the right of a man as well!” “It is unfortunate to see such a kind man being subjected to something like this, the reputation damage, the family trauma is unacceptable to me. There are a number of cases where women are not using the law, they are misusing the law,” she added. (All Photos: BCCL and Instagram) (BCCL/Tejas Kudtarkar)
