Elections 2019 : From Sam Pitroda to Kejriwal, everything that went throughout the day in politics

Home >> Delhi Elections 2019 : From Sam Pitroda to Kejriwal, everything that went throughout the day in politics

While Modi hit out at the Congress during an election rally in Haryana’s Rohtak on Friday, top leaders of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), including Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley, also slammed the opposition party.

Elections 2019 LIVE: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday hit out at the Congress party over controversial remarks by its senior leader, Sam Pitroda, on the 1984 riots. He said the "Hua to hua" comment on the anti-Sikh riots showed the "character and mentality" of the party.

While Modi hit out at the Congress during an election rally in Haryana’s Rohtak on Friday, top leaders of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), including Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley, also slammed the opposition party.

May 10, 2019 7:43 pm (IST)

West Bengal Commission For Protection Of Child Rights directs the Chief Electoral Officer to take action within 24 hours against BJP’s Diamond Harbour candidate Nilanjan Roy on charges of sexual assault of a minor who is 17 year old. The Commission also directs police to arrest the accused. Mamata Bannerjee’s nephew Abhishek Banerjee is the incumbent MP while the CPI (M) candidate is Fuad Halim. Diamond harbour constituency goes to polls in the 7th phase of elections on 19th May.

May 10, 2019 7:36 pm (IST)

Flag march by BSF companies for peaceful conduct of 6th phase of general parliamentary elections in West Bengal took place on Friday evening. These constituencies are Tamluk, Kanthi, Ghatal, Jhargram, Medinipur, Purulia, Bankura and Bishnupur. Jhargram is affected by left wing extremism.

May 10, 2019 7:34 pm (IST)

PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti condemns Sam Pitroda’s comments. “Just when one thought Cong was maintaining civility in this year’s elections, #HuaToHua happens. Admire Sam Pitroda for his contributions to but trivialising the horrific 1984 riots is unacceptable & a self goal for Congress. A wise enemy is better than a foolish friend,” she said

Just when one thought Cong was maintaining civility in this years elections, #HuaToHua happens. Admire Sam Pitroda for his contributions to but trivialising the horrific 1984 riots is unacceptable & a self goal for Congress. A wise enemy is better than a foolish friend — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) May 10, 2019

May 10, 2019 7:27 pm (IST)

Very Strong Pro-AAP Wave in Delhi, Similar to 2015 Assembly Polls: Kejriwal

There is a "very strong" wave in favour of the AAP in Delhi, similar to the 2015 Assembly elections when it won 67 out of 70 seats, party supremo and Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said on Friday. Polling for the seven Lok Sabha seats in Delhi will be held in the sixth phase of the general elections on Sunday. The AAP national convenor said Delhiites are "extremely happy" with his party`s works in the national capital especially in the fields of education, health, water, electricity, road and sewage.

May 10, 2019 6:59 pm (IST)

Delhi BJP Leader Files Police Complaint Against Sam Pitroda

Delhi BJP spokesperson Tajinder Singh Bagga on Friday lodged a police complaint seeking registration of a case against Congress leader Sam Pitroda for allegedly hurting sentiments of Sikh community with his remarks on 1984 riots. Pitroda, a close aide of Rahul Gandhi and Overseas Congress` head, had on Thursday reportedly said "hua to hua" (so what, it happened) about the 1984 anti-Sikh riots. Bagga said he has also filed a complaint against the Congress leaders with National Commission for Minorities seeking action for his comment. "I have filed a complaint at Parliament Street police station and also lodged protest over Pitroda`s comment at the National Commission for Minorities, seeking action against him for hurting sentiments of Sikhs who were victims in 1984 riots," he said.

May 10, 2019 6:51 pm (IST)

Rahul Gandhi in Chandigarh: PM Narendra Modi spoke about ‘Made in India’, ‘Startup India’ but still unemployment is now at all-time high in 45 years. I want to tell youth, especially those in Chandigarh, we`ve to compete with China. Not only Made in India, we`ve to print Made in Chandigarh behind cell phones.

May 10, 2019 6:42 pm (IST)

National Commission for Minorities issues notice to Congress leader Sam Pitroda.

May 10, 2019 6:31 pm (IST)

Sam Pitroda: I respect my Sikh brothers and sisters. What I really meant was what happened was very bad. My sincere apology if I hurt sentiments. I want to clarify that this was blown out of proportion.

May 10, 2019 6:25 pm (IST)

Sam Pitroda, Congress on his remarks on `84 riots: The statement I made was completely twisted, taken out of context because my Hindi isn`t good, what I meant was `jo hua vo bura hua,` I couldn`t translate `bura` in my mind.

May 10, 2019 5:47 pm (IST)

Congress leader Abhishek Manu Singhvi after meeting EC: PM Modi violating basic principle repeatedly. One cannot misuse government machinery for election purpose. Officers demanded various departments to share some statistics / figures so that BJP can use them in its manifesto.

May 10, 2019 5:39 pm (IST)

Congress: We believe that justice should be done to 1984 riots victims as also to 2002 Gujarat riots victims. We abhor violence of any kind, against any person or a group of people based on their caste, colour, region or religion. This is the essence of India. We continue to support the quest for justice for 1984 riot victims. Any opinion remark made by any individual to the contrary including Sam Pitroda is not the opinion of Congress party.

May 10, 2019 5:12 pm (IST)

Home Minister Rajnath Singh in Mathurapur, WB: Bangal ki khaadi se BJP ka aisa tufaan utha hai ke hamari Mamata didi ghabra gayi hain. Aur itna zyada ghabra gayi ki, jab yahan pe #Fani tufaan aata hai aur humara PM baar baar unko telephone karte hain tabhi unka telephone nahi uthati hain.

May 10, 2019 5:05 pm (IST)

Abhishek Manu Singhvi on Sam Pitroda’s comments: His remarks are not the party’s stand. The party condemns it. All leaders should be careful about what they talk. Congress Party has worked to provide justice to the victims of 1984 riots. No act of violence and riots can be forgiven.

May 10, 2019 5:03 pm (IST)

Manmohan Singh Thousand Times Better Than Modi: Kejriwal

As prime minister, Manmohan Singh was "thousand times" better than Narendra Modi, Delhi Chief Minister and AAP supremo Arvind Kejriwal, who was a key leader of the massive anti-graft movement against the UPA government in 2011, said on Friday. Calling him a "good man", Kejriwal said it was Singh who shielded India from the global economic recession in 2008 by taking a series of timely measures. "Manmohan Singh is a good man. He was thousand times better than Modi. He is an educated man, an economist of repute. He understands the economy," he told PTI in an interview. "In fact in late 2008, when there was global economic depression, India was perhaps the only country which was not impacted by it as Singh took a series of measures and saved the country," Kejriwal added.

May 10, 2019 5:37 pm (IST)

BJP president Amit Shah: More regional parties welcome to join NDA after polls if they wish so. Issues may be different in different parts of country but people voting everywhere in name of Modi.

May 10, 2019 5:36 pm (IST)

BJP president Amit Shah: We will better our 2014 tally of 282 seats in this Lok Sabha polls. Rahul Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra cannot run away from their past, said Shah, defending PM Modi`s attack on Rajiv Gandhi.

May 10, 2019 5:26 pm (IST)

Former Jammu & Kashmir CM Omar Abdullah compares Congress leader Sam Pitroda`s remark with PM Modi`s description of Gujarat riots in an interview. Modi had said that If “someone else is driving a car and we’re sitting behind, even then if a puppy comes under the wheel, will it be painful or not? Of course it is. If I’m a chief minister or not, I’m a human being. If something bad happens anywhere, it is natural to be sad.”

Hua toh hua is right up there with if "someone else is driving a car and we`re sitting behind, even then if a puppy comes under the wheel, will it be painful or not? as callous reactions to mass murder in pogroms. — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) May 10, 2019

May 10, 2019 4:58 pm (IST)

Rajnath Singh: I have seen many opposition parties using abusive words against PM. The PM is not an individual but it’s an institution. Everyone should maintain dignity.

May 10, 2019 | 4:56 pm (IST)

Independent Candidate From Sonipat Lok Sabha Seat Shot

Independent candidate from Sonipat Lok Sabha seat Satish Raj Deshwal escaped unhurt after unidentified masked assailants fired shots at him at his office here, police said Friday. The incident took place at around 5 am Thursday when two attackers fired shots through the window of the room in which Deshwal was sleeping, they said. The assailants had used a ladder to reach the room located on the first floor, city police station in-charge Sandeep said. He said a team led by him has been constituted to probe the incident and no arrest has so far been made in this connection.

May 10, 2019 | 4:47 pm (IST)

Yeddyurappa Says he Foresees Changes in Karnataka Political Scene After LS Polls

Karnataka BJP chief B S Yeddyurappa Friday said the longevity of the Congress-JDS coalition government in the State would depend on the stand taken by about 20 "disgruntled" Congress legislators after the Lok Sabha poll results. He forecast political changes in the state favouring the BJP, saying its tally in the assembly would increase. The former Chief Minister hit out at the state government for its drought management and called it "brain dead", as he cited "charged" atmosphere within the coalition as the reason for Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy heading to a resort.

May 10, 2019 | 4:45 pm (IST)

Congress’ Abhishek Manu Singhvi: Election Commission has become Modi Publicity Commission. BJP is shamelessly misusing government machinery. The ministry officials were sent an email to work on BJP’s vision document. We will go to EC now and file a complaint on this.

May 10, 2019 | 4:42 pm (IST

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee: BJP using the hawala route to transfer money for distribution among voters to get votes.

May 10, 2019 | 4:37 pm (IST)

Modi Hates My Family, I Will Repay Him With Love: Rahul

Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Friday said he will reply with love to Prime Minister Narendra Modi`s hatred towards him and his family. Addressing a rally in Himachal Pradesh`s Una, he also flayed Modi`s Bharatiya Janata Party government over demonetisation and the implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST). Modi may spread hatred against me and late PMs Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi, but I will repay with love, he said. In the last few days, PM Modi has referred to alleged corruption during Rajiv Gandhi`s term as Prime Minister. The anti-Sikh riots in 1984, around the time Rajiv Gandhi took over as PM, have also figured in his speeches.

May 10, 2019 | 4:29 pm (IST)

Modi`s `Chowkidari` is Making The Rich Wealthier, Says Mayawati

BSP supremo Mayawati on Friday targeted Prime Minister Narendra Modi, alleging "chowkidaari" is making the rich wealthier and his "theatrics and rhetoric" will not yield any result in the Lok Sabha polls. Addressing a rally in support of her party candidates in Northeast Delhi, she said no development was carried out for minorities, Dalits and backward castes in the last five years. Their condition was no different during the Congress` rule, she said.

May 10, 2019 4:20 pm (IST)

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra Friday alleged that while farmers were suffering, Rs 5,50,000 crore of big industrialists were waived by the BJP government and Prime Minister Narendra Modi`s friends recorded profits of Rs 10,000 crore in last five years. Addressing an election meeting here, she also hit out at Modi, claiming that he talks about Pakistan and other "absurd" issues, but never about the problems of the people. The Congress general secretary termed the present BJP government `ahankari` (egotistical), alleging that it spreads anger, hatred and negativity.

May 10, 2019 4:18 pm (IST)

Taking strong exception to the Prime Minister’s comment to link Rajiv Gandhi with the 1984 riots, Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh on Friday threw the Lok Sabha battle hat back into Narendra Modi’s ring by drawing a comparison with the Godhra massacre, which took place under the latter’s chief ministership in Gujarat. “It was wrong of Modi to connect Rajiv with the anti-Sikh riots of 1984,” Captain Amarinder told mediapersons who were travelling with him from Patiala to Jalandhar this afternoon. “What if someone starts linking Modi with Godhra?,” he asked, adding that it did not behove the prime minister of the country to stoop to such levels to win an election.

May 10, 2019 | 4:11 pm (IST)

PM Modi in Mandi, Himachal Pradesh: You should know about the kind of politics Congress party and these `mahamilawati` people indulge in. They say that there should be talks with separatists, sedition law should be scrapped, special powers to soldiers should be scrapped.

May 10, 2019 | 4:08 pm (IST)

SP leader Akhilesh Yadav: We will make a better future for everyone by building schools, hospitals and roads.

May 10, 2019 | 4:02 pm (IST)

PM Modi in Mandi, Himachal: In 2014, you made BJP victorious on 4 seats. You gave us abundant love in 2017. Today once again I`ve come here to ask for your blessings. The entire Himachal Pradesh has a right over me and I have a right over every single resident in Himachal Pradesh.

May 10, 2019 | 3:59 pm (IST)

Congress leader Anand Sharma on PM Modi`s comment on INS Viraat: Any PM would do so but this PM has no family, if he had family then he would also be going there, but he goes alone because he has no connect with a family or any respect for family values.

May 10, 2019 | 3:32 pm (IST)

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on post-poll alliance: We will support whoever will be forming the government at the Centre except for Modi ji and Amit Shah, on the promise that Delhi will be given statehood.

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on post-poll alliance: We will support whoever will be forming the govt at the Centre except Modi ji & Amit Shah, on the promise that Delhi will be given statehood. #LokSabhaEelctions2019 pic.twitter.com/GJkBG8E3pB — ANI (@ANI) May 10, 2019

Delhi CM: This is the mentality of BJP, even today BJP leaders are saying the same things that were written in the pamphlet. They have filed defamation case against us after defaming us. We are sending defamation notice to Gautam Gambhir today. We will not leave this matter. https://t.co/06bD9SkuZW — ANI (@ANI) May 10, 2019

May 10, 2019 | 3:28 pm (IST)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi`s nationalism is fake and he is manipulating media to manage his image. PM Modi says that he attacked terrorists but Pakistan Prime Minister wants Modi to be re-elected, why? Why do terrorists want PM Modi to be re-elected? Modi and Imran Khan are in it together. Imran Khan made Pulwama attack possible to help Modi in these elections: Kejriwal

May 10, 2019 | 3:11 pm (IST)

Samajwadi Party (SP) leaders Jaya Bachchan and Dimple Yadav hold a roadshow in Prayagraj.

Samajwadi Party (SP) leaders Jaya Bachchan and Dimple Yadav hold a roadshow in Prayagraj. #LokSabhaEelctions2019 pic.twitter.com/DJ805FinpZ — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 10, 2019

May 10, 2019 | 2:58 pm (IST)

Mayawati criticises Congress during her rally in Delhi says, "Congress had the responsibility of most of the states and the country as a whole for the longest time after elections. In Delhi for example, Congress ruled for a lot many years. But what did they do? They did not care for the minorities at all. Dalits, tribals, Muslims were not given any attention at all."
