The rise of Dimple Yadav: How Akhilesh Yadav’s wife is helping the Samajwadi Party’s image makeover

A file picture of Samajwadi Party leaders Akhilesh and Dimple Yadav. | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: As the long-drawn Lok Sabha election enters its final stretch, Uttar Pradesh continues to be the swing state that could determine the national outcome. A major setback for the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) here could upend the electoral calculations of the NDA, which needs to win 272 seats to bag a majority without the support of other parties.

The reason for the suspense is the coming together of the Samajwadi Party (SP) and Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), the two caste-based parties in Uttar Pradesh who put their bitter, two-and-a-half decades of differences behind to take on the BJP.

The battle is increasingly being seen as one between the arithmetic of the SP-BSP versus the chemistry of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

But the SP and BSP are subtly trying a bit of chemistry of their own, and that’s where the Kannauj MP Dimple Yadav comes in the picture.

In recent weeks SP leader Akhilesh Yadav’s wife has suddenly, as it were, multiplied her media appearances. What has grabbed the attention of political observers, however, is the fact that in these television appearances, she is seen occupying the same frame as her husband and comes across as a confident, independent-minded woman albeit wedded to the Samajwadi cause.

Almost nothing in incidental in politics. The projection of Dimple Yadav seems to be part of the subtle image makeover of the Samajwadi Party, led by the next-generation Yadav, Akhilesh.

While the BJP’s campaign pitch is completely dominated by the overarching presence of PM Modi, Opposition parties have had to struggle with a response to match the high-voltage ‘Phir ek baar Modi sarkar’ pitch.

That’s where female voters come in the picture. Recent research and anecdotal evidence indicate that the female vote is turning out to be a critical factor in election after election, and can’t be taken for granted. That explains the tickets reserved for female candidates by Odisha’s Naveen Patnaik and West Bengal’s Mamata Banerjee. That also explains a slew of schemes and promises by all major parties aimed at garnering the support of women.

The SP, however, has an appalling history of party leaders making misogynist remarks -- Azam Khan being the most recent culprit -- and worse. In an infamous incident in 1995, BSP chief Mayawati, then a rising star of Uttar Pradesh’s male-dominated politics, was nearly assaulted by SP workers who barged into her Lucknow guesthouse. The disturbing episode left a bitter aftertaste that took a quarter of a century to overcome.

The well-mannered Akhilesh – he rarely appears aggressive even while raising his voice at rallies – is shrewd enough to realise that the toxic masculinity associated with the older generation of his party leaders is unlikely to attract young, educated, smartphone-wielding female voters in the hundreds of towns and cities of Uttar Pradesh.

With an articulate Dimple by his side, Akhilesh seeks to project an aura of a modern couple where the wife has a voice of her own and pride of place in the family, which should go down well with the millions of aspirational young women of UP who are hoping to break away from the traditional diktats of what is still a fairly conservative society.

While the husband and wife often claim in interviews that caste doesn’t matter to them – Dimple is not from the Yadav OBC caste – she has reached out to Mayawati, her senior in politics, and attempted to form a personal bond with the four-time chief minister ever since the alliance between the two parties was sealed.

The other public gesture by Dimple that did not go unnoticed was when she bent down and touched Mayawati’s feet, a traditional -- and very Indian -- mark of respect towards elders that could go a long way in bridging any lingering divide between the SP’s Yadav base and the BSP leader’s Jatav followers. This is significant because there is often talk that while the Dalit vote will get easily transferred to the SP, not all Yadavs will vote for their local BSP candidate.

Indeed, Akhilesh, the former UP chief minister, has himself gone out of his way to ensure that Mayawati is treated with the utmost respect. He even declared that he would consider any disrespect towards her as a personal insult. The message has no doubt gone down to the SP cadre on the ground.

Caste continues to be critical to the politics of Uttar Pradesh. Gender is the next big thing. Akhilesh and Dimple Yadav are trying to strategically add to the SP’s soft power on both fronts. We will soon know how successful they’ve been.
