Questions raised at Rajasthan government, police after elderly woman's rape in Alwar hospital

The CM has assured that action will be taken against erring police officers (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Jaipur: Less than a week after a woman was gang-raped in front of her husband in Alwar of Rajasthan, yet another horrific instance of sexual assault has come to light from the very same district. In her complaint, a senior citizen from Alwar has alleged that she was raped inside a hospital while visiting to meet her newborn grandchild.

While a case has been registered in this regard under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), the rising number of crimes against women in Rajasthan raises serious questions at the state government and police machinery. Activists have alleged that the Rajasthan police have been using election duty as an excuse to avoid registering first information reports (FIRs) in cases of sexual assault, as was seen during the gang-rape of a woman in front of her wife.

In their complaint, the couple had alleged that they were waylaid by five men near Thanagazi-Alwar bypass. The men then dragged the husband and wife to a dirt track on the side of the road where they took turns to rape the woman in front of her husband for over two hours. The victims claimed that they were turned away by police officials when they tried to register a complaint in this regard earlier this month. However, media scrutiny prompted authorities to act on their feet and five men who gang-raped the woman and assaulted her husband were arrested within days.

A sixth man was also arrested for circulating a video of the heinous crime on social media. Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot said that the matter is under the personal supervision of the Deputy Inspector General (DIG). As a result, action was also taken against two erring police officials, including the Superintendent of Police (SP) and a Station House Officer (SHO) who turned the couple away by claiming to be tied up with 'election duty'.

#AlwarGangRapeCase | Congress' Archana Sharma says that they inherited a bad system in Rajasthan.@fayedsouza hits back by reading out the rape incidents that have happened in #Rajasthan after Congress government came to power. #WomenSafety pic.twitter.com/KLCg3kH0CU — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 10, 2019

However, brutal cases of crimes against women continue to emerge from different parts of the state of Rajasthan, including Nagor, Jhunjhunu, Bikaner, Ajmer and other districts. The state government or the top brass of the police are yet to furnish a response over the failure of effective policing which led to a woman being gang-raped in front of her husband in broad daylight.

Social activist Yogita Bhayana says, "We elect people to protect us. Not filing the FIR because of the election process is a slap on the face of the democracy." Her argument finds resonance with senior criminal lawyer KK Manan who told Mirror Now that such a horrible crime could not have happened without the connivance of the local police in Alwar.
