Indian tourist sentenced to one year in prison after sexually assaulting woman on UK flight

Hardeep Singh I Photo credit: Greater Manchester Police (Facebook) | Photo Credit: Facebook

Manchester: An Indian man travelling to the UK was jailed for 12 months for sexually assaulting a young woman on board Mumbai-Manchester flight earlier this year. Hardeep Singh, 36, will be deported to India after the end of his 1-year sentence.

According to the police, Singh pinned the young woman passenger down on her seat and tried to kiss her. He was sentenced to jail at Minshull Street Crown Court in Manchester for carrying out a “prolonged” sexual assault.

"From the outset of the flight, Singh's behaviour was despicable. After checking the woman was unaccompanied, he began to invade her personal space, pestering her and making unwanted physical contact, despite the passenger making it clear she did not want to engage him in conversation," Detective Constable Catherine Evans of Greater Manchester Police's Airport Team told the news agency PTI.

"Waiting until the woman and surrounding passengers were asleep, Singh subjected the woman to a prolonged sexual assault, forcibly restraining her when she tried to move away. Numbed with fear, it was only after she summoned the strength to overpower him that she was able to run away and raise the alarm," she added.

The victim, in her 20s, was on aboard the flight from Mumbai and Hardeep was seated next to her. He was visiting the UK on a six-month tourist visa. Since the onset of the flight he tried to engage in a conversation with her but the woman told the authorities that she felt uncomfortable.

When the woman got up to use the lavatory, Hardeep refused to move aside forcing the woman to squeeze past him. After the lights were put out the woman went to sleep. She woke up to find Hardeep sexually assaulting her. She tried to push him away but he persisted.

The victim felt alone as everyone was asleep and Hardeep pinned her down to her sear. She finally regained strength and reported him to a crew member.


