Delhi's own gully boys rapping all their way to polls

Born in poor families, in and out of school for lack of funds, five young rappers from Trans Yamuna area in the National Capital are rapping to encourage people to go out and vote this Sunday. The five, who didn't know each other till recently, already have small fan cubs of their own in the area and have 3,000 views on YouTube. The famous five, who do odd jobs and are enrolled in some courses, rap at chai addas and in the gullies. Lyrics are interesting and stress on daily woes but with the push to vote and make a difference. Residents are happy because they find the experience novel.

It's Delhi's own gully boys, a group of young boys treading through treacherous paths life has doled to them, are rapping away their angst to ensure people come out and vote in their area. Their raps are mainly based on their hardships in life, social issues, terrorist attack, rape, corruption and things they see around them and in their life. The five — Abhay Tyagi alias Fealess, Viraj Sharma alias Cheerfad, Roshan Prince, Vishal Bhatia and Sharaj Kant — are not related to each other, but their lives mirror each other's and so do their hardships and their love for rap has bought them together. The financial conditions of the boys is not sufficient so they all pen down thoughts on what they have faced in life and the prevailing situations in the society.

Cheerfad's younger sister Kavita alias Razdhani is also an aspiring rapper just like her brother. She is probably the only rapper from the Trans Yamuna area who raps about.

Rap lyrics of all five of them shed light on the socio-economic barrier, corruption, the dirty lanes where they have been brought up, the struggle of life, politics, elections, voting, disappointment with self, rape, terrorism and so on.

People in their gullies think of them as upcoming celebrities because they start rapping anywhere and everywhere. Initially, all of them faced problems as their families did not understand rapping and for most writing, the lyrics was a way to vent out the everyday frustration and gradually rap became a part of their lives. Bohemia and Eminem, the gods of rap are also their favourites.

A HIT ON YOUTUBE
