Alwar gang-rape case: Commission for Scheduled Castes charges police with carelessness; probe ordered

An enquiry by an officer of the secretary or joint secretary level will also be constituted in this matter. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Jaipur: After all the accused in the Alwar gang-rape case were arrested by the police, the National Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC) in its investigation of the gang-rape case, has found carelessness on the part of the police officials.

On Friday, the NCSC vice chairman L Murgan told news agency ANI that action against culprit police officials will be recommended under section 4. He further mentioned that the victim met Alwar Superintendent of Police on April 30 and FIR should have been registered immediately into the matter but it was only registered on May 2, the commission has taken this very seriously. He also said that an enquiry by an officer of the secretary or joint secretary level will also be constituted in this matter.

Reportedly, the Rajasthan government has ordered two investigations by the Divisional Commissioner and DIG, vigilance into the matter. The ANI report mentioned that SC has recorded the statement of the victims and it has also instructed the state DGP and chief secretary to provide security and necessary help to the victim.

On April 26, a woman who travelling with her husband was allegedly gang-raped by five men while her husband was beaten up in Thanagaji area of Alwar district in Rajasthan.

The woman and her husband were going from village Lalwadi to Taalvraksh on a bike, when about five men aged between 20-25 years, stopped them and took the couple to a deserted place. The accused raped the woman and allegedly assaulted her husband. Reportedly, they also threatened the couple not to report the matter to the police or they will make the video public.

Meanwhile, the victims reached the police to report the matter where the police allegedly said that they were busy with election work. The case sparked protests across the state, opposition parties also took it to streets demanding stringent action the police officials and the accused.
