Husband stripped naked and forced to watch as wife, 20, gang-raped by five men

The pair was followed and stopped by the gang before the woman was dragged into a ravine for a three-hour assault

Husband stripped naked and forced to watch as wife, 20, gang-raped by five men

A young woman was gang-raped by five men for three hours in front of her husband when they were travelling in northern India.

The 20-year-old was dragged into a ravine after the pair, who had been riding on a motorbike, was stopped by the group of alleged rapists in Alway, Rajasthan on April 26.

The group allegedly stripped off the husband's clothes and forced him to watch his wife being raped as they filmed the three-hour attack.

Police have arrested all five men for carrying the brutal assault and detained a sixth person for uploading the sickening footage to social media.

Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images)

The victim, from Dalit, has now called for the perpetrators to be executed, The Times of India reports.

She said: "I want that all the five men who raped me, videotaped me even when I pleaded with them not to and changed our lives forever in ways which I will have nightmares about, should be hanged.

"If there is any worse sentencing than that then it should be given to these five."

According to the husband, they were being followed and stopped by the five men about 10 minutes after leaving his in-laws house.

"They dragged us down the ravine and asked us to strip," said the husband.

"When we resisted they started tearing off our clothes till we had to take them off."

The gang then threatened to harm their parents if they reported the matter to the police, the husband told the reporters.

Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images)

She and her husband reported to the police when the assault video was posted online and went viral on May 4.

However, they were told that the case cannot be registered as there was no staff at the police station.

"In fact, the police also said that on May 5 and 6, no work will be done in the matter because of election," said the husband.

The issue was then reported to the inspector general of police of the Jaipur Range, S Sengathir, who insisted authorities had not tried to suppress the case.

The victim and her husband are now determined to fight for justice as they 'are not scared of anyone', in particular the five alleged rapists from Gujjar community, it is reported.

"Just getting them arrested is not the ultimate aim but it is to see them being given death sentence, " said the husband.
