Rajasthan: Woman raped in Alwar government hospital; no arrests made yet

The accused Ram Nivas raped her while Giriraj allegedly held her hand and shut her mouth. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Jaipur: After the Alwar gang-rape case is made the headlines, another rape case has been reported from Rajasthan. A woman was allegedly raped by two men at a government-run hospital in Kathoomar area of Alwar district.

The incident took place took on May 7. Reportedly, on Friday, Udhay Bhan, Superintendent, Kathoomar said that a woman registered a case the police stating that she was raped on May 7 by a man named Ram Nivas at the Kathoomar hospital and another man named Giriraj Prasad aided him. He added that the woman came to the hospital for delivery of her pregnant daughter-in-law on May 5.

Woman allegedly raped at a hospital in Kathoomar, Alwar. Uday Bhan, SI Kathoomar says, "A woman registered a case with us saying she was raped on 7 May by a man at the Kathoomar hospital, while another man aided him." #Rajasthan (10.5.19) pic.twitter.com/jeusbRLs1l — ANI (@ANI) May 10, 2019

News agency ANI reported on May 7, a compounder named Giriraj Prasad took her to the delivery room at 8 PM on the pretext of signing some documents. Reportedly, Ram Nivas was already present in the room. The accused Ram Nivas raped her while Giriraj allegedly held her hand and shut her mouth.

However, further investigation in the case is underway.

In another case reported from Alwar, on April 26, while a woman was travelling with her husband was allegedly gang-raped by five men while her husband was beaten up in Thanagaji area of the district.

The woman and her husband were going from village Lalwadi to Taalvraksh on a bike, when about five men aged between 20-25 years, stopped them and took the couple to a deserted place. The accused raped the woman and allegedly assaulted her husband. Reportedly, they also threatened the couple not to report the matter to the police or they will make the video public.

The opposition political parties staged demanding justice for the victim and a seedy probe in the case. The police here has been accused of delay in registering the case. The FIR in the case was registered six days after the incident.
