Locals attack police team for shielding chain snatcher from mob violence in Thane, 25 booked

No arrests have been made in this regard as of yet (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Thane: In a bizarre instance which has come to light from Maharashtra, a mob of locals in Bhiwandi township of Thane district have been booked for allegedly assaulting police personnel who were trying to arrest a chain-snatcher on Saturday. As many as 25 people have been booked in this regard, including Rishikesh Joshi and Suryaji Divekar, who were allegedly leading the crowd which attacked the cops.

Recalling the incident, eyewitnesses said that locals nabbed a chain-snatcher in Mankoli area under Narpoli police station limits in the late hours of Friday. A police team under the direction of sub-inspector (SI) Manikrao Kathure arrived at the spot and tried to take the chain-snatcher, one Nilesh Bhoir, in custody.

However, the angry mob demanded that Bhoir be handed over to them by the police. When the cops refused, the mob allegedly attacked them with iron roads and even vandalised their police vehicle. As a result, 25 people have been booked under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for assaulting public servants and rioting. An official familiar with the matter said that no arrests have been made in this regard as of yet.

A similar incident was reported from Thane district in April of this year when family members of a rape-accused allegedly stormed into the Vartak Nagar police station and brutally assaulted police officials on duty. The assailants believed that their brother was being falsely implicated for the gang-rape of a 22-year-old mentally-challenged girl in 2016. The incident took place after the brother in question was sentenced to 20 years' rigorous imprisonment along with five others by a court.

In fact, a 15-member team of personnel from the Bandra police station in Mumbai was thrashed and attacked with stones and glass bottles by kin of a chain snatcher. The incident took place in April of this year at the Irani Basti in Ambivli when the police team had gone there to arrest the chain snatcher.
