Noisy protest lands BJP in soup

A noisy protest staged by a BJP delegation on the Alwar gang rape issue at the Collectorate here has snowballed into a dispute between the party and the district administration. Jaipur Collector Jagroop Singh Yadav, who is also the District Electoral Officer, has taken up the matter with the police. Mr. Yadav has made a complaint to the Jaipur Police Commissioner, alleging violation of model code of conduct. He also sent video footage of the chaotic scene created in his office along with the complaint. Union Minister of State Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore (in photo) was part of the BJP delegation.

The BJP delegation, led by Union Minister of State Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore, had marched to the Collectorate on Thursday to submit a memorandum to the Governor with the demand for stringent punishment to the accused persons in the April 26 gang rape case. All the six accused have been arrested after a massive hunt by the police.

The BJP leaders raised slogans alleging police inaction in the case and stormed into the Collector’s room in his absence. Col. Rathore later said the BJP members had gone to meet the Collector after getting prior appointment, but he was not present at the office. The delegation members handed over the memorandum to an Additional Collector.

Mr. Yadav has made a complaint to the Jaipur Police Commissioner, alleging violation of model code of conduct in force for the Lok Sabha elections by the BJP leaders. Mr. Yadav said that the delegation members, including Col. Rathore, Ashok Parnami, Surendra Pareek, Rajendra Rathore and Narpath Singh Rajvi, had misbehaved with the officials present and indulged in an “indecent conduct”.

“BJP city president Mohanlal Gupta had informed me of a demonstration planned at the Collectorate Circle and submission of memorandum on May 9. After entering into my room, the BJP leaders used indecent language and Col. Rathore went to the extent of addressing a press conference on the spot,” Mr. Yadav said.

Mr. Yadav said he had gone to attend a meeting on the Smart City Project when the BJP delegation came to his office. He has sent a video footage of the chaotic scene created in his office along with his complaint and requested the Police Commissioner to take legal action in the matter.

Various employees’ associations in the Collectorate have also condemned Thursday’s incident and demanded action against the BJP leaders. The associations, which expressed concern over the bedlam caused in the district’s highest government office, included Rajasva Lekha Sangh, Kanungo Sangh, Tehsil Patwar Sangh, Vaahan Chalak Sangh and Office Assistants’ Association.
