Lok Sabha elections 2019: Why 6th, 7th phases are about Narendra Modi vs Rajiv Gandhi

My open challenge to Congress. Fight elections in the name of the former PM associated with Bofors in: Delhi and… https://t.co/qt0Op5dLQI — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1557157181000

While speaking at an election rally at Pratapgarh in Uttar Pradesh on May 4, Prime Minister Narendra Modi raked up controversies surrounding Congress president Rahul Gandhi ’s father Rajiv Gandhi and alleged that he died as “Bhrashtachari No. 1” (Corrupt number 1). While the Congress lodged strong protests, the BJP made it a Rajiv Gandhi versus Modi battle on 169 of the 543 seats going to polls in the fifth, sixth and seventh phases of the ongoing Lok Sabha elections.Going by the issues raised by Narendra Modi, his aim is to challenge the Congress in constituencies where the votes of Sikhs and Muslim women play a decisive role in deciding the fate of political parties.In Pratapgarh, Modi accused the Congress of harping on the Rafale deal only to tarnish his image. In a frontal attack on Rahul Gandhi, Modi said, “Your father was termed ‘Mr Clean’ by his courtiers, but his life ended as ‘Bhrashtachari No. 1’.”When the Congress protested, PM Modi justified his remarks. In an interview to a news channel, he said, “Answers have to be given about the Bhopal Gas leak case, Bofors deal, ‘big tree shaking’ quote, Shah Bano case and why Kamal Nath had been made Madhya Pradesh chief minister.”On May 6, PM Modi tweeted and said, “My open challenge to Congress. Fight elections in the name of the former PM associated with Bofors in: Delhi and Punjab, where innocent Sikhs were butchered in his reign. Bhopal, where he helped Warren Anderson flee after the infamous Gas Tragedy. Challenge accepted?”While 51 seats voted in the fifth phase on May 6 - two days after PM Narendra Modi’s charge - 59 seats each will go to polls on May 12 and May 19 respectively.Rahul Gandhi’s constituency Amethi and his mother Sonia Gandhi’s seat Raebareli, both in Uttar Pradesh, voted in the fifth phase.Though Sonia Gandhi may be comfortably placed, Rahul Gandhi is facing a tough challenge from BJP candidate Smriti Irani in Amethi. He had won with a margin of 3.70 lakh votes in 2009. But his victory margin dipped to just 1.07 lakh votes in 2014 when Smriti Irani was pitted against him for the first time.Amidst the tough challenge posed by the BJP in Amethi, Rahul chose to contest from a second seat of Wayanad in Kerala.However, more than Amethi and Raebareli, Narendra Modi’s attack on Rajiv Gandhi was aimed at improving the chances of the BJP candidates in the sixth and seventh phases of the Lok Sabha polls.All the seven seats of Delhi, which had witnessed the genocide against Sikhs in 1984 after prime minister Indira Gandhi’s assassination on October 31, will go to polls on Sunday. Sikhs have a strong presence in almost all the seats in the national capital.Sikhs have considerable presence in Haryana too. All the 10 constituencies in the state are also going to polls on Sunday.The BJP will hope to influence Sikh voters on the 1984 anti-Sikh riots case also in all the four seats in Himachal Pradesh, Chandigarh and Patna Sahib constituencies, which are poll-bound on May 19.Guru Gobind Singh, the last Sikh guru, was born in the holy city of Patna Sahib. Union law minister Ravi Shankar Prasad is contesting against former BJP leader Shatrughan Singh, who is contesting on a Congress ticket.Besides the anti-Sikh riots case, Narendra Modi raised the Bhopal Gas leak and Shah Bano cases to win the Bhopal voters.Thousands of people in the Madhya Pradesh capital had died after poisonous methyl iso-cyanate gas leaked from Union Carbide plant in December 1984. Rajiv Gandhi is accused of helping Union Carbide Corporation CEO Warren Anderson escape first from Bhopal to Delhi and then to the US.A large part of the dead were Muslims.The BJP has been trying to win the confidence of the Muslim women by raising the triple talaq issue. It sought to get a bill passed in Parliament but failed. It has promulgated an Ordinance banning triple talaq.By raising the Shah Bano case, the BJP hopes to strike a chord with the Muslim women. As per 2011 Census, Muslims constitute 26.28 per cent of the population of Bhopal.Shah Bano had won a maintenance lawsuit against her husband in the Supreme Court. However, the Rajiv Gandhi got the order overturned in Parliament, thus, putting the divorced Muslim women at disadvantage.The BJP is fighting a high voltage and symbolic contest in Bhopal by pitting 2008 Malegaon blast accused Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur against Congress Rajya Sabha MP Digvijaya Singh who had coined the term ‘Hindu terror’ and ‘saffron terror’.By raking up the Bhopal Gas tragedy and Shah Bano case, the BJP does not want to leave any chance to defeat Digvijaya Singh.With the 1984 anti-Sikh riots, Bofors deal, Shah Bano case and Bhopal Gas tragedy issues, the sixth and seventh phases are all about late Rajiv Gandhi versus PM Narendra Modi.
