Friends invite girl to terrace, sexually assault her

By Akash Gulankar



In a shocking case involving a group of teenage friends, a 16-year-old girl was invited on a messaging service to a building terrace in the Bharati Vidyapeeth police station area and was raped by a student three years senior to her.



According to information given by the police, the victim's father has lodged an FIR on January 16 against the three boys who sexually assaulted the victim. The prime accused has been identified as Ganesh Tukaram Pawar (19), who is a student. Two other accused, also students, are juveniles.



One of the Bharati Vidyapeeth police officials said, “The incident took place on January 15 at the terrace of the building of one of the accused between 3.30 pm and 11.30 pm. One of the boys called the girl on WhatsApp and asked her to come to the terrace. She was raped by Ganesh Pawar and assaulted by one of the juveniles. The girl informed about the incident to her parents when she reached back home. Later, the parents resorted to the cops."



The accused have been booked under sections 376, 363, 354, 342 and 34 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) for rape, kidnapping, sexual assault and wrongful confinement by the group of persons. Citing the age of the victim, sections 4, 8 and 12 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act have also been invoked by the cops.



One of the police officials added that the stringent sections of the Prevention of Atrocities Act have been invoked in the case, citing the caste of the victim and the accused. The sections invoked are described as section 3 (1) (w)(i) intentionally touches a woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, knowing that she belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, when such act of touching is of a sexual nature and is without the recipient‘s consent; (ii) uses words, acts or gestures of a sexual nature towards a woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, knowing that she belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe.



Ravindra Rasal, assistant commissioner of police attached to special branch 1, is probing the case. He said, “The prime accused, Ganesh Pawar, has been arrested and further investigation is under process. Two juveniles will be arrested soon and further legal action will be taken against them.” He informed that the girl has been sent for medical tests and her reports are awaited.


