Lok Sabha polls: 5 pain points that ail Delhi

Nationalism, full statehood, personality cult and slander campaigns dominated the election discourse in Delhi for weeks. But the five big pain points of pollution, public transport, water crisis, law and order and unauthorised constructions didn't adequately cut through the high-pitched campaign clutter.

As the National Capital's seven seats vote on Sunday to choose their representatives in Parliament, Mail Today puts the spotlight back on the areas that matter the most to people in their immediate and daily lives.

TOXIC AIR

Rising air pollution levels in Delhi have been a serious concern, so much so that Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal called the city a gas chamber. A Greenpeace report released in March ranked Delhi as the most polluted capital in the world.

BJP, Congress and AAP didn't mention air pollution in their 2014 election manifestos. But a growing public outcry has triggered a change. The three major parties have now pledged to combat the crisis.

In its national manifesto, BJP has promised to focus on 102 most polluted cities, including Delhi. Congress has promised to treat air pollution as a national public health emergency.

Delhi's ruling AAP has promised electric buses and vacuum cleaning of roads, among other measures, to clean up the air that turns hazardous particularly during winters.

TRAFFIC & TRANSPORT

Inadequate public transport facilities and regular traffic jams also cripple Delhi on a daily basis. The three parties have promised to prioritise transport infrastructure. BJP promises to launch an urban mobility mission to increase public transport usage.

Congress says it will formulate a policy on urban transport with a focus on Metro, suburban rail, buses and non-motorised modes. AAP promises a modern, reliable, clean and affordable public transport system.

It said had Delhi been a full state, AAP would have reduced Metro fares, set up a unified transport authority on the lines of London's transport system, built modern terminals and decongested Delhi by redesigning roads.

WATER WOES

Water crisis is another big challenge Delhi has been grappling with for decades. Experts say the city has sufficient water, but faulty distribution systems lead to shortages.

Delhi Jal Board is supplying 900 MGD (million gallons a day) of water, mostly from canals carrying river waters. The rest of the supplies come from ranney wells and tubewells.

Still, there is a shortage of about 300 MGD that affects tens of thousands of people. This has also allowed the water mafia to thrive. Experts say that as high as 45% of water is lost to spillages and thefts.

AAP has not specifically mentioned water crisis in its manifesto, but its candidates have been highlighting the issue and have promised to resolve it. Raghav Chadha, AAP's South Delhi candidate, released a 32-page manifesto majorly on basic amenities, including access to safe and clean drinking water.

BJP's national manifesto promises a new Union ministry on water. Prime Minister Narendra Modi at the launch of the manifesto promised a Jal Jivan Mission to ensure piped water to every household by 2024.

Congress, in its manifesto, included a section on water management, also promising a ministry of water, universal access to drinking water, besides doubling the budget for cleaning rivers.

SAFETY & SECURITY

Delhi was ranked the most unsafe city of India, with nearly 40% of rapes, 33% of crimes against women and the highest crime rate in 2016, according to the National Crime Records Bureau data.

The city also topped the list in cases of murder, abduction, juveniles in conflict with law and economic offences for that year. Concerns over safety of women have featured in the manifestos of all the parties.

On law and order, AAP has promised police reforms which include filling vacancies and reducing response time of PCR vans to five minutes and increasing citizen participation.

On safety of women, AAP promised 33% representations of women in police, fast track courts and periodic safety audits. AAP said law and order will improve if Delhi gets full statehood and the police comes under the city government.

Also, better law and order and safety of women were some of the key issues listed in AAP's constituency-specific manifestos. BJP's national manifesto, among other things, spoke about ensuring a life of dignity for women, women's safety, promotion of gender justice and reservation for women.

It said, women's security will be given more priority and forensic facilities and fast-track courts will be expanded to bring convicts to justice. Congress said in its manifesto that it will do a comprehensive review of the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplaces Act-2013 and extend it to all workplaces.

It plans to pass a model legislation to establish a separate investigative agency for heinous crimes against women and children and urge state governments to enact a law to establish such a body.

UNAUTHORISED CONSTRUCTIONS

Over the past 12 years, successive governments have made promises to regularise unauthorised colonies but nothing much changed in the illegal settlements built in violation of building and land-use laws.

About 50 lakh residents or 30% of Delhi's population in these areas don't have property ownership and transfer rights and are forced to live without basic civic facilities such as proper roads, sewerage lines and parking lots.

The number of these areas is now 1,797 up from 1,200 in 2007. Another burning issue is sealing of illegal commercial establishments under the supervision of a Supreme Court-appointed monitoring committee.

The exercise affects traders, comprising a sizeable population in as many as four of the seven Lok Sabha seats. Since December 2017, about 10,000 commercial establishments have been sealed for land misuse (converting residential units into commercial ones), non-payment of conversion charges and increased pollution emissions.

AAP's manifesto promises regularisation of unauthorised colonies and stopping sealing besides making efforts to evaluate the cases of sealed establishments. BJP and Congress have not mentioned the two issues in their manifestos.

The Union Cabinet in its meeting on March 7 - three days before the model code of conduct came into effect -appointed a 10-member committee under Delhi Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal to recommend a process to give ownership rights to residents.

The committee was asked to submit its report in 90 days. Congress candidates such as Sheila Dikshit and Arvinder Singh Lovely have promised to look into the issue. Lovely was the only candidate from the Congress who released a separate manifesto which had a promise to look into the crisis.


