Sailor from Odisha yet to be released by Nigerian pirates

BHUBANESWAR: A sailor from Odisha, Sudeep Kumar Choudhary, along with four other Indian seafarers, who were abducted by pirates in Nigeria on April 19, is yet to be rescued from their clutches. This despite repeated cries of the relatives of the abducted men with the former launching a social media campaign, seeking help from different quarters.Leading from the front, Sudeep's wife Bhagyashree Das has approached the Union minister for external affairs Sushma Swaraj via social media, seeking her intervention into the matter, but in vain. Bhagyashres's initiative has been followed by the relatives of other abducted Indian sailors, but without any luck.Responding to the pleas of the relatives, including that of Bhagyashree, the Union minister on May 7 tweeted: "I have seen news reports about abduction of five Indian sailors by pirates in Nigeria. I am asking Indian high commissioner to take this up at the highest level with Government of Nigeria for their release. Abhay - Please take this up and send me a report. @india_nigeria."Replying to the minister's direction, the high commissioner of India in Nigeria tweeted on the same day: "Respected Ma'am, As directed, have reiterated vigorously to Presidency, Foreign Minister and Interior Minister. Security forces are deployed, while ensuring safety of hostages, in Southern Nigeria. Other concerned parties have also been in touch. We are hopeful and will follow up."However, Bhagyashree is still awaiting the news of her husband's return. She on May 9 reminded the minister in a tweet, "Ma'am 3 days already over since you replied. Yet we the families are not getting any exact update on the same. Today 3 weeks over of their abduction. Ma'am I don't need any report, I want my husband back safe and soon! Plz try to understand my situation! You are the only hope."Sudeep, a native of Berhampur , was kidnapped along with four other Indians and two Nigerians while there ship (MT APECUS, IMO 733810) anchored off Lagos on April 19. According to reports, the ship, an oil tanker , arrived at Lagos when the incident took place in April.Apart from Sudeep, who is a third officer in Merchant Navy , the pirates have also abducted Ankit Hooda, an ordinary seaman, Chirag Jadhav, a seaman, Putcha Sai Avinash, second ordinary seaman and Moogu Ravi, a fitter in the ship.
