Lok Sabha Elections Phase 6: Key highlights

Around 10 crore will exercise their franchise to elect 59 Member of Parliaments.

New Delhi: The election for the sixth phase of the seven phase Lok Sabha Polls 2019 is in full swing. In this phase, 59 seats in six states including seven seats in the national capital Delhi are up for grabs. Around 10 crore will exercise their franchise to elect 59 Member of Parliaments.

We take a look at six highlights of the elections so far.



1) PM Narendra Modi on coalition: The twitter handle of the Gujarat BJP has tweeted Prime Minister Narendra Modi's views on the coalition government. PM Modi is quoted as saying, “BJP knows the art of running coalitions. I myself have worked with BJP allies in different states when I was working for organisation. Then our party has the legacy of Shri Vajpayee ji who ran the best coalition during his tenure.” The Prime Minister's tweet came a day before seven states went to polls on Sunday.

BJP knows the art of running coalitions. I myself have worked with BJP allies in different states when I was working for organisation. Then our party has the legacy of Shri Vajpayee ji who ran the best coalition during his tenure: PM Modi #DeshKeDilMeiModi — BJP (@BJP4India) May 11, 2019



2) Rahul Gandhi on PM Modi: Congress President Rahul Gandhi has accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi of using hatred as his campaign strategy. The Congress Presidemt said, “Narendra Modi used hatred as his poll strategy, we used love. And I think love will conquer the fight. The election was fought on key issues including demonetization, farmer problems, Gabbar Singh Tax and corruption in Rafale. Narendra Modi used hatred in the campaign and we used love and I am confident love will win.”



3) Clashes in UP during polls: There were violent clashes between supporters of BJP leader Pappu Singh and an RJD MLA in Maharajganj in Uttar Pradesh. Pappu Singh alleged that RJD MLA was distributing cash which led to a face-off between the two. The RJD MLA has denied all the allegations.

Clashes break out between BJP leader Pappu Singh & an RJD MLA in Maharajganj, #UttarPradesh. Singh alleged that RJD MLA was distributing cash which led to a face-off between the two. Meanwhile, RJD MLA has denied all the allegations pic.twitter.com/qE371c1Hze — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 12, 2019



4) BJP 's woman candidate allegedly heckled: BJP's Ghatal candidate and former IPS Officer, Bharati Ghosh was allegedly heckled in West Bengal. People in a video were seen chanting 'Go back Bharati' in Bengali. The Election Commission has ordered more security in these booths and sought a report from the district magistrate on the issue.The BJP candidate said she and her polling agent was assaulted before the police.

BJP candidate & Former IPS Officer, Bharati Ghosh was heckled in #WestBengal. People were seen in a video chanting 'Go back Bharati' in Bengali. EC has ordered more security in these booths & sought a report from the district magistrate pic.twitter.com/MBOEJa62hJ — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 12, 2019



5) Voters fume at VVIP treatment to Sheila Dikshit: Voters at a polling booth in national capital expressed disappointment after former Delhi chief minister and Congress candidate Sheila Dikshit was allowed to get her car to the polling station by poll authorities. While another senior citizen had to step down from her vehicle to walk up to the booth to cast her vote. Some voters at the polling booth raised objections at this following which authorities allowed the other senior citizen to take her car to the polling booth.



6) Voter turnout in till 2 pm: Low voter turnout was recorded till 10 am in the morning in the seven states. Total 50.77% voting till 4 pm in Phase 6. West Bengal- 70.51, Delhi-45.24, Haryana- 51.86 Uttar Pradesh- 43.26, Bihar- 44.40, Jharkhand- 58.08, Madhya Pradesh- 52.78.
