From dowry harassment to domestic violence: Now, #MenToo seek gender neutrality

(This story originally appeared in on May 11, 2019)

2018: The Year When #MeToo Shook India







Autoplay Autoplay 1 of 13 2018: The Year Of #MeToo In India 2018 saw the rise of the #MeToo movement in India. Inspired by a global campaign against sexual harassment and assault, women across the spectrum opened up and shared their stories about abuse by men in positions of power. And it began in October with actress Tanushree Dutta accusing actor Nana Patekar of sexual harassment while shooting for the 2008 film 'Horn Ok Please'.



What followed was a series of posts by other women who shared their experiences with the world. From actors, film directors to advertising top guns, artists and writers and politicians, women professionals called out obnoxious behaviour at the workplace. From unwanted attention in the office to sexual innuendos on the film set, there were many kinds of allegations that surfaced.



While some of these are still struggling in the industry amidst the allegations, some succeeded in getting a clean chit from authorities. Recently, rumours surfaced that Patekar has been given a clean chit. However, the 'Aashiq Banaya Aapne' actress quashed the rumours. However, director Vikas Bahl, who was one of the prime accusees, has been set free from all charges against him. The internal complaints committee of Reliance Entertainment, today, set the 'Queen' director free, who was accused by an employee of Phantom films under the #MeToo movement.



(In Pic: From top left, Nana Patekar, Aditi Mittal, Subhash Ghai, Anirban Das Blah. From bottom left, Alok Nath, Sajid Khan, Jatin Das, Vikas Bahl) Nana Patekar, Tanushree Dutta Former actress Tanushree Dutta in September accused Nana Patekar of sexually harassing her during the shooting of their 2008 film 'Horn Ok Pleassss'. Dutta went on to say that she had brought up the complaint 10 years ago when the incident occurred, but no action was taken.



The actress also said that she was supposed to do a solo number for the film, but Patekar decided to join in and perform intimate dance steps that made her uncomfortable.



Patekar denied the allegations and sent a legal notice to the actress, who filed a police complaint against the actor and the film's choreographer Ganesh Acharya, producer Samee Siddiqui and director Rakesh Sarang.



Meanwhile, Rakhi Sawant who had replaced Dutta in the song for the film, then accused her of taking drugs on the set. Dutta slapped a Rs 10 crore defamation suit against Sawant.



(In Pic: On the left Nana Patekar, on the right is Tanushree Dutta) Vinta Nanda, Alok Nath, Sandhya Mridul Alok Nath, known for his popular on-screen portrayals, found himself in the midst of the #MeToo controversy after writer-director Vinta Nanda accused him of rape. Actress Sandhya Mridul also alleged that he had made sexual advances towards her during a shoot.



Nanda had alleged that the actor had raped her 19 years ago. Nath, however, refuted the allegations and filed a civil defamation suit against Nanda. Nath's wife Ashu had also recorded her statement in court against Nanda and sought defamation against the writer-director.



Mridul, while slamming Nath for causing agony, praised Tanushree Dutta and Vinta Nanda for their courage to come forward and urged others to not be ashamed and ‘keep this fire going.’



(In Pic: From the left, Vinta Nanda, Alok Nath and Sandhya Mridul) Vikas Bahl, Vikramaditya Motwane, Anurag Kashyap, Kangana Ranaut On October 6, hours after Anurag Kashyap, Vikramaditya Motwane, Madhu Matena and Vikas Bahl announced the decision to dissolve their production house Phantom Films, director Bahl was accused of sexual harassment by a former employee.



The victim who had worked on the production house's film 'Bombay Velvet' recalled her ordeal with Bahl in 2015. Soon after, Kashyap and Motwane went on record to say that they were informed about the allegations by the employee and detailed the backdoor deliberation that took place in order to punish their partner. Their statement led to Bahl filing a Rs 10 crore defamation suit against them. The 'Queen' director also demanded interim action from the court seeking to restrain Kashyap and Motwane from making statements against him to media or through social media.



While the woman had earlier refused to take any legal action saying that she stands by her claims, the former partners continued to fight it out in court.



However, today, the director was set free of the allegations against him.





(In Pic: Top left is Vikas Bahl, top right is Vikramaditya Motwane, bottom left is Anurag Kashyap, bottom right is Kangana Ranaut) Sajid Khan, Saloni Chopra, Priyanka Bose, Mandana Karimi Sajid Khan had to step down from 'Houseful 4' after multiple allegations of sexual impropriety surfaced against the Bollywood director. His close friend and aide in Bollywood, Akshay Kumar also chose to not support him and decided not to shoot if Khan was on-board.



On October 11, an aspiring actress, Saloni Chopra had posted a detailed account of the harrowing time she had with Khan.



A freelance journalist also claimed that Khan had exposed himself when she was interviewing him in the early 2000s. After the allegations, Khan stepped down from the upcoming comedy 'Housefull 4'. The movie, produced by Sajid Nadiadwala and being distributed by Fox Star Studios, is the latest entry in a franchise that began in 2010. Khan has directed two of the previous three films.



Priyanka Bose, who has acted in critically acclaimed films including 'Lion', 'Gulaab Gang', and 'Half Ticket' among others, opened up about the incident that allegedly took place when Khan had called her for an audition. She detailed the incident and shared that soon after when she narrated the incident to her partner, he asked him to quit right away. She has been quoted as saying, “He called me for an audition. The text from his assistant read, “Should be comfortable in a bikini.” When I landed up with the required clothing, no sides were given.”



Mandana Karimi alleged that Khan made inappropriate remarks when she visited his office to discuss a role in his 2014 film 'Humshakals'. The actress said that Khan had asked her to remove her clothes, in order for her to get the part.



(In Pic: Top left Sajid Khan, top right Saloni Chopra, bottom left Priyanka Bose, bottom right Mandana Karimi)

Rishi (name changed) was part of a yoga group that required him to arrive at the studio early on Sunday mornings and set up the mats and straps, blocks and bricks. It was a long commute from his home in Chembur to the studio in Malad when a friendly live-in couple Lina and Karan - also fellow yoga practitioners - opened up their home to him on Saturday nights to ease Rishi's Sunday morning routine.It was on one such Saturday when Karan wasn't home that Lina made advances on Rishi. Rishi gave in and both kicked off a consensual sexual relationship that continued for months. When Rishi realised that the relationship was going nowhere and wanted to marry another girl that he had met, Lina flew into a rage and then slapped rape charges against him.Rishi (30) was arrested overnight and spent a week in jail. The case dragged in court for three years until his acquittal in February 2018. But his life was shattered. He lost his job, friends and the confidence to face the world. "He came to us almost a year into the case when the main thing we did was provide emotional strength through counselling," explained Amit Deshpande, who set up Vaastav Foundation "for preserving and protecting men's rights" in 2014 after his personal battle against a "false litigation of domestic violence " that he fought and won.It is false cases like Rishi's and Amit's why men's rights activists feel the need for " gender neutrality " to what they feel are "gender-biased" laws of the land.Most false cases that come their way are about dowry harassment and domestic violence, but there has been a surge in the number of consensual sex-turned rape allegations. "Most of the times these cases become extortion tools and although the acquittal rate in rape cases is 74%, stretched litigation destroys a man's reputation," said Deshpande, who also runs a suicide helpline for men in distress. "Once such a case is filed, a man is persecuted at every level - police, judiciary, media. Friends, family and acquaintances look at him with suspicion. It is a myth that women don't harass men. If we have to work towards equal rights, we have to work on legal recourse for men too. There has to be some penalty for the complainant and a system to withhold the identity of the accused until proven guilty in order to deter and weed out false accusers."While organisations like Deshpande's are conscious of the #MeToo movement and the atrocities done to women, there is growing concern for men facing false accusations and the absence of emotional and legal support. Instances of men being harassed may be few, but when they emerge they are rarely treated with seriousness, feel activists. And that forms the thrust of the men's rights movement in India, a fairly recent phenomenon.It started out as a Yahoo group in 2005 with men banding together to discuss and debate the IPC's Section 498A (dowry harassment), which, despite its good intent, saw husbands getting thrown into jail over petty domestic disputes. Today activists have branched out into 45 individual men's rights NGOs that operate under the umbrella of Save Indian Family.Their cause is not about antagonism to feminism, insists men's rights activist Captain Arun Sethi. "We're not saying, don't protect women, but there should be checks and balances. It's more about a draconian law that violates the already shrinking space of men's rights in marriage and its open-endedness makes men very vulnerable," said the 76-year-old who found himself behind bars with charges of dowry harassment after 21 years of marriage following a dispute with his wife. "I lost my reputation, my job, my money fighting the case. Who wants to employ a jailbird?"Deshpande said a primary demand is "gender neutrality in gender-biased laws under Sec 354 (outraging the modesty of a woman) and Sec 376 (rape) of the IPC". "Any discussion, disagreement or argument that may not have amicable results has the potential to become a case of Sec 354; we have people talking about how these laws have spoilt gender relationships within the office environment."Barkha Trehan, who formed Purish Aayog last year "after the government refused to institute one" cited several accounts where a man's complaint about harassment and torture was met with police apathy. She has been rallying for a "National Commission for Men (NCM)". Trehan is not alone. In 2014, the National Coalition for Men - a forum of 50 organisations - launched its own 'Men-ifesto' expressing concern over the growing number of "innocent men" falling victim to "gender-biased" laws .Anant Kumar, a Fulbright scholar and associate professor at Xavier Institute of Social Service, Ranchi, published a paper last year on the "rationale" and "consequences" of an NCM. He wrote that atrocities on men by women cannot be ignored, but an NCM might not be the only solution as it cannot be ruled out that this body might increase confrontation between itself and the National Commission for Women (NCW). "To prevent this," he suggested, "the government could restructure and rename the NCW to make it gender-neutral" .
