PM Modi, Mayawati lock horns over Alwar gang-rape case with 'crocodile tears', 'dirty politics' jibes

PM Modi, Mayawati lock horns over Alwar gang-rape case | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Mounting attack on West Bengal Chief Minister and BSP supremo, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday alleged that she was shedding crocodile tears on the incident of gangrape in Rajasthan’s Alwar. The PM also asked the BSP chief to withdraw support from the Congress-led Rajasthan government.

A woman was gang-raped in front of her husband in Thanagaji area of Rajasthan’s Alwar on April 26. The victim’s husband alleged that the police did not take action against the accused citing that they were busy with the election duty.

Addressing election rallies in Kushinagar in eastern Uttar Pradesh, PM Modi said, "Please do not shed crocodile tears. If you are serious, why don't you withdraw support from the Congress government in Rajasthan."

Retorting to PM Modi’s remark, Mayawati said that he was doing "dirty politics" over the gangrape incident, adding that her party would take political decision if strict action is not taken by the Rajasthan government.

"In the wake of this incident (Alwar gang-rape), Modi is doing dirty politics. BSP for sure will take required political decision if strict action is not taken in the case," she said in a press note.

Earlier on Saturday, PM Modi had accused the Rajasthan government of suppressing the gangrape case and said that it was only concerned about votes.

Addressing a rally in Uttar Pradesh's Ghazipur yesterday, PM Modi had said, “Two weeks ago, a woman from Dalit community was gang-raped in Alwar, instead of apprehending the culprits, Rajasthan government and the police started to suppress the case.”

“Congress ko dar tha ki Dalit beti ke balatkar ki baat khulne se us ke vote pe asar padega. Aur ye mombattiyan lekar nikal padne wale log, unki mombattiyon se beimani ka dhuan nikal raha hai, ye jo award wapsi gang thi, unko poochna chahta hoon, ab gang kyun chup baithi hai? (Congress was afraid that if the news of gangrape of a Dalit daughter was disclosed then it would affect its vote bank. Smoke of disloyality is coming out from the candle of this candle march group. Why the award wapsi group is silent now, I want to ask.),” he added.
