BJP targets Mamata, Gehlot

Javadekar slams Bengal CM for violence; targets Rajasthan CM over Alwar rape.

The BJP on Sunday launched a scathing attack on West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot over violence in their States.

Union Minister Prakash Javadekar demanded Mr. Gehlot’s resignation over the Alwar gang-rape. The BJP complained to the Election Commission about what it called large-scale election-related violence in West Bengal.

“There has been unprecedented violence during polling in West Bengal; almost 460 incidents have been reported by our booth workers till 3 p.m. today [Sunday],” Mr. Javadekar said.

“Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee seems to have lost her patience in the face of an upsurge of support for the BJP... and that is probably the reason she is making incendiary statements,” the Minister said.

He made a particular mention of the attack on Bharati Ghosh, a former IPS officer and BJP candidate in Ghatal (which went to the polls on Sunday), and blamed it on Ms. Banerjee.

Mr. Javadekar, the BJP’s election in charge for Rajasthan, said 27 incidents of violence against Dalits had been reported from the State; particularly egregious was the police inaction in the Alwar gang-rape case.

“A heinous gang-rape was committed on a Dalit woman in front of her husband, and was filmed. The husband was later blackmailed too. The police sat on it for a week... just because the election was on. Mr. Gehlot, who also holds the Home portfolio, should resign,” he said.

‘Confident of 300 seats’

At the conclusion of the sixth phase of polling for the Lok Sabha election, Mr. Javadekar said, the BJP was confident of securing 300 seats on its own, and more with the NDA allies.

“That is because Prime Minister Narendra Modi has become a symbol of leadership, national security and progress. Another reason for our confidence is our power at polling booths, with our workers,” he said.

“The people have possibly for the second time in history of independent India, voted unanimously for a person. In 1977, just as the people voted out Indira Gandhi, they are, in a pro-incumbency wave, voting Mr. Modi back to power,” he said.
