‘Oppn attacking me as I have changed ‘hua toh hua’ culture’

Kushinagar: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday accused the Congress brass of trying to hush up the Alwar gang rape case and remaining tight-lipped over it.“Nyay Nyay cheekhne wali Congress ke naamdar ke moonh par balatkariyon ne tala laga diya hai. (Congress leaders had been screaming about justice, but the rapists have sealed their lips now),” Modi said while addressing an election rally here.Modi said if Congress has good intention, it would not have tried to suppress the horror that unfolded in Alwar.“But they have just one answer. And that is “Hua toh hua”, Modi said, in reference to Congress leader Sam Pitroda remark on 1984 Sikh riots. Modi said the ‘hua toh hua’ attitude had become part of government functioning in Congress-led UPA government. “The opposition is after me since I have changed that work culture,” he said.Referring to Mayawati questioning his backward status, PM said those seeking my caste certificate usurped public money to fill their coffers.“I was CM of Gujarat for longer than the total time of Bua and Babua and have served as PM for five years, but I never dreamt of becoming rich. Mera bahi-khata sabke saamne hai. Kaun garibon ke liye jita hai uska jeeta jagta udaharan aapke saamne hai. None of my relative is in politics from panchayat to Centre,” he said, and accused Opposition leaders of getting bungalows worth crores constructed for themselves.Reiterating he was most backward by birth, Modi said he always worked to take the country forward. “All casteist leaders should know Modi is of garib caste. I have lived in poverty. I have reached here after fighting poverty. I have seen how my mother and sisters faced problems while cooking. I studied in the light of ‘dhibri’ (oil lamp) and did not have a toilet in house. I reached here after facing such challenges. So, when you gave me power I thought of toilets, opened bank accounts for poor and ensured power connection and medical facility,” Modi added.Targeting the opposition over multi-crore NRHM scam, Modi said that his government came up with Ayushman Bharat scheme that provisioned free medical treatment to the poor.Modi said that the entire opposition is against Aadhaar card, but I stood by it because it helped his government in removing at least 8 crore middlemen.
