Modi, Maya spar over Alwar gang-rape

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Kushinagar/Lucknow, May 12

A full-scale war of words broke out on Sunday between Narendra Modi and Mayawati over the Alwar gang-rape incident with the Prime Minister accusing the BSP supremo of “shedding crocodile tears”, a charge trashed by her as his “dirty politics”.

Addressing election rallies in Kushinagar and Deoria in eastern Uttar Pradesh, Modi mounted a scathing attack on the BSP supremo and dared her to withdraw support to the Congress government in Rajasthan if she was really serious about the incident.

Hours after his remark, Mayawati charged the Prime Minister with doing “dirty politics” over the gang-rape of a Dalit girl in Alwar and demanded his resignation for incidents of Dalit atrocities in the past.

“In the wake of this (Alwar) incident, Modi is doing dirty politics. The BSP will, for sure, take an appropriate political decision in the absence of stringent and proper legal action in the case,” Mayawati said in a press note responding to the Prime Minister’s challenge to her to withdraw support to the Congress government in Rajasthan.

The Congress government in Rajasthan has been accused by both Modi and the BSP supremo of brushing the case aside for political gains.

After Modi’s barb, Mayawati retorted with a list of incidents on which she said the Prime Minister should take moral responsibility and resign from his post.

“The BSP will take the required political decision soon, but why is PM Modi not taking moral responsibility for the incidents in the past such as the Una flogging incident, Rohit Vemula case or other cases pertaining to Dalit atrocities? Why is he not resigning?” the BSP press note issued in Lucknow stated.

On April 26, the gang-rape victim was travelling with her husband on a motorcycle when the accused stopped them and took them to an isolated place off the road. They allegedly beat the husband and raped the victim in front of him, threatening them with dire consequences.

The husband claimed that he had approached the Rajasthan Police on April 30 after the incident, but an FIR was filed on May 7. He had alleged that the police did not take action saying that they were busy with the elections.

Addressing election meetings in Kushinagar and Deoria in eastern Uttar Pradesh, Modi said, “Please do not shed crocodile tears. If you are serious, why don’t you withdraw support to the Congress government in Rajasthan.” The BSP has given support to the Congress government in the state.

Expressing concern over the gang rape of the Dalit woman, Mayawati had on Saturday alleged that the Congress government in Rajasthan did not let the matter come to anyone’s notice by “terrorising” the victim’s family until the completion of the polling process there.

“Under these circumstances, the victim and her family will not be able to get justice. The BSP appeals to the Supreme Court to take notice for ensuring prompt justice and strict punishment to the accused,” she had said. — PTI

Please do not shed crocodile tears. If you are serious, why don’t you withdraw support to the Congress government in Rajasthan?— Narendra Modi, Prime Minister

Modi is doing dirty politics. The BSP will, for sure, take an appropriate political decision in the absence of stringent and proper legal action.— Mayawati, BSP Supremo
