Red terror slows down road work in Maha

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Shiv Kumar

Tribune News Service

Mumbai, May 12

An ambitious programme by the central government to construct roads in Naxalism-affected areas in the country has come to a halt following threats of attacks by Maoist groups in the past three years, according to state government sources.

With contractors and infrastructure development companies showing little interest in bidding for projects in the interiors of the worst-affected districts of Gadchiroli, Gondia and Chandrapur, work on several roads is yet to begin.

According to the state Public Works Department, 43 projects in Gadchiroli district under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana did not receive any bids when tenders were floated a few years ago. After the terms of the contract were modified, 22 road building projects found takers while the rest are still on the drawing board, according to sources.

However even the projects which found interest from contractors, work is going on at a snail’s pace.

“Six roads measuring 165.8 km in length are yet to be completed though those were supposed to be ready in the last financial year,” said a state government official.

Continued threats like kidnappings, beatings and arson from Maoist groups active in Maharashtra’s Gadchiroli, Gondia and Chandrapur districts have ensured that infrastructure projects do not get completed on time.

“Work is often abandoned as Maoist groups send messages to road construction crews to run away,” said a PWD official.

State government officials say the attack on May 1 where Naxalites set on fire 24 vehicles belonging to a road contractor before setting off an improvised explosive device killing 15 police personnel was not an isolated incident.

“The number of attacks on workers and contractors by Naxals in Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh has increased ever since road building projects were accelerated in left-wing extremism (LWE) areas in the past two years,” said a state Home Department official. As per the strategy devised by the Centre, projects for road construction in these areas are being awarded under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana overseen by the Public Works Departments of various state governments.

State PWD officials are seen to enjoy good networking skills with local representatives. “In the past, PWD officials managed to ensure that healthcare facilities and even electricity transmission facilities were constructed in Naxal-hit areas without any hindrance,” said a state government official.

After the May 1 incident, posters by the banned Communist Party of India (Maoist) have warned road contractors from completing the 36-km stretch of road between Purada and Yerkad in Gadchiroli district. Only 12 km have been completed so far, according to sources.
