Hapur: Gangraped, turned away by cops, 20-year-old widow sets herself on fire

When the victim tried to approach police for help, she was reportedly turned away by the cops. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: In a shocking incident from Hapur district of Uttar Pradesh, a 20-year-old widow set herself on fire being repeatedly gangraped and exploited by her 'keeper'.

The victim is now battling for life with 80% burns at a hospital in Delhi. According to a report in Times of India, the victim set burned herself last month.

The woman's ordeal began after the death of her husband. She was later sold by her father and aunt for Rs 10,000. The woman was repeatedly harassed and raped by the man who 'bought' her.

The report suggested that the accused took loan from friends to 'buy' the victim. He also sent the woman to his friends to work as domestic help where she was again raped and harassed.

When the victim tried to approach police for help, she was reportedly turned away by the cops. A video of the woman is now in circulation where she can be seen alleging that police did not take any action against the culprits and brushed the matter aside after taking money.

An FIR has been lodged against the 14 people under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Hapur Superintendent of Police Yashveer Singh said that police have begun the investigating into the case.

“We have received a complaint against at least 14 persons and a probe has been set up,” the report quoted Rajesh Kumar Bharti, station house officer of Babugarh police station.

Meanwhile, Delhi Commission for Woman (DCW) has taken up the woman's case and written to UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath seeking compensation and justice for the victim.

In a letter sent to Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister, DCW chairperson Swati Maliwal said, “DCW is in receipt of a representation from a survivor of gang rape belonging to Hapur. The survivor has suffered unimaginable harassment at the hands of the UP police in Hapur which have refused to register an FIR despite repeated complaints.”
