Union Minister Babul Supriyo Alleges His Security Personnel's Vehicles Was Attacked With Stones By TMC "goons"

Union Minister Babul Supriyo on Sunday alleged that his security personnel's vehicles were attacked with stones by Trinamool Congress (TMC) "goons" near West Bengal's Basirhat. Mr Supriyo said that he had gone for a rally for Bharatiya Janata Party candidate Sayantan Basu. The attack took place when he was returning from the rally in Basirhat, he said in a tweet.

Driving bk frm Bashirhat after a rwlly for fellow BJP candidate SayantanBasu•Stopped 2 hv some tea•People taking selfies, cordial chats but suddenly a bunch of #TMchhi goons arrive &start shouting dirty slogans!Resisted by my security, they break their car&try on me too #TMchhi pic.twitter.com/r64ZiphN7F — Chowkidar Babul Supriyo (@SuPriyoBabul) May 12, 2019

Police said the accused were taken to a detention place near Basirhat city.

The state leadership of the BJP has filed a complaint in the matter along with the video footage as proof with the Election Commission of India (ECI). The BJP has also demanded the removal of the head of the police of the district.

Read: DAMAGE CONTROL: Robert Vadra Deletes His Paraguay Flag Voting Selfie, Shares A 'corrected' Version

Meanwhile on Sunday, elections were held in 14 seats in Uttar Pradesh, 10 seats in Haryana, eight constituencies each in Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal, four in Jharkhand and seven seats in Delhi where votes were cast by a number of public figures, including President Ram Nath Kovind, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi, UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj.

With Sunday's polling, votes have already been cast in nearly 89 per cent of the 543 constituencies, while the last phase of voting will take place on May 19 for the remaining 59 seats.

The Election Commission (EC) said 63.48 percent turnout was recorded across the states and Delhi, with West Bengal recording over 80 percent polling and Delhi registering just 60 per cent. In 2014, it was 63.37 percent.

The EC said the polling percentage was recorded at 9 pm.The figure is provisional and it may rise. Over 10.17 crore people were eligible to decide the fate of 979 candidates.
