Gadchiroli blast case: Internal probe finds violations of several standard procedures; SP not consulted before sending reinforcements

Maharashtra police’s internal probe found violations of several standard procedures



Maharashtra police’s internal probe into the circumstances that led to the dispatch on May 1of 15 Quick Response Team (QRT) personnel from Kurkheda to Purada in Gadchiroli, to deal with an arson incident allegedly perpetrated by Maoists, after which they died in an Improvised Explosive Device (IED) blast, found no lapse on the part of Gadchiroli police’s superintendent of police (SP), said police sources. According to the sources, verifications done so far found that the SP’s permission had not been taken prior to the dispatch of the police personnel.



According to sources, had the standard operating procedures been observed by other junior police officers, the deaths could have been averted. As per the SOP, in a Left –Wing Extremism (LWE) — affected district like Gadchiroli, the police is not required to respond immediately to an incident like an arson for up to 72 hours as there is a possibility that it could have been staged by Maoists to create an emergency, so that the reinforcements could be ambushed by a blast or gunfire attack, a state police source said. “It has been established that the permission of the district police chief, the SP, had not been taken prior to sending the 15 QRT men to Purada, to deal with an arson petrated by the Maoists,” the source said. A sub-divisional police officer who allegedly ordered the 15 QRT men to reach Purada, so that a counter-action against Maoists could be taken later, has been sent on leave and is awaiting “administrative action”, the source said.



The police probe into the May 1attack indicated that the blast was allegedly a part of the classic ‘bait-and-ambush’ tactic employed by Maoists, seen in the past in other LWE -affected parts of the country, including Chhattisgarh, Odisha and the erstwhile Andhra Pradesh. In this case, the bait was staged at Dadapur village, under the jurisdiction of Purada police station, where around 10 hours before the blast, dozens of Maoists had set ablaze 27 vehicles and machines belonging to a construction contractor. The blast killed, apart from the QRT men, the driver of a private vehicle they were travelling in.



“The reinforcement was sent in haste, in violation of the SOP,” the source said. “Firstly, there was no need to rush the dispatch of reinforcement in the first 48-72 hours. Secondly, the QRT men could have been sent on foot, along a route that would give them cover and an element of surprise. Thirdly, the QRT men could have been sent in three vehicles, not one, in a staggered manner,” the source said.



The source added, “Fourthly, in a LWE zone like Gadchiroli, if police personnel are to move from point A to point B, a Road -Opening Party should have sent in advance and intelligence should have been procured about the safety of the road stretch that has to be taken up.” The road chosen by the QRT men was considered a safe road, since there had been no violent incident or attack by Maoists there since 1996 and it was also the only connecting link between Purada and Kurkheda, the source said.



According to the Gadchiroli police’s FIR, operatives of four combat units of the banned Communist Party of India (Maoist) — Company No. 4, Tipagad Dalam (squad), Korchi Dalam, and Vistar Platoon Dalam No.1 —were allegedly part of the conspiracy. The police’s first information report mentioned eight members of the CPI (Maoist)’s Central Committee as accused who are alleged to have played roles in the conspiracy behind the blast and the torching of the vehicles, with the “intention of unseating the democratically elected government through armed revolution”.


