Netas must not politicise Alwar gang-rape case: Congress slams PM Modi-Mayawati face-off over incident

Cong slams PM Modi-Mayawati face-off over Alwar gang-rape | Photo Credit: Times Now

Jaipur: Amid war of words between BJP and BSP over Alwar gang-rape case, Rajasthan Deputy Chief Minister Sachin Pilot on Monday said that politicians must not politicise such incidents.

Speaking to Times Now, Pilot called the incident “heinous” and said that the Rajasthan government are taking necessary action in the matter.

“It’s a heinous crime. We are open to investigation. The SP has been transferred, SHO has been suspended. The government has taken action against police officers who were involved in any lapses that may have occurred. Government is very sensitive into taking into account their views and ideas to justice to satisfy people who have been wronged. If anything further needs to be done we are more than happy to do it,” he said

“This election time people need to try to refrain from politicising incidents that have shamed us as a human being,” he added.

Earlier, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had said that BSP chief Mayawati is shedding crocodile tears over the incident while asking her to withdraw support from the Congress-led Rajasthan government if she is “serious”.

Addressing a rally in Uttar Pradesh, the PM said, “Please do not shed crocodile tears. If you are serious, why don't you withdraw support from the Congress government in Rajasthan.”

Responding to PM Modi’s remark, the BSP chief said that he was doing "dirty politics" over the gangrape incident, adding that her party would take political decision if strict action is not taken in the matter by the Rajasthan government.

A woman was gang-raped in front of her husband in Thanagaji area of Rajasthan’s Alwar on April 26. The victim’s husband alleged that the police did not take action against the accused citing that they were busy with the election duty.

Earlier, PM Modi accused the Ashok Gehlot government of suppressing the case in the wake of ongoing elections.

Addressing a rally in Uttar Pradesh's Ghazipur yesterday, PM Modi had said, “Two weeks ago, a woman from Dalit community was gang-raped in Alwar, instead of apprehending the culprits, Rajasthan government and the police started to suppress the case.”

“Congress ko dar tha ki Dalit beti ke balatkar ki baat khulne se us ke vote pe asar padega. Aur ye mombattiyan lekar nikal padne wale log, unki mombattiyon se beimani ka dhuan nikal raha hai, ye jo award wapsi gang thi, unko poochna chahta hoon, ab gang kyun chup baithi hai? (Congress was afraid that if the news of gangrape of a Dalit daughter was disclosed then it would affect its vote bank. Smoke of disloyality is coming out from the candle of this candle march group. Why the award wapsi group is silent now, I want to ask.),” he added.

Mayawati had also alleged that the Rajasthan government was hushing up the incident for political interests.
