Hindu Mahasabha equates Kamal Haasan with Hafiz Saeed for ‘Hindu terrorist’ remark, says 'Jinnah is his ideal'

Kamal Haasan, Actor-turned-politician | Photo Credit: PTI

Chennai/New Delhi: Actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan’s statement regarding "Hindu terrorist” earned a sharp rebuke from fringe groups, with Hindu Mahasabha’s Swami Chakrapani comparing him with Pakistani terrorist Hafiz Saeed. Swami Chakrapani also alleged that Haasan’s ideologue was Mohammad Ali Jinnah, who was “responsible for the division of the country.”

Responding to Haasan’s remark that Nathuram Godse, “a Hindu”, was the “first terrorist of independent India,” The Hindu Mahasabha leader said, “Kamal Haasan's statement is condemnable. His statement is similar to that of Pakistan’s terrorist Hafiz Saaed. That is why I urge him to please cooperate in maintaining the unity in the country.”

Addressing Haasan, Chakrapani further said, “I know your ideal is Jinnah, who orchestrated the division of the country and caused the deaths of many innocent Hindus and Muslims. Thus, his behaviour would also reflect that ideology. His behaviour is wrong and condemnable.”

Speaking at a rally in Aravakurichi in Tamil Nadu's Karur district on Sunday, Haasan told the crowd that the first extremist of independent India was a Hindu, referring to Nathuram Godse who assassinated Mahatma Gandhi in 1948.

Haasan said, “I am not saying this because this is a Muslim-dominated area, but I am saying this before a statue of Gandhi. Independent India's first extremist (theevravaadi) was a Hindu, his name is Nathuram Godse. There it starts.”

Aravakurichi, regarded as a minority community-dominated area, is one of the four constituencies that go to polls for the Assembly bypolls in Tamil Nadu on Sunday (May 19). A candidate of Kamal Haasan's Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM), which was founded in February 2018, is contesting the assembly by-polls from that seat.

64-year-old Haasan, while addressing the crowd on Sunday, said that he was Mahatama's "great-grandson in spirit" who had come there to "question his assassination." He also said, “Good Indians desire for equality and want the three colours in the tricolour to remain intact. I am a good Indian, will proudly proclaim that.”

Meanwhile, the BJP lashed out at the Makkal Needhi Maiam chief, accusing him of attempting to trigger communal violence in a minority-dominated area. Tamil Nadu BJP chief Tamilisai Soundararajan tweeted in Tamil, "We strongly condemn Kamal Haasan for talking about Hindu extremism in his poll campaign. He is triggering communal violence in a place where there are a lot of minorities. The Election Commission must take stringent action against Kamal Haasan for this speech."

On the other hand, MNM spokesperson defended the party chief’s statement, saying that he had made the remark about Godse and Hindu in a bid to delink terror from any religion.
