NHRC takes cognizance of Hapur gang-rape case; notice issued to state government, police

The reports have been demanded within four weeks. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Lucknow: The National Human Rights Commission on Monday has sent a notice to the Uttar Pradesh government and the state's police chief over the reported gang rape of a widowed domestic help after which she reportedly set herself on fire.

Reportedly, the rights panel said in a statement that the NHRC has taken suo motu cognisance of a media report that a widow in her late 20s was allegedly sold by her father and aunt for Rs 10,000, gang-raped by her keeper and his friends. The woman was then turned away by police when she approached them for help.

According to news agency PTI, the traumatized woman set herself on fire last month and is battling for life with 80 per cent burns at a private hospital in Delhi.

Meanwhile, the commission has issued a notice to the chief secretary and the director general of police (DGP) of Uttar Pradesh, seeking a detailed report on the medical treatment of the survivor. Reportedly, the DGP has been further directed to inform the commission in detail about the progress of the investigation and arrest, if any in the case. The reports have been demanded within four weeks.

The PTI report further mentioned that the NHRC observed that the incident gives an extremely shocking and pulsating narrative showing the vulnerability of the helpless woman. Reportedly, the woman from Hapur, western Uttar Pradesh, was allegedly sold after the death of her husband. The man who bought her had taken loans from several people and sent the woman as a domestic help to the houses of his creditors where she was repeatedly harassed and raped.

Although, an FIR has been registered against 14 persons under the various sections of the Indian Penal Code, and investigation has been initiated in the case. The NHRC further told PTI that the woman alleged that she approached police officials as well as the superintendent of police in Hapur, but they refused to register her complaint, let alone take any action against the accused.
