Retired cop casts vote hours after cremating son

Says it was his duty towards the nation; son died on Saturday night

For lakhs of Delhi voters who abstained from voting in the Lok Sabha election for one reason or another, a retired Delhi Police personnel set an example by casting his vote on Sunday after cremating his elder son in the morning.

Inder Singh (62), who retired as an Assistant Sub-Inspector of Delhi Police in 2016, lost his elder son Sunil Kumar (35) on Saturday around 11.30 p.m.

Sunil was undergoing treatment for a critical spinal injury at a hospital in Vasant Kunj after falling from a moving tractor on April 10.

“We were overwhelmed with grief. But I voted along with my younger son after cremating Sunil on Sunday morning. It was my duty towards the nation,” Inder Singh said.

Sunil got involved in farming after quitting his temporary job in the Delhi Transport Corporation. He was the family’s breadwinner, the retired policeman said.

Inder Singh’s family cast their vote at a polling station in Daryapur village which falls under North West Delhi Lok Sabha constituency.

BJP candidate from the seat, Hans Raj Hans and Leader of Opposition in Delhi Assembly, Vijender Gupta paid a visit to Mr. Singh and his family saluting their courage and their sense of duty towards the country.

Mr. Gupta said that the family set an inspiring example not only for their village but for the entire country.

Delhi recorded a voter turnout of 60.21% on Sunday, down from 65% in 2014, on its seven Lok Sabha seats.

Scorching heat, summer vacations and a “not very positive image of the Election Commission” was among the reasons behind such large numbers not casting their votes, said experts.

Delhi Chief Electoral Officer Ranbir Singh had called the turnout a “disappointment” and attributed the reason for the lower turnout to sweltering heat. “This time, the election was on a Sunday. With Saturday also being a holiday, people might have gone on vacation to nearby hill stations to escape the heat in the city,” the CEO said.
