It is Modi vs Rest

As the Lok Sabha elections 2019 reached its last leg, political jibes have now turned into personal attacks. The latest verbal war took place between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) supremo Mayawati.

Mayawati, who is known for nononsense political comments and always kept herself away from any controversial and personal comments, has now got into the verbal war with Modi.

On Monday, giving reaction to a news agency, the BSP chief made a personal attack on PM Modi. She said: "He (Modi) abandoned his innocent wife for political gains," adding, "Wives of BJP leaders fear he'll make their husbands leave them."

She also alleged that PM Modi could never respect sisters and wives as he had left his own wife for political gains. "It is extremely shameful. How can he respect others' sisters and wives when he has abandoned his own innocent wife for political gains? I have come to know that in BJP, married women leaders get scared when they see their husbands in Modi's close proximity. They fear that like Modi they might also abandon their wives. Under such circumstances, I specially request all the women of the country not to give their votes to such a person. This would also be their real respect to the deserted wife of Modiji," the BSP chief said.

Mayawati made the comments while talking about the Alwar gang rape case and the Centre's alleged inaction in the investigation. She slammed Modi for playing politics to gain the Dalit vote after never having done anything for the community.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi had challenged Mayawati in an election rally to withdraw her support to Rajasthan's Gehlot government over the Alwar gang rape case. Furious over it, Mayawati talked to the press to refute the PM's statement.

Mayawati's comment sparked sharp response from BJP with Uttar Pradesh Deputy CM Dinesh Sharma telling India Today TV that Mayawari had gone in political frustration due to her imminent defeat in spite of her alliance with Akhilesh Yadav and this is the reason she is making personal comments.

Addressing a joint SP-BSP rally in Gorakhpur, Mayawati repeated her caste swipe at Modi, calling him a fake OBC. He (Narendra Modi) is lamenting in his rallies that Opposition is using abusive language for him. "Jo gaali khaata hai, woh gaali khaane ka kaam karta hai" (those who get abused must have done something to deserve this treatment), she said.

The Mayawati vs Modi war going to dominate the last phase of election and both the parties are trying to get the maximum mileage out of it.
