The Shillong Times

Flashing incidents shock Mumbai, two held

Mumbai: Mumbai was shocked by two sickening acts of a policeman and another person allegedly flashing their private parts before two women over the weekend, police said. In the first instance, a police constable was arrested on Sunday after a complaint from a policewoman living in an opposite building at the Police Colony in Kurla. The accused, Harishchandra B. Lahane, 41, reportedly stripped himself around 11 p.m. on Saturday when the policewoman stood in the balcony of her flat. Following a complaint by her, he was arrested, said an official. In another incident, a 38-year-old man, Sandeep Kumbharkar, allegedly flashed his private parts before a Mumbai girl who had gone to withdraw money from a bank ATM in Mulund on Sunday. The incident happened at the ATM in Hariom Nagar when the 23-year-old woman was present. On the pretext of seeking assistance in operating the ATM, the man suddenly flashed his private parts before her. The woman recorded it on her mobile camera and later lodged a formal police complaint. “It’s 3 AM when I am typing this. A man just flashed his d**k in a f**king ATM. I had gotten down to withdraw money … and was facing problems and this guy offered to pay for it but he kept touching me inside the ATM,” the girl wrote in her Twitter post. In both the incidents, police have registered offences under various sections of the Indian Penal Code. (IANS)

Woman who accused Monserratte of rape goes missing

Panaji: The woman who lodged a rape case against former Goa minister and Congress’ Panaji bypoll nominee Atanasio Monserratte has gone missing from a rehabilitation facility here, police said on Monday. Verna police inspector Sandesh Chodankar said the woman, who charged Monserratte with drugging and raping her in 2016 when she was a minor, was undergoing rehabilitation at a facility in South Goa district from where she went missing on April 28. Last month, a missing person complaint was lodged and later on May 10, the police registered an FIR for offence of abduction against an unknown person, Chodankar said, adding that efforts were on to trace the woman. Monserratte, who is contesting the upcoming Panaji Assembly bypoll on Congress’ ticket, was booked in May 2016 for allegedly raping the woman in March that year, when she was 17 years’ old. A charge sheet was later filed against him by the police in the district court of North Goa. Auda Viegas, director of a South Goa-based NGO, said the victim was initially kept at a state-run facility for juveniles, but later shifted to a convent in South Goa as part of her rehabilitation. (PTI)

Body found dumped in box

Thane: The body of an unidentified woman was found dumped in a box at the Kasara Ghat in Thane district of Maharashtra, a police official said on Monday. Some passersby informed the police control room on Sunday about foul smell at a spot on the ghat section, he said. When the police reached the spot, they saw a big cardboard box there and on opening it, found the decomposed body having several injury marks, he said. The official said they suspect that the woman, presumably in her 50s, was killed around 10 days back and the body later dumped in the ghat area. The body was sent for postmortem to a government hospital in Sahapur area and a case registered under Indian Penal Code Sections 302 (murder) and 201 (causing disappearance of evidence of offence), he said. A probe was underway to identify the deceased and nab the culprit, he added. (PTI)

Man alleges water theft

Nashik: A man has lodged a complaint alleging water theft at his house in scarcity-hit Nashik district of Maharashtra, police said on Monday. Vilas Ahire, a resident of Shravasti Nagar in Manmad town, claimed he stored around 500 litres of drinking water in two tanks on the terrace of his house in view of the water shortage in the area, police inspector Suresh Kumar Dhusar said quoting the complaint. When Ahire checked the tanks on Saturday, he found the stock quite less. He subsequently lodged a complaint at the Manmad police station about 300 litres of water allegedly having been stolen from the storage units, Dhusar said. A probe was underway into the complaint, he said. According to a source in the local civic body, the drinking water supply to Manmad town was irregular as the water level of Wagdardi dam located nearby had gone down considerably due to deficient rainfall last year. (PTI)
