Women in BJP fear husbands will abandon them: Maya’s jibe at Modi

Narendra Modi

gang rape

Ashok Gehlot

Mayawati

Arun Jaitley

A day after Prime Ministerattacked her for not taking a stand on Alwarinvolving a Dalit woman and continuing to support thegovernment in Rajasthan, BSP supremotargeted Modi for abandoning his wife for politics.Hitting back, Finance Ministersaid Mayawati was “ not fit high office of PM”, even as “ she is firm on becoming PM”.Mayawati on Monday alleged that women in the BJP were scared of their husbands meeting the Prime Minister fearing they too might “abandon their wives”.“Mujhe toh yeh bhi maloom chala hai ke BJP mein, khas kar vivahit mahilayen, apne aadmiyon ko Shri Modi ke nazdeek jate dekh kar yeh soch kar bhi kafi zyada ghabrati rehti hain ke kahin yeh Modi apni aurat ki tarah humein bhi apne pati se alag na karwa de. (I have come to know that in BJP married women get nervous when their husbands go near Modi fearing that, like him, their husbands may also leave them),” said Mayawati. “Under such circumstances, I request all the women of the country not to give their votes to such a person. This would also be their real respect to the deserted wife of Modiji,” Mayawati said. Reacting to Prime Minister’s statement with regard to the Alwar gangrape case, Mayawati said Modi was silent on the issue.“He (Modi) is trying to play dirty politics over it so that in the elections his party can be benefited. It is extremely shameful. How can he respect others’ sisters and wives when he has left his own wife for political gains?” “He has only said it after I made my views public on the issue...,” Mayawati said and accused the PM of using this ‘heinous’ crime for political motives.Finance Minister Arun Jaitley on Monday tweeted hours later that she was “unfit for public life”. “Behan Mayawati—She is firm on becoming a Prime Minister. Her governance, ethics and discourse stoops to an alltime low. Her personal attack today on the Prime Minister exposes her as unfit for public life,” Jaitley tweeted.
