Bandipora rape case: Chorus for justice grows; leaders demand action as Kashmir boils under outrage

Follow us on Image Source : INDIA TV Leaders come into action as Kashmir demands justice for 3-year-old

As the rape case of a 3-year-old girl gathers attention, more people have come out in protest of the incident and in demand of justice for the minor girl. While authorities in Jammu and Kashmir are up for action against the accused, students and locals have flocked to the streets.

The minor girl is being voiced by a number of leaders, who have expressed outrage on Twitter.

Taking to social media, BJP leader Subramanian Swamy said, "The whole nation supports the brave educated Kashmir Valley women who came out in the streets to protest against most disgusting horrific rape of a 3-year girl. For Mehbooba to suggest that Sharia Courts should adjudicate is ridiculous."

"Heart wrenching to hear the news of the rape of 3 year old in Kashmir. Such heinous crime against an innocent minor! My prayers to the precious angel and her family," actor-turned-politician Urmila Matondkar wrote on Twitter.

"The rape of a child in Tirgaam is a travesty. @JmuKmrPolice must ensure a speedy investigation with only one consideration and that is to identify the guilty, prepare a watertight case & ensure exemplary punishment to those responsible," Former Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir Omar Abdullah wrote.

Opposing the incident, Former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti said, "Mortified to hear about the rape of a 3 yr old girl in Sumbal. What kind of a sick pervert would do this? Society often blames women for inviting unwanted attention but what was this child’s fault? Times like these, Shariah law seems apt so that such paedophiles are stoned to death."

Meanwhile, Governor Satya Pal Malik on Monday directed police to complete investigations on a fast track basis. Malik expressed deep shock and pain over the incident and took a detailed report of the ongoing investigation in the case.

The state police have also constituted a special investigation team (SIT) to probe the rape case.

Divisional Commissioner Kashmir Baseer Ahmad Khan had said the inquiry into the incident is being conducted on a fast-track basis and will be concluded very soon.

Khan said justice will be done in the case and the culprit will be given severe punishment as per law. He appealed to the people to maintain peace, brotherhood and law and order.

Anybody having grievances regarding the incident can personally contact him immediately, he said.

Latest India News
