News Digest: A smart, speedy recap of the day's headlines

Mumbai: Have you missed any news today? Here are the top national, international headlines of the day.

Violence at Shah rally: In Kolkata on Tuesday when BJP president Amit Shah held a roadshow taking the battle against arch-rival TMC to Mamata Banerjee, an unprecedented chaos erupted between BJP supporters and students of Calcutta University, threw stones and bottles.

Read: Clash breakes out at Shah's Kolkata rally, stones hurled, vehicle burnt

Priyanka Gandhi on RSS: Priyanka while addressing a polly rally on Tuesday said when the entire Punjab was fighting for country's independence, RSS people were doing 'chamchagiri' (flattery) of Britishers. They never fought in the independence movement," she said.

Read: RSS never fought for nation, only did 'chamchagiri' of Britishers: Priyanka

DMK-BJP alliance?: Tamil Nadu’s BJP president Tamilisai Soundararajan said her party was in contact with the DMK.

“They are talking through somebody and establishing contact. BJP is all set to win, all poll predictions point to BJP's victory, wherever you go BJP is winning,” she added.

Read: We will win, we are talking to DMK: Tamil Nadu BJP president

'Neech aadmi' jibe: After the Bharatiya Janata Party's (BJP) asked Congress to respond on Mani Shanker Aiyar's "neech aadmi" comment, the party leader denied to give any further clarification.

Read: 'Main ullu nahi hoon': Mani Shankar stands by 'neech aadmi' jibe for PM

Iran FM meets Sushma Swaraj: Things are tricky for India, with Iran’s Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif flying to India on Monday for a scheduled meeting with India’s External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj. Zarif is hoping India would rally behind Iran and throw its weight in what characteristically looks like a no holds barred conflict with the US.

Read: Amid US pressure, Tehran sends Foreign Minister to India for talks

Sri Lanka Easter Bombing: Four sources in Sri Lankan investigating agencies said they believed Aadhil Ameez, a 24-year-old, was the link between two groups that carried out the attacks on churches and hotels that killed more than 250 people and wounded hundreds more.

Read: Sri Lankan engineer, under Indian surveillance, key in Easter attack

'Beti darao , balatkari bachao': Congress hit out at BJP on Tuesday over the Hapur gang-rape incident, claiming that rather than the slogan 'Beti Bachao Beti Padhao' which was coined by the Narendra Modi government, the ideology of the BJP government in Uttar Pradesh is that of 'beti darao, balatkari bachao' (scare the girl child and save the rapist).

Read: 'Beti Darao, Balatkari Bachao,' Congress hits out at BJP

AAP's dig at Modi: "BJP is contesting in the name of Prime Minister Narendra Modi while Modi Ji is contesting using the name of Pakistan," Sisodia said during a press conference here.

Read: BJP campaigns on Modi's name, Modi on Pakistan's, says AAP

Inspiration to all: Age is just a number and Tao Porchon-Lynch proves it well. Tao, a 100-year-old, is an India-born American citizen who has no plans of stopping practising and teaching yoga.

Read: The dance of life at 100

Mayawati slams PM Modi: “Prime Minister Modi government’s ship is sinking, even the RSS has stopped supporting them. In view of unfulfilled election promises and the public agitation, their swayamsevaks are not being seen putting in the work, it has made Shri Modi nervous,” the BSP chief tweeted.

Read: Modi govt’s ship sinking, RSS stopped supporting them: Mayawati slams PM

Mamata's meme row: The Supreme Court Tuesday granted conditional bail to a BJP activist arrested for allegedly posting a morphed image of Mamata Banerjee on social media and asked her to apologise, while observing that freedom of speech ends when it infringes upon others' rights.

Read: Say sorry for morphed Mamata photo, SC tells Bengal BJP leader, gives bail
