Exclusively accessed FIR of Hapur gang-rape unveils chilling details, police inaction

No arrests have been made in this regard as of yet (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Lucknow: Appaling details have emerged in connection with the alleged prolonged sexual assault of a 20-year-old woman who has claimed that she was thrashed, tortured and raped by multiple men over a period of years starting 2014. The woman's husband told media outlets that the couple approached police multiple times with the intention of filing an official complaint in this regard but were turned away.

A copy of the First Information Report (FIR) accessed by Mirror Now says that 16 people have been booked on charges of rape, gang-rape and criminal intimidation under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). In their complaint, the couple had alleged that the woman worked as a domestic worker at several homes in their village where she was beaten and sexually assaulted by men. In fact, the report also states that she bore a child as a result of rape by one of the accused.

Taking suo moto cognizance of the matter, the National Commission for Women (NCW) sent a letter to the deputy inspector general (DIG) of Uttar Pradesh and the state government, seeking a speedy probe and detailed report in this regard. The commission has also demanded prompt action against police officers who refused to file the woman's complaint and even on multiple occasions, stooped down to assassinate her character and that of her husband's.

The matter came to light only on April 28 when the woman self-immolated. Following the incident, her husband told media outlets that the accused men threatened to throw acid on his wife and even told her that they would kill her if she were to approach police and file a complaint against them. Police officials, including the then station house officer (SHO) of Babugarh district and the official holding the position now, took money from the accused to hush up the matter, alleged the husband.

However, what is most shocking is that despite the matter coming to light and a police inquiry into the matter, no arrests have been made in this regard as of yet. The Uttar Pradesh (UP) police and the state government are yet to make a statement over the heinous crime which has come to light.
