Teen raped in Kashmir even as clashes continue over 3-year-old’s rape

SRINAGAR: At a time when the Kashmir Valley is on the boil over the alleged rape of a three-year-old girl at Malikpora village in Sumbal area of Bandipora , another rape involving a teenage girl came to light in central Kashmir's Ganderbal on Tuesday with the arrest of the accused. The teen was allegedly raped on Sunday even as clashes over the May 8 Sumbal rape continued unabated.Ganderbal SSP Khaleel Ahmed confirmed the arrest of accused Aasif Wani, 20, saying they got a complaint from the teen survivor's family on Sunday and immediately filed an FIR. A police team was then sent to the spot, leading to the arrest of the accused, who was still in police custody, he said.The survivor has been medically examined. A special team has been constituted to fast-track the investigation of the case, the SSP said.Meanwhile, accusing the arrested local boy of the heinous act, the Sumbal survivor's father said: "My little girl went missing on May 8 evening when people were busy with breaking the day's fast. My wife told me that she had gone to the market with her uncle. By the time I came back from the mosque after namaz, my daughter had not arrived. When I asked the 'uncle', he told me that he had sent her home at 7.20pm. We then went to various places in search of her but failed.""As a last-ditch attempt, I called her out aloud from outside my house and there was a feeble response from one of the bathrooms of the adjacent school. I ran towards the bathroom and found my daughter naked, with some blood stains on her clothes. On asking her, the girl named the accused boy for the act. Then we went to the police and got him arrested," the mother of the survivor said.On the other hand, the father of the accused said that the little girl used to visit their home often. "She is a loving girl and we used to offer her sweets etc. My son was very fond of her and treated her like his own kid," he said, adding that there was some tussle between the two families and that was why the girl's family had named his son.Meanwhile, clashes erupted outside Amar Singh College, Bemina Degree College and SP College in Srinagar after students staged protests against the alleged rape of the three-year-old."Students resorted to stone pelting on the police from inside the campus. Police responded by lobbing teargas shells inside the college premises," said an official of one of the colleges.The alleged rape of the baby has also caused sectarian tension in the Valley. The authorities have deployed security forces in areas dominated by one sect of the Muslim community to avoid any law and order problem.
