Clashes during Shah's Kolkata roadshow: BJP tells EC to bar Mamata from campaigning, Bengal CM calls BJP Prez 'goonda'

Clashes during Shah's Kolkata roadshow: BJP tells EC to bar Mamata from campaigning, Bengal CM calls BJP Prez 'goonda'

BJP and TMC supporters Tuesday fought pitched battles on the streets of KolkaClashes during Shah's Kolkata roadshow: BJP tells EC to bar Mamata from campaigning, Bengal CM calls BJP Prez 'goonda'ta during a massive roadshow by Amit Shah, who escaped unhurt but was forced to cut short the jamboree and had to be escorted to safety by police.

BJP and TMC supporters Tuesday fought pitched battles on the streets of Kolkata during a massive roadshow by Amit Shah, who escaped unhurt but was forced to cut short the jamboree and had to be escorted to safety by police.

Parts of the city plunged into a welter of violence as his convoy was attacked with stones by alleged TMC supporters from inside the hostel of Vidyasagar College, triggering a clash between supporters of the two parties, officials said.

Furious BJP supporters retaliated and were seen exchanging blows with their TMC rivals outside the college entrance.

Several motorcycles parked outside were vandalised and set ablaze. Shards of broken glass littered the lobby of the college where a bust of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, a noted philosopher and a key figure of Bengal Renaissance, was smashed to smithreens. Police personnel were seen trying to douse the fire with buckets filled with water.

Contingents of Kolkata Police deployed for the roadshow swung into action and were seen chasing away the warring groups.

"There was an attempt by TMC hooligans to attack me. Mamata Banerjee (West Bengal chief minister) tried to provoke violence. But I am safe," Shah said.

Shah said while clashes erupted police remained a mute spectator.He said he was told by police that the permission for the roadshow ended near the college and that he will be taken to the ancestral home of Swami Vivekananda on Bidhan Sarani."They (police) deviated from the planned route and took a way where there were traffic jams. I was not allowed to reach Swami Vivekananda's house to pay tributes and I am saddened by it," Shah claimed.Banerjee hit right back, calling Shah a "goonda".

A BJP delegation met the ECI in connection with the clashes that took place during the massive roadshow conducted by party president Amit Shah in Kolkata today. The BJP delegation comprised Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, Union Minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi, Anil Baluni, GVL Narasimha Rao among others .

Naqvi after meeting the poll-body told reporters that the party has urged the ECI to pass an order for the immediate arrest of history-sheeters in the state. "We demanded from the EC that disturbing elements and history-sheeters be arrested immediately, central forces' flag march be conducted and CM Mamata Banerjee be barred from campaigning for instigating her supporters," Naqvi said.

(With PTI and ANI inputs)
