Villagers seen hurling 'firebombs' at elephant, her calf in West Bengal's Bishnupur

Villagers attacked the animal and her calf after they wandered onto their farmland (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Kolkata: International publications are abuzz with a picture showing locals at a village in West Bengal hurling firebombs at an elephant and her calf. Images of the incident, captured by photographer Biplab Hazra illustrate the escalating man-animal conflict erupting in several parts of India where deforestation has led to rising engagements between distraught villagers and untamed animals.

The incident which took place in Bishnupur, West Bengal, has sparked outrage among animal rights activists. Irate villagers charged at the elephant and her calf after they reportedly wandered onto the farmland of local farmers. Photographer Biplab Hazra told news agency Caters that incidents such as these happen because villagers have to save their crops. He adds that there are several elephant corridors such as Bishnupur spread out across the country.

Indian elephants are an endangered species which are one level above the 'critically threatened' category. A report by The Independent asserts that the population of wild elephants has dipped by over 50 per cent in India since the 1940s. Deforestation is one of the major reasons behind clashes between locals and the world's largest mammal in most parts of the country.

A similar issue was reported from Gumla district in Jharkhand just this month where a horde of wild elephants went on a rampage killing a 26-year-old woman and her infant daughter. Wildlife officials managed to control the situation and drive the elephants into a forest range nearby. Going by reports, the horde attacked a thatched house in the village where the deceased woman and her child were sleeping.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Hoarfrost, low temperatures in Nilgiris disrupts normal life, tourism in Ooty; livestock affected adversely
