Actor promises marriage, rapes 21-yr-old woman

raping

sex

He invited her to his house and raped her, his mother too is accused of threatening the woman against meeting her sonA short film director and a small-time actor, who has acted in a few short films, has been arrested on charges ofa 21-year-old private firm employee after inviting her to his house, claiming that he was throwing a birthday party.The actor is alleged to have distanced himself from the victim after his mother caught them while they were havingat his office premises. The actor was arrested by the Viveknagar police on Monday and remanded to judicial custody.The woman has also filed a complaint against his mother as she reportedly abused and threatened her with dire consequences asking her to stop meeting her son.The accused has been identified as P Pramod Kumar, a resident of Ashwini Layout in Viveknagar.Kumar’s mother is the second accused in the case. The police are ascertaining her exact role in the rape case before taking any action against her. The victim also stays in Viveknagar and claims that she is acquainted with the accused since 2017.The woman, who is presently employed in a private firm, is said to have come to know Kumar while she was studying.“The victim and the accused were neighbours and were in a relationship for the last two years. She came to know him as she was interested in his work. He is said to have called her to his house, claiming that it was his birthday, and then raped her. He is said to have made false marriage promise to her and then would regularly take her to his house to get physically intimate with her,” said a police officer.The woman has also alleged that she was raped in Kumar’s office premises in Koramangala 7th Block. Kumar’s mother came to know of her son’s relationship with the woman and is said to have walked in on them when they were in a compromising position on the office premises.The mother allegedly warned the woman not to meet her son. Despite this, the two used to meet regularly.“The victim learnt that Kumar was looking for a girl to get married to. She confronted him and he refused to marry her saying that his mother does not want her has her daughter-in-law. His mother is also alleged to have threatened to get her killed if she is seen with her son again. He is also alleged to have distanced himself from her and stopped answering her phone calls. Then on May 10, he is alleged to have called her to his office and raped her again,” the officer added.Upset with Kumar’s refusal to marry her, the woman filed a complaint with the police.The Viveknagar police have registered a case of rape (IPC 376), cheating (IPC 417), intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace (IPC 504), and criminal initimdation (IPC 506) against Kumar.
