Verifying tenants: Whose duty is it?

GREATER NOIDA: Residents’ associations have asked police to ensure stricter verification of tenants while the cops have said that the onus of getting the checks done lies with the house owners Members of several RWAs said the topic of verification was raised only when there was a fight between foreign nationals and Indians and then buried under the carpet. Greater Noida , a hub of education, has many foreign nationals — at least 7,000 from African countries alone.A similar demand for stricter tenant scrutiny was raised when a few Africans were allegedly assaulted in Pari Chowk in 2017. This time, a few residents demanded that the entire verification process be made online. In the past two years, tenant verification drives by the authorities concerned have been held four times.Jitendra Bhati, RWA president of Delta I, said there were two major reasons for the lack of tenant verification in Greater Noida — one is the apparent disinterest among caretakers posing as owners of houses and the other was the alleged dilly-dallying at the end of the police.“There are many ghost-owners of properties across the city. They are least interested in getting a verification done. Since foreigners tend to pay high rent, the owners often ignore the verification process for lure of money. They merely get a rent agreement made,” he said.In the past, there have been reports of fake rent agreements made to move in to houses. At times, rent agreements are also not renewed.Many societies organise their own verification drives. Harendra Bhati, a member of the Active Citizen Team, said that in 2016, they had distributed as many as 800 forms, but the verification could not be completed.Police said the onus of getting the verification done lay with the owner. “It is virtually impossible for police to visit each and every house and get the verification done. The onus lies with the owners and police facilitate it. We will start a drive soon. The force is now busy in elections,” said Vineet Jaiswal, SP (rural).
