DPS Srinagar wins best delegate trophy

Srinagar

The student delegation of Delhi Public School, Srinagar won the best delegate trophy at the recently held La Martiniere Girls Model United Nations Conference held from May 9 to May 13, 2019, at La Martiniere Girls School, Lucknow.

In a statement here a spokesman of the school said that the DPS Srinagar team beat twenty schools for the honour. The students were placed in various committees wherein two of the nine delegates secured first positions, two-second positions, two third positions in their respective committees. Moreover, few other delegates received verbal mention in their respective committees.

Model United Nations, is an educational simulation where children get acquainted with diplomacy, international relations and procedural functioning of the UN in its real-time, besides enhancing their leadership qualities, researching capacity, critical thinking and listening and debating skills.

Students of DPS Srinagar praised organisers for their professionalism. “All the arrangements were wonderful. Agendas and portfolios were well thought out and the committee proceedings, socials and dinners were also amazing,” said Nabil Akhtar, student of DPS Srinagar.

Chief guest Aditi Pathak, national programme officer, UNESCO Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Education for Peace and Sustainable Development gave away the awards.

In her address, she talked about the power of youth and said that little steps taken at the individual level could bring about a change in the world.

LMGC principal Aashrita Dass proposed the vote of thanks, while Kashish Gupta secretary general LMGMUN 2019, declared the conference closed.

Congratulating the delegation, the Principal Alistair R A Freese said, “Being alumni of La Martiniere College, it is all the more a greater occasion of joy for me, and a matter of pride for me that DPS Srinagar has been able to achieve this feat.”

The Chairman Vijay Dhar has also congratulated and said, “I am happy our students are excelling at opportunities where they get to showcase the best of their skills that we work so hard to hone at school.” The teachers of the school have also conveyed their congratulations to the students.”
