Not Brunei Or Saudi Arabia, A Man Was Assaulted For Being Gay In India

A man from Bikarnakatte near Mangaluru, was assaulted by a mob of people for allegedly being gay. Many recorded the video and watched, but nobody bothered to call the cops or intervene. As his lone, weeping mother stood in the crowd and begged them to stop, the man--Poojary--was beaten by the angry townspeople, stripped by having his shirt torn off and long hair cut off.

Apparently a priest with the title of “Daiva Patri”, Poojary was stripped of his status by having his hair, a mark of his holiness, removed. His Daiva bracelet, which is also a nod to him being a “demi-god”, was snatched from him by the angry crowd that yelled, “…he thinks he can do all that to a boy and get away. What if something had gone wrong.” The irony is, he didn’t do anything to the “boy”, because Poojary’s partner is not a minor, and according to the police, there was no report of their relations being anything but consensual.

Even so, Poojary hasn’t filed a police complaint, perhaps in fear of coming out

It’s obviously not easy for a religious person to come to terms with their sexuality and speak openly about it to their conservative social circle. That’s probably why, despite being subjected to such violence, the victim hasn’t filed a police complaint against the assailants. Given the conservative community Poojary belongs to, people from LGBTQIA+ circles probably don’t have the social space to even admit to being gay, regardless of the immunity constitutional provisions give them.

So instead, the police has lodged a suo moto case against those accused for assaulting him. Surprisingly, their response has been progressive enough to help shut down those trying to make a case against Poojary: “The male partner … was a major, so no case can be made against him. Whereas, the three individuals have gravely assaulted Poojary, for which we have taken action.” Mangaluru’s police commissioner Sandeep Patil even gave the media a statement reiterating that: “Irrespective of any allegation, nobody is authorised to assault another individual. The case has been registered at Barke Police station, investigation will follow.”

While the Indian media cries itself hoarse about the injustices of nations like Brunei and Saudi Arabia towards gay people, who is going to look within and call out the regressive mindsets of our own citizens?
