Khyala murders: son succumbs to injuries after parents’ death

Kin, neighbours protest demanding relief for surviving minor children

A young man who was stabbed multiple times by his neighbour in west Delhi succumbed to his injures on Friday morning, days after he and his parents were attacked by their neighbour in Khyala on Wednesday evening, the police said.

While Anita* had died on Wednesday, her husband Ram Pal* passed away on Thursday. The police received information regarding the death of their son Amit* around 4 a.m. on Friday.

Accused Mohammad Saleem*, who was arrested on Thursday morning, has also been accused by his daughter of molesting her a few years ago.

Anita and Ram are survived by two minor children and their elder daughter Priya*, who got married last April. The family of the victims is now worried about the future of the minors, aged 8 and 11 years.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (West) Monika Bhardwaj said the police will write to the Delhi State Legal Services Authority (DSLSA) regarding compensation.

“We will write to the DSLSA regarding compensation to be given under the victim compensation scheme,” she said.

The family members and neighbours staged a protest near a mosque in Khyala on Friday demanding relief for the children. The protest started around 12 p.m. and continued till late evening.

“Priya is married and the two other children are too small to take care of themselves. We want the Chief Minister or his representative to meet us to make sure the children are taken care of and have a roof over their head. None of this is their fault,” said Ram’s 54-year-old brother, who works as a driver.

A neighbour, 62-year-old Ramvir Singh, said the protest will continue till action is taken. “We will not perform Amit’s last rites till we are assured of relief for the children,” Ramvir said.

Ms. Bhardwaj said her team was talking to protesters and trying to pacify them.

Amit’s post-mortem will be conducted on Saturday, the police said. The couple’s last rites were performed on Thursday.

(*Names changed)
