Matoshree, Balasaheb were on terrorists’ radar in 1989, ex-Shiv Sena member Narayan Rane writes in his memoir

Shiv Sena patriarch Balasaheb Thackeray. | File image | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: A potential terror threat had once loomed over Matoshree and Shiv Sena patriarch Balasaheb Thackeray was forced relocate every member of his house to undisclosed, safer locations for a few days in 1989, the autobiography of former Sena member Narayan Rane has revealed.

The then-chief minister of Maharashtra, Sharad Pawar, had to then call current Sena chief and Balasaheb’s son Uddhav to alert them about the attack, Rane’s book claimed. Balasaheb also featured on the hit-list of Khalistanis after the Sikh separatist movement spread their web across cities in India, including Mumbai.

The extremist development came in the backdrop of a press conference organised by Balasaheb on 19 March 1988 at which he sought assurances from the Sikh community that none of them had been financing the Khalistani movement. After the presser, Balasaheb threatened the community that he would ensure they would be ostracised if they aided extremist activities, Rane wrote in his book ‘No Holds Barred: My Years In Politics’.

Rane, who is now a Member of Parliament from Rajya Sabha with a BJP backing, added that after the Sena lost the 1989 Maharashtra assembly elections, Balasaheb landed in a vulnerable position as the state security fell into the hands of the Congress.

“He (Thackeray) amped up protection at Matoshree and everyone was on high alert. In the midst of all the tension, a newly-married Uddhavji received an unexpected phone call from chief minister Pawar saheb, who asked him to come and see him immediately. Alone – he had specified,” Rane, a former Maharashtra chief minister himself, wrote in his book, PTI reported.

Pawar had also claimed that there could have been some involvement of insiders in the entire plot to execute Balasaheb – from Matoshree, the state police force, and even the home ministry. He also offered the Thackerays hightened police protection.
