HC takes suo motu cognizance of Sumbal rape

SRINAGAR: Jammu and Kashmir high court on Wednesday took suo motu cognizance of the alleged rape of a three-year-old girl in Sumbal area of Bandipora district on May 8. A division bench comprising chief justice Gitta Mittal and justice Tashi Rabstan directed IGP Kashmir SP Pani to submit a status report on the investigation into the crime on Friday.Taking up the matter, the division bench told the state that such horrific incidents must be dealt with seriously. “Children are to be protected from such gruesome and violent incidents,” the bench remarked while seeking a status report from the IGP through police counsel BA Dar. Dar told the court that he would seek all the developments related to the crime by Wednesday evening itself and submit the status report by 10am on Friday.Soon after the rape came to light and the accused was arrested, the governor’s administration constituted an SIT to investigate the crime that had sparked largescale protests in the Valley, resulting in clashes at various places. Several people, including policemen, were injured in the clashes, some of which were fought between two sects of the Muslim community.A complete shutdown was observed in parts of Shia-dominated Budgam district in central Kashmir for the third consecutive day on Wednesday. Reports said that all shops and business establishments in Magam and Budgam towns remained closed. Restrictions were imposed to avoid any untoward incident even as internet services remained suspended for the fourth day on the trot in the area.Meanwhile, deputy commissioner of Budgam district Syed Sehrish Asgar appealed to the people to maintain communal harmony and not heed rumours even as educational institutions across the Valley remained closed for the fourth day on Wednesday.Reacting to the ongoing protests and subsequent violence over the rape, former chief minister and National Conference vice-president Omar Abdullah lambasted the vandals. Omar tweeted, “Indulging in acts of vandalism is in no way helping the cause of justice for the little girl. Using her rape as an excuse to damage property & indulge in violence is most unfortunate.”He also retweeted a tweet with a photograph of damaged window panes of a mall. Omar wrote, “Some highly intellectual youths decide to demand justice by doing injustice to others. Nothing can justify these students destroying other people’s property... shame on you.”
