Alabama’s Abortion Bill Is Immoral, Inhumane, and Wildly Inconsistent

On Tuesday night, the Alabama Senate voted to outlaw nearly all abortions in the state, with no exception for rape or incest. If the governor signs the bill into law, as expected, it would likely pose a direct challenge to Roe v. Wade. De-facto abortion bans have taken hold in multiple states in recent months, but this particularly aggressive and particularly cruel measure gives a clear preview of what the anti-abortion movement wreaks: a nation in which even little girls who are raped are forced to have babies.

In response, women (and a lot of men) around the country are gearing up for a fight. On social media, women are sharing their abortion stories with the hashtag #YouKnowMe—that is, in a nation where nearly one in four women have ended a pregnancy, everyone knows someone who has had an abortion. Many of the women tweeting #YouKnowMe had abortions for the most common of reasons: they were pregnant when they didn’t want to be, and couldn’t afford a child; or didn’t want a child at that moment; or didn’t want a child with the person who impregnated them. Others found wanted pregnancies were tragically doomed. And still others were pregnant from rape.

Around the world, and even in many restrictive U.S. states, abortions are allowed for women seeking to protect their health or lives, or for rape and incest victims. Brazil, Benin, Sudan, and South Korea, among many others, outlaw abortion, but allow rape victims to end their pregnancies. Even many of the most “pro-life” places recognize that there is a particular cruelty in forcing a rape or incest victim to bear an attacker’s child.

But rape and incest exceptions are vexing things for the anti-abortion movement. For those who would allow them, exceptions reveal a paradox that it’s O.K. to have an abortion if getting pregnant wasn’t your “fault”—and that forced pregnancy is a punishment for women who have sex for the fun of it. That’s pretty inconsistent with the claim that outlawing abortion is about preserving “life.”

One of the lead architects of the Alabama bill made this view even more plain when he stated that the measure, which purports to protect fertilized eggs, embryos, and fetuses, would not actually apply to all embryos. After all, if you argue that life begins at conception, that’s a big problem for I.V.F. In the name of protecting “life,” anti-abortion legislators could functionally outlaw fertility treatments that involve fertilizing eggs and selecting the strongest embryos for implantation. But don’t worry, said Alabama State Senator Clyde Chambliss: “The egg in the lab doesn’t apply. It’s not in a woman. She’s not pregnant.”

In other words, it’s not about the life of a fertilized egg at all. It’s about controlling women.

Instruments used in a criminal abortion. From Bridgemanartists.com

And rape victims, more often than not, are women—and girls. Anti-abortion groups claim, without irony, that, when it comes to a pregnant rape victim, “the woman’s problem is not that she’s pregnant.”

No one would argue that ending a pregnancy solves the trauma of a rape. But being forced to carry a pregnancy against your will can certainly compound that trauma. Rape is a heinous crime, not just because it’s a violent assault—although it is—but because it strips away a woman’s control over her own body. It’s why those who provide care for rape survivors let them choose their own paths—whether to report to the police, how to seek treatment. It’s why nurses who provide sexual assault exams go through special training, so that the women they care for don’t walk away feeling violated all over again. It’s why mental-health professionals who work with rape survivors spend so much time helping survivors reinhabit their own bodies, and feel in control of their own lives and physical selves.
