Stepfather molests girl, kills elder two after they find out

editorial@tribune.com

Sanjay Bumbroo

Tribune News Service

Marrawala (Pinjore), May 15

In a shocking double murder case, a man killed his two stepdaughters by slitting their throats at Marrawala village in Pinjore block of this district in the wee hours of today. He reportedly killed them after they came to know about the molestation of their younger sister by him.

The victims have been identified as Aashia (20) and Shifa (18). The stepfather has been identified as Habib, who fled from the house after committing the crime. His 16-year old youngest stepdaughter not only saved herself but also her younger brother from his attack. She sent her younger brother on the rooftop, while she locked herself in a washroom.

The matter came to light when the mother saw her daughters lying in a pool of blood around 6.30 am and raised the alarm. Hearing her shrieks, her third daughter came out of the bathroom and narrated the whole incident.

People living nearby gathered near the house and informed the police, who reached the spot. SHO of the Pinjore police station Mukesh Kumar informed Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) Kamal Deep Goyal, who, along with police officials and an FSL team, arrived at the crime scene.

After taking fingerprints, the bodies of the victims were shifted to the Kalka Civil Hospital for a postmortem. Later, the bodies were handed over to the family.

DCP Kamal Deep said as per preliminary investigation, Habib was a widower and had married the mother of the victims, whose husband had also died around 12 years ago. Habib is a native of Bijnore in Uttar Pradesh and had shifted to Marrawala about three years ago. He used to sell vegetables in a shop adjacent the house where they had shifted three months ago.

The DCP said the financial condition of the family was normal as both victims, Aashia and Shifa, were working in a company at Baddi in Himachal Pradesh and were earning Rs 6,000 to 8,000 per month. He said their mother was also doing stitching and other works and was earning about Rs 7,000 per month. The elder son of the family was working in Mumbai, he said. The DCP said the suspect was having a verbal duel with the family members for the past few days over some issue. The Pinjore police have registered a case under Section 302 of the IPC and under the POCSO Act against the suspect.

Youngest one saves herself, brother

The victims have been identified as Aashia (20) and Shifa (18). The stepfather has been identified as Habib, who fled from the house after committing the crime. His 16-year old youngest stepdaughter not only saved herself but also her younger brother from his attack. She sent her younger brother on the rooftop, while she locked herself in a washroom.
