Moti Nagar murder case: Wife, daughter of accused provoked attack on businessman?

The police probe say that the victim's daughter was also assaulted by accused's wife and daughter.

New Delhi: Taking the probe further, the Delhi Police has arrested the main accused's wife and daughter in connection with the murder of a businessman Dhruv Rathi in Moti Nagar. The accused and his three sons were arrested by the police. The victim was allegedly stabbed to death during a fight when he resisted the harassment of his daughter.

The incident happened in west Delhi’s Basai Darapur village early on Sunday. The businessman's son was also critically injured in the incident.

According to a report in Times of India, the two women were arrested after eyewitnesses confirmed the allegations of their involvement in the murder of the businessman. The reports suggest that the wife and daughter of the accused initially pelted stones at the victim from their balcony.

The police probe also alleged that the two women came down and handed over a cleaver to his husband to attack the victim. It is also said that accused Jehangir's wife also called the police control room claiming they were attacked by the businessman. However, the accused's wife has claimed that she came down to stop the fight and didn't gave any weapon to her husband.

On Wednesday, the family of the victim denounced efforts on social media to give the incident a communal colour. The victim's family said it was their Muslim neighbours that came to their rescue during the incident.

According to a report in Hindustan Times, the deceased businessman's relatives maintained that the Muslim family not only took the injured businessman and his son to the hospital on their scooter, but also prevented the physical assault on the victim's daughter while others looked on. According to killed businessman’s brother, some visitors repeatedly tried to communalise the incident.

Earlier, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal had asked Delhi Police to take strong action against the accused.
