Will not tolerate such acts; victim will get ‘nyay’: Rahul Gandhi after meeting Alwar gang-rape victim

Rahul Gandhi in Alwar | Photo Credit: ANI

Alwar: Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Thursday met the Alwar gang-rape victim and assured that she will get justice. “The victim will get nyay (justice); stringent action will be taken against the accused,” Rahul told the press after meeting the gang-rape victim and his family in Rajasthan's Alwar district.

The victim, a Dalit woman, was allegedly gang-raped in front of her husband on April 26. As per police, six accused accosted the woman and her husband on the Thanagazi-Alwar bypass and took them to a secluded place. The six then committed the crime in front of the husband.

The FIR in the case was filed six days later on May 2. Two days later, the accused circulated a video clip of the crime causing further outrage.

The police have arrested the six accused, including the one who shot and circulated the video clip of the crime.

Rahul today said he had spoken to Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot after learning about the incident.

“Soon after I heard about the incident (Alwar gang-rape), I spoke to Ashok Gehlot ji. This is not a political issue for me. I met the victim's family and they have sought justice, which will be done. Action will be taken against culprits,” the Congress chief said.

“We will not tolerate such acts,” he added.

Gehlot, on his part, said “we are not doing politics on the issue”, while adding that the government will provide job to the victim.

Rahul was accompanied in Alwar by CM Gehlot and Deputy Chief Minister Sachin Pilot.

The gang-rape incident had triggered massive protests in Alwar, Jaipur, Dausa and nearby areas. Violence had erupted at a march led by Rajya Sabha BJP MP Kirori Lal Meena in Dausa on Tuesday; more than half a dozen people received injuries in the incident.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, BSP supremo Mayawati and other leaders have spoken on the incident and condemned it.
