Terrorists end Shipra Sharma’s Kabul mission to help victims

Shipra Sharma left her home and went all the way to Afghanistan to help the victims of terrorism. Knowing well that this mission is fraught with danger, Shipra devoted herself serving the victims of terrorism in Kabul.

But the destiny had other plans. On Monday (January 14) a bomb exploded near a heavily-fortified foreign compound in Kabul, in which Shipra and three other people were killed.

The Taliban on Tuesday claimed responsibility for the attack.

A pall of gloom descended on Jodhpur as her body arrived in the city on Thursday.

Just six days ago, family members had bid her goodbye as she left for Kabul and on Thursday they were again at the airport but to receive her body.

Tearful scenes were witnessed at the airport. Her mother fainted as she could not bear the loss.

Shipra, who is survived by a four-year-old son, had been working for NGO for years. Four months ago she was associated with US’ the Afghan Institute for Civil Society.

After staying in the US for some time, she had reached Kabul last October. While working as a director, she was looking after the rehabilitation of families suffering from terrorism. She visited Jodhpur to meet her family on New Year. From here, she returned to Kabul on January 12.

On January 14, at 7.30 pm, she was talking to the mother Asha Sharma and told her that she was well and planning to change her house.

After half an hour, a truck full of RDX hit the compound and Shipra died on the spot. Central Minister and Jodhpur MP Gajendra Singh used his good offices in bringing her body to Jodhpur.

Shipra’s uncle Rajkumar, who is associated with the Brahman Mahasabha, said that when Shipra told us that she was going to work for an NGO in Afghanistan, everyone protested against it.

But she wanted to do some different and was not afraid of death and daily bomb blasts in Kabul.

When she came to Jodhpur for New Year, she was very excited about her work as she was serving victims of terrorism in a neighbouring country.

Shipra studied at St Patrick’s School in the city, did a masters degree from the University of London. She was associated with an NGO from Mumbai since 2007, informed her family.

MP’s help sought

After the news of Shipra Sharma’s death from the Indian Embassy in Afghanistan came a pall of gloom decended her home. Her family asked MP Gajendra Singh Shekhawat to help bring Shipra’s body to India. The MP then helped to bring the body home.
