Nathuram Godse a true patriot, says Sadhvi Pragya on Kamal Haasan remark

Bhopal BJP candidate Sadhvi Pragya Thakur has said Nathuram Godse, who is known to have assassinated Mahatma Gandhi, was a "deshbhakt" (patriot) and will remain so forever.

Sadhvi Pragya was reacting to Kamal Haasan's recent comment that the first terrorist in India was a Hindu. Speaking at an election rally, the Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM) founder said, "The first terrorist post-Independence was Nathuram Godse, a Hindu. It started from there. He killed Mahatma Gandhi. I am questioning this as the great grandson of Gandhi."

Asked about Kamal Haasan's comment on Hindu terror and Godse, Sadhvi Pragya said, "Nathuram Godse was a deshbhakt, is a deshbhakt and will remain a deshbhakt. People calling him a terrorist should instead look within. Such people will be given a befitting reply in these elections."

#WATCH BJP Bhopal Lok Sabha Candidate Pragya Singh Thakur says 'Nathuram Godse was a 'deshbhakt', is a 'deshbhakt' and will remain a 'deshbhakt'. People calling him a terrorist should instead look within, such people will be given a befitting reply in these elections pic.twitter.com/4swldCCaHK ANI (@ANI) May 16, 2019

Kamal Haasan's remark stirred a massive controversy with the BJP lodging a complaint with the Election Commission (EC) against the remark. A criminal complaint was also lodged against Haasan.

Haasan later issued a clarification and said he was misquoted and he never said the word "terrorist". Kamal Haasan has filed an anticipatory bail petition, seeking quashing of the FIR against him.

Sadhvi Pragya, on the other hand, has also stirred several controversies ever since she was released in the Malegaon blast case.

She courted a major controversy by saying she had cursed Maharashtra ATS chief Hemant Karkare during her prison term, after which he died in firing during the 26/11 Mumbai terror attack.

Sadhvi Pragya also told India Today TV during an interview that she was cured of her cancer after drinking cow urine.

She also invited trouble when she said that she herself had climbed on top of the Babri Masjid to demolish the mosque and was very proud of it.
