News Digest: A smart, speedy recap of the day's headlines

Mumbai: Have you missed any news today? Here are the top national, international headlines of the day.

CJI sexual harassment case: The former woman court staffer, who levelled allegations of sexual harassment against CJI Ranjan Gogoi, will soon file an appeal against the clean chit given to the CJI by an in-house panel of the apex court.

Read: Woman to appeal against clean-chit to CJI in sexual harassment case

PM Modi attacks Bengal government: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday asserted that the West Bengal Police, in connivance with the state government, was trying to wipe out evidence of statue desecration in Kolkata.

Read: Police trying to wipe out evidence of statue desecration: PM Modi

Oppn party meet: In an effort to oust Narendra Modi-led BJP to come to power again, UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi has taken it upon herself to play host to all Opposition parties. There were reports that Gandhi has called a meeting in New Delhi on the day of the results, May 23.

Read: Sonia Gandhi writes to Oppn parties, calls meeting on May 23?

Haasan's "Hindu terrorism" remark: BJP's Pragya Singh Thakur on Thursday stoked yet another controversy by terming Nathuram Godse, the man who assassinated Mahatma Gandhi, as a 'deshbhakt' (patriot).

Read: Nathuram Godse was, is and will be 'deshbhakt': Sadhvi Pragya on Gandhi killer

Mamata on EC's decision: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Thursday thanked the leaders of opposition parties, who came out in her support as she protested against the Election Commission's decision to cut short the poll campaign duration in the state.

Read: Mamata thanks Oppn for backing her over EC's decision to curtail campaigns

Slipper hurled at Kamal Haasan: During campaigning, slippers were thrown at actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan on Wednesday evening in Madurai. The attack came three days after Haasan said: “India’s first extremist was a Hindu”, referring to Nathuram Godse.

Read: Slipper hurled at Haasan amid Godse remark, 11 named in complaint

Mamata vs PM Modi: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee slammed the Election Commission on Thursday, stating it had sold out to its brother the BJP. “I feel sad but I don't have anything more to say, I am ready to go to jail for saying this. I am not scared to say the truth,” Mamata said.

Read: EC used to be neutral, but today it is sold out to BJP: Mamata

Alwar gangrape case: “Soon after I heard about the incident, I spoke to Ashok Gehlot ji. This is not a political issue for me. Justice will be done and action will be taken against the culprits,” said Rahul Gandhi after he met Alwar gangrape survivor.

Read: 'Justice will be done': Rahul Gandhi after meeting Alwar gangrape survivor

Racial attack in US: Ravi Bhalla, the first ever Sikh mayor of a city in New Jersey, has been allegedly racially targeted after his photoshopped image as an Arab dictator was published on a local website.

Read: Photoshopped image shows first-ever Sikh Mayor as Arab Dictator in US

Jamal Khashoggi murder: Hatice Cengiz, the fiancée of slain Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi, criticised US government’s response to his killing on Wednesday. She said Trump administration has failed to uphold American values by allowing the Saudi government to avoid meaningful consequence for the crime.

Read: Failed to uphold US values: Khashoggi fiancee slams Trump response to his killing

Porn audio in UK train: Passengers travelling on a London train recently had an erotic experience when the driver accidentally played porn on the public announcement system.

Read: UK train driver mistakenly broadcasts porn over sound system, video goes viral

Crime in Madhya Pradesh: A man and his two cousin sisters were tied to a tree and severely beaten for several hours by around nine persons in Madhya Pradesh's Dhar district after he allegedly eloped with a married woman, police said on Thursday.

Read: Man, cousin sisters tied to tree and thrashed in MP; 5 held
