Bengal: Congress, BSP mount blistering attack on EC

The Congress and the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) said on Thursday that the Election Commission (EC) acted under pressure from the BJP-led government as it excluded Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s rallies from the campaign ban it imposed in violence-hit West Bengal.

The Congress said the decision is a dark spot on India’s democracy, while the BSP termed the decision as unfair.

Congress’ media in-charge Randeep Singh Surjewala said the EC has abdicated its Constitutional duty to ensure a level-playing field and has negated the due process under Article 14 and Article 21 of the Constitution.

“This appears to be the EC’s parting gift to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the BJP in order to ensure that Modi’s two pre-announced election rallies, at Mathurapur and Dum Dum in afternoon/evening today (Thursday), are not hit by the its order,” Surjewala said.

Also read: Mamata Banerjee govt out to destroy everything in Bengal: PM Modi

He said instead of punishing goons and hooligans of the BJP, led by the party President Amit Shah, the EC is punishing democracy per se. “It has created a fear psychosis by admitting the EC’sinability to hold a free and fair poll. The order is an unpardonable betrayal of the Constitution,” he said.

He said the Congress had filed 11 complaints with evidences of negation of the Model Code of Conduct by Modi and Shah. “Despite clear dissent in EC ranks, and it being a clear cut case of throwing the MCC into the dustbin by the Prime Minister, the EC meekly surrendered to the whims of Modi and Shah and chose not to take any action whatsoever,” he said.

BSP President Mayawati said the EC’s decision sets a very dangerous trend. “The EC has banned the campaigning in West Bengal from 10 pm today (Thursday). But the Prime Minister is holding two rallies (before the ban comes into force). This shows that the Commission is working under the pressure of BJP,” Mayawati said in Lucknow.

“Why did they put the ban from 10 pm and not since the morning? It is unfair. The BJP has targeted Mamata Banerjee. Attempts being made to defame the Bengal government,” she said.

For more: Elections 2019
