Ground Zero tense, some families leave

Tension continued in West Delhi's Basai Darapur village on Thursday, four days after a 51-year-old businessman, Dhruv Tyagi, was stabbed to death for confronting the harassers of his daughter.

While many Muslim families have decided to leave the village, members of the Tyagi community, who met at a condolence, meet advocated boycotting outsider Muslims who live in the area without police verification.

Riyaz Ahmed, one of the people who tried to rescue the victim family said he has send his wife, kids and other women members of his family to stay at relatives place in other part of the Capital. "We are under extreme fear after a large number of outsiders are coming here with arms. They are provoking the local people. Because of this I have taken precautionary measures and sent women and kids of my family to our relative's house. I'm also staying at a friend home," Ahmed said.

Businessman Dhruv Tyagi was stabbed outside his house in West Delhi on Sunday, when he protested his 27-year-old daughter's harassment. He succumbed to his injuries on Monday. Police have arrested the accused, Mohammad Alam, 20, and his father Jehangir Khan, 45, and two others involved in the case. "They committed this heinous crime and the law of our land will punish them. But I'm worried about the communal harmony in my village," added Ahmed, a local property dealer, who had tried to save Tyagi and his son during the incident. He said at least 100 Muslim families live in the village and most of them are living in fear.

Munir Ali, another tenant of same lane adjoining the house of the accused said, "We are extremely afraid and I have sent my wife, mother and three kids to our relative's house in Okhla. If the situation does not get normal in a day or two, I will also leave the locality." On Thursday, the Tyagi community organised a condolence meeting in Basai Darapur village, which became a Mahapanchayat where large number of people from across the city gathered. Many prominent people from the community addressed the Mahapanchayat and advocated for boycotting the Muslim community.

Ambrish Tyagi, the general secretary of the Tyagi community in Delhi, said, "I have pointed out before Mahapanchayat that we should avoid giving their properties on rent to the Muslims." A Mahapanchayat of 260 villages of Delhi will be held on June 1. Tapeshwar Tyagi, the elder brother of deceased told Mail Today, "We want justice for whatever we lost. We are approaching the case according to law and respect the sentiments of others." Madhup Kumar Tiwari, Joint Commissioner, Western Range, Delhi Police, said adequate arrangement has been arranged in the village.

"We have deployed adequate number of police personnel in Basai Darapur to maintain peace. The local are very cooperative. We are concerned about the outsiders. We are keeping a close eye on their activities and appealed. Maintaining peace in the area is our prime target," said the Joint Commissioner.
