Gujarat: 20-year-old PUBG addict arrested for killing retired government employee

RAJKOT: Cracking the murder mystery of an 82-year-old Ahmedabad resident, the Surendranagar police arrested a 20-year-old youth, who confessed that he had turned violent due to PUBG game addiction and haranguing by the victim.Gunvatrai Bhatt, a retired government employee, was found dead in his car near Sayla on Ahmedabad-Rajkot highway on May 5. The murder was mysterious as police ruled out robbery after finding that his mobile, cash and other valuables were intact. Bhatt was on way to Junagadh and was self driving.The youngster Bhargav Jani, who was arrested from his house in Krushnanagar Society in Surendranagar, told police that Bhatt was constantly haranguing him, which infuriated him so much that he slit his throat.Jani met Bhatt at a highway restaurant near Limbdi and asked for a lift till Rajkot. He even told Bhatt that he was also Brahmin like him and knew driving. So, Bhatt offered him to drive the car.As they started the journey, Bhatt asked Jani why did he not wear ‘janoi’ (sacred thread) despite being a Brahmin. Jani replied that he was an alcoholic and that’s why he did not prefer to wear the threat. This enraged Bhatt and he started scolding Jani for this drinking habit. Bhatt continued his tirade, which angered Jani so much that he flashed out a knife and slit the old man’s throat, police said.Bhatt had started for Junagadh from his son Deven’s house in Bopal. Deven is a deputy director in Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation,After killing Bhatt, Jani went around the villages between Sayla and Limbdi searching for a place to dispose the body. But he couldn’t find any place and left it in the car and fled the spot. Before leaving, he took out Rs 2,000 from Bhatt’s pocket.”Jani told us he was addicted to playing PUBG game, which had made his nature violent and that he had committed the crime in a fit of rage,” said D B Basiya, deputy superintendent of police, Limbdi.Jani caught in CCTV buying new shirtRajkot: As he was drenched in blood, Jani decided to get rid of his blood-soaked shirt and buy a new one. He went to two shops in Sayla wearing a shawl to hide the blood stains and bought a shirt. Then, he hired an autorickshaw to go to Muli. On the way, he threw away the bag containing his blood-stained shirt from the running rickshaw.“The rickshaw driver grew suspicious and approached us. We found the shirt. We launched an investigation by making inquiries into the shops where a person had recently bought a shirt and found CCTV footages of Jani with a shawl wrapped around his torso as well as his naked torso. Then, we circulated the footages on social media,” said Basiya.After the footages went viral, cops received a tip-off from an anonymous caller that the person matching the descriptions was living in Krushnanagar Society of Surendranagar. Acting on this information, the cops arrested him.
