‘God-fearing’ bank auditor gets 7 years’ jail for rape

State Bank of India

Mumbai

Sangli

DNA

An auditor working with a government-run bank was recently sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment by a sessions court for raping and criminally intimidating a 42-year-old single woman who was the bank’s customer. The incident happened in 2013 when the woman, a mother of four children, was working as his house help.The woman had first come in contact with Ganesh Iyer, employed with the, in 2008, when she availed of a loan for her daughter’s education. She subsequently worked for him as his house help for three years till 2011. It was only in 2013 that Iyer called her tofrom, under the pretext of getting her a baby sitter’s job and raped her, according to the prosecution.Additional Sessions Judge AD Deo also ordered Iyer to pay a fine of Rs 1 lakh out of which Rs 50,000 would be given to the victim.Iyer had claimed false implication saying he refused to give into the victim’s Rs 5-lakh demand for extortion. However, the judge rejected all his defences based on the “cogent, reliable, trustworthy and unscathed” testimony of the woman, which was backed by independent witnesses. The evidences included testimonies of watchmen who saw Iyer take her to his apartment and amatch.“It emerges from the above discussion that the evidence on record, convincingly proves that the accused took undue advantage of the adverse financial condition of the prosecutrix,” the judge observed.According to the woman’s testimony, Iyer, a ‘God-fearing person’ who performs pooja thrice a day and a ‘happily married’ father of two met her in 2008 in Miraj, Sangli, where she had applied for an education loan for her daughter. He was the branch manager at the bank.The woman used to make both ends meet by working as a private nurse. However, when Iyer told her that he was in a need of a house help, she readily agreed and started working for him. He lived alone during those days, with his family occasionally visiting him.However, in 2011, Iyer was transferred to SBI’s Mumbai branch as an auditor. One day in October 2013, he called her up from his native place in Tamil Nadu and told her he had found her work of a baby sitter and a nurse to his friend’s father.The victim agreed to take up the job and joined Iyer who was on his way to Mumbai, two days later. On October 13, once they reached the apartment, Iyer, she says, asked her to shift a pooja stool in the bedroom. He then handed her over a bottle of oil and asked her to massage his back, and in that process forced himself on her.The victim said that when she resisted, Iyer told her that there would be an increase in compound interest on her daughter’s educational loan.
