Madhya Pradesh: Man hacks wife, parents to death with axe; police case registered

He has been booked under sections of the Indian Penal Code and further investigation in the case is underway. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Bhopal: In a case reported Madhya Pradesh, a 32-year-old man hacked his parents and wife to death with an axe following an argument over a domestic issue. The incident happened at Samri village in the Raisen district on Thursday.

The accused also assaulted his six-year-old son, he was immediately rushed to a hospital in Bhopal. Reportedly, the accused is identified as Jitendra Purwa.

News agency PTI reported, the accused indulged into a heated argument with his wife 30-year-old Sunita over some domestic issue. His 60-year-old father Jalam and 55-year-old mother Sharda intervened in the argument and tried to pacify him.

The Bareli police station inspector K S Mukati said, as soon as his parents tried to pacify him, he killed his parents and wife with an axe in a fit of rage. Meanwhile, after committing the heinous crime, the accused fled from the spot. However, the police have registered a case against the accused. He has been booked under sections of the Indian Penal Code and further investigation in the case is underway.

In another case reported from Madhya Pradesh, a Class 6 student went through extreme torture and humiliation by a teacher of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya in Jhabua district of Madhya Pradesh. The student had to endure 168 slaps by her classmates on the orders of the teacher for not completing her homework. The incident came to light after the victim's father lodged a complaint with the police.

After the registration of the FIR, the accused teacher surrendered in the police station. Meanwhile, a local court rejected his bail plea and sent him to jail. The accused teacher was identified as Manoj Verma.



The judge Jai Jai Patidar has rejected the accused teacher Manoj Sinha's bail plea. In 2015, the central government passed The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 making corporal punishment in child care institutions a punishable offence.
