Kamal Haasan news: Eggs, stones hurled at Kamal Haasan in Trichy

Kamal Haasan on protest over his Godse remark: I am not afraid of being arrested. Let them arrest me. If they do th… https://t.co/MS54kq8EjH — ANI (@ANI) 1558063697000

Kamal Haasan on stones thrown at his rally in Trichy: I feel the quality of polity is going down. I don't feel thre… https://t.co/Mz7gJOeFxy — ANI (@ANI) 1558063712000

Kamal took to Twitter after eggs and stones were hurled at him during a campaign in Aravakurichi

Dear MNM family and fans, this is an acid test for our decorum and demeanour. Do not listen to their noises and be… https://t.co/C7HKswqaU1 — Kamal Haasan (@ikamalhaasan) 1558030615000

High drama at Kamal Haasan’s rally as eggs, stones hurled post-speech

TRICHY: The controversy over Makkal Needhi Maiam founder Kamal Haasan ’s ‘Hindu terrorist’ remark took a violent turn on Thursday when stones and eggs were hurled towards him from the crowd during a campaign meeting at Velayuthampalayam in Aravakurichi constituency. The actor escaped unhurt and two men who hurled the stones aimed at him were picked up by police.Earlier in the day, seeking anticipatory bail in the Madurai bench of the Madras High court after a case was registered for the ‘Hindu terrorist’ speech, Kamal said he had not spoken about Hindus in general but only about Nathuram Godse. He had said religion had nothing to do with terrorism, before commenting on Godse. The court has reserved order on the petition.Meanwhile, the state election machinery denied permission to Kamal Haasan’s campaign in the Sulur assembly constituency scheduled for Friday, the last day of campaigning for the byelections in the state.“We had to deny permission for his campaign taking into consideration the law and order problem that his speech might create,” said a senior police officer from Sulur sub-division. The MNM had sought permission for campaign speeches at eight places in Sulur on Friday. Party functionaries said they had approached police seeking permission long ago and the denial at the last moment was a ‘deliberate move’ to scuttle MNM’s prospects. The actor- politician had campaigned on May 10 in Sulur where he alleged that all leading parties were scared of MNM’s growth.The denial of permission had evoked disappointment and anger among MNM cadres. Kamal, who got to know about the development during his meeting at Velayuthampalayam,said attempts to stifle him would only help spread his words faster and farther.“I have said this earlier, if you stop my speech, my words will spread across places, and people gathered here will do that,” said Kamal Haasan before leaving the stage. He said MNM cadres would never indulge in violence and hinted that it was the handiwork of his political rivals. '“Police are citing law and order issue. But the crowd gathering for MNM is the one that even cleans the leftover garbage at the venue after meeting. Therefore, we all know where the law and order issue comes from,” he said. Two men who allegedly hurled the stones and eggs were cornered and thrashed by MNM supporters after they ensured Kamal left the venue safely. The duo was rescued by police.Kamal himself had to cancel his campaign for a day after his remark on Nathuram Godse snowballed into a major controversy. But he resumed campaigning and staunchly defended his statement, pointing out that the term ‘theeviravadhi’ referring Godse meant extremist and not terrorist. He said his statements on Godse were historic truth and the media had distorted it.
