Briefing

JAMMU



Over the last few years, ‘honour’ killings are being reported from Jammu and Kashmir. Last week, a husband Tota Ram allegedly stabbed his wife Sheetal, 25, to death near Gold Gym in Bahu Plaza area of Jammu. Residents of Balmiki Colony, Tota has now been arrested by the police. Investigations have revealed that Tota suspected that his wife was in an illicit relationship.

NOIDA

A Kashmiri student Syed Wahid, 23, who was studying in a private university of Noida went missing five months ago but now reports have started coming in that the said student is languishing in a jail in Pakistan, according to report published by India Today. Quoting his father, the report says that he has received a call from Pakistan, a call allegedly made from an inmate who was released from the jail, who claimed Wahid had told him to inform his father in Kashmir. This is making the missing story all the messier.

BANDIPORA



Absconding for almost 23 years for his involvement in the killing of seven persons, an Ikhwani, a government gunman, Wali Mohammad Mir, son of Mohammad Maqsood Mir, resident of Saderkoot Bala, Bandipora, was arrested last week. He was arrested by Sumbal police from Barwala Kangan village and is said to be involved in case FIR No. 125/1996 U/S 302, 307, 325, 341 RPC 7/27 arms Act. He is accused in the brutal murder of seven persons including five men and two women, and injuring five other persons of village Saderkoot Bala.

USA

A Kashmiri journalist based in New Delhi, Ashwaq Masoodi has recived Nieman Fellowship at Harvard University last week. She will be joining 26 other Nieman Fellows for the class of 2020 for two semesters; this year Ashwaq is the only Indian in this list. Reportedly, she would explore ways to battle stereotypes and improve media reporting on Muslims, the largest religious minority in India. Ashwaq has been working in Mint since August 2013.

SHAHEED GUNJ

It may sound bizarre to many but yes the Women and Child Rights Commission offices in Kashmir are presently functioning literally under a Chinar tree in the old Assembly complex in Kashmir. Their office, prior to yearly Darbar move, has now been occupied by the State Law Commission. Reportedly, the officials have said that their files are in the office, but the office doesn’t belong to them after they came to office to start it again in Srinagar.

UDHAMPUR

The phrase friends for life was witnessed last week in Jammu’s Udhampur district where two youth drowned while attempting to save their third friend, who is now safe, at Birmah Nallah in Udhampur. After the boys drowned, the locals raised alarm and tried to save all three but could save only one. Rohit Kumar and Suraj Kumar, aged 22 and 20 respectively, were the residents of Adarsh Colony in Udhampur. An FIR has been registered in the case and further investigation is underway.

JAMMU

The date of Jammu and Kashmir with Bollywood is still continuing. Last week, a Bollywood movie Never Give up was released with a Jammu resident, Pixie Mahajan, as the lead role. She was born in J&K and brought up in Bangalore. A Mass Communication Graduate, Pixie is the granddaughter of famous Indian cartoonist late Pran Kumar Sharma (Nana Ji) best known as the creator of Chacha Chowdary. Prior to her cinematic debut, reportedly, she has won the title Miss Drama Queen for her best performance as an actor at Miss Femina Style Diva South contest in 2014. In the same year, she also won the title Miss Valentine’s Bangalore.
