Nathuram Godse was nervous, fearful going to gallows, said judge who heard his appeal

Nathuram Godse, the murderer of Mahatma Gandhi, has resurfaced. He has beocme a talking point in the national election when India is preparing to vote for 59 seats in the final phase of the Lok Sabha polls. This comes almost 70 years after Godse was hanged for the assassination of the Father of the Nation.

It began with a statement by actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan at a public meeting in Tamil Nadu on May 12. "Free India’s first terrorist was a Hindu, his name is Nathuram Godse. There it [terrorism] starts," Kamal Haasan was quoted as saying hours after the polling ended in the penultimate phase of Lok Sabha election.

Four days later, Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur -- BJP’s Bhopal Lok Sabha candidate, responded to Kamal Haasan saying, "Nathuram Godse was a deshbhakt, is a deshbhakt and will remain a deshbhakt."

Both have retracted their statements. Kamal Haasan, in his clarification, said he did not use the word terrorist but extremist for Godse. Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur, under pressure from the BJP leadership, apologised and withdrew her statement.

This was not the first time when Godse was praised as a patriot. In late 1990s, a play was staged in Maharashtra when it was under BJP-Shiv Sena rule describing the circumstances and giving out the arguments behind Godse and his accomplices’ conspiracy to assassinate Mahatma Gandhi in 1948.

As late as 2017, the Hindu Mahasabha Godse was a member of the group unveiled a temple dedicated him in Gwalior.

Godse in assassination

Justice GD Khosla, who heard the appeal filed by Godse and his co-convicts against the trial court’s verdict in the Mahatma Gandhi’s assassination case, published a book in 1965 recording the events. Justice Khosla said Godse was enraged with Mahatma Gandhi accusing him of compromising the pride of Hindus and India to appease Muslims.

"The decision to strike was taken on January 13, when it was learnt that Mahatma Gandhi had started his fast to put pressure upon the Government of India and compel it to review its former decision to withhold the payment of 55 crores rupees to Pakistan...the conspirators could wait no longer," wrote Justice Khosla.

The plot to assassinate Mahatma Gandhi was well thought out. "He [Godse] held two insurance policies of Rs 2,000 and Rs 3,000 respectively on his life. On January 13 he nominated [co-conspirator] Apte's wife as the beneficiary under the first policy, and on the following day he similarly assigned the second policy for Rs. 3,000 to his [co-accused] brother's wife," the judge said.

One attempt on Mahatma Gandhi’s life by Godse’s gang had failed 10 days before his assassination on January 30. Judge Khosla, based on the case file, gave a detailed description of the assassination at Delhi’s Birla Mandir where the Mahatma was to attend his evening prayer meeting.

"The prayer meeting had not yet started, but a crowd of about 200 persons was awaiting the arrival of Mahatma Gandhi. Godse was moving among the people apparently unconcerned. Suddenly, there was a stirring in the crowd, and everyone stood up to form a passage for Mahatma Gandhi, who was seen coming up slowly with his hands resting on the shoulders of two girls who were walking by his side. As he raised his hands to join them in the customary greeting, Godse took a quick step forward, pushed aside the girl on Gandhiji's right and, standing in front of him, fired three shots in quick succession at point-blank range."

Fear on Godse’s face

Godse was thrashed by the crowd before being rescued by a police officer present there. A massive police hunt began to arrest other conspirators. Police completed the investigation in five months following trial began in the Red Fort and heard by judge Atma Charan.

"The court pronounced judgment on February 10, 1949. Hindu Mahasabha leader Veer Savarkar, a cult figure for the BJP, was among those accused in the conspiracy. He was acquitted for lack of evidence. Nathuram Godse and his friend [Narayan] Apte were sentenced to death. Other five convicts were awarded life sentence."

The convicts filed an appeal in the Punjab High Court. Justice Khosla was part of the three-judge bench that heard their appeals. Godse did not challenge his conviction upon the charge of murder, nor did he question the propriety of the death sentence.

Godse’s appeal was confined to the finding that there was a conspiracy. The high court confirmed death sentence awarded to Godse and Narayan Apte. They were hanged on November 15, 1949 in the Ambala jail.

According to Justice Khosla, Godse "repented of his deed and declared that were he to be given another chance he would spend the rest of his life in the promotion of peace and service of the country".

"The two condemned prisoners were led out of their cells with their hands pinioned behind them. Godse walked in front. His step occasionally faltered. His demeanour and general appearance evidenced a state of nervousness and fear."

"He tried to fight against it and keep up a bold exterior by shouting every few seconds the slogan 'Akhand Bharat' [undivided India]. But his voice had a slight croak in it and the vigour with which he had argued his case at the trial and in the High Court seemed to have been all but expended," observed Justice Khosla.
