View: Dr Jekyll and Ms Pragya Singh Thakur

Did gentle Dr Jekyll agree with violent Mr Hyde? He did not. But the two were one and the same person. Does the BJP agree with its Bhopal candidate, Pragya Singh Thakur, who celebrates the demolition of the Babri mosque and hails Gandhi’s assassin Godse as a patriot? It says it does not. But she was handpicked by party president Amit Shah and Prime Minister Narendra Modi as a symbol of the Congress’ alleged animosity towards Hindus.Benevolent Dr Jekyll turned into marauding Mr Hyde because of schizophrenia. What excuse does the BJP have for its handpicked candidate manifesting the opinions of those who sent Nathuram Godse to kill Mohandas Gandhi? That victimhood in false terror charges has affected her capacity to think straight? Or could it be that she prefers candour to the perpetual doublespeak of the Sangh Parivar on what it actually thinks of Gandhi and his vision of interfaith harmony?Under Prime Minister Modi’s expert stewardship, Gandhi has been reduced to a mascot of the toilet campaign. No doubt, this is a campaign that Gandhi would have approved of, although, being the practical man (chatur bania, Amit Shah called him) that he was, he would have had the sense to appreciate that if you build toilets where water has to be fetched from afar by daily drudgery, no one would want to pour such water down the drain and would use the toilet buildings for storage purposes.Gandhi’s chief practical emphasis was on interfaith harmony and cooperation. This was not some abstract ideal but the only practical way to rally the multi-religious Indian people together against their colonial rulers. But inter-faith harmony was and remains anathema to the Sangh Parivar, whose mission is to subvert India’s constitutional concept of citizenship and replace it with Hindutva.India should be a Hindu Rashtra or Hindu state, believed Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, ideological fountainhead of Hindutva and co-accused, along with Godse, in the Mahatma Gandhi assassination case. The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and its loose-knit web of organisations together strive to reduce non-Hindus to the status of second-class citizens and redefine Indian nationhood as Hindutva.Pragya Singh Thakur is an ardent believer in this cause. She was arrested by the Maharashtra Anti-Terror Squad for terror strikes on Muslim targets. The National Investigation Agency conducted the prosecution in such a fashion, after the Modi-led government took office, that she was discharged in two cases. But the evidence presented against her by the investigation team led by Hemant Karkare, who was killed defending his countrymen during the Mumbai terror attack of November 26, 2011, was so compelling that the judge refused to let her off the hook in the Malegaon blast case and framed charges against her. She was out of jail on bail, on health grounds, when the BJP decided to field her against Digvijaya Singh in Bhopal, as a symbol of Congress’ victimisation of Hindus.The victim has accused Karkare of framing her and claimed credit for his death: she had cursed him; and lo and behold, Pakistani terrorists crossed the seas to execute her supernatural sentence. If you thought that scientific temper is a monopoly of those who block radar with clouds, think again.The symbol of the BJP’s grievance against the Congress was candid not just on feelings on Hemant Karkare’s death, but also on the destruction of the 16century Babri mosque. Then, she was eloquently candid on her feelings towards Nathuram Godse, who, she declared was, is and will remain a patriot.A patriot is someone who performs a great service to the nation in the face of personal harm. She believes that killing the Mahatma was rendering a great service to the nation. This is the kind of victimhood that the BJP champions. It is just that its mainstream leaders have enough sense to know that it is still too early to openly praise the Mahatma’s assassin. So Prajna Singh Thakur has been gagged, for the time being.As the public discourse moves, over time, further away from the influence of libertards and sickularists, the time will come when the Sadhvi and her ilk can speak their mind and be proud of it. Patience, Mr Hyde. Your time will come.
