Provide clear reason for exempting Malegaon 2008 blast accused from court: NIA court

The special NIA (National Investigation Agency) court has ordered every accused involved in the Malegaon 2008 blast case to be present once every week for the hearing. Most of the accused give cyclostyle exemption application to the court. Now the court has demanded a cogent reason for an accused to seek exemption from appearing in court. After the accused Swami Dhardwivedi alias Shankaracharya raised an objection over NIA submitting an application for original register of FIR, heated argument took place. Thereafter, the order was issued. This submission was done on May 16 by the NIA.

Upset at the heated arguments, the court raised the issue of the accused not appearing in court and seeking exemption for flimsy reasons. Hence, the court has ordered all accused to be present in court at least once a week. The advocates representing the other accused then requested the court that it was not possible for every accused to come to Mumbai court every week.

In October last year, charges were framed against Sadhvi Pragyasingh Thakur, Lt Col Prasad Purohit and five others for terror activities, criminal conspiracy and murder, among others. The court had scrapped the MCOCA charges in the case and since October 2018, the trial has started. However except for a few accused like Sameer Kulkarni, who appears in court during the hearing, other accused like Sadhvi Pragya do not come to the court at all.

Advocate J P Mishra appearing for Sadhvi Pragya said, It is not possible for Sadhvi to come every time from Bhopal. She does not have a place to stay here and travelling frequently will not be feasible for her either.

During the hearing today the court also reprimanded the Malegaon blast victim who has been intervening in the case by filing various applications. A deceased victim's father was currently seeking that Maharashtra ATS should depute officers to assist NIA in court. Special court today rejected this application. The court has asked the victim to not directly file any application and that it has to be routed through the public prosecutor in the case.

Malegaon, a small town in Nashik district of Maharashtra was terrorised by a bomb blast in 2008 which killed six people and injured over hundred. Arrested in 2008, Sadhvi Pragya was given a clean chit by the NIA, but the trial court refused to discharge her from the case. Sadhvi Pragya and others are being tried under the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act. She was granted bail by the Bombay High Court in 2017. Last month, Sadhvi Pragya was declared as a BJP candidate from Bhopal.

Also read | Will never forgive Sadhvi Pragya for insulting Gandhi, says PM Modi

Also read | Cow urine cured my breast cancer: Sadhvi Pragya

Also watch | Nathuram Godse was a deshbhakt: Sadhvi Pragya Thakur
