Delhi air pollution today: AQI at 'very poor' 381, sufficient amount of rain may improve air quality to 'poor'

The improvement in air quality was observed due to an appreciable increase in the wind speed to 3.8 kmph in spite of dense fog and lower boundary layer height.

New Delhi: The overall air quality in the national capital was improved to the 'very poor' category on Saturday morning from 'severe' range on Friday morning. According to the System of Air Quality and Weather Forecasting And Research (SAFAR), Air Quality Index (AQI) was recorded at 381 on Saturday morning.

The improvement in air quality was observed due to an appreciable increase in the wind speed to 3.8 kmph in spite of dense fog and lower boundary layer height, SAFAR said. It is predicted that the AQI would improve marginally and slowly, however, it would remain in the 'very poor' range for the next three days.

Delhi: Ten trains are running late due to foggy weather conditions — ANI (@ANI) January 19, 2019

A widespread intrusion of moisture over northern Indian region including Delhi is expected due to an active western disturbance. If this western disturbance causes a sufficient amount of rain, it is expected that the AQI would rapidly move into 'poor' range, SAFAR mentioned. Otherwise, pre-shower conditions or little shower would only aggravate the adverse meteorological conditions.

Dense to very dense fog would continue to hover at isolated places over Delhi resisting prominent pollutants to mix vertically keeping working negatively for the air quality. Ten trains were running late due to foggy weather conditions, news agency ANI reported.

Also Read: Villagers seen hurling 'firebombs' at elephant, her calf in West Bengal's Bishnupur

The overall PM2.5 (fine particulate matter in the air with a diameter of less than 2.5 micrometre) level in Delhi was recorded at 225 in the 'very poor' category while the PM10 (fine particulate matter in the air with a diameter of fewer than 10 micrometre) level was recorded at 369 under 'very poor' category.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
