Jodhpur High Court seeks report from Rajasthan government over rising graph of crimes against women

Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Jaipur: A bench of the Jodhpur High Court has pulled up the Rajasthan government over recent instances of brutal crimes against women which have come to light from the state. The HC has directed Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot and his cabinet of ministers to furnish a reply in this regard at the earliest, explaining how the state government has acted to curb crimes such as these.

It has been suggested that the HC took cognizance of alleged police inaction in connection with a case from Alwar where five men waylaid a couple on the Thanagazi-Alwar highway and gang-raped the woman in front of her husband even as a sixth local recorded the heinous crime on his cell phone and later released it on social media. In their complaint to the police, the couple had alleged that they were threatened by the accused to not approach the police. While the incident occurred on April 26, a first information report (FIR) was only lodged in the first week of May.

Speaking to media personnel, the couple had also claimed that local police officials did not pay heed to their complaint and on multiple occasions, refused to file an official complaint. On the basis of the complaint, police later swung into action and arrested all six accused. While a superintendent of police was shunted out, a station house inspector (SHO) was suspended in the wake of allegations of police inaction. Notice in this regard was also sent to the Rajasthan government by the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC).

Addressing the public and the media on Thursday, CM Ashok Gehlot said that the rising crime graph is Alwar is a reason for concern and the state government has decided to bifurcate Alwar into two police districts. Gehlot also said that a new superintendent of police (SP) level post has been created to specifically address and curb crimes against women hailing from scheduled castes or scheduled tribes families.

Jodhpur High Court issues notice to Rajasthan government seeking its reply on recent incidents of gang-rape in the state. — ANI (@ANI) May 17, 2019

Meanwhile, family members of the woman had demanded that she be relocated to a different place from Alwar. Earlier this month, the National Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC) also claimed that in its investigation of the gang-rape case, it found carelessness on the part of police officials.
