Extortion from jail: Former superintendent quizzed

PATIALA: The organised crime control unit (OCCU) of the Punjab Police has questioned Patiala Central Jail former superintendent Rajan Kapoor and other staffers of the high-security facility for allegedly extorting Rs 15 lakh from the prime accused in the Muzaffarpur shelter home sex scandal, Brajesh Thakur.Thakur was shifted to the prison in Punjab on the Supreme Court’s orders. The alleged extortion had taken place when Kapoor was heading the prison. He has since been shifted to the jail training school of the central prison.Terming the allegations of an extortion racket being run by gangsters in connivance with jail staffers from inside the prison as “serious”, OCCU probe team leader inspector general (IG) of police Kunwar Vijay Pratap questioned the jail staff and prisoners here on Friday. The team descended on the jail in afternoon and stayed there till late in the evening.The IG said they were investigating into the claims from all angles. “We had summoned some jail staffers to the Chandigarh headquarters on Thursday, where we also questioned previous jail superintendent Rajan Kapoor and other policemen posted in Patiala prison,” Partap added.The probe team also visited the barracks of gangster Gaurav Sharma, alias Goru Bachcha, where Thakur was allegedly tortured for three days, apart from other parts of the jail. The team could not find any CCTV cameras outside the barracks. The IG said it was yet to be established if the cameras had been deliberately removed from there.The team also questioned some inmates who could have been witness to the alleged kidnapping and torture of Thakur. It also took a written statement from him.The IG said while 10 jail staffers had been questioned, they were yet to conclude the investigation as others who could provide vital details in the cae were yet to be quizzed. Any recommendations for further action in the case would be made on the basis of the facts collected during the probe, he added.The probe was ordered after ADGP (jails) Rohit Chaudhary, in a report, had stated that gangster Bachcha, in connivance with then jail superintendent Kapoor, had tortured Thakur. The sex scandal accused had appraoched the apex court, which asked the Punjab government to look into the issue, bringing the whole matter to light.The ADGP’s report stated that Thakur was shifted to the barracks where gangsters Goru Bachcha, Amit Bhura, Bholu Havelian and Kali were lodged, at around 4am on November 11.They tortured him there for three days. During this time, CCTV cameras inside the jail were shut down. By torturing Thakur, the gangsters managed to extort Rs 15 lakh as ransom from his family and the exchange of money took place in Delhi, where gangsters’ aide Raman collected the money from the Thakur’s daughter Nikita, it was alleged. Raman had jumped bail and is a proclaimed offender.Of the Rs 15 lakh, the then jail superintendent took Rs 6 lakh, the report had said.On the other hand, Kapoor has been maintaining that all the allegations are false and that he is being targeted by criminals as he had been imposing discipline inside the jail.
