Water management to be Modi's priority if NDA is re-elected

New Delhi:

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will undertake a two-day visit to Uttarakhand beginning May 18 to pay obeisance at the Himalayan shrines of Kedarnath and Badrinath. PM Modi will visit Kedarnath on May 18 and offer prayers at Badrinath the following day, Pradesh BJP media incharge Devendra Bhasin said. Congress president Rahul Gandhi will hold a meeting with senior leaders of the party today.

18:21 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Andhra Pradesh CM and TDP leader N Chandrababu Naidu meets BSP Chief Mayawati in Lucknow.



Andhra Pradesh CM and TDP leader N Chandrababu Naidu meets BSP Chief Mayawati in Lucknow. pic.twitter.com/MQ5xlNUW4R

— ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 18, 2019



18:07 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Trinamool Congress leader and nephew of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, Abhishek Banerjee through his lawyer sends a defamation notice to Prime Minister Narendra Modi for alleged derogatory remarks made against him in a public rally on 15 May, held in Diamond Harbour in West Bengal.

18:22 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Andhra Pradesh CM and Telugu Desam Party (TDP) Chief N Chandrababu Naidu met Samajwadi Party Chief Akhilesh Yadav, in Lucknow, today.



Andhra Pradesh CM and Telugu Desam Party (TDP) Chief N. Chandrababu Naidu met Samajwadi Party Chief Akhilesh Yadav, in Lucknow, today. pic.twitter.com/ujUgNz6Qfq

— ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 18, 2019



18:06 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Karnataka Water Min DK Shivakumar: Maharashtra govt had agreed to release water after our request but now they are not releasing water in Krishna river. For the benefit of farmers and people of Kagwad and Athani we're releasing last 1 TMC from our live storage from Ilakal dam.

18:06 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In TMC has written to Election Commission seeking directions to Mukul Roy, BJP to leave constituencies of West Bengal set to go on poll on 19 May.Letter states,"He's a voter of Delhi and lawfully not entitled to stay in any constituency in Bengal going to polls on commencement of 48hour restriction period".

16:17 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prime Minister Narendra Modi trekked 2 kms to the cave and on request of media allowed cameras to make initial visuals. PM will begin his meditation in a few hours which will last till tomorrow morning. No media or personnel will be allowed in the vicinity of the cave.

16:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prime Minister Narendra Modi meditates at a holy cave near Kedarnath Shrine in Uttarakhand.



Prime Minister Narendra Modi meditates at a holy cave near Kedarnath Shrine in Uttarakhand. pic.twitter.com/KbiDTqtwwE

— ANI (@ANI) May 18, 2019



14:58 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Saurabh Bhardwaj, AAP on Arvind Kejriwal's reported statement 'My PSO reports to BJP Govt, my life can be ended in minutes': After becoming CM he has been attacked at least 6 times in presence of police. Even after such incidents no action was taken. We don't trust Delhi Police.

14:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP worker Anoop Singh Chandan has registered a complaint with the police against Suheldev Bhartiya Samaj Party Chief OP Rajbhar (in file pic) for allegedly abusing BJP workers at a public meeting yesterday, in Ghazipur.

14:18 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Andhra Pradesh CM and Telugu Desam Party (TDP) Chief N. Chandrababu Naidu met Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) President Sharad Pawar in Delhi, earlier today.



14:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Visuals of polling parties at an EVM distribution centre in Bhatinda, Punjab. All 13 parliamentary constituencies to go to polls in the last phase of Lok Sabha Eelctions 2019 tomorrow.





14:00 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Chief Election Commissioner Sunil Arora issues statement on EC Ashok Lavasa's purported letter to him, says, 'an unsavory and avoidable controversy reported in sections of media today about internal functioning of ECI in respect of handling of Model Code of Conduct.'



13:58 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In CEC Sunil Arora: But the same largely remained within confines of ECI after demission of office unless appearing much later in a book written by the concerned ECs/CECs. I personally never shied away from a public debate whenever required but there is time for everything. (

13:58 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In CEC Sunil Arora issues statement on EC Ashok Lavasa's purported letter to him: The 3 members of EC are not expected to be template or clones of each other, there have been so many times in the past when there has been a vast diversion of views as it can, and should be.

13:58 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Randeep Surjewala on purported letter by EC Ashok Lavasa to CEC: Chunav Aayog Modi ji ka pitthu ban chuka hai, Ashok Lavasa ji ki chitthi se saaf hai CEC aur un ke sahyogi Lavasa ji ka jo bhinn opinion hai Modi ji aur Amit Shah ko lekar usko bhi record karne ko taiyar nahi hain.

13:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Sheila Dikshit on Delhi CM's reported remark 'Muslim votes shifted to Congress in Delhi at last moment': Don't know what is he trying to say. Everyone has a right to vote whichever party he/she wants to vote. People of Delhi did not understand nor liked his governance model.













13:55 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In JD(S) chief and former prime minister HD Deve Gowda: We are with Congress, I don't want to speak anything more. On 23rd results will come, clear picture will be known to the entire country & what further development takes place.

13:54 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Malkangiri (Odisha): Maoists blew up Panchayat Bhawan in Timurpalli.









12:21 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Going to temple is a subject of one's personal faith. However, Prime Minister Narendra Modi was more focused on cameras than his worship. Where ever the cameras were installed, the PM was looking at themand offering prayers: Senior Congress leader Pramod Tiwari to News Nation

12:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Sheila Dikshit on Delhi CM's reported remark 'Muslim votes shifted to Congress in Delhi at last moment': Don't know what is he trying to say. Everyone has a right to vote whichever party he/she wants to vote. People of Delhi did not understand nor liked his governance model

11:12 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The Election Commission has issued a notice to BJP candidate from Gurdaspur Sunny Deol for allegedly violating of the model code of conduct. Poll officials took serious note of a public meeting held by Deol in Pathankot on Friday night, after the silent period come in force. They also found that a loud speaker was used in the public meeting in which around 200 people were present.

11:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prime Minister Narendra Modi offers prayers at Kedarnath temple.



11:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi: Andhra Pradesh CM N. Chandrababu Naidu arrives at Congress President Rahul Gandhi's residence.

07:08 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Dr V Shanmugam: If an election agent/candidate wants VVPAT slips of a booth recounted,he can submit written request before RO. RO passes a speaking order. If he allows recounting,slips from particular VVPAT will be counted before all counting agents & results shown to them.

07:08 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Uttarakhand Addl Chief Electoral Officer: After votes in EVMs have been counted, slips from 5 randomly selected VVPATs will be counted. In case there's difference b/w the 2 tallies, they'll be cross checked again&tally of VVPAT slips will be considered as the final tally.

07:07 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Acharya Pramod Krishnam, Congress candidate from Lucknow: It is the large-heartedness of Rahul Gandhi that he gave respect to Shatrughan Sinha but Shatrughan Sinha should also give respect to the party.

07:06 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Acharya Pramod Krishnam, Congress' Lucknow candidate: Rahul ji joined Shatrughan ji's roadshow as he was following 'Party dharm' but Shatrughan ji didn't follow 'Party dharm'. He's taking politics lightly. Politics is related to India's future, there should be sensibility.

07:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In AMMK workers arrested for assaulting election officials granted bail.

07:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress president Rahul Gandhi will hold a meeting with senior leaders of the party today.

07:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi will visit Kedarnath on May 18 and offer prayers at Badrinath the following day, Pradesh BJP media incharge Devendra Bhasin said.
