BJP finds more Godse ‘admirers’

BJP finds more Godse ‘admirers’ Tweets go out in support of Mahatma Gandhi's assassin

| Bangalore | Published 17.05.19, 11:59 PM

The Twitter handles of two BJP parliamentarians from Karnataka, one of them a Union minister, displayed posts supporting Nathuram Godse hours after terror accused and party Bhopal candidate Pragya Singh Thakur had called Mahatma Gandhi’s assassin a “patriot”. Lok Sabha member Nalin Kumar Kateel posted his comment on Friday evening around the same time that a BJP spokesperson condemned Pragya’s statement and said she should apologise. Kateel later deleted his tweet and apologised.

Advertisement

The tweet on the timeline of Union minister for skill development Ananth Kumar Hegde appeared on Saturday but he later blamed it on hackers. “Am glad that 7 decades later today’s generation debates in a changed perceptional environment and gives good scope for the condemned to be heard upon. #NathuramGodse would have finally felt happy with this debate!” the tweet on Hegde’s Twitter handle said. “Time to assert and move away from being apologetic! If not now…When?” Kateel’s tweet compared Godse favourably with former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and 26/11 terrorist Ajmal Kasab. “The number of those killed by Nathuram Godse, one. Number of killings by Ajmal Kasab, 72. Rajeev Gandhi killed 17,000 people. Now tell me who is the cruel killer among them,” the tweet said in Kannada. The mention of “17,000 people” appears an allusion to the victims of the civil war in Sri Lanka, where Rajiv had deployed Indian troops as peacekeepers — a decision for which the Tamil Tigers assassinated him in 1991. His death anniversary falls next Tuesday. Hegde later tweeted: “My account was hacked since yesterday. There is no question of justifying Gandhi ji’s murder. There can be no sympathy or justification of Gandhi ji’s murder. We all have full respect for Gandhi ji’s contribution to the nation.

My account was hacked since yesterday. There is no question of justifying Gandhi ji's murder. There can be no sympathy or justification of Gandhi ji's murder. We all have full respect for Gandhi ji's contribution to the nation. — Chowkidar Anantkumar Hegde (@AnantkumarH) May 17, 2019

My Twitter account has been breached twice in the past one week and certain tweets have been posted on my timeline which has been discarded and deleted. Regret the posts attributed to me. — Chowkidar Anantkumar Hegde (@AnantkumarH) May 17, 2019
