Rajasthan: Days after Alwar gang-rape case, two more rapes cases reported; citizens demand action

The deceased along with two accused went to the wedding where they allegedly raped a minor | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Jaipur: After the Alwar gang-rape made national headlines, two more rape cases have been reported from the state. A 14-year-old girl was gang-raped in Alwar and an eight-year-old girl was raped by her neighbour in Dholpur district of the state.

Reportedly, an outrage against the Ashok Gehlot government has been reported and the citizens are questioning the failed state of affairs in context with the law and order situation in Rajasthan. After the Alwar gang-rape the incumbent government was widely criticized for lack of action in the case.

Mirror now reported, in Alwar, a 14-year-old girl was kidnapped and allegedly raped by unidentified men on May 14. The girl was traveling from her maternal uncle's home where she had gone for a wedding. Reportedly, the family members caught hold of one of the accused and beat him to death. Meanwhile, the other two have been absconding and the police is looking for the accused.

A police official said that they found the man's dead body, who was identified as Rahul Gurjar. The deceased along with two accused went to the wedding where they allegedly raped a minor, he added. Meanwhile, the police have detained two in the case and a murder case will be reported under the relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code.

Earlier this week, seven persons including three brothers were booked for allegedly raping a 26-year-old woman in Rajasthan's Jhalawar district. The seven were identified as Bane Singh, Ghanshyam, Dewan, Mangilal, Durgalal, Pappu and Magilal hail from village Manpura Jagir.

Reportedly, based on the woman's complaint, the accused were booked under section 376D (gang rape) of Indian Penal Code, SHO Bhalta Police Station Satayanarayan Malav told news agency PTI.

As per the complaint, the woman was abducted and raped by the men on May 12 while she had gone out to relieve herself, Malav said. A medical examination of the victim was conducted and efforts are on to arrest the accused.
