Maharashtra: 22-year-old apprehended for molesting deaf-mute woman at railway station

The 28-year-old woman joined a government office six months back in Mumbai and the accused had befriended her at the workplace. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A 22-year-old man was arrested by the Wadala Railway police for molesting a hearing and speech impaired woman at Sandhurst Road Station. Reportedly, the two worked used to work together where the accused, Vishal Bhaskar was an office boy.

The accused was interested in her but the woman snubbed her. The 28-year-old woman joined a government office six months back in Mumbai and the accused had befriended her at the workplace.

According to a report in the Times of India (TOI), earlier this year, Bhaskar-the accused had sent objectionable texts from her cellphone to himself. The found the behaviour inappropriate and after she and her parents complained to the manager and Bhaskar was immediately Bhaskar was fired from the job.

Meanwhile, on May 6, the woman was about to board Panvel-bound local train from Sandhurst Road Station around 4:30 PM when Bhaskar rushed towards the train and pulled her out of the local.

Reportedly, the victim did not immediately approach the police as she wanted her mother to explain to her about the situation. But her mother was out of town, so when she returned the girl along with her mother filed a complaint and enacted what happened.

Senior inspector Rajendra Pal told TOI that he was arrested the same day and was immediately booked for molestation under the sections of the Indian Penal Code.

In another case reported from Mumbai, a man was arrested for alleged rape of a 21-year-old model and actor. Police officials familiar with the matter said that the accused is a 55-year-old practicing doctor who came into contact with the complainant while she was working in a serial.

A first information report was filed on the basis of a complaint by the woman and a case has been lodged in this regard under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). The accused has been sent to police custody and further investigation into the matter is underway. An official probing the allegations against the doctor told sections of the media that he was arrested from his residence in Chembur.
