Will commit suicide if accused are not punished: Alwar rape victim

After the horrific Thanagazi rape case, yet another heinous incident came into limelight where a minor girl was allegedly gang raped by three boys on May 14. The girl along with her mother has threatened to commit suicide if no action is taken against the accused. As per the complainant, the girl, who was at her maternal uncle's home in Alwar's Bansoor area had gone out to relieve herself. The three accused pounced upon her, took her to a nearby school and gang raped her. The girl claimed that the three fled from there on a bike after the incident.

One of the accused was allegedly lynched to death afterwards and the other two were later nabbed by the police.

After filing the FIR, the girl has given her statement under Section 164 in the Court.

"No, I do not know them. I was brought home by my mother and my maternal aunt. Yes, punishment must be given. If punishment is not given, then I will commit suicide. All I want is they should be punished", the minor girl said to India Today.

"As I stood up after relieving myself, three boys came from behind and dropped handkerchief on my face. As I shouted, my mother and my maternal aunt came over there. Seeing them coming, the trio ran away from there on a bike. My mother and maternal aunt then brought me home", the girl earlier mentioned.

The police has claimed that one of the minor accused was nabbed and beaten up after which he passed away. The body of the dead accused was found around 12 kms away from the place of the alleged gang rape.

"One of the boys was caught and he was beaten up as well, he has died as well and the two boys, they had run away as well, we have nabbed them after investigation...", Ramji Lal, Investigating Officer, mentioned.

The complainant's mother, while speaking with India Today, demanded that strictest punishment should be meted out to the accused so that no one does it.

The police has registered separate cases, of gang rape and murder, and is investigating both of them.

Also read | Rajasthan: 3 minor girls raped within month after Alwar gang rape

Also read | Alwar gang rape case: Chargesheet filed against six accused

Also watch | War of words between PM Modi and Mayawati
