Delhi: Angered by her 'throwing water', neighbour stabs woman to death in front of her daughter

The family of the deceased alleged that the accused had another argument with the victim around 10 days ago (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: An appalling incident surfaced from the national capital after a woman was stabbed in front of her daughter. The deceased was allegedly killed by her neighbour. The incident took place in Mahipalpur, South Delhi. The deceased was washing utensils outside her house when the incident took place.

The accused was identified as Gopal Singh. The accused allegedly lost his temper when the deceased threw the left-over water in his direction. The two had an argument after which, the accused stabbed the deceased.

While talking to the Indian Express, Pardeep, a relative of the deceased stated that he was outside his residence when he heard the deceased's daughter crying for help. When he ran to the deceased's house, he allegedly saw that the accused was stabbing the deceased. Pardeep then snatched the knife from the accused's hand and caught him.

The passersby and the locals reached the spot and started thrashing the accused. Pardeep called the police control room and informed them about the incident. The deceased was rushed to AIIMS Trauma centre but was already dead.

The family of the deceased alleged that the accused had another argument with the victim around 10 days ago. Pardeep stated that the deceased was throwing water outside her house, it was not on the property of the accused.

In another incident from Bengaluru, a man allegedly slashed the cheek of a woman after she denied his repeated marriage proposals. The accused had allegedly been stalking the victim for a long time and even after being constantly rejected, he had continued pursuing the victim.

A flight attendant, the victim was returning home from work when her cab was stopped by the accused. The accused forced himself into the cab and proposed marriage to the victim. When she denied, the accused allegedly took out a knife and slashed her cheek. The accused surrendered days after the incident.
