15-year-old rape suspect beaten to death in Rajasthan

A 15-year-old boy suspected of raping a girl of the same age was allegedly beaten to death in Rajasthan’s Alwar district on Friday, a police officer said on Saturday. The two other boys allegedly involved in the gang rape have been detained.

Two separate cases of gang rape and murder have been lodged on the basis of complaints of the girl and the boy’s family.

Alwar’s police superintendent, Parish Anil Deshmukh, said the boy’s family said he had gone to attend a relative’s wedding in Harnad Ki Dhani when he was murdered.

He added the family has filed a complaint accusing the girl’s family of killing him.

Deshmukh said the girl’s family, too, has filed a police complaint alleging that the boy and his two friends had abducted the girl and raped her near the wedding venue.

“When the family went looking for the girl, they found her with the three boys. While one of the boys was caught by the family, the other two managed to flee. The boy was allegedly beaten by the family members,” he said.

Deshmukh said prima facie the police have found the deceased and the girl knew each other.

“The two other minors accused were detained yesterday [Friday] and were presented before a court that sent them for detention at a juvenile home,” said Deshmukh.

The alleged gang rape in Alwar was one of the five sexual assaults reported in Rajasthan since Friday.

A 14-year-old relative allegedly raped a six-year-old girl in Churu district.

“The girl had gone to fetch water when the 14-year old accused took her to an isolated place and committed the crime on Friday. He has been detained,” station house officer Malkiyat Singh said.

In Dholpur district, an eight-year-old girl was raped in Khurd village.

“The victim was staying at her maternal grandfather’s home where the accused raped her. He was arrested on Saturday,” station house officer Yashpal Singh said. He added they were verifying the age of the accused.

In Bharatpur, a woman on Saturday lodged a complaint against a labour contractor accusing him of raping her.

The woman and her husband work at a brick kiln as daily wagers.

On May 12, she had gone to work alone as her husband was admitted in hospital and finding her alone, the labour contractor, Vijay Singh, allegedly raped her, the police said.

A 17-year-old girl has filed a police complaint in Jaipur accusing two relatives of raping her and her sister on May 10.

In her complaint on Saturday, she said they were attending a wedding where the relatives gave them drinks laced with intoxicants and then took them to Karauli, where they raped them.

The police were yet to arrest the accused until late Saturday.

The fresh alleged rape cases come as the ruling Congress has drawn flak for a delay in filing a case in connection with the gang-rape of a woman in Alwar on April 26. The woman was raped and her sexual assault was filmed while her husband was beaten up.

(With PTI inputs)
