Dacoits wanted in hundreds of cases in Andhra and Telangana nabbed by police with gold worth over Rs 50 lakh

Vijayawada Police Commissioner Ch Dwaraka Tirumala Rao (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Vijayawada: In a major breakthrough for law enforcement agencies, police have arrested three members of a gang of dacoits responsible for committing multiple crimes in both Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. Officials with the Central Crime Station (CCS) police arrested the three members, including a juvenile, Police Commissioner Ch Dwaraka Tirumala Rao told media outlets on Friday.

At the time of making the arrest, personnel also recovered gold ornaments weighing 1,258 grams worth Rs 54.60 lakh along with 17.2 kgs of silver jewellery valued at Rs 9.65 lakh. The commissioner further said that a laptop and two cars were also seized from the dacoits' possession. It has also come to light that the arrested dacoits have several hundred cases registered against them in multiple states and had been committing thefts for the past 15 years.

According to a report by Deccan Chronicle, the arrested dacoits have been identified as Bhukya Nagaraju Naik, Pulletikurthi Umamaheswara Rao and Banavath Raja. While Naik hails from A Kondur in Krishna district, Rao is from Old Guntur and Raja from Vissanapet Mandal of Krishna district. As per the latest report, two other members of the same gang are currently lodged at the Vishakhapatnam Central Prison, Guttikonda Pavan Kumar and Nallamothu Suresh.

A team led by CCS Assistant Commissioner of Police K Prakasa Rao which made the arrest during a vehicle check at Kandrika village on Friday said that Naik, Rao and Raju had committed five offences in Vijayawada along with Pavan Kumar, an engineering graduate. The accused will now be produced before a court where police are likely to seek extended custody. Meanwhile, the 16-year-old boy who was found with the dacoits at the time has been sent to a juvenile home. With the arrest of these gang members, police officials hope to close hundreds of case of theft and dacoity, where they were identified as the accused.
