Indian TV Actor says Police Beat Him all Night

"We started abusing each other and I got angry"

Indian TV actor Aansh Arora has said that he and his brother were beaten up by members of the Uttar Pradesh police.

Arora, who is known for his role in Kasam Tere Pyaar Ki, claimed he and his brother were assaulted following an altercation at a shop.

He was taken to the ICU where he spent three days there. He remains at a hospital in Delhi.

The incident happened in the early hours of May 12, 2019.

Arora had gone to a shop where he ordered food including a hotdog. When he asked for the bill, workers allegedly told him that he would have to wait for the hotdog for at least an hour.

The actor told them to cancel the order as he was running late. However, the staff allegedly refused to cancel his order.

Arora said: “They said how can we take money from you without giving you the food?

“I said that means you want me to wait here. I questioned why they were not cancelling my order. And that is how the arguments started.

“We started abusing each other and I got angry and even banged my hand on the reception counter, breaking the glass.”

See footage of the Altercation

https://www.instagram.com/p/BxmNTUHhgBY/?utm_source=ig_web_copy_link

Arora soon left the shop but decided to return a few hours later as he felt bad.

“When I reached home I felt bad. I thought the staff lost money because of me. So I decided to visit them again, apologise and pay them. But they handed me over to the police.”

Arora went into the shop while his brother waited in the car. He alleged that staff members had called the police and they were waiting in a van.

He was then arrested but when his brother went over to ask what had happened, they allegedly arrested him too. Officers allegedly seized their phones.

According to the TV actor, five to six policemen beat them up at the Indirapuram police station. His requests to speak to his family were also ignored.

The brothers were then put inside a cell at approximately 3 am.

On May 12 at 10:30 am, Arora alleges that his brother was taken to another room and beaten again.

“When my brother was brought back to the cell, he was unable to walk and was howling and screaming in pain.”

“After that, they dragged me from the cell to the same room and asked me to count till 40, and each time I reached 40, they hit me.”

Officers also warned him that if he missed out a number, he would have to restart and was beaten again.

The TV actor claimed the policemen beat him on his legs and feet with a bat.

Their parents found that their sons were at the station after making enquiries. After requesting for information, they were eventually told that they were in a cell and would be produced before a magistrate.

They were produced before a court in the evening where they were granted bail.

Arora and his brother were then taken to the hospital. Arora was admitted but his brother was discharged after First Aid.

Arora is trying to get justice for what happened. He wrote to the National Human Rights Commission.

According to the actor, he said:

“I was physically assaulted and tortured by the officers of Indirapuram police station in Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh.

“My minor brother and I were subjected to extremely cruel and inhuman behaviour by the officers who assaulted us through the night till the next morning.”

SSP Upendra Agarwal said: “As of now, I am unaware about this incident. I will verify and inquire into it.”
