Karnataka: Two days after gangster’s killing, Vijayanagar cop transferred

MYSURU: The sneaking suspicion that there is something amiss in the encounter wherein a Punjab-based gangster–Sukhwinder Singh—was killed has just got stronger with the transfer of Vijayanagar police inspector B G Kumar, who gunned him down, two days after the incident.The transfer of Kumar, who is in a hospital, hasn’t come as a surprise, as there are apparent anomalies in the encounter story from day one. He has been shifted to headquarters, central range, Bengaluru.Senior officers told TOI that inspector Kumar maintained ‘secrecy’ about the entire operation to nab Sukhwinder and his accomplices. The inspector claimed that the gangsters had come to exchange demonetised notes to the tune of Rs 500 crore.As per a complaint filed by inspector Kumar, he intercepted the gang from Punjab on outer ring road near an apartment and a scuffle ensued between the two sides for some time before Kumar opening fire at Sukhwinder. Kumar, who was in mufti, claimed that the gang tried to assault a constable later attacked him. He opened fire at Sukhwinder in self-defence, he had claimed. Sukhwinder suffered bullet wounds on his upper chest and fell unconscious.Sukhwinder was rushed to KR Hospital in a police vehicle. Kumar, according to senior police officers, didn’t inform them about the operation beforehand and also did not put things on record. Kumar informed seniors about the firing nearly 45 minutes after the incident, after bringing Sukhwinder to hospital.Though police department sources maintains that it is an encounter, they too agree that many questions remain unanswered. The police haven’t seized currency notes nor any weapon from the gang.Meanwhile, the body of Sukhwinder was handed over to his relative Gurmeet Singh after an autopsy at MMCRI mortuary. Gurmeet, who arrived in Mysuru with two others – Harjinder Singh and Arminder Pal Singh, received the body and left for Punjab via Bengaluru and New Delhi.The body was shifted to Bengaluru airport in an ambulance and from there it was taken to New Delhi in a flight and then to Faridkot, his native place in Punjab.The relatives, who were in Mysuru to complete the formalities and gave their statement to a judicial magistrate, didn’t talk to media persons. They left for Mysuru around 4.30 pm on Saturday.Earlier, the judicial magistrate recorded the statement of Sukhwinder’s relatives and that of investigation officer, ACP Mariappa. The entire procedure was videographed including autopsy, scanning and statement recording.DCP M Muthuraju said CID officers had already arrived in Mysuru and once the procedures were over, they would take over the case from Mysuru City police. The case is likely to be handed over to CID on Sunday.The DCP added that Sukhwinder’s relatives didn’t give any complaint to police with regard to the encounter.
