MHA, Delhi police scoff at Arvind Kejriwal's 'assassination' fears

The Ministry of Home Affairs and Delhi Police said on Saturday that Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal has been provided security cover of highest-level on his request and seeing threat assessment. Kejriwal has alleged that his personal security officer could assassinate him.

"Every person appointed in the security wing are very professional and remains on high alert," said a senior officer in Ministry of Home Affairs. The police force also said, "The unit has been providing security cover commendably for several high dignitaries of all political parties. The security personnel posted in the security team of Chief Minister, Delhi are equally well committed to their duties."

Minister of State for Home Affairs for State Kiren Rijiju said, "Arvind Kejriwal ji has crossed all the limits of political insanity and human impulsivity. How can a Chief Minister make such a reprehensible statement? We are political rivals not enemies! Security of the nation and it's citizens is the responsibility of the Govt (government)."

Earlier in the day, Kejriwal claimed that his life was under threat and that the BJP is conspiring to kill him. He feared that he will be murdered like former PM Indira Gandhi. "I will be murdered like Indira Gandhi by my PSO one day," Kejriwal told a new channel. He said, "BJP is after my life."

Kejriwal said his PSO reports to BJP and added, "They will kill me one day through my PSO, like Indira Gandhi".

Earlier this month, Kejriwal was slapped by a man during a roadshow in Delhi's Moti Nagar area on Saturday. Police had claimed that the culprit was a disgruntled AAP worker but the party blamed the BJP for the attack.

Delhi BJP, meanwhile, accused CM Kejriwal of playing politics over the "serious" matter of security and making false allegations against it for "cheap popularity. It questioned why the AAP chief did not file a police complaint if he had doubts about the integrity of his PSO and said he has insulted the police personnel.
