Bihar: Mob set Ramgarh police station on fire over death of college student

The agitated mob burned vehicles and even pelted stones at police officers, injuring eight police personnel in the protest (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Bihar: Agitated by the death of a college student, hundreds of people took to the streets, vandalised vehicles and threw bricks. The mob, which consisted of over 100 people, set the Ramgarh police station ablaze and caused injuries to seven police personnel along with a Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP). The student was admitted to a hospital in Varanasi where she succumbed to injuries on Thursday.

The mob demanded the arrest of the customer service centre operator of a private bank in the Baraura village who they accused of the death of the student. Allegedly, the accused had thrown the girl on the railway tracks after raping her.

Also Read: Vellore Pongal tragedy: Bull dies after a head-on collision with another bull during manju virattu event

The agitated mob demanded a compensation worth Rs 25 lakh and a government job for a member of her family. The horde first blocked the main road at Durga Chowk and then marched towards the Ramgarh police station.

According to a report in the Hindustan Times (HT), the mob consisted of more than 100 people who resorted to vandalism and pelting in an attempt to demand justice. The people eventually blocked the Mohania-Buxar Road with the victim's body, stopping all movement.

Following the obstruction, Mohania DSP was asked to visit Durga Chowk and listen to the grievances of the mob in an attempt to pacify their swelling anger. However, when the DSP reached Durga Chowk, the crowd went out of control and pelted stones on the team. Even though an immediate attempt was made to escape, seven officials and the DSP got injured.

The mob reached the Ramgarh police station where they opened the lock-ups and then set the building on fire. Warnings were also given to reporters barring them from taking pictures of the scene. The crowd was later controlled by Rakesh Rathi, DIG Sahabad who eventually convinced the mob and cleared the area.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
