Delhi: Woman employee of a five star hotel abducts Mumbai businessman for Rs 30 lakh ransom, arrested

The two other women present in the house accused the 64-year-old man of raping their daughter. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: The Delhi Police has arrested six persons, including four women, for allegedly abducting a managing director of a marine engineering company. One of the women accused works with a five-star hotel in Delhi's Chanakyapuri. The arrests came following a six-hour long hostage drama that culminated at a house in East Delhi's Lakshmi Nagar area.

According to a report in Times of India, the 64-year-old victim had come to the city from Mumbai for a business trip when a he got a call a woman known to him on Friday evening. During the call, the accused along with another woman sought a meeting with the victim to which he agreed. The victim had checked into a 5-star hotel in the national capital on Thursday night.

After her meeting, the woman managed to convince the victim to meet one of her friends and accompany them in a car. Later, the three went of the hotel in a Hyundai Verna car. The accused woman took the victim to a house in Lakshmi Nagar, where two other women appeared.

According to the victim, the two other women present in the house accused the 64-year-old man of raping their daughter. When the victim denied the allegations, the accused women offered to let him go by paying a ransom of Rs 30 lakh. The Managing Director was forced to call his area manager to arrange Rs 30 lakh. When the victim called the area manager, he found something amiss and informed the police. The police said the accused were making calls from Whatsapp to hide their identities.

During the initial investigation, the police scanned the CCTV footage of the hotel and found that the accused woman escorted the victim out of the hotel in a car. According to Additional DCP (New Delhi), Eish Singhal, the police managed to track the car with the help of its registration number. The police swooped on the owner of the vehicle at his house in Lakshmi Nagar.

The police said that during the questioning the car owner admitted to being part of the kidnapping plot to earn the quick buck. After the tip off from car owner, the police raided the house in Lakshmi Nagar and located the victim locked in a room.
