'What Was She Wearing?' An Exhibition That Demonstrates Why Rape Is Never The Victim's Fault

If a girl gets raped or molested the first question society asks is ‘What clothes were you wearing?’. It is disturbing and at the same time saddening that people tend to blame the victim and not the perpetrator of this horrible crime.

Over the years many activists, social media campaigns and NGOs have tried to convey that rape is never ever the victim's fault. Nothing and no one has the right to violate someoneé body (man or woman).

An exhibition in Brussels is amplifying this very message boldly, for all those who care to understand. It consists of recreations of outfits worn by people when were raped and assaulted. It was inspired by a project created by the students at the University of Kansas.

We have had so many request for our art exhibit that we are creating a second installment! Want to participate in our 2019 “What Were You Wearing?” exhibit? Fill out this form:https://t.co/3WaBdZ6WYD pic.twitter.com/gm7eEVtn70 — Me Too Springfield (@MeTooSGF) January 18, 2019

The exhibition that was earlier held in January 2018 was again held this year considering the number of requests for it. The exhibits will be available for public viewing till January 20, 2019.





Delphine Goossens, a worker in the prevention services in Brussels took the original testimonies of the Kansas students and gathered pieces of her and her co-workers' clothing to represent the outfits in the exhibition which was named ‘What were you wearing?’

She has put up the exhibition at the Molenbeek Maritime Community Centre. “I think a school can make it, or a university,” she said. “It’s easy.”

There were several outfits hanging around the room, including a girl child's frock, a t-shirt and shorts.





A woman, Liesbet Verboven, who came to see the exhibition said that her experience was very emotional. A friend of hers was assaulted and had a poor experience with the police, who blamed her decisions and location for the incident.

“It leaves a big impact to see all these clothes, that it can happen to anyone, anytime, anywhere,” Verboven said. “I hope it can change the mindset of people that blame the victims of violence and rapes,” she added.

With 'What Were You Wearing?', Goossens challenged society's notion that rape happens due to revealing clothes.

Just because someone decided to wear something that doesn't fit someone else's idea of 'decent clothing' does not mean she is asking for it. If she partied, consumed alcohol, decided to stay out late or travel with men does not mean she was asking for it. Rape is always, always the fault of the rapist.
