Drama looms up over Kejriwal security jibe; BJP files case

New Delhi: Delhi BJP leader Vijender Gupta on Sunday lodged a police complaint against Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and his deputy Manish Sisodia accusing them of hatching a conspiracy to falsely implicate him in criminal cases.

The Rohini MLA's claim comes a day after Kejriwal had alleged that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) would get him assassinated by his own personal security officer (PSO), the way former prime minister Indira Gandhi was killed.

"Kejriwal and Sisodia are hatching a larger conspiracy against me to falsely implicate me in criminal cases," Gupta said in his complaint submitted at Parliament Street Police Station here. "They can go to any extent to gain sympathy and implicate anyone for their political dividends and the same is known to all," he added.

The BJP legislator also alleged that the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) national convener had "scripted" the May 4 attack on him during a road show in Delhi's Moti Nagar. "In the recent past, in order to yield political gains, Kejriwal scripted the 'slap-gate' during his road show and blamed the BJP for it," he said.

"Subsequently, it was revealed that Kejriwal himself demanded the liaison officer that the security of his vehicle should be removed because in the presence of security personals, his script will be thwarted," Gupta alleged. According to Delhi Police, they have received the complaint and will take required action accordingly.

'Withdraw Kejri's security cover, BJP asks police' Following Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal's allegation that his own security detail could assassinate him, the Delhi unit of the BJP has written to the Delhi Police demanding withdrawal of the Kejriwal's security cover.

The Delhi BJP spokesperson Praveen Shankar Kapoor, on Sunday, wrote a letter to the Delhi Commissioner of Police, the Union Home Ministry and the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi demanding withdrawal of the security cover provided to the Chief Minister of national capital.

"Delhi Police should seek an apology from Arvind Kejriwal and if he does not apologise, then the Chief Minister's security cover be withdrawn," Kapoor wrote in the letter. Kapoor also raised concerns about the mental condition of the security personnel who are posted for the security of the Delhi Chief Minister following the allegations and demanded psychological counselling for them.

"I believe the entire security squad around Arvind Kejriwal must be facing mental depression after hearing their protectee's statement fearing death at their hands. All security staff deployed around Arvind Kejriwal should be given psychological counselling," Kapoor added.
