#MenToo supporters protest for Men’s Commission at India Gate

The stretch between India Gate and Rajpath witnessed a peaceful protest by the supporters of the #MenToo movement on Saturday. Activist Barkha Trehan, along with members of her city-based NGO, gathered at the location to demand justice for victims of fake rape accusations in the country. With placards like, “I am a man and I have the right to live with dignity,” and “Crime has no gender”, the protest had victims and their family members demanding the formation of a Men’s Commission.Activist Barkha Trehan, along with supporters of the #MenToo movementAfter organising two protests at India Gate within a week, Barkha Trehan now plans to organise protests all over the country to stand for the #MenToo movement. “We are going to organise this protest in Mumbai now. We will also appeal to others to come out and support actor Karan Oberoi since he was denied bail recently. If this commission is formed, we expect it to hear the grievances of men. We need some laws supporting them,” she said. The supporters also wore cut-outs of TV actor Karan Oberoi. “These cut-outs convey that today it has happened with Karan, tomorrow it can happen with you or your loved ones. So come out and support the #MenToo movement, as it can happen with your father, brother or son,” added Barkha.The supporters also wore cut-outs of TV actor Karan Oberoi, who has denied the accusation of rape and extortion by a tantrik-cum-healerMany victims who had come to support the movement shared their stories with us. Fifty two-year-old Ramesh Kumar*, who was falsely accused of rape and was acquitted recently, told us, “I was accused when I was 50 years old.While my wife believed me, how do you deal with society? The charges were dropped because there was no evidence. Kuch kiya hi nahi tha, woh evidence kahan se laate? Par meri zindagi ke 2.5 saal nikal gaye uss case mein aur kuch nahi bacha. Jeetne ke baad bhi meri zindagi nahi bachi. Since then, I have been helping others to fight such cases.” Avinash Kumar, a government employee, said, “I started talking to a girl online . We met once and after our meeting, she proposed marriage. But when I rejected the offer, she accused me of rape. She alleged that I raped her and then I married her the next day. As per the FIR, she also claimed that I made her speak to my parents and then we asked for Rs 25 lakh dowry. Jabki humare beech aisa kuch nahi hua tha. I can lose my job any day. It is mentally taxing for me and my family. My career will be finished and the thought kills me. I have come here today because I hope if a Men’s Commission is in place, maybe a life can be saved from a false accusation.”*Name changed on request
