Ghaziabad: TV actor approaches NHRC after 'torture' by UP Police

Ghaziabad police has handed over the case to Circle Officer Aparna Gautam to probe the allegations. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Ghaziabad: After a TV actor accused Indirapuram police of 'third degree' torture, the senior officials of the Ghaziabad police has handed over the case to Circle Officer (CO) Aparna Gautam to probe the allegations. The incident occurred on May 12 when the TV actor Ansh Arora was involved in a brawl at Shoprix shopping mall.

The probe in the case came after the actor approached the National Human Rights Commission alleging torture by police. The video clip of the incident shows the actor damaging computer sets at the shop in anger.

“Initially, a non-cognizable offence report under IPC Section 427 was registered against him. Later, Ansh Arora was seen in video footage damaging the store’s property and arguing with the staff. On that basis, we added IPC sections 323, 504 and 506 to the NCR,” the report quoted SSP Upendra Kumar Agrawal as saying.

The actor, who has worked in several TV serials including ones produced by Ekta Kapoor, said the police treated him like a criminal.

The brawl erupted when the actor visited Shoprix mall on the intervening night of May 11 and 12 and ordered a hotdog. But when he was told to wait for an hour, Ansh started to argue with the staff and broke computer systems.

The actor said that he visited the mall again the next day along with his brother to apologise for his rude behaviour the previous night. But the mall staff called the police and he and his brother was taken away by the Indirapuram police.

Ansh Arora alleged that he was put in lockup at the police station and was beaten up with a leather strap. The actor also alleged that the police officers threatened him with electric shocks.

However, the Ghaziabad police has rejected the actor's allegations claiming he is making up a case to avoid criminal action for alleged vandalism in a Vaishali mall.
