Movie Review: Chhota Bheem Kung Fu Dhamaka

critic's rating: 2.5/5

Trailer : Chhota Bheem Kung Fu Dhamaka

After regaling viewers in films such as Chhota Bheem and the Curse of Damyaan, Chhota Bheem and the Throne of Bali, and Chhota Bheem: Himalayan Adventure the ever popular TV character gets another big-screen iteration in Chhota Bheem Kung Fu Dhamaka.The action shifts to China in this film. Chhota Bheem and his group of friends, Chutki, Raju, Kalia, Dholu, Bholu and Jaggu the monkey are shown to be Kung Fu experts and travel from Dholakpur to China to take part in the annual Kung Fu contest organised by Emperor Jian and held on Princess Kia’s birthday every year. The princess was blessed by a legendary dragon, who appeared out of the blue when she was born and fixed his mark on her. Since that day, people began to see her as the dragon’s favourite and the King declared her has his heir. The king’s nephew Zuhu wanted the throne for himself and tried to kill the princess when she was an infant. He was banished from the kingdom as a result and swore revenge. He not only wants to be the emperor but wants the firestone which gives the dragon its powers. He kidnaps Kia for that purpose. Bheem, his Dholakpur gang and some various other warriors gathered for the tournament embark on Kia’s rescue. How they come about it forms the crux of the film...As the film is set in China and involves Kung Fu, be prepared to find a mysterious stranger stepping in to teach Chhota Bheem some cool new techniques. Like Kung Fu Panda before him, Chhota Bheem learns that the answers lie within him. He gets a better grip on his emotions, understands the true nature of Kung Fu, and ultimately, is able to defeat evil Zuhu.One must say that the film is mounted better than the earlier full-length affairs. The artwork is bright and colourful and the 3D effects are nice as well. The pink coloured dragon has been rendered quite well. Care has been taken to incorporate the Chinese elements in the frames.The plus points are marred by the inclusion of songs, which bog down the proceedings and unnecessarily stretch the runtime. Also, the proceedings are so predictable that you know beforehand that Chhota Bheem will rise to the occasion and rescue the princess. One wishes that the plot twists were more intricate and the level of difficulty much harder. Also, a better representation of Chinese characters in the rescue -- it was their princess after all -- would have added another layer to the film.Having said all that, Chhota Bheem is a character whom children look up to as a laddoo eating superhero, so perhaps the target audience won’t mind such kind of inconsistencies...
