Manoj Tiwari slams Mamata Banerjee for Bengal violence, says ‘Mamata didi is now Mamata dadagiri’

Manoj Tiwari | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: Delhi BJP president Manoj Tiwari launched a scathing attack on West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and said that ‘Mamata didi’ is now ‘Mamata dadagiri’. Tiwari gave this statement while condemning violence in the state.

Tiwari also said that Banerjee doesn't trust people of West Bengal and claimed that during polls, she attacked BJP workers and did not allow people to vote.

Tiwari’s statement comes after a BJP delegation met top Election Commission officials and demanded re-polling in constituencies where the violence took place during all phases of the Lok Sabha polls.

The delegation also requested deployment of central forces till the model code of conduct is in force.

"We have met the Election Commissioners and informed them about the violence that had taken place in all the seven phases of the Lok Sabha polls and requested for re-polling in all the violence-affected constituencies,” said Goyal and added that there is a possibility of violence even after counting of votes.

He further requested the Commission to deploy the central forces in EVM strongrooms till the end of counting to ensure fair counting.

Accusing WB CM of threatening BJP candidates, poll agents and party sympathisers, Goyal further urged the EC to take note of the matter. Goyal was accompanied by Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman and senior BJP leaders.

After the polling ended in West Bengal several persons were injured in post-poll clashes between political parties. As per the media reports, many polling agents of opposition parties were beaten up and their houses and vehicles were attacked after voting ended in nine constituencies.

As per the exit poll prediction the BJP is set to win big in the Lok Sabha elections and could hit the double-figure mark up from its 2014 tally of two seats.

Times Now-VMR exit poll has predicted that the saffron party will win 11 out of 42 seats in the state.
