Telangana minor's gang rape: 5 days on, police arrest five accused

Days after the gang rape of a minor girl in Telangana's Siddipet, police arrested five accused in the case on Sunday. One of the accused is still absconding. The incident took place on the 15th of this month.

According to the Siddipet police, the survivor alleged that her friend along with a few others gang-raped her at an isolated place. Police said that one of the main accused befriended her over the phone and convinced her to go out with him, before committing the crime on the same night.

Based on the complaint from the survivor, the police have registered a case under IPC sections 376 (Punishment for Rape) and 366 (Abducting women against her will), and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act 2012, along with SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.

According to police, Shivaratri Venkat, the main accused who befriended her over phone, asked her to come out with him. After she went with him, he and his friends took her to an isolated place on the outskirts of Gajwel and raped her.

While five of the accused are from Gajwel town, one hails from the same village as the survivor. All the accused are in the age group of 19-23. Speaking to the media, Siddipet ACP P Sathyanarayana said, "On 18th (Saturday), we held five of the six accused and upon their questioning, they admitted to the offence.”

Two special teams headed by the ACP caught two accused at Kompalli in Hyderabad in a mall, while three others were nabbed at Gajwel and Jagadevpur.

The accused have been identified as Shivaratri Venkat (21), Shivaratri Anjaneyulu (21), Alankunta Parashuram (23), Alakunta Rajinikanth (19) and Mohammed Rahim Pasha (19).

Speaking to TNM, an investigation officer said that the absconding accused will be arrested soon.

Police have seized three bikes and four cell phones, along with a pair of gold earrings from the accused.

The five accused were sent to judicial remand on Monday.

Police sought the intervention of Women and Child Welfare department officials, who took the survivor to a state-run child home.
