Noida: 45-year-old NTPC official rapes 11-year-old on pretext of giving her tuition

The accused, who is employed by NTPC, is currently on deputation with Power Finance Corporation. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Noida: Police in Noida have arrested a National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) official for allegedly raping an 11-year-old girl for over a year on the pretext of giving her tuition at his home. The matter came to light when the victim revealed to her school teacher about her ordeal. The girl is a student of a prominent school in the city.

Later, the girl's teacher informed the victim's parents who lodged an FIR on Sunday against the 45-year-old NTPC official. The accused has been identified as Akhil Gupta.

The accused who has been booked under section 376 (rape) of Indian Penal Code and sections 3 and 4 of the POCSO Act, was arrested on Tuesday. According to a report in Times of India, Gupta has a college going daughter and a son who studies in Class 8.

The accused had close ties with the girl's family and the victim would often visit Gupta's house to get help in her studies. Both the victim and NTPC official reside in the same housing society.

In a written complaint to police, the girl's mother said, “The director of the school asked us to come for a meeting. We took along two close friends from the housing society. After returning from the school around 4.30 pm, the child kept sleeping till 8 pm. When we asked her about her problems, she started crying."

The victim's mother also alleged,"Earlier, he would only kiss her on the cheeks, but later he started kissing her on the lips. The misbehaviour increased with time. At one point, he would grope her and even assault her."

Acording to police, accused NTPC official would make the victim and his son study in different rooms. when the girl came to his house, the accused strictly instructed his wife not to disturb him while he “taught” the kids.

The FIR stated that the victim's parents received a call from her school teacher on May 16 and were told that Gupta had been assaulting their daughter for over a year.

The accused, who is employed by NTPC, is currently on deputation with Power Finance Corporation.
