Delhi: Brother stabs childhood friend 7 times for molesting his sister

After a heated argument, the accused stabbed his childhood friend seven times in front of his parents (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Delhi: A brother took vengeance for his sister's molestation by stabbing the alleged accused. The brother, who has now surrendered at the Ambedkar Nagar police station took the law in his hands after he lost his cool and stabbed the 19-year-old who allegedly molested his sister. The brother stabbed his childhood friend after a heated argument on Saturday in front of his parents.

The accused brother went to the house of the deceased who lived with his family. He went to his house and stabbed him seven times in front of his parents after a heated argument. The incident is reported to have taken place in South Delhi at around 10:30 am on Saturday.

Also Read: Human trafficking suspect taken into custody in Kochi

The police told the Indian Express that the family of the teen made attempts to save their son's life but were terrorised by the accused. After the incident, the accused successfully escaped as the family started raising an alarm for help. A police officer stated that the victim was rushed to a hospital, where he passed away. He also stated that a team was formed under ACP Vijay Singh Chandel for conducting raids in addition to filing an FIR.



Much to the surprise of the officials, the accused surrendered at the Ambedkar Nagar police station. The accused, in his statement to the police, said that the victim, who was his childhood friend, was a regular visitor at his house and even used to stay over at his place. The accused added that the deceased had visited him for dinner on Thursday night where the two slept on the first floor with the brother of the accused.

However, the victim excused himself to go to the washroom after which he went to the room of his friend's sister on the second floor and allegedly molested her. The police also added that the deceased fled the scene after the girl started shouting. No complaint, however, has been filed by the girl or her family in relation to the alleged molestation.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
