UN hailed for sending notice to India on HR abuses in IOK

Srinagar, May 21, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir Chairman, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai has appreciated the UN’s effort to seek from India details of cases, related to torture and killings of civilians in Kashmir.

Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai in a statement issued in Srinagar, today, strongly condemned India’s refusal to provide any clarifications on such cases. He also hailed Association of Parents of Disappeared Persons (APDP) and J and K Coalition of Civil Society (JKCCS) for doing an amazing job to highlight human rights abuses and releasing a comprehensive report on torture and brazen human rights violations in Kashmir.

Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai said the United Nations and UNHRC have not only been mandated to investigate but to intervene, if a state fails to conduct impartial investigations, or refuses to investigate the cases of gross human rights violations. He said world community and UN must take cognizance of the brazen rejection of report by India and New Delhi should be isolated internationally over this serious act of vandalism of international commitments.

Sehrai said, India must be held accountable for these human rights violations. Kashmiris have suffered immensely for the past three decades and helplessly eyeing world community and international bodies for their rescue. “We would therefore like the Human Rights Council to take account of the evidence with a view to mount an investigation into the serious oppression and human rights violations suffered by the people of Kashmir,” he added.

He expressed concern over impunity for human rights violations and lack of access to justice. He said that the draconian laws, Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) and the Public Safety Act (PSA) had created structures that “obstruct the normal course of law, impede accountability and jeopardize the right to remedy for victims of human rights violations”.

The Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Muslim Conference, Shabbir Ahmed Dar, in a statement also welcomed the clarifications sought by the United Nations Human Rights Council of 76 cases of killings and torture of civilians by Indian forces. The Special Rapporteurs Agnes Callamard, Danius Puras and Nils Melzer wrote a letter to India asking it for clarifications in the scheduled time of sixty days, but India failed to comply with.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
