Chennai: Angry youth stabs mom to death, hurts stepdad

Chennai: A woman and her second husband were brutally attacked and stabbed by her 22-year-old son in Mannivakkam on Tuesday night. Police said the son killed her mother as he believes his mother's illicit affair triggered his father to commit suicide a few years ago.

According to police, Anbu, a construction worker and a resident of Mannivakkam in Vandoor allegedly committed suicide at his residence a few years ago.. Anbu lived by his wife Bhavani( 40) and three children including the murderer Sampath( 22).

Sources said, after Anbu's death, Bhavani developed a relationship with one Raja alias Rajkumar( 35) of Somangalam in Tambaram. When Bhavani told the children's about her relationship they allegedly opposed her relationship with him . However, Two years ago the couple got married and lived at Rajkumar's house in Somangalam, whereas the three children's stayed at Mannivakkam.

Police sources said Sampath warned the couple not to see his sister and brother and to get out of their lives. Meanwhile, on Tuesday Night Bhavani and Rajkumar visited a relation house in Mannivakkam and the couple on their way back to Tambaram met Sampath on Mannivakkam Main road.

Sampath

Angered Sampath had gone to his house, picked up a kitchen knife and allegedly chased the couple on a two-wheeler. Police said on seeing Sampath Rajkumar rode the vehicle at high speed, lost control and hit a speed breaker. The couple fell off the bike when Sampath attacked and brutally stabbed her mother in full public view. .When Rajkumar came to her rescue he was also attacked by him.

Passersby caught Sampath and alerted the Vandalur Otteri Police. The police who rushed to the spot sent them to the Chrompet government hospital where Bhavani was declared dead. Rajkumar was referred to the Rajiv Gandhi government hospital where he is undergoing treatment.

Meanwhile, Sampath was arrested and he confessed to having committed the crime. During interrogation, he told the police that her mother had in an illicit relationship with Rajkumar even when his father was alive. He alleged that his father committed suicide because of Bhavani's affair. Further investigations are on.
