Probe in limbo as investigators can’t reach ‘ex-wife’ Shimla

The investigation into the much-talked about Biman aircraft hijacking attempt case by one Polash Ahmed on February 24 at Chattogram Shah Amanat International Airport has allegedly been hindered due to non-cooperation of Polash’s “former” wife, yesteryear film actress Samsun Nahar Shimla.

Although three months have passed, investigators are yet to talk to Shimla over the issue, while motive behind the hijack is yet to be ascertained.

“We are trying to contact Polash’s wife Shimla. She needs to be questioned in person in connection with the case, to find answers to some questions raised during investigation,” Inspector Rajesh Barua of Chattogram Metropolitan Police Counter Terrorism (CT) unit told The Daily Star.

“Police are yet to confirm the motive of Polash behind the attempt but we are looking if there is any third party or mastermind involved with the incident,” said Rajesh, also the investigating officer (IO) of the case.

Since Shimla is not listed as an accused or witness in the case, it has not been possible for police to be more assertive with the family, the IO said. As she appears to be an important part of the probe, a notice will be served at Shimla’s permanent and temporary addresses, to appear before the investigation team.

Family members of Shimla said she has been in Mumbai of India since before the incident. Her brother Md Selim told The Daily Star, “She is in Mumbai for last five to six months.”

“We don’t know when she will come to Bangladesh,” said Selim, without explaining further.

While asked about the location of Shimla, IO Rajesh said, “We also came to know that Shimla is in Mumbai. We hope we will get important information once we can talk to her.”

Deputy Commissioner (DC) of CT Md Shahidullah said they have recorded statements of 18 witnesses including the cabin crews and pilots so far.

According to a report on Prothom Alo dated May 21, 2018, Shimla was signed to do a Hindi-language film “Safar”, and had begun filming there in May 2018.

Meanwhile, a day after the incident, Shimla -- who rose to prominence as the leading lady of the 1999 film “Madam Fuli” -- in a video message to an online news portal had said that she divorced Polash in November 2018.

Polash apparently tried to hijack a Boeing 737-800 aircraft of Bangladesh Biman on February 24, forcing an emergency landing at Chattogram’s Shah Amanat International Airport. He allegedly tried to enter the cockpit brandishing a toy gun.

All 148 passengers and cabin crew were evacuated safely. Polash was killed in an eight-minute operation by members of the army’s para-commando unit.

Investigators later said it was a toy gun and the explosives were just small pieces of plastic pipes wrapped in red tape.

Debabrata Sarker, technology assistant at Shah Amanat International Airport in Chattogram, filed a case on February 25 night with Patenga Police Station, in which he said the suspect was seen carrying suspicious-looking objects during the hijack bid 15 minutes after the plane took off from Dhaka.
