Dramatic drug bust in Kochi: Dealer tries to shoot down cops, arrested with 6.5kgs of hashish

Dramatic drug bust in Kochi: Dealer tries to shoot down cops, arrested with 6.5kgs of hashish

Varghese Judson, a resident of Puthuvype in Kochi, was captured after a tense standoff with officials.

news Crime

The Excise Department in Kerala seized 6.5 kilograms of a hashish-like drug called charas worth Rs 13 crore from a Kochi native on Wednesday, following a dramatic operation. It is the largest quantity of charas to have been seized in Kerala.

The drug was confiscated from Varghese Judson, a resident of Puthuvype in Kochi, who is allegedly associated with international drug dealers. He was captured through well-planned operation executed by Excise Department officials in Kochi.



Varghese Judson

Judson was captured by the Excise Department on Wednesday afternoon at International Container Transshipment Terminal (ICTT) road in Kochi. During the tense standoff, which caused panic among bystanders on the scene, Judson tried to shoot officers with a pistol he was carrying. Officials retaliated with a service revolver and held Judson at gunpoint.

Judson then tried to flee, but officials tackled him and snatched his gun away. Within a few minutes, the situation was brought under control, excise officials said in the press meet held on Wednesday.

Drugs peddled under cover of autistic son

The officials managed to capture Judson after months of effort and planning. “About 50 youth were held over the past couple of months and this lead us to the Judson,” according to an official at the press meet.

Judson was transporting the drug charas to Kerala from Nepal via Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Bengaluru. “Judson has a son who is autistic. In most of his trips, he takes his son with him so that he can escape from the stringent police checking, if there is any,” excise officials said.

According to officials, Judson single-handedly peddled drugs. Department authorities have repeatedly tried to nab Judson, but each time he has managed to flee.

“But this time we planned thoroughly. An official among us impersonated a customer and contacted Judson through one of his close aides,” the official said.



Excise department officials with Judson after seizing the drugs

The National Investigation Agency (NIA) had also given information about Judson to the Excise Department. Judson had been notified that he was being followed by central agencies, which made him sell whatever drugs he had left with him. The Excise Department used this opportunity to capture him.

In the international market, a kilogram of charas would cost Rs 1.5 crore. Six-and-a-half kilograms were seized from Judson, according to officials, but holding just 100 grams of charas could land a person in prison for 10 years.

Rishiraj Singh awards excise team

Excise Commissioner Rishiraj Singh IPS awarded Rs 25,000 to the team of officials who conducted the massive drug operation. The team was lead by Excise Special Squad Inspector P Sreeraj.
