Increasing vehicles, inadequate infrastructure and manpower! Traffic congestion in Thane claims another life

The life of an innocent bus driver was lost owing to the poor management of traffic in Dombivli and Kalyan (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: Twin cities Kalyan and Dombivli have been facing issues in providing proper infrastructure to the increased number of vehicles. A question on the poor state of affairs was recently raised when a bus driver, Vasant Shingote died after not being able to reach the hospital due to traffic congestion.

The 50-year-old, Vasant Shingote who was employed with the Kalyan Dombivli Municipal Transport (KDMT) as a bus driver passed away because of the delay caused in reaching the hospital due to stagnant traffic movement. A rather challenging development, the number of vehicles has been increasing every year by 50,000 to a lakh since the year 2010, and poor infrastructure in the cities has proved to be incapable of managing the same.

A report by the Kalyan Regional Transport Authority (RTO) suggested that the number of vehicles in the two cities has increased from 5.43 lakh to around 9 lakh in five years. Despite the notable increase, no traffic lights were installed and no additional manpower was appointed to ensure efficient management of traffic. A KDMC official told the Hindustan Times that traffic signals could not be installed owing to a lack of response from maintenance companies.

Also Read: Delhi: Brother stabs childhood friend 7 times for molesting his sister

Reportedly, the traffic police department blamed the KDMC for poor management. Assistant Commissioner of traffic police, Ulhasnagar, stated that the KDMC was supposed to install traffic signals and that even after writing to them quite a few times, there was no response from their side.

According to HT, there are 260 traffic personnel manning around 9 lakh vehicles in Kalyan and Dombivli, leaving a requirement of up to 200 more men in order to ensure efficient management. On speaking to the regular commuters, it was also discovered that since August 2018, the traffic on the Kalyan-Shilplata route has deteriorated.

Citizens have also stated that the twin cities need proper infrastructure in order to ensure smooth traffic movement. Wider roads, more manpower and attention to the issue needs to be given by the concerned authorities so that they can evenly balance the increase in vehicles.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
