Bhopal: Father awarded life imprisonment for raping 13-year-old daughter

The heinous crime took place in a village under the jurisdiction of Themi police station of the district in April 2018 (Representative image). | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Bhopal: A man was awarded life term imprisonment by a court in Narsinghpur for raping his 13-year-old daughter. The court of additional district and session's judge of Narsinghpur sentenced the accused father with imprisonment till death. A fine of Rs 5,000 was also imposed on him.

The heinous crime took place in a village under the jurisdiction of Themi police station of the district in April 2018, according to a report in The Times of India. The survivor, in her complaint to the police, said that when her mother and sister had gone to the fields, her father dragged her into the house and raped her.



The FIR registered at Themi police station also mentioned that the accused father had raped the minor girl three times in the past also. The survivor finally took the courage to confide in her mother after which the mother and daughter went to the police station to file a complaint.

Also Read: Constable shot at in Bihar's Gaya, investigation underway

In another appalling incident reported from Haryana, a drunken father allegedly raped his 12-year-old daughter at their house in Manesar earlier this month. The man who had fled after committing the crime was arrested a day later.

The girl and her elder brother were sent back home from school after the girl fell ill. However, the father sent his son back to school. While the minor was resting, the accused father locked her room and raped her. When the survivor's mother returned home in the evening, she found her daughter crying. The girl narrated her ordeal to her mother after which the police was informed and a case was registered against the accused father.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
