Jaipur: Doctor of a leading hospital, 4 others rape, mutilate woman

When the victim came to know that Deepesh had duped her, she confronted him and demanded the money back. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Jaipur: A resident doctor of a leading hospital and four other persons have raped and mutilated a 26-year-old woman in Kanota area of Jaipur on Tuesday. All the five accused have been booked by the police.

The three accused have been identified as Dr Anurag, Deepesh Chaturvedi, Kapil Sharma. Two other accused are yet to be arrested and identified.

The accused allegedly mutilated the victim's private parts and burnt her with cigarettes. According to a report in Times of India, the accused were booked after the matter came to light on Wednesday. The victim was found in a semi-naked condition on a road outside the Kanota jungle in Jaipur.

In her complaint to the police, the victim said she dumped in the jungle after she was raped by the accused. Later, the victim regained consciousness and managed to come on to the road to reach local police station.

“Police also confirmed that her body bore injury marks but details would be verified only after medical examination is conducted," the report quoted DCP (East) Rahul Jain as saying.

The Police officer said special teams have been formed to probe the matter further. According to preliminary statement by the victim, her ordeal began last year when she lodged a harassment complaint against one Kapil Sharma.

A police officer said, “Around the same time when she filed the case, she came in contact with Deepesh, who had introduced himself to her as the vice president of the human rights commission. Deepesh had taken Rs 45,000 from her to expedite her case against Kapil."

When the victim came to know that Deepesh had duped her, she confronted him and demanded the money back. The police officer added, "The victim went to meet Deepesh at his home at 9pm in the night on Tuesday. When she reached accused's home where he allegedly hit her in the head and she fell unconscious."

When the victim woke up, she found herself surrounded by Deepesh, Kapil, Dr Anurag and the two other unidentified persons. The accused then raped and tortured her for hours inflicting injuries on her private parts.
