A case for healthy politics

Kamal Haasan

extremist

Nathuram Godse”

actor

Rajiv Gandhi

In an unprecedented order on’s bail application, Madras High Court said his statement constituted hate speechThe path to terrible judicial orders is paved with misconceived, even if good, intentions. The latest manifestation of this is a judgment passed by the Madras High Court saying “do not identify terrorist with his religion”. Actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan allegedly said in a public meeting that “the firstin Independent India was a Hindu, who is. An FIR was filed against him for inciting hatred and Haasan went to court seeking anticipatory bail.In an application for anticipatory bail, all that the court needs to decide is whether or not the applicant will be granted bail the moment he or she is arrested. In this case, however, the court overreached and launched into a discussion on the merits of what Haasan allegedly said.I reiterate, in such an application the court is not required to give a finding on whether the alleged act of the applicant constitutes a crime or not. It is not supposed to pronounce guilt or innocence. For some reasons, though, the court chose to disregard this in Haasan’s case.In court, the’s lawyers insisted that all Haasan did was state a historical fact, to which the court’s response was the historical facts must also be made in the right ‘context’. Who will decide what the right context is? Must politicians now get their speeches pre-approved by courts? There is no law and no judgment in this country which prescribes and defines the correct ‘context’. Leave aside the fact that this was a simple bail application; even if this was the judgment on merits, all that the court would have to do is give a finding on whether or not Haasan’s speech falls under the penal provisions, which says nothing about ‘context’.In its order, the court laments increasing communalisation and hate speech in the society (which is fine). But in this case, it has practically pre-judged Haasan’s case and diminished the chances of him getting a fair trial.Outside of the courtroom, I would posit that Haasan’s statement has to be seen in the ‘context’ in which it was made. Multiple BJP politicians said that Hindus can never be terrorists. This is a statement which leads to inciting hate – its effect is to say that religion ‘X’ is superior to all other religions and therefore its believers can never engage in a certain vile act. These politicians did not say that it is wrong to link religion to terrorism but they singled out one religion, declared that it is superior to all others and, in the process, implicitly conveyed that other religions were inferior.It is in response to this that many politicians, including Haasan, tried to counter an insidious claim by pointing out what they believed was a fact which contradicted the original claim. One of the largest terrorist organisations in the world – one which maintained a navy, fighter aircraft with which they bombed military installations, had courts and a bank and a radio station, assassinated at least two heads of state including Indian Prime Minister– was the LTTE, which was mostly comprised Hindus.The point I’m making is simple. People from all religions can be murderers, rapists, robbers and terrorists. Politicians who claim otherwise do so in an attempt to hand out a superiority complex in exchange for votes. One also hopes that political discourses were more about issues that affect the common folk instead of which religion has terrorists and which doesn’t or how much we dislike Pakistan. The Madras HC cites an excerpt from an earlier judgment passed by the court:“One should not forget the fact that many cadres die hard cadres. Unless, the leaders themselves decide to condemn the cadres for hate politics and encourage them to practice healthy politics, the present ugly trend cannot be put to an end. The cadre should be taught about values of democracy and not to indulge in filing frivolous cases like the case on hand then only the onslaught on the democracy at least could be contained if not prevented (sic).”Maybe someday; in another life, in another time.
