Karnataka turmoil: Congress MLA lands in hospital after 'friendly fight' with colleagues, 'all is well', says party

Follow us on The political drama was unfolded in the southern state last week, when lawmakers from both BJP and Congress went missing.

In an ugly twist to the ongoing political drama in Karnataka, a Congress Legislator was hospitalised after being allegedly injured during a brawl with other party lawmakers, who are reportedly under the BJP radar, at a resort on the city outskirts.

According to reports, Karnataka Congress MLA Anand Singh had to be hospitalised after an alleged brawl with other party legislators while staying at a resort in Bengaluru.

However, Congress said that all was well within the party.

"Anand Singh was taken to hospital after there was a friendly fight between few MLAs at the resort. Everything is all right and Anand is taking rest at the hospital," state's Food and Civil Supplies Minister BZ Zameer Ahmed Khan told reporters.

Singh is a legislator from Vijayanagara Assembly segment in Ballari district. He was shifted to a private hospital in the city centre.

The party did not share the details of the attack on Singh.

Interestingly, Karnataka Congress party leaders, including DK Shivakumar, denied any such attack on Singh.

Reacting to the incident, the state unit BJP alleged that Congress MLAs "fear for life" under Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy government.

"Congress MLAs fear for life under HDK government. Siddaramaiah preaches everyone about Constitutional values, we demand (Congress state unit president) Dinesh Gundu Rao and Siddaramaiah to immediately suspend their party MLA responsible for the attack on Anand Singh," the party tweeted.

The southern state`s Congress legislators have been residing at a private resort on the city outskirts since Friday night, after a party meeting was chaired by Siddaramaiah at the state legislature building Vidhana Soudha, as a show of legislators` strength.

The party`s senior leaders and MLAs at the resort have been holding discussions over the alleged poaching attempts by the Bharatiya Janata Party and preparing for the ensuing Lok Sabha elections in April-May, the state Congress said.

Amid the political turbulence, Congress MLA Byrathi Suresh has courted a fresh controversy after media reports of former chief minister Siddaramaiah receiving a luxury car from him surfaced.

Denying the reports, Congress leader and minister D K Shivakumar said Siddaramaiah has not been gifted Mercedes-Benz car by Suresh, but it had been given for his travelling purposes.

"There is no gift or anything. We sometimes take our friends' vehicle to travel. There is no issue.

Is there any record that he has received a gift or anything? Nothing, no record," he said.

The political drama was unfolded in the southern state last week, when lawmakers from both BJP and Congress went missing.

In the 224-member Assembly, BJP has 104 members, Congress-79, JDS 37, BSP, KPJP and Independent one each, besides Speaker. BSP, KPJP and an Independent are supporting the coalition.

Latest India News
