Girl's family sets boy's house on fire in Uttar Pradesh after couple elopes

The fire was doused and no one was harmed, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Muzaaffarnagar: At a time the entire country was glued to their television sets, a drama was playing out in a small village of Uttar Pradesh on Thursday. Relatives of a woman from Rasulpur Ghari village burnt down the house of a man who she allegedly eloped with earlier this week. The 20-year-old woman and 26-year-old man have been dating for some months before they decided to run away, said police on Friday.

Kin of the woman had been agitating for the past couple of days over her decision to elope with the boy and took the decision to take matters into their own hands on Thursday when they set fire to the boy's family home as well as a house owned by his uncle. Fortunately, no one was harmed since the boy's family and that of his uncle's had already left their homes anticipating violence by the woman's relatives.

Eyewitness accounts asserted that a team of police personnel and fire tenders were rushed to the spot and managed to douse the fire which had engulfed the two houses. Security presence in the village has also been heightened with the aim of curbing any further instances of violence.

Meanwhile, a case under section 436 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) corresponding to charges of mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to destroy a house, has been filed against 10 people, including four women. Station house officer (SHO) of Miranpur, Pankaj Tyagi told news agency PTI that the girl's family members also filed a complaint in this regard which led to local law enforcement agencies tracking down the couple.

A much similar situation had emerged in Hasanpura area of Jaipur in Rajasthan August of last year when families of a boy and a girl ran away after they were denied permission by their respective families to marry each other. Additional police force had to be deployed in the area in light of threats of communal violence owing to the boy and the girl hailing from different religious communities. However, the woman in a statement to the police said that she eloped with the boy at her own will and without any pressure or coercion.
