Former pastor, residing in Port Austin, faces licensing action

LANSING — A former pastor residing in Port Austin, who has been temporarily removed from the ministry since 2016, is facing licensing action by the Michigan Attorney General's Office.

Lawrence Ventline also currently is being investigated by the Oakland County Sheriff's Office, Sgt. Dale Brown told the Tribune Friday.

AG Dana Nessel reported it's alleged Ventline sexually assaulted a Michigan resident, and he is still actively counseling children.

Nessel on Friday said her department took licensing action last week against Ventline. The news came during a press conference Friday as the AG's office announced arrests and charges in its clergy abuse investigation.

Nessel said Ventline had a professional educationally limited counseling license through the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (LARA).

"Just two weeks ago, we confirmed he (Ventline) is still actively taking on children as his clients," Nessel said. "His counselor's license was summarily suspended last week by LARA."

"We filed an administrative licensing complaint against him," she added. "Unfortunately, his crimes were outside the statue of limitation, so he could not be criminally charged."

Ventline told the Tribune Friday that the claim is "a bunch of bologna with some guy trying to make some money from attorneys."

He said he's still a priest — and has been for 43 years — and that he retired in February. He said Nessel's accusations were false claims and reiterated several times his case was "dismissed and thrown out."

"What kind of claim is this bullshit?" he told the Tribune.

However, the Archdiocese of Detroit has confirmed that he has been temporarily removed from the ministry since 2016, and that prior to that restriction, Ventline had not been assigned to full-time parish ministry for nearly 20 years.

He last served in a full-time role from 1996-97 as an administrator at the St. Mark Parish in Harsens Island.

Ventline last assignment as a pastor was at St. Joesph the Worker Parish, in Lake Orion, from 1987 until 1990.

"It was really just a personnel matter," said Ned McGrath, director of public affairs for the Archdiocese of Detroit, in regard to why Ventline was not a pastor since 1990. "He didn't have a full-time assignment. He did assist in some parishes, but was not a pastor or an associate pastor.

"It was a personnel decision ... we do that for some of our priests," McGrath said. "Not every priest we have is a pastor or an associate pastor and it was just for that reason."

Following his last full-time assignment, Ventline was still associated with the Archdiocese, but in a lesser role.

"I don't have all the things that he was doing," McGrath said. "I think he would have probably helped in some parishes from time to time, saying a mass or something. He has a license for counseling and he was probably doing that, but I'm not sure."

McGrath added that Ventline still answered to the archdiocese.

While he is restricted from the ministry, Ventline is supposed to be prohibited from representing himself as a priest, even though he did so to the Tribune on Friday afternoon. He also is prohibited from wearing clerical attire, and exercising any form of church ministry.

Regarding the AG's investigation, it was announced Friday that five men who were priests have been charged with a total of 21 counts of criminal sexual conduct.

Charges were filed as follows:

• Timothy Michael Crowley, 69, Lansing Diocese, was charged in Washtenaw County with four felony counts of first-degree criminal sexual conduct (CSC), a maximum sentence of life in prison and a lifetime of electronic monitoring, and four felony counts of second-degree CSC — a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison. Crowley, who was a priest in various parishes, including St. Thomas Rectory in Ann Arbor, was arrested Thursday in Tempe, Arizona.

• Neil Kalina, 63, Archdiocese of Detroit, was charged in Macomb County with four felony counts of second-degree CSC, a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison and a lifetime of electronic monitoring. Kalina, who was a priest at St. Kiernan Catholic Church in Shelby Township, was arrested Thursday in Littlerock, California.

• Vincent DeLorenzo, 80, Lansing Diocese, was charged in Genesee County with three felony counts of first-degree CSC, a maximum sentence of life in prison and a lifetime of electronic monitoring, and three felony counts of second-degree CSC, a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison. DeLorenzo, who was a priest at Holy Redeemer Church in Burton, was arrested Thursday in Marion County, Florida.

• Patrick Casey, 55, Archdiocese of Detroit, was charged in Wayne County with one felony count of third-degree CSC, a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison. Casey, who was a priest at St. Theodore of Canterbury Parish in Westland, was arrested Thursday in Oak Park, Michigan.

• Jacob Vellian, 84, Kalamazoo Diocese, was charged with two counts of rape, a maximum sentence of life in prison. Vellian was a priest at St. John the Evangelist Parish, Benton Harbor, and now lives in Kerala, India.

"Although we have charged these men with very serious crimes, I want to remind everyone that they are innocent until proven guilty by a court of law," Nessel said.
