Former Southwest Michigan priest charged with rape, awaits extradition in India

KALAMAZOO, MI -- A former visiting priest in the Diocese of Kalamazoo was charged with rape alongside four other former priests facing criminal sexual conduct charges, Michigan Attorney General Dana Nessel announced Friday.

Jacob Vellian, 84, who once served in the Diocese of Kalamazoo, was charged with two counts of rape, which carries a potential maximum sentence of life in prison, according to a press release from Nessel’s office.

Vellian was a priest at St. John the Evangelist Parish in Benton Harbor and now lives in Kerala, India, the release said. According to the felony complaint filed by the state of Michigan, Vellian is accused of sexual abuse of a minor during the years of 1973-74.

Charges being brought against the five men were announced in a press conference Friday, May 23, in Lansing. Four of the men have been arrested. Vellian awaits extradition in India, the release said.

A victim, identified as Jane Doe in the complaint, was a 15-year-old parishioner who served as a volunteer administrative assistant to a priest at St. John the Evangelist. About a month after she started in the position, Jane Doe alleged Vellian began to compliment her, provide gifts and rub her neck and shoulders, the complaint said.

The complaint claims she was physically molested on several occasions by Vellian. He allegedly touched her and said he was “praying for her and trying to fill her soul with the Holy Spirit,” the complaint said.

Jane Doe reported the allegations in 2002 and again in 2010 at which time she was referred to the Benton Harbor Police Department. According to the complaint, the Diocese of Kalamazoo found her report to be credible.

Vellian was a visiting priest from India for one year during the 1970s, according to a statement from the Diocese of Kalamazoo. The diocese has “fully cooperated with this ongoing investigation and will continue to do so,” the statement said.

“As a Church, we continue unite in our prayers for all survivors. We remain steadfast in our commitment to promote greater protection and safeguards of all people," the statement said.

In March, a support group for men and women abused by members of the Roman Catholic Church called on the Diocese of Kalamazoo to publicly list the former Kalamazoo-area priests who have credible allegations against them.

Ann Phillips Browning, who came forward with allegations of abuse by Vellian at St. John’s Catholic Church in Benton Harbor in the 1970s, has since returned to the Catholic Church and said in March that she has become a “watchdog" on the issue of clergy sex abuse.

Browning detailed her story in an interview with MLive/The Saginaw News in February. She outlined the emotional challenges she has since endured, including depression, anxiety, panic attacks and an eating disorder.

“I was a victim and for years I lived as a victim. I let what happened to me control me,” Browning said. “I’ve gone through years of therapy, hard work, and I feel I’ve now come out a survivor that’s strong enough to speak up and to advocate for others.”

The four other men charged in Nessel’s announcement Friday are:

Timothy Michael Crowley , 69, Lansing Diocese, was charged in Washtenaw County with four felony counts of Criminal Sexual Conduct (CSC) 1, a maximum sentence of life in prison and a lifetime of electronic monitoring, and four felony counts of CSC 2 – a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison. Crowley, who was a priest in various parishes, including St. Thomas Rectory in Ann Arbor, was arrested Thursday in Tempe, Arizona.

Neil Kalina , 63, Archdiocese of Detroit, was charged in Macomb County with one felony count of CSC 4, a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison and a lifetime of electronic monitoring. Kalina, who was a priest at St. Kiernan Catholic Church in Shelby Township, was arrested Thursday in Littlerock, California.

Vincent DeLorenzo , 80, Lansing Diocese, was charged in Genesee County with three felony counts of CSC 1, a maximum sentence of life in prison and a lifetime of electronic monitoring, and three felony counts of CSC 2, a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison. DeLorenzo, who was a priest at Holy Redeemer Church in Burton, was arrested Thursday in Marion County, Florida.

Patrick Casey, 55, Archdiocese of Detroit, was charged in Wayne County with one felony count of CSC 3, a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison. Casey, who was a priest at St. Theodore of Canterbury Parish in Westland, was arrested Thursday in Oak Park, Michigan.

The attorney general’s tip line can be reached at 844-324-3374 or online at mi.gov/clergyabuse.

The Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests said in a press release Friday that they are grateful of Nessel’s “steadfast pursuit of justice.”

“We hope that as the investigative team in Michigan work their way through the remaining tips that other charges will be filed, communities will be safer, and survivors throughout the state will feel believed and be encouraged to come forward,” Zach Hiner, executive director of SNAP said in the release.
