Nine rapists arrested in two gang rape cases in Saurashtra

RAJKOT: Two gang rapes have been reported from Una of Gir-Somnath district and Bhavnagar on Friday. Though the crimes had been committed three and one months ago, respectively , the complaints in these connections were lodged only on Thursday, said police. Nine persons have been arrested in connection with the two crimes.A 35-year-old widow in Dron village of Una taluka alleged she was gang raped by four persons. In her complaint, the survivor has accused Ravi alias Nilesh Bambhania who had befriended her and had taken her to the outskirts of Dron village and raping her in February this year.“While Bambhania was raping the survivor, two other accused Sandeep Sakhat and Manu Chauhan shot a video of the act before they raped her. They also blackmailed her of circulating the video clip. Then the fourth accused, Akshargiri Bawaji, who was driving the survivor back home on his bike, raped her on the way,” said D D Gohel, inspector with Una police station. Gohel further said that the survivor also accused one Yasin Baloch of helping the accused in the crime.Police investigation revealed that the key conspirator in the case was the survivor’s sister-in-law who had an extra-marital affair with Chauhan, about which the survivor knew. As her sister-in-law found the survivor to be a hindrance in her relationship with Chauhan, she asked him to teach her a lesson. Then Chauhan and Bambhania hatched the conspiracy to rape the survivor.Meanwhile, the police have launched a manhunt for the survivor’s sister-in-law. They however, refused to divulge details citing probe confidentiality In the second case, a 17-year-old girl from Gokulnagar locality on Airport Road in Bhavnagar was gang-raped by eight persons on April 25, four of whom were arrested on Friday.The survivor said that Ankit Mer, her boyfriend, had taken her on his bike to a farmhouse in Gokulnagar. There he raped her after which his friends Prakash Baraiya, Shiva Koli, Vivek Makwana and four more associates took turns to rape the girl. The perpetrators confined the survivor to the farmhouse for three days and raped her repeatedly.While Mer, Baraiya, Koli and Makwana have been arrested, police are hunting for the other accused.
