After birthday party, techies get the bumps after birthday

techies

Luckily the gang did not hurt us as we agreed to their demands. If we had tried to overpower them, the consequences would have been worse as they would definitely have attacked us with the scissors. – One of the techies

Threereturning home at 3 am robbed at scissor-point in MarathahalliThree techies were robbed by a three-member gang in Marathahalli when they were returning home after celebrating a friend’s birthday. The accused threatened the victims with scissors and iron rods and asked them to hand over all their valuables. Fearing an attack, the victims ran away from the spot, after handing over their wallets and mobile phones. The techies who are from West Bengal and Bihar are staying together and were walking back home when they were robbed.The victims of the attack have been identified as Akshay Maji, Abhishek Kumar and Anmoy Banerjee, all residents of 8th main, Tulsi Theatre Road, Marathahalli. The victims were robbed in the wee hours of Monday between 3.30 to 3.45 am on 10th Main, Tulsi Theatre Road. The victims have filed a complaint with the Marathahalli police.Maji is a native of Bihar while the other two victims are from West Bengal. All three are employees of reputed tech firms located in Marathahalli.Speaking about the incident, Maji said, “All three of us had gone to a friend’s house on the 10th main for a birthday celebrations. The celebrations went on till 3 am in the wee hours. Since our house was just few metres away, we were walking back home. The road was pitch dark as there were no street lights. Suddenly three men came before us from nowhere. All three had scissors and iron rods with them and they threatened to stab us with scissors if we did not give them our valuables.”One of the victims gave away his mobile phone, while the other two handed over their wallets to the accused. The victims then ran away from the spot towards their house. Fearing that the accused could be following them, the techies stopped at a distance and turned around, only to see the gang going away on a white scooter.“Luckily the gang did not hurt us as we agreed to their demands. If we had tried to overpower them, the consequences would have been worse as they would definitely have attacked us with the scissors. The accused were talking to us in Hindi. All the three were dark skinned. The gang had managed to hold us hostage for at least five minutes,” the techie added.After reaching home, the victims called the police control room. The control room alerted the jurisdictional Marathahalli police.“The police reached the spot and called the techies to the scene of the crime. They started searching for the gang but were unsuccessful. The accused could be a part of a professional gang. We are going through the CCTV footage in the vicinity to get some clues of the accused,” said an officer who is a part of the investigations.A case of extortion under section 384 of the Indian Penal Code has been registered against the accused.The Marathahalli police has registered a case and investigations are on.
