Did PM Modi really mention Wg Cdr Abhinandan in his victory speech? Here’s what Pak media 'thinks' - Watch

PM Narendra Modi

New Delhi: From reporters who go out of their way to present news in a hilarious way to anchors who make horrendous on-air gaffes Pakistani media rarely fails to disappoint the Twitterati.

In a new video which is breaking the internet, a Pakistani news anchor claimed that Prime Minister Narendra Modi mentioned the name of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman while addressing BJP workers after results for the Lok Sabha elections were declared.

Pakistani Media Thinks PM Modi mentioning “Abhinandan” in his speech is actually Wing Commander Abhinandan



pic.twitter.com/YgpPODidCs — Ashish (@ashishtikooo) May 24, 2019

However, if you see the video you will find that the PM was not mentioning the Wg Cdr but was congratulating the BJP workers and supporters who worked tirelessly for the party to ensure its victory.

Wing Commander Abhinandan was captured by Pakistan after his MiG-21 Bison crashed in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir following an aerial dogfight with Pakistan Air Force (PAF) jets.

The pilot had to eject from his fighter jet and was captured by Pakistani villagers across the border and thrashed until the Pakistani Army arrived and took him into custody.

The brave pilot won the internet by his calm and composed demeanour while being in captivity. After immense pressure from the international arena including India, Pakistan released the Wg Cdr at Wagah border.

In a recent media report, it was revealed that while being in captivity Abhinandan was also in the custody of Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence during which he was tortured both mentally and physically.

The Wing Commander was debriefed after his return to India and went through rigorous medical examination after which the IAF decided to reinstate him to another unit due to concerns about his safety. Earlier, the pilot was posted at Srinagar airbase and as per the initial reports, he will join another key base in the western sector.
