After quarrel with husband, woman batters sons to death in Telangana

After quarrel with husband, woman batters sons to death in Telangana

The 28-year-old told media persons that after killing the children, she could not gather the courage to end her life and hence surrendered to the police.

news Crime

In a gruesome act, a woman brutally killed her two young sons after a fight with her husband in Telangana's Siddipet town on Saturday. The police said that the woman, in a merciless act, stuffed a cloth into the mouths of her two sons; one a 5-year-old and another aged two-and-half years, and battered them to death with glass bottles.

The shocking incident occurred in Ganesh Nagar neighbourhood of Siddipet town, about 100 km from Hyderabad. According to police, Saroja also switched on the TV and kept it running at a loud volume, to drown out other sounds. After committing the ghastly crime, Saroja reached a police station in Karimnagar and surrendered. Officials then informed their counterparts in Siddipet.

The 28-year-old homemaker told media persons that following a quarrel with husband, she decided to kill her children and commit suicide. However, after killing the children, she could not gather the courage to end her life and hence surrendered to the police. Media reports suggest that she even wrote a suicide letter, before deciding to turn herself in.

Her husband Chityala Bhaskar, a driver, was not at home when she killed the children. However, on being informed of the incident by his neighbours, he rushed home and was reported to be inconsolable.

According to police, Saroja and Bhaskar had an inter-caste marriage six years ago after the latter divorced his first wife. They had two sons. Ever since the marriage, the couple had differences and were frequently quarrelling.

Speaking to reporters, Siddipet Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP), Narasimha, said that the police had alrerady registered a case and added that swift action would be taken. Saroja has already been taken into police custody and will be produced in front of a local magistrate as per the due process.

IANS inputs
