Bulandshahr children murder: Were the kids killed over Ramzan iftar party?

Mohammad Hafiz had not invited his maternal cousin Salman for the iftar party. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Bulandshahr: Upset over not being invited for Ramzan iftar party, a man has allegedly shot dead three children of the host's family in Bulandshahr district of Uttar Pradesh. The incident occurred in Faisalabad locality on Friday.

The accused also dumped the bodies in a nearby tank. The victims have been identified as Aasma, Aleeba and Abdul.

The bodies of the victims aged between 9 and 12 were recovered from a water tank in Dhaturi village in the district, said a police officer. The police have filed the case in the case. The accused has been identified as Salman.

According to a report in Deccan Herald, Mohammad Hafiz had not invited his maternal cousin Salman Malik for the iftar party which led to him being angry.

Upset over the so-called insult, the accused Salman, a resident of Jalipur village in Bulandshahr, took the three children to a deserted area and shot the three children dead.

After the kids went missing, the family of the deceased had filed a missing persons complaint at the police station, but there was no attempt from police to locate the children.

Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) has suspended SHO of the local police station Dhruv Dubey.

"Primary investigation has revealed Salman Malik was particularly unhappy for not being invited for Roza iftaar organised by the family and he could have abducted children and murder them brutally. Children went missing at 9.30pm on Friday and family reached Kotwali police station at around midnight. No action was taken at that moment which has tarnished police image and hence I have suspended station SHO Dhruv Bhushan Dubey and constable Ashok Kumar with immediate effect," said a Times of India report quoted Bulandshahr SSP N Kolanchi as saying.

Police have launched a manhunt to nab the main accused Salman Malik, who is still at large after committing the crime.

The police have arrested one Bilal, an accomplice of Salman, for allegedly plotting the triple murder. Bilal is also maternal uncle of the children.
