Actor Ranjeeta accused of hitting husband

Masand

Ranjeeta Kaur

Pune police

criminal intimidation

Koregaon

Yesteryear actor of Laila-Majnu and Ankhiyon ke jharakhon se fame,, is accused of assaulting her husband, Raj Masand, along with their son, on multiple occasions and threatening to kill him.Raj Masand has been doing the rounds of police stations over the past few days to lodge a complaint. The 68-year-old has already submitted several applications to the police complaining of repeated attacks on him by his wife and son, Sky and their intimidation about murdering him.In his application to the senior citizens’ cell of the, he alleged that on May 23, his wife of 30 years, Ranjeeta, and Sky had thrashed, torn his shirt and tried to push him off the balcony of their fourth-floor apartment. He contended that the duo had been extorting him for money and resorted to abuse when he refused to comply.The police filed an occurrence report for voluntarily causing hurt, insulting a person and. Subsequently, Masand filed yet another application alleging that his son has resumed his threats after finding out that he had approached the police. “He threatened me with murder.In the past, he has hit me with whatever his hands could get hold of. His mother encourages him to do all this. She keeps saying that I will cough up money, only when I am physically assaulted. My son is a very dangerous person, he roams around with three-four bouncers all the time,” the second letter insisted.The police summoned all three on Saturday. “However, only the complainant turned up. We called Sky up but he refused come over. He said if the cops need to speak to him, they have to pick him up and bring him in. When we tried calling his mother, she simply refused to pick up our calls,” stated a letter posted by the police’s senior citizen cell.The letter dated May 25 instructsPark police to file a case under Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act. At the time of going to press, Masand was sitting at Koregaon Park police station to lodge an FIR. He was asked to wait for senior officers, who had gone out for a meeting. “My wife and son are in a property dispute with me and keep venting their angst with such assaults,” he said.When Mirror contacted Sky, he heard out the reason and then disconnected the call. Ranjeeta too fail to respond to calls or text messages.Madan Bahaddarpure, senior police inspector at Koregaon Park police station said, “We’d earlier registered a non-cognisable offence against them. We’re yet to register any other case since.”
