Amethi: BJP MP Smriti Irani lends a shoulder to close aide Surendra Singh’s mortal remains - Watch

Smriti Irani, BJP MP from Amethi | Photo Credit: ANI

Amethi: Newly elected Amethi MP and BJP leader Smriti Irani on Sunday lent a shoulder to mortal remains of her close aide Surendra Singh, who was shot dead last night at his residence in Amethi. An emotional Irani, who had rushed back from Delhi to her constituency earlier today after receiving the news of Singh’s death, was seen performing the duties of a pallbearer during his funeral procession.

Singh, a BJP worker and former village head of Barauli, had worked closely with Irani during the Lok Sabha election campaign. He was killed on Saturday night when a few unidentified assailants shot at him. As per reports, bike-borne gunmen arrived at his residence last night and fired at him indiscriminately.

50-year-old Singh was referred to a government hospital in Lucknow but later succumbed to his injuries during treatment, news agency PTI quoted Assitional Superintendent of Police, Daya Ram as saying. The attack took place merely a few kilometers away from the district headquarters of Gauriganj in Amethi.

After attending Singh's funeral, Irani vowed to ensure that the culprits get death sentence. She said, "I've taken an oath before Surendra Singh ji's family, the one who fired and the one who ordered it, even if I have to go SC to get the culprits a death sentence, we will knock the doors of the court."

#WATCH BJP MP from Amethi, Smriti Irani lends a shoulder to mortal remains of Surendra Singh, ex-village head of Barauli, Amethi, who was shot dead last night. pic.twitter.com/jQWV9s2ZwY — ANI (@ANI) May 26, 2019

The police suspect that an old enmity may have led to the attack. UP DGP Om Prakash Singh told the news agency, "We have come to know about old enmity. We are also finding out if there was any political enmity." So far, cops had taken seven people into custody for interrogation.

Meanwhile, Surendra Singh's son has hinted that a few Congress supporters may have been involved in the murder of his father. He told news agency ANI, "My father was a close aide of Smriti Irani and would campaign for her day and night. After she was elected as the member of parliament from Amethi, a Vijay Yatra (victory procession) was carried out. I think some Congress supporters didn't like it."

Singh had previously served as the head of Baraulia village, whch was adopted by former Defence Minister Manohar Parrikar in 2015 under the Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana. The slain BJP worker had later quit his post as the village head to participate in the saffron party's election campaign.

Singh's murder took place just a few days after Irani wrested away the Gandhi bastion from Congress, winning the Amethi Lok Sabha seat with a margin of 55,000 votes. The BJP emerged as the single largest party with 303 seats in the 2019 polls, while the Congress was restricted to 52 seats.

Surendra Singh's wife, Rukmani Singh said that Irani had assured her that she would take care of her children and provide them protection. She said, "Smriti Irani met me & assured she'll take care of my children like her own&give us protection. It was a political fight, he helped didi to win. There are many Congress workers here."

Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Keshav Prasad Maurya extended condolences and expressed grief over the death of the BJP worker from Amethi. He said, “The death of a party worker is indeed very sad and unfortunate. He was a hard worker. Even if his killers are hiding below the ground, they will be caught. The entire Amethi is sad over the incident."

UP minister Rita Bahuguna Joshi also demanded strict action against the culprits responsible for the crime.
