Minor Menace: Underage driving up six times in 6 years

A 17-year-old student of a prominent South Delhi school was killed and four of his friends, all minors, were injured when the car driven by one of them hit a truck in Dwarka. A driver was killed after a car, driven by a 17-yearold, crashed into his auto-rickshaw on Central

Delhi's Kasturba Gandhi Marg. The two recent accidents are a reflection of a growing menace on the Capital's streets - minors at the wheel. "The system is handicapped. There is no fear of law. People are being killed because minors drive and drive recklessly. Both parents and cops need to take this seriously," said Shilpa Mittal, sister of Siddharth Shrama who was killed by a boy driving a Mercedes car in Delhi's Model Town recently. In India, the legal age to drive a vehicle is 18. Her concerns are genuine.

Sample these: In 2018, Delhi Police issued tickets in 1,228 cases of underage driving, up from 1,067 in 2017. The figures in 2016, 2015, 2014 and 2013 were 746, 225, 186 and 178, respectively. There is a 589% jump between 2013 and 2018. And the numbers are only growing. In the first 15 days of 2019, 61 children, or four in a day, have been caught driving.

PARENTS BLAMED

School principals also blame parents. "The responsibility lies with parents. No school allows students to bring vehicles. It is the parents who start giving a free hand to young children for weekend getaways or parties," said Dr Ameeta Mulla Wattal, Principal of Delhi's Springdales School.

"On our part we regularly tell parents that a driving kid puts himself and other lives at risk," she said.

A report prepared by Nissan India and a non-profit, SaveLIFE Foundation, has revealed that 96.4% of the underage respondents from Delhi-NCR admitted that their parents were aware that they were driving vehicles.

Also, 70.4 % of the underage respondents in Delhi-NCR said their parents allowed them to drive. Some parents say they are 'helpless'. "Despite my resistance, my son sneaks out with the car keys in our absence. Once he almost got involved into a serious accident. We took away the car but three months later, he fought with his father and started using it again," said Isha Grover, a homemaker whose 16-year-old boy drives a car to tuition classes in Rohini.

Others are 'careful'. Simi Singh, parent to a 15-year-old, said she made sure her son doesn't drive alone.

"He is always accompanied by an elder person when he drives. We don't give a free hand. My husband taught him how to drive a scooty first, then a car," she said.

CRACKDOWN SOON

In cities like Hyderabad and Jaipur, authorities have started imprisoning vehicle owners in cases of minors being caught driving. And Delhi Police may soon follow suit.

"Harsher charges under IPC sections will be slapped on parents to send them behind bars if their minor kids are caught driving. This way parents will be extra cautious," said a Delhi police official.

Taj Hassan, Special Commissioner of Police (Traffic), said special teams will be deployed around schools, colleges and other institutional areas to identify and fine minors driving.

"Police needs to be tough on this rising problem by initiating punitive action and holding parents responsible for allowing their children to drive vehicles," he said.

Delhi Police covered 944 schools in 2018 for awareness on underage driving.

"A total of 11,633 teachers were briefed about road safety and film shows were organised in 1,218 schools. Over 17 lakh students participated in road safety awareness campaign across Delhi in 2018," said a police official.

COUNSELLING NEEDED

Psychologist Dr Deepali Batra recommended counseling sessions for kids and strict law enforcement. "Counseling of children is a must in schools. People take pride in underage driving. Many parents think that their children are independent. But they need to realise that underage driving is taking a toll on human lives. A number of schoolchildren drive rashly." "A heavy penalty should also be imposed before releasing vehicles. Schools must stop entry of students' vehicles. Lessons on road safety should be added to curriculum," she said.

THE LAW TWEAK

At present, a child caught driving is fined Rs 500 and the parents have to pay Rs 1,000. However, the Modi government's Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill-2016 seeks to deem guardians guilty in such cases with a fine of Rs 25,000 with three years in jail.
