Gautam Gambhir calls attack on Muslim man in Gurugram deplorable, calls for action

A day after a Muslim man was allegedly assaulted in Gurugram by four unidentified youths for wearing a traditional skull cap, East Delhi MP-elect from the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Gautam Gambhir said that an exemplary action is needed by the Gurugram authorities.

Terming the incident as "deplorable", Gautam Gambhir said that India is a secular nation where renowned lyricist Javed Akhtar wrote "O Palan Haare" for the movie Lagaan and Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra wrote "Arziyan" for movie Delhi-6.

Taking to Twitter, Gautam Gambhir said, "In Gurugram, Muslim man told to remove skullcap, chant Jai Shri Ram. It is deplorable. Exemplary action needed by Gurugram authorities. We are a secular nation where @Javedakhtarjadu writes "O Palan Haare, Nirgun aur Nyaare" and Rakeysh Om Mehra gave us the song "Arziyan" in Delhi 6."

A 25-year-old Muslim man was allegedly assaulted in Gurugram by four unidentified men for wearing a traditional skull cap. In a complaint to police on Sunday, Alam alleged that four unidentified men accosted him in a Sadar Bazar lane and objected to him for wearing a skull cap.

The Gurugram incident refers to the incident where a 25-year-old Muslim man was allegedly assaulted by four unidentified men for wearing a traditional skull cap. The victim was identified as Mohamad Barker Alam, a native of Bihar, living in Jakob Pura area of Gurgaon.

In a complaint to police on Sunday, Mohamad Barker Alam alleged that four unidentified men accosted him in a Sadar Bazar lane when he was returning home after offering namaz in a mosque and objected to him for wearing a skull cap.

"The accused threatened me, saying wearing cap was not allowed in the area. They removed my cap and slapped me while asking me to chant Bharat Mata ki Jai," he said in the FIR, registered at the city police station.

He said, "As I followed their instruction and chanted Bharat Mata ki Jai, they asked me to chant Jai Sri Ram which I refused. At this, the men picked up a baton from the roadside and began beating me. They hit me on my legs and back."

An FIR has been under sections 153, 147, 149, 323 and 506 has been registered in the case.
