Cow vigilantes’ terror in MP, victims get arrested and jailed, assailants caught after video surfaced

Shams Ur Rehman Alavi

NewsBits.in

Support TwoCircles



BHOPAL: In yet another incident of cow vigilantes’ terror, three persons including a woman were first humiliated and publicly tortured, before they were booked under stringent MP cow protection act, arrested and even sent to jail on judicial custody.

Though this incident had occurred on May 22, there was no action against the cow vigilantes who brutally assaulted two men and humiliated a woman apart from forcing them to chant religious slogans. After the video of the incident came out, police took action against the cow vigilantes–Shubham Singh Baghel and four others.

Baghel was externed from the Seoni district limits in the past and has a criminal record. Yet, on his claim that the trio was carrying ‘suspicious meat’, the police had promptly registered case under the sections of the MP Cow Protection Act. Baghel claims to head the Sri Ram Sena in Seoni.

After the video was widely shared and there was outrage on social media, the police issued a press note. It said that the assailants have been booked and sent to jail. However, question remains as to how police had taken fast action against the victims of lynching bid just on the basis of hearsay and report of anti-social elements, even when lab test report hadn’t arrived.

Interestingly, there were already claims being circulated that the meat was suspicious (attributing it to a veterinary expert) though the reality was that report was yet to come. Home minister has said that action has been taken in this case. Though police insisted that they had taken arrested the culprits, there is an important aspect about it.

That, how vigilantes are able to put pressure on local police and manage to get anyone framed and arrested. And, why unless there is outcry, no action is taken. Will any tough directive issued by Police Headquarters? Can the woman and the victims who were brutalised, get justice or receive compensation for this sort of public torture?
