FIR filed over rape threats to director’s daughter

They were issued on Twitter by a self-proclaimed follower of the Prime Minister

The Amboli police here on Sunday registered a First Information Report (FIR) over the alleged rape threats issued on Twitter to the daughter of filmmaker Anurag Kashyap last week.

The filmmaker, a vocal critic of the Narendra Modi government, had on May 23 taken to Twitter to express outrage over the threats. He said a Twitter user, who identified himself as Chowkidar Ramsanghi, sent tweets to his daughter using abusive language and threatening to rape her.

Mr. Kashyap tweeted, “Dear @narendramodi sir. Congratulations on your victory and thank you for the message of inclusiveness. Sir please also tell us how do we deal with these followers of yours who celebrate your victory by threatening my daughter with messages like this for me being your dissenter.”

Outrage on Twitter

About 8,800 users responded to the tweet, which garnered 11,000 retweets and 28,000 likes. Many users said they disagreed with Mr. Kashyap’s political views, but were outraged at the threats issued to his daughter by a self-proclaimed supporter of the Prime Minister. Several users advised him to file a complaint with the Mumbai police.

Senior police inspector Bharat Gaikwad said Mr. Kashyap submitted a complaint on Sunday.

He said, “We have registered an offence of outraging a woman’s modesty under the Indian Penal Code, along with relevant Sections of the Information Technology Act. Further investigations are under way with assistance from the cyber police.”

Late on Sunday night, in another tweet, the filmmaker said, “The irony with social media is when I say vote for your constituent so one can take their problems to them, they say Vote for the PM. When you tag PM to the tweet they say it’s not his responsibility, go to the constituent.”

He added, “Anyways I want to thank @MumbaiPolice @MahaCyber1 @Brijeshbsingh for helping me with filing the FIR. Thank you so much for the amazing support and starting the process. Thank you @Dev_Fadnavis and thank you @narendramodi Sir. As a father I am more secure now.”

Special Inspector General (Maharashtra Cyber) Brijesh Singh, who was tagged in the tweet, said, “Please do not worry, we are duty bound to protect, online and offline.”
