Malleswaram market back to drawing board

BDA

Bangalore

Bengaluru

BBMP

By Y Maheswara Reddyinvites re-tendering for market complex after seven yearsTheDevelopment Authority (BDA) has finally decided to terminate the contract entered with P Vijayakumar for the construction of a five-storied market complex at Malleswaram and commence re-tendering process soon. The project had an estimated cost of Rs. 130 crore.“We have issued five notices, apart from imposing a penalty of Rs. 40 lakhs on the contractor, but he still failed to expedite the construction work. Now, I have recommended termination of his contract,’’ said a BDA executive engineer.On Monday morning, Deputy Chief Minister Dr G Parameshwara had expressed anger over the delay in completing the construction work. He was seen yelling at the BruhatMahanagara Palike () Commissioner for not keeping him informed about the incomplete work at the market complex.The BDA had taken up the construction of the market complex in 2012 and has also issued a work order to contractor P Vijayakumar. But the work began by the end of 2015 due to the delay in vendors vacating the market. “The construction of the market complex was supposed to be completed in 24 months. We had extended it to 2018 but the contractor has completed only 40 per cent of the construction work,’’ says the Executive Engineer.With the termination of the contract, the BDA has to float a tender inviting the bidders to complete the pending work.Meanwhile, the construction site has become a cesspool of sewage and dirty water has become a breeding place for mosquitoes.“I was admitted to a hospital for fever. Doctors told me mosquitoes are the main cause for my illness. I spent around Rs. 20,000 for my treatment ten days ago,’’ says P Ramaswamy, who owns a small eatery. A few vendors are attributing petty politics as the reason for the delay in completion of the work. MLA, Dr. C N Ashwath Narayan has refuted the allegations.“The vendors have to know the fact. It is Congress-JD(S) coalition which is in power in the state and the BBMP. The Congress MLA is the chairman of BDA. I am also waiting for the completion of the construction work. I want the BDA authorities to take stringent action against the contractor for delaying the work,’’ says Dr. Ashwath Narayan.The other pressing need is to restore electricity to the temporary sheds put up by the BDA. It is said there was no power supply to these shops for the last six months. The other issue is that vendors have to go either 11th Cross or 15th Cross to attend nature’s call since the toilets are locked due to lack of water.
