Madhya Pradesh High Court allows gang-rape survivor to terminate pregnancy

The pregnancy is nine weeks old and the medical board which was constituted opined that it can be terminated. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Bhopal: The Madhya Pradesh High Court has granted permission to a gang-rape survivor to abort her nine-week-old foetus. The court has granted the order on Tuesday.

Reportedly, Justice Virender Singh, presiding over the vacation bench, allowed the 19-year-old woman's writ petition, where she was seeking permission to terminate her unwanted pregnancy. According to news agency PTI, the petitioner is permitted to approach District Hospital, Dewas within a period of one week for termination of pregnancy, said Justice.

He further added that the DNA sample of the foetus can be preserved so that it can be used in the trial of the case. Reportedly, the bench maintained that in the present case, the pregnancy is nine weeks old and the medical board which was constituted opined that it can be terminated.

Meanwhile, the advocate Dharmendra Chelawat said his client claimed that she was in a mental shock after being gang-raped and she wanted to rid herself of the unwanted pregnancy as she is young and keeping the future in her mind. The police officials told PTI that the woman was allegedly abducted and raped by two men in the neighbouring Dewas district of the state. And a trial court in Dewas is currently hearing the case.

In a similar case reported from Jaipur, Rajasthan, a 16-year-old girl filed a petition in the Rajasthan High Court seeking permission to abort her 26-week foetus. The High Court has asked the Rajasthan government to form a medical board and discuss the petition.

After the habeas corpus petition was filed, it was discovered that the minor had got married and she was then taken to Nari Niketan thereafter. Considering the 26-week-old foetus, Justice Sandeep Mehta and Justice Abhay Chaturvedi said that the teenager is pregnant with a 26-week foetus, whereas the pregnancy upto 22-week can be terminated as per the law.

The girl will now be presented before a medical board constituted by three gynecologists of the MDM Hospital, Jodhpur.
