Caught on camera: Following quarrel with in-laws, woman jumps off roof along with her two-year-old son

A video of the woman jumping off the roof | Photo Credit: Times Now

Jaipur: A video showing a woman jumping off the roof of her home along with her two-year-old son in Sikar district of Rajasthan is doing rounds on social media. In what can only be termed as a miracle, both the mother and the boy survived the fatal fall and are currently undergoing medical treatment at a government hospital in Churu.

Identified as Pushpa, the wife of one Dinesh Kumawat, the woman resides with her husband and his family under the limits of ward-21 of the Ramgarh Shekhawati city in Sikar district of the state. In the video, the woman can be seen jumping off the roof of her husband's family home with her infant son in her arms.

As per reports, the woman decided to take the tragic step following a scuffle with her husband's family. Both the mother and the child suffered severe injuries and were rushed to a local hospital only to be referred to a state-run hospital in Churu city of Rajasthan. They are currently undergoing medical treatment and more details about the condition of their health are awaited.

This is not the first time such an incident has come to the fore from the state of Rajasthan. Earlier this month, a woman was allegedly thrashed and made to walk naked to a police station in Bidasar area of Churu district to report the matter. Police officials familiar with the matter told media outlets that the woman was harassed and even physically assaulted by her mother-in-law and sister-in-law following a spat over domestic affairs.

In Jhalawar district of the state, a 25-year-old woman was found hanging from a tree in Pedola forest earlier this month. A police investigation into her death indicated that it was a case of suicide. However, a case was registered against the woman's husband and six of his family members on the basis of a case registered by her father. The accused were booked under sections 306 and 498-A of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for abetting suicide and subjecting her to cruelty.
