4 NDFB-S rebels jailed for 5 years for Adivasi massacre

Picture used for representational purpose only

GUWAHATI: A special National Investigation Agency (NIA) court here has convicted four NDFB (Songbijit) faction militants in connection with the 2014 massacre of Adivasi villagers at Pakiriguri village in Assam's Kokrajhar district and sentenced them to at least five years in prison.

All of them have been charged under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA).

At least five Adivasis were killed and another five sustained grievous injuries due to indiscriminate firing by NDFB(S) militants on December 23, 2014, in Pakiriguri village. On the same day, more than 75 people, including 12 minors, were shot dead by militants of the outfit across Sonitpur, Chirang and Kokrajhar districts. Though the state police began investigation initially, the NIA took over the probe later.

"Bina Basumatary, Jayanta Mushahary, Dwithai Basumatary and Khanda Daimary were convicted by the NIA court on Monday for committing offences under various sections of the IPC and UAPA. All of them had pleaded guilty before the court. They were slapped with charges of harbouring and aiding members of the militant outfit to carry out the massacre in the area," a source said.

Besides imprisonment of five years, a penalty of Rs 10,000 was also slapped on them. In the same case, another accused, Gautam Mahalia, had earlier pleaded guilty in April and was sentenced to 4.5 years in prison. The trial against 10 other accused, who are in judicial custody, will continue, the source added.

Following the massacre, security forces had launched a massive operation against NDFB(S) in which more than 50 cadres of the outfit were killed and 873 others were nabbed. Some 15 AK-56 rifles, 10 AK-47s, two M-16, two HKs, seven Insas rifles, 495 rounds of ammunition, 21 grenades and 81kg of explosives were seized during the operation. However, the prime accused in the case - NDFB(S) leaders Bidai and Batha - continued to evade arrest. It is suspected that they are hiding somewhere in Bhutan.


