Rape accused claims he had consensual sex with alleged victim

Suffolk Police carried out checks in Lowestoft in the wake of the rape. Picture: Suffolk Police - Credit: Archant

A Lowestoft man accused of raping a woman in a car after offering her a lift home has claimed they had consensual sex.

During his second day in the witness box at Ipswich Crown Court, 34-year-old Ajay Rana said the woman had put her hands behind his head and pulled him on to the passenger seat of the car where she was sitting.

He said she was making noises and said to him: "I know what you want. This is what you want."

Rana told the woman he didn't have a condom and she had told him again: "I know this is what you want."

He told the court he then helped her pull down her underwear before undoing his trousers and having consensual sex with her.

Rana said that several days later, he saw a news item about a woman being raped in Lowestoft. He subsequently decided to go home to India and bought a one-way ticket on December 13.

He later got a job on a ship and was arrested in Bilbao, Spain.

During his evidence, Rana - of May Road, Lowestoft - said he was driving home when he saw the alleged victim stumbling along the road and offered her a lift home.

He had refused the woman's offer of money for the lift and claimed that, when he stopped the car, she asked him if he "wanted some fun."

Rana, who denies rape on December 9, 2017, added he had worked in the Merchant Navy and came to the UK in January 2017 to do a course at the East Coast Maritime College.

The court has heard that, on the night of the alleged rape, the woman met an old friend during a night out in Lowestoft and went to a house party with his group.

She left the address after 5am and Rana, who she had never met before, stopped to offer her a lift and allegedly raped her in the car.

Within a few days of the woman reporting the alleged rape to police, Rana left the country and was later arrested in Spain after a European arrest warrant was issued.

The trial continues.
