How fake news influenced Lok Sabha elections in Bengal

The animosity between Trinamool Congress supremo Mamata Banerjee and Narendra Modi-led BJP reached its peak during the elections.

By any measure, the 2019 Lok Sabha election was the most fact-checked Parliamentary election in Indian political history.

But there was one state that not only dominated discussions in political and social circles, but also figured prominently in the intensely fought propaganda war. No prizes for guessing that it was West Bengal, the hotbed of political violence and testimony to bitter acrimony among leaders of various political parties.

So it's no surprise that among the 200 fact-check stories AFWA did since February related to elections, 80 of them were about Bengal.

Didi's rhetoric vs Modi's aggression

The animosity between Trinamool Congress supremo Mamata Banerjee and Narendra Modi-led BJP reached its peak during the elections. It was a full on tit-for-tat show.

When Modi called the Bengal CM "speed breaker Didi", referring to her as a road block for development, a belligerent Banerjee gave it back, calling him an "expiry PM" with whom she does not want to share the dais.

When Modi said in an interview that Banerjee sends him sweets every year, the TMC chief retorted, saying she would send him sweets made of mud and pebbles that will break his teeth.

After Uttar Pradesh, Bengal is the second state that witnessed the highest number of election rallies and speeches by Modi. It clearly shows that the top BJP leadership took Bengal as a prestige fight.

Fake news as a weapon

Former senior journalist of BBC and political observer Subir Bhowmik said, "The stakes were very high for both. But BJP realised that with the demise of the Left, Banerjee is the only formidable force in the state."

As per Bhowmik, fake news has been used as an instrument to polarise society and draw support in favour of political parties. For some political observers, it is not a new trend and the ground was already set. During the Left regime, there was, however, a sense of guard.

"Now people don't even care. The heavy dose of social media news has opened a flood gate of communal violence. See the number of fake news originating from Barasat, Basirhat, Diamond Harbour and Krishnanagar - areas with high religious polarisation. Social media has worked as a provocative factor," says Maidul Islam, professor of Political Science at the Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata.

Allegations of Muslim appeasement against Mamata due to certain administrative steps have only widened the gap among Hindus and Muslims. Issues such as imam allowances, shifting Durga Puja immersion timings due to Muharram, etc. have been effectively used by pro-Hindutva pages to fuel communal tensions.

This sort of polarised and vicious religious and political environment is the perfect breeding ground for fake news and false narratives, and social media is often used as an amplifier for the same.

Divide and rule

The Hindu-Muslim divide was by and large the predominant theme of the fake news industry. Fact checkers have more than often come across contents mostly targeting communities with fake claims. Old visuals of violence or of communal riots in other places have been passed off in the name of Bengal.

Fake contents such as BJP workers arrested in Bengal for throwing beef in temple was circulated on Facebook pages like "Paschim Banga Budhijibi Mahal", notorious for posting misleading information.

An old unrelated incident of a boy being thrashed in UP over a monetary dispute has been passed off as a Hindu boy being tortured in Bengal for hoisting a saffron flag.

Who's got the edge?

Like in other places, the fake news machinery has worked in a coordinated and well organised manner among various party workers in Bengal. Hundreds of Facebook pages and WhatsApp groups were formed in the last few months for the purpose.

To give an example, while Facebook pages such as "Paschim Banga Budhijibi Mahal" or "All India Trinamool Congress - AITC Supporters" acted in favour of TMC, others like "Bengal Hindu Community" or "United Hindu Concern" worked for the BJP.

But who has an edge in circulating fake news on social media in Bengal?

As per Subir Bhowmik, it was the BJP which has a mammoth, well organised machinery and a proper digital army to reign over social media, "The Trinamool Congress is no match for them (BJP) in the sophistication and with the dexterity that they have deployed party workers to circulate fake news," he added.

We compared the growth rate of the followers of two Facebook pages - "Bengal Hindu Community" and "All India Trinamool Congress - AITC supporters" in the last three months.

"All India Trinamool Congress - AITC supporters" has a huge following of nearly four lakh people, whereas "Bengal Hindu Community" has a little over 45,000 followers.

But we found that the growth rate of "Bengal Hindu Community" followers is phenomenally high at 347 per cent, whereas the growth rate for "All India Trinamool Congress - AITC supporters" is only 18 per cent. The comparison was done with the help of Crowdtangle.

Impact on voters

So did these false or misleading narratives actually influence the voting patterns or alter the electoral results in Bengal? Probably some issues viral on social media did affect the electoral outcome.

Analysing the poll data of Lok Sabha constituencies in West Bengal, India Today's Data Intelligence Unit has found that though the BJP improved its performance this election, the party could not win even one of the nine seats that went to polls in the seventh phase of the Lok Sabha elections.

The seventh phase took place a week after Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's bust was vandalised inside a college during violence between BJP and TMC supporters in north Kolkata. Social media was rife with all sorts of misinformation regarding the incident.

Though we cannot exactly say what influenced the sudden dip in BJP's vote bank in the last phase, but the Vidyasagar bust incident followed by the uproar on ground as well as on social media could have played a key role.
