Man sets himself on fire outside the White House

Shocking video shows the moment an unknown man inexplicably set himself alight outside the White House. WARNING: Graphic

Don't miss out on the headlines from News. Followed categories will be added to My News.

WARNING: Graphic content

A man set himself on fire near the White House on Wednesday, the Secret Service said.

Shocking footage showed the man walking around with his body engulfed in flames.

Moments after he set himself ablaze police officers arrived on the scene and sprayed the man with fire extinguishers.

He was arrested and taken to hospital with burns to 85 per cent of his body and “life-threatening” injuries, according to reports.

A video grab shows a police officer extinguishing a man who set himself on fire. Picture: Greg Miller/EPA/AAP

According to the US Secret Service the man was treated at the scene and transported to a hospital. Picture: Greg Miller/EPA/AAP

“I can confirm that we’ve transported one patient with burns from the Ellipse and we’re now on the scene assisting law enforcement,” a spokesman for the Washington Fire Department said.

The incident took place shortly after noon on the Ellipse — south of the president’s residence — near 15th Street and Constitution Avenue, the Secret Service said on Twitter.

“Secret Service personnel are on scene assisting @NatlParkService and @usparkpolicepio in rendering first aid,” it said, referring to park rangers and park police.

“We saw this man,” Alina Berzins, 17, who was visiting the National Mall with her two cousins, told CNBC. “He starts running, and then we saw him covered in flames.”

Video shot by Berzins and posted to Twitter by her father shows the man, clad in black pants, covered head to toe in flames as he takes a slow walk across the grass near 15th Street NW and Constitution Avenue NW.

“According to my daughter … she just saw a person that was on fire running across the White House lawn,” the dad, Krisjan Berzins, tweeted. “Police and rescue have responded. They’re closing all surrounding streets right now.”

Officers are seen racing over to the man, including one armed with a red fire extinguisher, and police cruisers pulling up with lights flashing.

The man collapsed as he was covered with a plume of white foam, Alina Berzins said.

“Everyone was in shock,” she said. “I was in shock.”

A man has set himself on fire outside the White House.

Other witnesses told Fox 5 DC that the man was wearing a sweatshirt — despite the 32-degree heat — and carrying a black bag. The shirt had writing on it but the witnesses couldn’t make out what it said.

The Ellipse is a large public park that lies south of the White House.

A suspicious package that was on fire was also found in the park, near where the man was extinguished.

Last month, a man set his jacket on fire just outside the White House fence on Pennsylvania Avenue. That man suffered non-life-threatening injuries.

Self-immolation has been used as an extreme form of political protest since ancient times.

In 1963, when Vietnam was under the rule of the Ngo Dinh Diem regime, Buddhist monk Thich Quang Duc poured gasoline over himself before setting himself alight in the middle of a Saigon street.

The 1963 photo was taken by then AP Saigon correspondent Malcom Browne.

His act was copied by several other Buddhist monks, protesting discrimination against them, until South Vietnam fell later that year.

It’s also been used as a political protest in India, China and Turkey in recent decades.

In July 2017 a Sydney man set himself ablaze in protest near the Department of Immigration.

Originally published as Man sets himself on fire outside the White House
