Ghazipur violence: UP cop not killed accidentally, but was "targetted", witness reveals

Ghazipur violence: UP cop not killed accidentally, but was "targetted", witness reveals An eye-witness revealed that Vats was not accidentally killed in the stone-pelting incident, but was especially targeted by a group of people who enclosed him and attacked him with stones. By: ABP News Bureau | 01 Jan 2019 09:06 AM (IST) FOLLOW US:

New Delhi: In a major revelation in the killing of UP constable Suresh Vats who died in the unfortunate stone-pelting incident in Ghazipur after PM’s rally, an eye-witness revealed that Vats was not accidentally killed in the stone-pelting incident, but was especially targeted by a group of people who impounded him and attacked him with stones. The witness also told that when force reached the spot, Vats was somehow taken to a hospital. Eye-witness to the violence, a priest in nearby temple, Dharmanand Maharaj Pujari said that the crowd hurled stones at Vats until he was almost-dead. “we brought the injured cop inside the temple, but the crowd continued pelting stones at the temple as well and was trying to break into. All the priests of the temple were able to stop them after a lot of efforts. Later he was somehow taken to hospital after force arrived but his body had already turned yellow,” Pujari said. The Martyred cop was cremated in Prayagraj on Monday. He was returning from the duty in PM Modi’s Ghazipur rally when he was faced with Nishad pary workers who had blocked the roads and were staging protests. As he went there to control the situation, he was killed allegedly by angry protesters. It was belive that Vats got injured by a stone in his bid to control the situation, but as per the witnesses, he was targeted and killed by repeated stone attacks. UP CM Yogi Aditynatah has announced a compensation of Rs 40 lakh for the wife of the deceased constable and Rs 10 lakh for his parents, the state government said. Police is searching for Nishad party general-secretary as the prime accused in the case.

Follow Breaking News on abp LIVE for more latest stories and trending topics. Watch breaking news and top headlines online on abp News LIVE TV
