The Shillong Times

INX case: Order on which court to hear matter on June 2

New Delhi: A court here on Wednesday reserved its order on the issue whether the INX Media case against newly-elected parliamentarian Karti Chidambaram will be heard by the court it is now before or the special court trying cases against lawmakers. District Judge O.P. Saini said that he will deliver order on June 2 on whether the case will be heard by the same court or will be transferred to the MP/MLA court in the Rouse Avenue court complex. The court order came after the case was marked to it by another special court which was already hearing the matter. Early on Wednesday morning, Special Judge Anurag Sain, who was scheduled to pass an order on plea of former INX Media director Indrani Mukerjea seeking to become approver in the case, asked the CBI to clarify whether he has jurisdiction to entertain the plea or not. Judge Sain has sought legal opinion on this as Karti Chidamabaram, son of former Union Finance Minister P. Chidambaram, has elected to Lok Sabha from Tamil Nadu’s Sivaganga and there is a special court to deal the cases related to lawmakers. (IANS)

Vadra seeks permission to travel

New Delhi: Delhi’s Rouse Avenue Court on Wednesday reserved its order on businessman Robert Vadra’s application seeking permission to travel abroad on June 3 on medical grounds. Vadra, who is being probed for his alleged involvement in a money laundering case, had sought permission to go abroad citing medical reasons. He had, on May 21, moved a special CBI court seeking permission to travel abroad. During the hearing, ED opposed Vadra’s application to travel abroad stating that it’s a routine medical treatment. Vadra’s counsel KTS Tulsi submitted that a small tumour in his client’s large intestine has been detected, for which a doctor has to be consulted. Meanwhile, Vadra is expected to appear before the Enforcement Directorate (ED) in Delhi on Thursday in a case related to land grab in Delhi-NCR, Bikaner in Rajasthan and purchase of properties in foreign countries. (ANI)

Clashes in J&K leave 20 injured

SRINAGAR: Clashes broke out between protesters and security forces during a cordon and search operation in Kulgam district of Jammu and Kashmir on Wednesday, leaving 20 persons injured. The operation was launched in Tazipora area in the early hours following information about presence of militants there, officials said. They said as the security personnel were carrying out searches, a large number of locals gathered and started pelting stones at them. The security personnel used batons and fired pellet guns to disperse the protesters, the officials said, adding nearly 20 persons were injured in the incident. While most of the injured were treated at a local hospital in Kulgam, four youth with serious injuries were referred to a hospital here for treatment, they added. The cordon was lifted as security forces did not find any militant in the area. (PTI)

Woman beaten up for dowry

Faridabad (Haryana): A woman was allegedly beaten up by her husband and in-laws over dowry. The incident came to light after the video of the assault went viral. “I was beaten by my in-laws and my husband. They have been demanding dowry and saying that if I cannot give them money then I have to give divorce to my husband. They are also demanding a motorcycle”, the victim told ANI. The victim got married earlier this year. Her in-laws soon allegedly started demanding dowry from her. “It was a love marriage and we have been married for just two months. My husband, his brother and their parents beat me yesterday evening,” the woman added. Police are looking into the matter. “It is a personal dispute between husband and wife. We were informed that the woman was beaten by her husband and in-laws,” said Vikram Kapoor, Deputy Commissioner of Police, Faridabad. (ANI)

Bride elopes with priest

Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh): Just two weeks after her marriage, a woman from Madhya Pradesh has reportedly eloped with the priest who performed her wedding rituals. Reena Bai, 21, hailing from Tori Bagrod village in Vidisha district, was married on May 7 and the rituals were performed by a priest, Vinod Maharaj. Reena Bai is missing since May 23 and has taken away cash and jewellery with her, relatives say. A case has been filed with the police. Family members now believe that Reena Bai had an affair with the priest before the marriage. (IANS)
