Gang 'tried to rape disabled mum then killed her daughter, 8, for crying'

The suspects also allegedly threatened to burn the woman's family members if she complained to police in Bharatpur, India

Gang 'tried to rape disabled mum then killed her daughter, 8, for crying'

Four men tried to gang rape a disabled woman before choking her eight-year-old daughter to death for crying when she heard her mother's screams, it is alleged.

The group then allegedly threatened to burn the woman's family members in a brick plant where she worked in Bharatpur, India, if she tried to tell police.

They told villagers the daughter had died from a disease and performed her last rites, it is claimed.

One of the alleged attackers was a police officer while the other three were owners of the brick plant, India Today reports.

It is claimed the attack happened in the shanty town where the woman was staying with her family.

The incident happened on May 12 but the survivor only recently found the courage to report it.

Image: Getty Images/EyeEm) Getty Images/EyeEm)

Earlier this month, Mirror Online reported a separate incident in which a 14-year-old girl with a blind father and disabled mother was raped repeatedly after her family sold her into sex slavery for just £1,700.

The girl was sold a total of three times in Rajasthan, India, after her "desperate" relatives convinced her parents to hand her over to human traffickers, reports the Times of India.

She changed hands for 1.5 Lakh, the equivalent of £1,681.50, police officer Jagdish Prasad said.

The girl is believed to be from the upper Dalit class.

Mr Prasad said: "About three months ago their relatives convinced the desperate family to sell their daughter for RS 1.5 lakh to human traffickers.

"She was brought to Bharatpur where she was raped by one person."

She was then sold to another man who raped her before she was passed again.

The brave youngster managed to escape from this house and raise the alarm.

She is believed to have handed over a raft of evidence to police, including the phone numbers of her attackers.

Three people were arrested for rape of a minor while others were arrested for trafficking and illegal confinement of a minor, Mr Prasad said.
