INDIA Mumbai, Dalit doctor did not commit suicide, she was murdered

Post-mortem investigations have revealed signs of strangulation on the body of Dr. Payal Tadvi. The three colleagues who tortured her are in prison on remand. The episode brought to light the profound discrimination of caste that exists in society.

New Delhi (AsiaNews / Agencies) - The young graduate of a medical hospital in Mumbai, found dead on May 22, did not commit suicide but "was killed". This is the accusation launched by Nitin Salute, the victim's lawyer, who reveals that the autopsy carried out on the body of Dr. Payal Tadvi shows signs of strangulation.

Yesterday, the police arrested the three colleagues who tortured the young woman and allegedly pushed her to suicide. These are Dr. Bhakti Mehere, Hema Ahuja, Ankita Khandelwal. Family members reported that the persecution of the three perpetrators had begun immediately after Payal's arrival in the hospital. The older colleagues insulted her in front of the patients, threw the medical records at her, and after going to the bathroom they rubbed their dirty feet on the doctor's mattress.

The story of the young doctor, who died at the age of 26, sparked a wide debate in India. The doctors who performed the autoptic examination report scars and burns prior to death. Her death has brought to light the entrenched caste discrimination that still exists today in the country and that affects all walks of life, from the Dalits (formerly untouchable) to those in society who succeed in gaining a good position thanks to study.

This is the case of Dr. Payal Tadvi, originally from Jalgaon, northern Maharashtra. Although of tribal adivasi origin, she was able to graduate in Medicine. Later, thanks to the public places reserved for disadvantaged caste foreseen by the Constitution to rebalance the ancient discriminations, she was also able to access the specialization in Obstetrics and Gynecology of BYL Nair hospital in Mumbai.

At the moment the three doctors are in prison, subject to a pre-trial detention regime. The family appealed to the judges to treat the case as a murder. The defense lawyer argues instead that all the charges are based only on the testimony of the victim's mother and it is certain that his clients will be released.
