'Dry state Bihar': Bride calls off wedding after drunken groom, wedding party assault her kin

The incident took place on Friday in Bihar's Bhagalpur district (Representative Image)

Patna: A little over two years since alcohol prohibition was imposed in the state of Bihar, reports of alcohol-related incidents continue to emerge from the state illustrating a brazen disregard for the Bihar Prohibition Act (2016). One such instance has come to light from Bhagalpur district where a 21-year-old to-be bride decided to teach the groom and his relatives a lesson they would never forget.

Like any other wedding, this too began with the bride's kin awaiting the arrival of the wedding party on Friday night, reported Times of India. However, members from the groom's side allegedly thrashed their counterparts from the girl's side while under the influence of alcohol.

Irate with the behaviour of her to-be husband and his kin, the bride called off the wedding and decided to take legal action against the groom and members of his wedding party. A native of Akbarpur village, Anusha Kumari's wedding with Paain Tilakpur resident Uday Razak was fixed about eight months ago.

The bride's family members told the national daily that the groom himself along with his kin engaged in drunken behaviour and even thrashed some of the bride's family members. This led the bride to take the extreme decision of calling off the wedding and seeking legal recourse. The accused, 28-year-old Uday Razak is a jawan with the Bihar police. Anusha's father has registered an official complaint with the Kahalgaon police against the groom and his wedding party for violating the Bihar Prohibition Act, 2016.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Manual scavenger dies after 'inhaling toxic fumes' inside drain clogged with plastic waste
