Cancel exams, sack UPPSC secretary: Protesting aspirants

Policemen chase away protesting civil services aspirants in Allahabad on Friday

ALLAHABAD: A day after STF arrested Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission (UPPSC) controller of examinations Anju Katiyar for her involvement in a 2018 LT grade exam paper leak case, scores of civil services aspirants took to streets on Friday and demanded that commission’s present secretary Jagdish be sacked.

Protesting in front of UPPSC headquarters on Stanley Road, the aspirants also demanded that the commission cancel all examinations conducted during the tenure of the current UPPSC secretary and Katiyar.

They also said that CBI should probe all recruitments during the tenure of the two top UPPSC officials.

The agitators had started assembling since early morning at the protest venue and as the crowd swelled, several units of Rapid Action FoRce (RAF), Provincial Armed Constabulary and police were deployed for safety.

Police monitored the situation closely as devotees were offering ‘alvida namaz’ (last Friday prayer during the month of Ramzan) at several mosques of the city.

The stir also hit traffic movement and police diverted commuters to alternative routes to avoid jammed streets.

Meanwhile, district officials, led by the ADM and SP, tried to pacify the protesters, who were adamant that they wanted to talk to chief minister Yogi Adityanath through video conferencing. However, the administration did not relent to their demand.

After several rounds of negotiation failed, police started chasing away the protesters with mild use of force. While running away from the police, many youth fell down and sustained injuries.

A few of them even pelted stones at the policemen, however none of the law enforcers were injured.

Later, police patrolled Civil Lines area to drive away all protesters.

“We negotiated with the protesters for over four hours and things were under control till some of the aspirants were ready for a dialogue. However, the atmosphere was disturbed once some youth who weren’t aspirants started creating a ruckus. We then used mild force to disperse them,” said ADM (city) AK Kanojia.

Similar protests had rocked the city after a PCS (Mains) exam paper was leaked in 2018.

Katiyar was arrested in Varanasi on Thursday and sent to 14 days’ judicial remand for her alleged involvement in the LT grade exam paper leak case. She was sent to remand after being produced before a special court judge.


