Mercilessly thrashed for 'eating meat near place of worship', labourers claim they were having vegetarian food

PETA members protest against killing animals to mark World Vegetarian Day in Bengaluru (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Bareilly: Yet another startling case of mob violence has come to light from the state of Uttar Pradesh where four daily wage labourers were mercilessly thrashed by unidentified assailants allegedly after they were seen eating meat near a makeshift temple. The incident which took place in Bareilly comes at the heels of outrage over the arrest of a teacher, two years after he wrote a Facebook post in support of consumption of beef.

The matter came to light earlier this week when a video of the assault began circulating on social media. A preliminary investigation has led police officials to suggest that the attack could have been due to two of the four labourers hail from minority communities. The victims of this attack had arrived at Baheri at the behest of a mason who had hired them to work as labourers, added police personnel.

Warning: Disturbing video, abusive language



Daily wage workers about to have their meal abused and assaulted by assailants in Baheri area in UP's Bareilly. Attackers can be heard abusing victims for eating meat at a religious site. @Uppolice pic.twitter.com/4UqYUuoSH5 — Piyush Rai (@Benarasiyaa) May 31, 2019

However, the men attacked allegedly for eating beef near a place of worship claim that they were consuming a vegetarian meal when a group of unidentified young men arrived at the spot and began assaulting them. In a video of the incident, the assailants can be seen thrashing the labourers.

Station house officer (SHO) of Baheri station, Dhananjay Singh told news agency ANI that the four men had been hired to aid with the construction of a private home. They had gone to a nearby 'devasthan' to eat their food. A 'devasthan' is a miniature shrine with idols of god, usually near or under shady trees.

Four people were beaten up allegedly for eating meat inside a temple in Bareilly on 29th May. SP Rural says, "A case has been registered, all accused will be arrested shortly. Locals who thrashed them said they were eating inside a religious place." pic.twitter.com/ookOvyrq6m — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 1, 2019

A first information report (FIR) in this regard has been registered against Adesh Valmiki and Manish along with four other unidentified men, said Bareilly senior superintendent of police (SSP) Muniraj G, adding that two teams have been formed to locate and arrest the rest of the accused who are currently at large. More details in this regard are awaited.
