Amit Shah takes charge as home minister: 5 challenges he faces ahead

This is the first time that Amit Shah is holding any portfolio in the Narendra Modi-led central government. (Photo: Facebook/ AmitShah)

Two days after taking oath as a cabinet minister in the Narendra Modi government, Amit Shah took charge as India's home minister on Saturday. This is the first time Amit Shah is holding any position in the Narendra Modi-led central government. He contested his first Lok Sabha election in 2019 and was elected from the Gandhinagar constituency in Gujarat.

In the first Narendra Modi government (2014-2019), Amit Shah did not take any cabinet post, despite being a Rajya Sabha MP, and continued being the BJP president.

After taking the charge Amit Shah thanked Prime Minister Narendra Modi for trusting him with this responsibility.

"The safety, security and welfare of citizens will be the priority of the Narendra Modi government. Under the leadership of PM Modi, I will try my best to achieve this," Amit Shah said in his tweet.

ALSO READ | From sticking bills for BJP to managing Union home ministry: Rise and rise of Amit Shah

Amit Shah's taking charge as Union home minister, a post previously held by Rajnath Singh who is now the defence minister, is significant because this comes in the backdrop of fragile law and order situation in Jammu and Kashmir, routine Maoist attacks in Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand, cross-border infiltrations, among others.

Here are 5 key challenges before Home minister Amit Shah:

1) J&K: Will situation improve and President's Rule end?

The state of Jammu and Kashmir has been without an elected government for almost a year now. The state was placed under Governor's rule last June and under President's rule last December when the six-month period of the Governor's rule ended.

The law and order situation in the state is so fragile that the Election Commission had to postpone the assembly elections in Jammu and Kashmir. Had the situation been normal, these elections would have been held simultaneously with the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, just as they were held in Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh.

ALSO READ | In last 5 years, J&K saw 93% rise in death of security personnel in terror attacks

On February 14, at least 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawans were killed in Pulwama in a suicide attack when an IED-laden SUV rammed into a CRPF bus that was part of a convoy. Following the Pulwama terror attack, the Indian Air force carried out airstrikes at terror camps in Balakot, Pakistan.

However, despite this, news of terror activities is routinely reported from the state. An IndiaToday.in analysis based on government replies in Parliament showed that there was a 176 per cent rise in terrorism activities in J&K in the past five years. (Read details here.)

2) Maoist attacks in central India

Challenge for Amit Shah as India's new home minister is not limited to the state of Jammu and Kashmir. Maoist groups in Central India have been routinely attacking security personnel. Even the 2019 Lok Sabha elections were not violence free in the region. BJP MLA from Dantewada in Chhattisgarh, Bhima Mandavi was allegedly shot dead by Maoists during the election season.

On May 3, Maoist killed 15 security personnel in Maharashtra's Gadchiroli and torched 26 vehicles. Just like Jammu and Kashmir, encounters between security forces and Maoists in Central India are regularly reported.

As home minister, Amit Shah will be in-charge of all central paramilitary forces (also known as Central Armed Police Force (CAPF)) and will be responsible for ensuring law and order in the country.

3) NRC and Citizenship Bill

The National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Assam and the Citizenship Bill were important and fiercely debated issues in the run-up to the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. Amit Shah, on multiple occasions, has advocated in their favour.

The NRC aims to trace illegal immigrants (largely from Bangladesh) who have been residing in Assam, detain them and find ways to send them back to their native country. On the other hand, the Citizenship Bill proposes to grant Indian citizenship to those religious minorities from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan who had to flee their country to escape religious persecution.

ALSO READ | Amit Shah joins Modi govt: What changes and what may now worry Team Modi-Shah

As home minister, it will be Amit Shah's responsibility to ensure that the NRC process is carried out in an amicable manner.

The task is arduous. For example, earlier this week media reported an Army veteran who fought the Kargil War with Pakistan has been declared an illegal immigrant by officials in Assam and has now been sent to a detention camp.

4) Checking cross-border infiltration

Cross-border infiltration has been a major problem for India that directly poses security threats for the country. This infiltration takes place not only on the Indo-Pakistan border, but also along the border with Bangladesh and Myanmar.

In February, an IndiaToday.in analysis had found that government records show that nearly 400 terrorists managed to infiltrate into Jammu and Kashmir between 2016 and 2018. (Read more on cross-border infiltration here).

Rampant cross-border infiltration along the Indo-Bangladesh has been a major problem in Assam, Bangladesh and Tripura. Locals allege that over the decades this infiltration has resulted in a demographic substitution in the bordering districts. They allege that this demographic substitution has made the natives a minority in their own homelands. Assam has been witness to a number of popular agitations in the past three-four decades against this.

5) Preparing crucial NCRB reports

The union home ministry has an important wing called the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB). The NCRB is responsible for preparing important annual reports on the law and order situation in the country.

Since 1953, NCRB had been preparing an annual report titled 'Crime in India', which had detailed state-wise data on crimes like murder, rape, rioting, kidnapping, arson, crimes against women, atrocities committed against Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs), sedition cases, corruption offences, human trafficking, among others. However, the NCRB has not released this report after 2016.

ALSO READ | PM Modi's acche din claims are great but what about data on jobs, farmers' suicide & crime?

Another key report prepared by the home ministry via NCRB is the annual report titled 'Accidental Deaths and Suicides in India'. This report was prepared every year since 1967. However, just like the report on 'Crime in India', the home ministry has not released this report since 2015.

The report is important because it is the only official country-wide data on farmers' suicide. Its findings give valuable insight on the status of agrarian distress in the country.

In 2015, when the last report was released, it was found that on an average every day at least 34 farmers committed suicide in India (12,602 suicides in 2015). Most of these were reported in Maharashtra (37.8 per cent) followed by Telangana (16.9 per cent) and Karnataka (14.9 per cent). The total number of suicides in 2015 was nearly 2 per cent more than the figure in 2014.

ALSO WATCH | Can Amit Shah help fix the Kashmir issue?
