In Ajjarkad dist hospital, a rare display of Hindu-Musilm bond and a brazen assault by the doctor

Udupi, Jun 1: A doctors has always been held in high regards because life and death of a patient lies with him, with the leave of the God. He is the embodiment of humanity without any barrier. That's what the general view of people towards doctors in the society. But, this view is overturned by the General Physician in District Hospital at Ajjarakad, Udupi by allegedly assaulting a woman.

The incident took place in the backdrop of an exemplary manifestation of Hindu-Muslim concord wherein a Muslim family was taking care of a helpless Hindu woman and providing her financial assistance too.

After a fall, Sundari Moilythi was bed-ridden at her house without proper care, food and treatment. She was in dire need of medication. Her Muslim neighbors took her to the district hospital and got her admitted six days ago with the support of her relatives and local Zilla Panchayat member Shashikanth.

Unfortunately, the doctor was on leave and for five days Sundari was stranded without any proper treatment or care like any other patient in the hospital. Only a lady doctor was attending her and other patient every 24 hours just as a formality.

The worst was yet to come. According to the relatives and neighbors of the patient, Dr Nagesh, the general physician, who resumed duty yesterday (Friday, May 31), not only continued to ignore the patient but also stared misbehaved with those visiting her.

The patient’s neighbor Saira Banu (wife of P A Mohiddin, Assistant Commandant in BSF) asked the doctor why the treatment was not given to the patient for five days and why the CT scan of the patient was recommended by the doctor to be conducted outside while that facility was available in the hospital.

This enraged Dr Nagesh, who went wild and pushed her out of the ward by holding her hand in front of other women and patients including relatives of Sundari, eye-witnesses said.

The victim immediately approached the Udupi Women Police Station and lodged a complaint. An FIR under the Section 354A of IPC (attack & outrage on the modesty) has been registered against the doctor. The spot mahzar was also conducted.

Meanwhile, Sundari was discharged from the hospital for the better treatment in other hospital in the city. However, due to high pressure from social activists, journalists and other community workers, Dr Nagesh got the patient re-admitted in the hospital and conducted all the medical check-up procedures including scan, MRI immediately.

Many patients and their kin claim that though the good facilities are available in the hospital, most of the times the doctor recommended the patients to conduct their medical tests etc in other private hospitals.

Local activists have urged the authorities concerned including Udupi district-in-charge Minister to look into the issue immediately and take necessary action against the doctor so that the patients may get better treatment in the hospital.

Ms Rajani Devadiga from Mangaluru, who is presently based in Gujarat and the Devadiga community organization based in Mumbai are also working for the patient's cause and thanked the Muslim neighbors of the patients for their selfless service.

The reporter is an NRI social activist and a member of the patient’s neighboring family, which has been taking care of her.
