Fact Check: What is the truth behind this viral message of horrible rape case in Delhi?

A disturbing photo has gone viral on social media with the claim that an Assamese girl from Delhi University has been raped and killed in Delhi. The claim further says that the dead body of the girl was found in a Jungle in Delhi. The photo is created by combining two different images. The bigger photo shows an injured female lying fainted on the ground and the smaller one shows a young girl, posing in a formal dress. The post gives the impression that both girls are the same.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) found that the photo in which a girl is lying on the ground is from Mexico. We couldn’t find any detail of the other photo which is on the right.

The message with the viral picture says that a Muslim girl, who was the resident of Assam had secured 92% in class 10. She was the student of a college in Delhi University and was found raped and killed in a jungle in Delhi. The message also alerted people not to send their daughters to Delhi alone.

The post went viral on Twitter as well.

When we reverse searched the image of the injured girl, we found an article of Daily Mail in which the viral photo was used. As per the article, the woman’s name was Maria Santos Gorrostieta, who was the mayor of a town in Mexico. She was kidnapped and killed in November 2012 by a drug gang.

We also tried to find the information regarding the image on the right but couldn’t get any detail of the same.

With all the possible keywords, we scanned the internet thoroughly but couldn’t find any such incident of the rape case of Delhi in the news articles.

We also reached out to Delhi Police to authenticate the message added in the post. Delhi police PRO, ACP Anil Mittal clarified to India Today that no such incident has been reported in Delhi.

Also read: Fact Check: The truth behind a Tokyo restaurant serving human meat

Also read: Fact Check: Viral picture of Muslim man being heckled is not from India

ALSO WATCH| Did PM Modi spend Rs 80 lakh on make-up?

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim The message with the photo says that an Assamese girl from Delhi University was being raped and killed in Delhi. Conclusion The photo in which a girl is lying on the ground is from Mexico. As per the Police, no such incident has been reported in Delhi. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
