Out of controll : The Tribune India

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

Nonika Singh in Chandigarh

The ugly world of trolls is getting uglier by the minute. It showed its most despicable face a few days back. When the nation, or at least the Narendra Modi followers, was celebrating the return of the NDA government with a thumping majority in the Lok Sabha elections, an appalling incident struck out like a sore thumb. Anurag Kashyap, a celebrated filmmaker, drew our attention to it. No, this time around he was not asking his followers to oppose Narendra Modi and his party. Rather, he was reaching out to the Prime Minister, seeking his intervention after his daughter received a rape threat on her Instagram handle. The threat was shameful, and the fact that the troll targeted Kashyap’s innocent daughter, Aaliyah Kashyap, to get even with him made it even more repugnant.

The vile threat read like a scene from a C grade film, or perhaps not, for which certification authority would have allowed such abhorrence. The rape threat, posted by a social media user, supposedly a Modi follower as Kashyap alleged, was laced with the most derogatory language, the kind that would/ should put every right-thinking individual to shame. Of course, venomous rape threats follow women all over the world, often for speaking out their mind. Have an opinion and threats will deluge you is the unwritten rule of social media, especially if you belong to the fairer sex.

In the UK, Caroline Emma Criado-Perez, a feminist campaigner who made sure the Bank of England put back the face of a woman on its notes, became a victim of online abuse for her beliefs. However, women face intimidation for the slightest and often no provocation at all. In 2017, the UN special rapporteurs on violence against women and freedom of expression remarked that the prevalence of gender-based online abuse, including threats of rape, can “chill and disrupt the online participation of women journalists, activists, human rights defenders, artists and other public figures and private persons”.

However, to use a rape threat to get even with a man is a new low even by trollers’ appalling standards. For a very long time, the Twitter mob and digital Maoists have been allowed a free run on social media. Thriving under the cloak of anonymity which guarantees impunity of sorts, they have been calling the shots and taking pot-shots at all and sundry. Television actress Shilpa Shinde was trolled ruthlessly, including a rape threat, when she supported Navjot Singh Sidhu for his remarks post the Pulwama attack. Though they aim their toxic volleys at everyone having an opinion they don’t concur with, celebrities, especially the ones who speak their mind, are their favourite soft targets. So, when the man in question is an acclaimed and gifted director, known as much for his dissenting views as his outspoken stance on a range of issues, both political and apolitical, the barbs stick harder. Kashyap, who has shown the gumption to call out the biggest stars in the film industry as well as the Prime Minister on several occasions, was not going to gloss over the threat/insult. He has spoken loud and clear, even if it led to exposing his daughter to public glare and himself to unsavoury comments of his filmy brethren.

Can’t see the wood for the trees

However, the point here is not what motivated Kashyap to tag the Prime Minister. The vexing question is, how long such trolls would be allowed to have a free run? Instead of casting aspersions on Kashyap’s intentions as some of the otherwise sagacious men and women like Ashoke Pandit and Suchitra Krishnamoorthi have, not just the film industry but each one of us, the sane civilised citizens or netizens, should rally around him. This isn’t about Kashyap locking horns with the establishment to ensure the release of his film. What he has demanded is his right as an individual and, even more importantly, as a father. Our response should be in line with sense, sensibility and sensitivity befitting the citizens of a democratic nation.

Kashyap may have thanked the Mumbai police, the Prime Minister and Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis for ensuring an FIR was registered. But a vote of thanks to the authorities concerned will only be due once the process is completed and the guilty booked. Just like a pervert who made obscene rape threats on Facebook was arrested by the Kolkata police. Or the person, who threatened former Congress spokesperson Priyanka Chaturvedi on Twitter with the rape of her seven-year-old daughter was caught, thanks to the intervention of Union Minister Rajnath Singh.

Ignore online abuse at your own peril

Online rape threats might be getting commonplace but ignoring these would be as disastrous as turning a blind eye to sexual crimes in real world. Virtual abuse is not just another nasty comment women often accost and ignore on streets. As social media is transforming into a hub of vile and spite, the ruffians who have begun to rule this space can be ignored at our own peril. Researchers have found that trolls are likely to have narcissistic, Machiavellian, psychopathic, and sadistic tendencies which, by the way, are the same personality traits found in sexual offenders and serial killers. The author of Misogyny Online, Emma Jane, says, “While speaking publicly is not for everyone, silence does tend to protect perpetrators, obscure larger social problems, and serve as a petri dish for the cultivation of shame.”

So dear all, never mind your political affiliation, instead of questioning Kashyap, shame and expose the vitriolic trolling Indians who consider it their birthright to hyperventilate with sexualised vitriol.
