Delhi: Minor sexually assaults sister-in-law, slits her throat; hangs nephew to death

The police found selfies clicked with minor suspect just before the incident on Thursday afternoon. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: The Delhi Police apprehended a minor for allegedly killing his sister-in-law and her minor son after she resisted his attempts to sexual assault. The incident happened in central Delhi's Prem Nagar area.

Reportedly, the accused hails from Muzaffarpur district in Bihar and he used to sell vegetables in the national capital. The police officials said that from the past 20 days, the accused was staying with the deceased's family.

News agency PTI reported that the police found bodies of a 26-year-old woman and her four-year-old son at their rented accommodation. Reportedly, the woman's throat was slit with a sharp object and she was lying in a pool of blood and meanwhile, her minor son was found hanging from a ceiling fan.

The police officials told PTI that during the preliminary investigation, the cops found out that the minor was the last person to visit their room. Upon tracing deceased's phone, the police found selfies clicked with minor suspect just before the incident on Thursday afternoon.

The police arrested the suspect after they found several minor injuries on his body. These marks included teeth bites on the legs, scratches on the face, neck and the back. Mandeep Singh Randhawa, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Central) told PTI that while the suspected was being interrogated he revealed that on Thursday, he attempted to sexually assault the deceased which she resisted strongly. And during the resistance, he got minor injuries on his body.

Following the assault he hit the woman with a stone which left her unconscious, the police added. Meanwhile, the child who was sleeping woke up, thinking that he would tell everything to his father, the accused hanged the child with the fan and then slit the woman's throat with a knife.

However, he then brushed the blood stains in the washroom and left the premises. After the incident, he roamed in Baljeet Nagar and Prem Nagar areas for two to three hours. However, the police have recovered the knife, stone and the soap which was used in the crime.






