Kathua rape victim's family appeals to India to 'stop Hindu-Muslim fight' over her

Candle march for the Kathua rape victim | Photo Credit: BCCL

Srinagar: The grieving family of the eight-year-old child, who was brutally gang-raped and killed in Jammu and Kashmir's Kathua district in January this year, has an important message to share. "Stop Hindu-Muslim divide over her," the family members said, even though they added that they were scared they would not get justice in the case. Speaking to Times Now, the family also questioned the BJP's 'Beti Bachao' slogan, and slammed the Bharatiya Janata Party leaders who had attempted to 'shield' the accused in the case. The mother, sister, and uncle of the victim spoke to the channel and admitted that they were scared for their lives after the incident.

In an exclusive conversation with Times Now, the uncle of the minor girl urged citizens to not allow the issue to turn into a communal fight saying, "A child is a child. We should not look at them through the prism of Hindu, or Muslim, or Sikh." On the other hand, the girl's sister confessed that was "very scared" and had even been scared to "venture out alone" after the incident. However, the mother of the victim, as well as the sister, stated that justice would only be served in the case when the alleged rapists were hanged to death. "How had an eight-old child wronged them? They killed my daughter, so they should also be killed," the mother of the child said.

Meanwhile, in the wake of massive public outrage over the gang-rape of a minor girl in Jammu and Kashmir's Kathua, Union Women and Child Development Minister Maneka Gandhi on Friday announced that her ministry intends to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO), making provision for death penalty for child rapists. In a video message, Gandhi said she was “deeply disturbed by the rape case in Kathua and all the recent rape cases that have happened on children”.

Eight people, including mastermind Sanji Ram, have been charged with kidnapping, rape, and murder of the eight-year-old girl from the Bakerwal community in Rasana village in January. As per the probe, the girl was kept in a temple, drugged, repeatedly raped and finally murdered to scare the nomadic Muslim community out of the village.

According to police charge sheet, several people, including a police officer, raped her before bashing her head with a stone. Sanji Ram, identified as the main conspirator, is the caretaker of a temple. Ram allegedly planned the heinous act to instil fear among grazers belonging to Bakarwal community. The girl’s body was recovered from Rassana forest in Kathua district on January 17, 2018, a week after she went missing while grazing horses in the area.

Outrage over the horrific rape and murder of the eight-year-old girl child has escalated in the last few weeks, more so after the charge sheet filed in the case revealed spine-chilling gory details of the crime. Several politicians and Bollywood actors took to Twitter to strongly condemn the barbaric crime, with Congress President Rahul Gandhi holding a midnight candle mrach on Thursday to pray for the child and to demand justice in the case.


