Custodial torture: Theft accused dies of thrashing

SURAT: A 23-year-old man, victim of torture by cops in custody at Khatodara police station, was declared dead by doctors at a private hospital here on Saturday night. Eight cops earlier booked for custodial torture have been now charged with murder. Preliminary postmortem findings confirmed that the man was thrashed due to which he suffered shock and brain haemorrhage and this ultimately led to his death during treatment in Unique Hospital on Saturday. Postmortem found around 36 injury marks on the body of Om Prakash Pande, a resident of Pandesara and native of Uttar Pradesh. He was in illegal custody of police for three days after he was caught on suspicion of having committed a theft in an area under the limits of Khatodara police station.Police are yet to arrest the accused eight cops who were present in Khatodara police station when the offence was being registered against them, but escaped after injuring their colleagues on Friday night. The accused cops were not found at their houses.Police booked Mohanlal Bhagwanram Khileri, police inspector; Chirag Pruthviraj Chaudhary, police sub-inspector; and six junior cops, namely, Haresh Chaudhary, Kanaksinh Diyol, Paresh Bhukan, Aashish Dihora, Kalpesh Garmabha and Dilu Sangani for murder. Earlier on Friday, the accused cops were booked under various sections of Indian Penal Code including 330 (voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession), 342 (wrongful confinement), 324 (voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons), and 348 (wrongful confinement to extort confession).The investigation in the case has been transferred to Chintan Teraiya, deputy commissioner of police special branch. Police got forensic penal postmortem done on the deceased’s body at New Civil Hospital on Sunday. Three forensic doctors did postmortem of the body and based on their report, police were now taking further action in the case.“I went to the postmortem room in the hospital to ensure forensic postmortem of the body by senior most doctors. The accused cops have been booked for murder and investigation has been handed over to a DCP,” police commissioner Satish Sharma told TOI.“The preliminary postmortem findings have revealed that the man died of shock and brain haemorrhage caused due to multiple injuries. He was thrashed by the cops,” Sharma added.
