Okay with ‘Jai Shri Ram’, but not how BJP uses it: Mamata

editorial@tribune.com

Kolkata, June 2

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee today alleged the BJP was mixing religion with politics by repeatedly using the ‘Jai Shri Ram’ phrase.

“Jai Sia Ram, Jai Ram ji ki, Ram naam satya hai, etc. have religious and social connotations. We respect these sentiments. But the BJP is using religious slogan Jai Shri Ram as their party slogan in a misconceived manner by way of mixing religion with politics (sic),” she said in a Facebook post. Banerjee said she had no problem with any particular slogan being used in political rallies or events of a party. “We do not respect this forcible enforcement of political slogans on others...,” she said.

The TMCsupremo also said attempts were being made to propagate the ideology of hatred, which should be opposed. “This is a deliberate attempt to sell hatred ideology through vandalism and violence, which we must oppose together,” Banerjee wrote.

The CM has lost her cool twice in the past few weeks over people chanting ‘Jai Shri Ram’ at a few places in the state, as her motorcade passed through those areas.Banerjee lost her cool on Thursday when a group of men shouted “Jai Shri Ram” as her motorcade was passing through North 24 Parganas district’s Bhatpara area, which is the stronghold of Singh, who had defected to the saffron party from the TMC weeks before the LS election.

1 dies as violence continues

A ‘BJP worker’, Ajay Mondol, was stabbed to death in North 24 Parganas while several others were injured as political violence continued in the state on Sunday. Reports of houses being ransacked and activists of the BJP and TMC sustaining injuries surfaced through the day. — Agencies

Chant it to ward off bad spirits, CM told

New Delhi: Delhi BJP leader Praveen Shankar Kapoor asked Mamata to chant lord Ram’s name, saying it will help ward off “bad spirits”. In a letter to the TMC chief, Kapoor said he had sent her a ‘Bhagwan Shri Ram Naam Mantra’ and asked her to keep it on her table. “I request you to keep it on your work table and it will soon remove the effect of bad spirits on you and make you follow the path of Ram Rajya in public service,” he said.
