BJP MLA kicks, thrashes woman NCP leader in Gujarat, says assault was not intentional

Gujarat BJP MLA Balram Thawani beat up and kicked a woman NCP leader on the streets, triggering a hue and cry on social media. The NCP leader from Naroda went to his office for some work in the locality when he slapped her and started kicking her.

After massive criticism from all quarters, Balram Thawani said, "I got swayed by emotions and I accept the mistake. It was not intentional. I have been in politics for last 22 years and such a thing has never happened before. I will say sorry to her."

#WATCH BJP's Naroda MLA Balram Thawani kicks NCP leader (Kuber Nagar Ward) Nitu Tejwani when she went to his office to meet him over a local issue yesterday. Nitu Tejwani has registered a complaint against the MLA. #Gujarat pic.twitter.com/dNH2Fgo5Vw ANI (@ANI) June 3, 2019

Nitu Tejwani, NCP leader from Naroda: I had gone to meet BJP MLA Balram Thawani over a local issue but even before hearing me he slapped me, when I fell down he started to kick me. His people also beat up my husband. I ask Modi ji, how are women safe under the BJP rule? #Gujarat pic.twitter.com/PWUjekyyyC ANI (@ANI) June 3, 2019

In the viral video shared by ANI, Balram Thawani and his men can be seen thrashing the woman even as she struggles to get up on her feet. He continues to kick her repeatedly as she continues to struggle.

Another man picks her up while Thawani goes on with his assault.

Now, Thawani has said the assault was "not intentional".

Sitting on a hospital bed, Nitu Tejwani told ANI, "I had gone to meet BJP MLA Balram Thawani over a local issue but even before hearing me he slapped me and when I fell down he started kicking me. His people also beat up my husband. I ask Modi ji, how are women safe under the BJP rule?"

Tejwani had gone up to Thawani with complaints of water scarcity in the area.

Thawani also clarified that the incident happened in heat of the moment and also claimed that the woman and her husband had come with the intention to pick up a fight.
