Free travel for women 'desperate bid to buy votes': Manoj Tiwari

The BJP's Delhi unit chief Manoj Tiwari Monday alleged that the AAP government's proposal to make metro and bus travel free for women is a "desperate bid to buy votes".

The BJP leader said Kejriwal is making such announcements because he's fast losing ground in Delhi.

"It seems he's lost his mind... 'ghoshna mantri' (announcement minister) has made another announcement to make people laugh... he made 70 promises and all are lies," he told reporters.

"After the tight slap of defeat, he started the process for implementing 10 per cent reservation for economically weaker sections. He's making such announcements to hold onto his ground in Delhi. It's a desperate bid to buy votes," Tiwari said.

The BJP leader, however, made it clear that he's not against giving free rides to women in buses and the Delhi Metro.

"We are not against the idea. There is no problem in giving free rides to women, but where are the buses? The AAP is befooling people," he alleged.

The BJP's Delhi unit has plans for free rides to all in government buses, but we will not make any tall promises, Tiwari said.

Attacking the Kejriwal government over insufficient number of buses in the city, he said, "Around one crore women in the city will need 20,000 buses, but we have just 3,500-3,800. Where will they sit?"



The AAP government had also promised to deploy marshals and install panic buttons in DTC buses, but failed to deliver on its promise, he said.

Tiwari claimed Kejriwal will make many more such announcements to "ensnare the gullible people."



"He has lost his mental balance. People should be cautious of him".

People need to support the BJP against "nakampanthi (failure) and divide and rule" policy of the Kejriwal government, he added.

"Can he do in three months what he failed to do in 52 months? In five years, Modi has become synonymous with faith and confidence, while Kejriwal has become a curse," Tiwari alleged.

Free bus travel for everyone can be ensured but it needs planning, he said, adding first electric buses need to be brought in to curb pollution.

The AAP's vote share in the capital dipped alarmingly in the Lok Sabha polls, from 33 per cent in 2014 to 18.1 per cent this time.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
