Death Penalty Of Shakti Mills Gang-Rape Convicts Upheld, No Respite From Heat Wave And Other News

The Bombay High Court has upheld the death penalty of three convicts in the 2013 Shakti Mill gang-rape case. The Bombay HC on Monday ruled that section 376(E) of the Indian Penal Code under which repeat offenders in rape cases can be awarded life imprisonment or death penalty is constitutionally valid and is applicable in the case.

A division bench of Justices B P Dharmadhikari and Revati Mohite Dere made the ruling while dismissing the petitions filed by three convicts in the Shakti Mill gang rape case challenging Constitutional validity of the legal provisions under which they were sentenced to death in 2014. Read more

Ten Hottest Cities In The World Are In India Right Now, People Feel They Are Living In Furnaces

The acute heatwave that has gripped northern India has thrown normal life out of gear for the past few days and is most likely to remain the same at least for a few more days.

On Sunday the day temperatures crossed 50-degree Celsius in Rajasthan's Churu, making it the hottest city in the world. It is not just Churu, other cities like Sri Ganganagar, UP's Banda and Narnol in Haryana were among the hottest places in the world. Read more

Kerala Woman Wrongly Diagnosed With Cancer, Suffers Severe Side Effects Of Chemotherapy

A woman in Kerala was undergoing Chemotherapy at the Kottayam Medical College after tests conducted at a Dianova Laboratories, private lab in the city "wrongly" diagnosed her of having cancer.

The woman had undergone treatment at the General surgery department of the hospital on February 28 for a lump on her breast. Read more

Eight Climbers On Nanda Devi Still Missing, Officials Say Little Chance Of Finding Them Alive

After unsuccessful attempts to trace right missing climbers in Himalayan region, around Nanda Devi mountain with the help of two Indian Air Force helicopters, the officials have now said it’s unlikely to find the survivors.

The eight climbers included climbers from Australia, Britain, United States and India and the rescue effort were started on Saturday when they didn’t return to the base camp. Read more

Colleges In Bengal Give Students The Option To Keep Faith Matter Private & It's A Great Move

In a welcome move, at least 50 college across West Bengal have added ‘humanity’, ‘secular’, agnostic’, and ‘non-religious’ as options in the religion column of their online admission forms and this has specially been done for students who don’t want to disclose their faith.

The move would allow the students applying for undergraduate course in these colleges to keep their religious beliefs secret. Read more

Over 6,800 Cases And Rs 71,500 Crore Bank Frauds Were At An All Time High In 2018-19

Over 6,800 cases of bank fraud involving an unprecedented Rs 71,500 crore have been reported in 2018-19, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has said.A total of 5,916 such cases were reported by banks in 2017-18 involving Rs 41,167.03 crore, it said.

As many as 6,801 cases of fraud were reported by scheduled commercial banks and select financial institutions involving an amount of Rs 71,542.93 crore in the last fiscal (increase of over 73 per cent in the fraud amount), the Reserve Bank said in reply to an RTI query. Read more
