HC orders cops to pay Rs 10 lakh for lax probe

MUMBAI: The Bombay high court on Monday set aside the death penalty faced by a man as well as the rape and murder charge of a four-year-old girl he had been convicted of in 2012.Slamming the police, a division bench of Justices Bhushan Dharmadhikari and Prakash Naik ordered the Maharashtra government to pay Rs 10 lakh to the girl’s family “for negligent investigation into the death of their daughter”. The court said the state could recover the amount from the investigation officer and other police personnel “found guilty of lack of diligence in investigation”.The post-mortem report did not support the police claim of rape-murder in Sakinaka, but was backed by reports from doctors who had only seen photographs of the body.Nazir Khan, an employee of a hoarding company, was, however, held guilty of causing disappearance of evidence.The bench ordered that Khan, in prison for the last seven years, should be released if he’s not wanted in any other case. The owner of the hoarding company and a co-accused, was also acquitted.The court rejected Khan’s plea for compensation for wrongful prosecution, saying he was guilty of a criminal offence of removing evidence and was not entitled to any relief. He served the maximum seven-year term for the offence.Khan had claimed that the girl, who was playing in the hoarding firm’s godown, had died after plywood boards fell on her. Scared of being implicated, he had left the body on the Western Express Highway near Vile Parle (see box). Advocate Yug Chaudhry, counsel for the accused, pointed out that the post-mortem reports did not mention rape or murder. The police had added the charges based on a medical report by doctors who had not examined the body and had given their opinion on the basis of photographs of the decomposed body.“The material on record does not record a finding of rape, does not show culpable homicide and does not rule out accidental death. The investigating officer has left the material lacunae in the entire exercise and that has not been rectified even after directions of the court,” said the bench.The court slammed the police for failing to probe the cause of death and determining if the accused could have been charged with causing death due to negligence. “Medical evidence does not permit us to hold that there was any offence of murder or rape... the investigating officer ought to have attempted to find out whether fall of plywood sheets on the victim would have resulted in her death,” said the judges. “Whether plywood sheets stored in the godown of the accused persons slipped and fell on the deceased victim because of negligent storing or because of some human act is the moot question which needed investigation and answer. Unfortunately, investigating officer has not brought on record any material in that respect.”A sessions court in 2016 had held Khan guilty of rape-murder and sentenced him to death. Meher was convicted of removing evidence and sentenced to three years.
