The Shillong Times

CBI asked to complete shelter home probe in 3 months

New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Monday directed the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to probe into allegations of trafficking, unnatural sexual assault and video recording of victims at a shelter home in Muzaffarpur of Bihar.The court ordered the agency to complete the probe and place before it the report within three months. The top court also asked the CBI to investigate allegations of murder, after human skeletons were exhumed from a spot at the insistence of one of the accused in the case. It had earlier asked the agency to probe into murder of 11 girls at the shelter home and file a status report by June 3. The apex court also directed the CBI to investigate the role of outsiders, allegedly involved in sexual assault on victims, usually after intoxicating them.The case came to light in May last year following a report by the Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) alleging sexual abuse of inmates at the shelter home. In the medical examination that followed, sexual abuse of 34 out of the 42 girls was confirmed. (IANS)



Kathua rape case: Court to pronounce order on June 10

Pathankot: The Pathankot district and session court will pronounce its order in a case pertaining to rape and murder of an eight-year-old girl in Kathua on June 10. The trial in the case was completed on Monday. The eight-year-old girl, belonging to a nomadic Muslim tribe, was abducted, drugged, gang-raped, tortured and killed in January last year. The trial began in April last year against seven accused out of eight. Trial for the juvenile is yet to begin. (ANI)

Militant, associate killed in J&K

Srinagar: A militant and his “active associate” were killed in a shootout with security forces in Shopian district of Jammu and Kashmir, police said on Monday. “During the preceding night, security forces at a checkpoint on Shopian-Turkawangom road at Mool Chitragam (in the south Kashmir district) intercepted a vehicle. However, the terrorists boarding the vehicle opened fire from inside on the security forces,” a police spokesman said. He said the security forces retaliated and in the process, “one terrorist identified as Firdous Ahmad Bhat and an active associate Sajad Ahmad who was driving the vehicle got killed”. Both of them were residents of neighbouring Kulgam district, the spokesman said, adding another militant managed to flee taking advantage of the darkness. (PTI)



Pak intruder’s body handed over

JAMMU: The body of a Pakistani intruder found Saturday night on Indian side of the international border in Pargwal-Khour sector of the district was handed over to Pakistani authorities. The body was handed over to Pakistan Rangers at a Border Out Post (BoP) along the Indo-Pak border in Jammu district, officials said Monday. “The body of the intruder was handed over to a Pakistan border post,” the official said. The BSF had found the body of the Pakistani intruder at Bhag Nallah in Pargwal-Khour sector of the district during patrolling at late Saturday night. On search, it was found to have two pension passbooks and Pak currency worth Rs 20 on it, they said. The BSF handed it over to Pargwal Police Post and after examining the body, it was shifted to the GMC Hospital where post mortem was conducted. (IANS)
