‘Living in fear, such people should be killed’

editorial@tribune.com

Aparna Banerji

Tribune News Service

Jalandhar, June 3

“Hum yahi kahenge aise bande ko mar dena chahiye. Eh nabalag hain bacche. Hamara baccha hai, kisi ka baccha ho sakta hai. Bacche rakhne hai, kaam bhi karna hai. Jab in bacchon ke saath kuch ghatna hoti hai. Hum khauff mein jeete hain,” (I would say such people should be killed. These are minor children. It’s my child today, could be anyone’s tomorrow. We have to raise our children and work too. When such incidents happen, we live in perpetual fear) says the father of a three-year-old girl, who was raped at Salahi village in Jalandhar a week ago.

Separated by a hospital bunk, the parents of two minor girls who were recently raped, tend to their daughters at the Civil Hospital’s children’s ward.

With her red eyes due to crying and sleeplessness, the mother of the 10-year-old who was raped yesterday, sits one bed away from the Salahi village family. “Aaye to dekha, makan malik ko bataya. Unhone peeta. Ab theek hai,” (I came and saw, told my landlord and they beat up that man. Now it’s fine) she says, when being asked about the death of the man who raped her daughter, before she breaks down.

While a man was allegedly killed by angry residents after he raped the 10-year-old girl at Dinesh Nagar yesterday, the incident was the fifth rape of a minor in the state in a week (not counting adult women). Protests were also witnessed at Shahkot and outside the SSP office last week.

The 10-year-old lies in bed, half-covered with a dupatta, still wearing a soiled shirt stained with blood and complaining of abdominal pain from time to time. “She was covered in that much blood when I came home. She went crawling to her aunt’s house,” she says then breaks down.

Both mother and father of the girl are migrant labourers who moved from Nepal to Punjab two months ago on the insistence of the woman’s sister. The father is away to work even today, as someone has to earn the bread for the family.

She said: “We collectively earn merely Rs 1,000 per month and came here two months ago in search of better jobs. We never knew such thing would happen to us. My only hope is her treatment goes well and the government helps her for further treatment.”

The man, lying next to his three-year-old daughter, also shares a similar sordid story. His daughter was raped by a man who was his associate for nine years and worked on a same farm. He absconded and hasn’t been caught yet.

He says: “Dar mein hain hum. Shiksha dena hai, roti dena hai. Kaise parhaenge bacche ko. Kuch samajh nahi aa raha.” (We are scared. I have to educate my girl and feed her. How will I educate her. Cannot understand.) Locked up inside the room where he stays with his daughter, she was picked up by the suspect and taken to another room in the fields. It was only at 5 am the next morning that he found her at a room in another field, “covered in blood”.

While the post-mortem of the deceased accused, who raped the 10-year-old, is yet to be conducted, ACP, Jalandhar, Harsimrat Singh, said today that, “The brother of the deceased (accused) will come tomorrow, the post-mortem will be conducted when his relatives arrive. The rape is confirmed and the girl’s vaginal swabs have been sent for testing.”

Boys not safe either

In what would be the sixth such incident concerning a minor, another person was booked for sodomising a four-year-old boy at Mitthapur here today.

Son of migrant labourers, the boy was lying on the roof of a migrants’ settlement when a neighbour attempted to molest him.

Ramdeen (20), alias Ram Kumar, a native of Behraich village in UP, has been booked under Section 377, IPC, and relevant sections of the POCSO Act. Inspector Naveen Pal Singh Lehal, SHO, police station Division No. 7, said: “The victim belongs to a family of migrants, hailing from Lucknow, and is the only son of his parents. The boy’s mother caught him attempting to violate her son. On seeing her, he pushed the family members and fled.”

The police said an FIR was registered last night. The accused is absconding. His possible hideouts were being searched to nab the culprit.

Police personnel were deputed on duty outside the ward. Police officials also visited the ward.
