Villagers thrash, strip suspected robbers before handing them over to police in Gujarat

Gujarat Police is probing the matter (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Ahmedabad: Officials with the Dahod police have confirmed that a group of locals in Garbada taluka of Gujarat captured two suspected robbers and thrashed them within an inch of their lives before handing them over to the police. The incident took place on Sunday, June 2, after the suspects apprehended a man and his daughter only to rob them before attempting to flee the spot.

A first information report (FIR) in this regard has been lodged by the Dahod police on the basis of a complaint by Devsinh Parmar, a resident of Ablor village in Garbada. In his statement, Parmar claimed that he was on his way to Dahod along with his daughter when three men stopped their motorcycle. The assailants then thrashed Parmar and his daughter with sticks and robbed them of cash amounting to Rs 10,000 and jewellery valued at Rs 12,000.

However, Parmar's daughter raised an alarm alerting residents of the area who ran to the father-daughter duo's rescue. While Rahul Bhabhor managed to flee the spot, his two accomplices, 35-year-olds Sardar Bhabor and Babu Bhabhor could not escape the clutches of the angry locals. What followed was a glaring display of mob action, a sight which has become prevalent in recent years across the length and breadth of the country.

Police officials familiar with the matter said that the villagers stripped the two robbers naked and thrashed them black and blue before handing the two over to the police. A video of the assault was also shot and is being widely circulated on social media. After they were taken into police custody, the two robbers were rushed to the Dahod government hospital where they are currently undergoing treatment for injuries incurred during the assault. Medical reports of the victims are also being collected.

Meanwhile, investigators said that statements of both the loot accused and villagers who attacked the suspects have been recorded. A case has also been registered against the villagers who assaulted the two men, added officers. Superintendent of Police Hitesh Joysar confirmed that faces of the locals who attacked the duo were caught on videos, which have gone viral. He further added that the two suspected robbers already have cases registered against them.
