160 civilians killed in J&K in 2018: JKCCS

160 civilians killed in J&K in 2018: JKCCS

SRINAGAR, Jan 2: The report of Jammu Kashmir Coalition of Civil Society (JKCCS) regarding civilian killings in the state in 2018 contradicted the statistics presented by Director General of Police Dilbagh Singh at a press conference here today.

According to JKCCS, an eight-month old kid and 30 minors under the age of 17 years were among the 160 civilians killed in Jammu and Kashmir in 2018.

The report by the human rights group has termed 2018 as deadliest year in a decade.

As per the figures of JKCCS, 586 persons were killed last year. They included 267 militants and 159 security personnel.

Cross border shelling in Pallanwala sector in Jammu killed an eight month old baby, Nitin Kumar. Ten-year old Musharraf Fayaz and nine year-old Saliq Iqbal of Shopian were killed when littered unexploded shells went off near encounter sites, the report said.

Regarding the civilian killings, the report said 71 of them were killed by security-men, 29 died in cross LoC shelling, 25 by unidentified gunmen, 18 by militants and 20 in explosions. A civilian died in stone pelting.

The report also mentions the gang rape and murder of a girl child in Kathua.

South Kashmir districts including Kulgam, Anantnag, Pulwama and Shopian witnessed maximum 85 civilian killings in the year, the report states.

There have been 191 incidents where “excessive” force was used by the government, while 40 people lost their lives near encounter sites, the report mentions.

According to the report internet services were blocked on 108 timed during 2018. South Kashmir districts recorded the maximum of such 67 instances. Internet was shut in entire Kashmir seven times.

The report also highlighted the detention of media persons including Aasif Sultan and Delhi-based journalist Zulkarnain Banday who was summoned and detained in Srinagar.

It also says that social media users were harassed for posting their views on many occasions.

A youth Sheeraz Ahmad Naikoo was killed due to pellet injuries in Anantnag and a 19-month-old toddler, Hiba Jan from Shopian was injured in her right eye with the metal shards.

In 2018, 275 cordon and search operations were conducted and 143 encounters took place during the year. 120 residential houses were damaged out of which 31 were completely burnt during militancy related incidents.

Eleven political activists were killed in “targeted violence”, while there have been multiple attacks on the family members of policemen, political activists and militants.

November was the bloodiest month with 61 killings.

According to report there was no end to slapping of PSA.

A minor, Umar Yusuf Khan, who suffers from a peculiar nervous disorder, was also booked under PSA.

A 60-year-old political activist, Abdul Rehman Tantray suffered a haemorrhage while in detention under PSA. Another 65-year-old political activist Muhammad Ramzan Sheikh was also jailed under the administrative detention law.

A pellet victim from Pulwama, Suhail Ahmed Trambo was also detained under PSA and lodged in Kathua Jail.

Separatist leader, Masarat Alam Bhat was slapped with PSA for the 37th time in the past year.
