Man on death row for alleged rape-murder set free; Bombay HC raps cops for shoddy investigation

The order was passed by a bench comprising Justices Bhushan Dharmadhikari and Prashant Naik (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: A division bench of the Bombay High Court on Monday decided to commute the death sentence passed out to a local resident accused of raping and murdering a minor girl in 2012. The accused, Nazir Khan, had been in prison for the past seven years on charges of rape, murder and destruction of evidence. Employed with a hoarding company in the city, Khan was convicted in the case of rape and murder of a four-year-old girl by a sessions court in 2016 and sentenced to death.

However, a bench comprising Justices Bhushan Dharmadhikari and Prashant Naik has now ordered Maharashtra government to pay the victim's family Rs 10 lakh as compensation for "negligent investigation into the death of their daughter". In addition, the Bombay High Court also advised the state to recover the amount of the compensation from the investigating officer (IO) and other police officials "found guilty of lack of diligence" during the course of the probe.

The incident dates back to January 1, 2012, when the minor girl's father approached police with a missing person complaint. Patrolling officers found the body of a minor, matching the description of the missing girl, on the side of the Western Express Highway the very next day. Within 24 hours of the discovery of her body, police officials arrested Nazir Khan on suspicion of his involvement in the girl's alleged rape and murder. In his defence, Khan stated that the girl died after a plywood board fell on her in the godown of the hoarding company which employed him. He further claimed that he secretly dumped the girl's body for fear of being implicated in her death.

Arguing for Khan, advocate Yug Chaudhry said that the post-mortem reports of the girl did not mention rape or murder despite the allegations being levelled by police at every single juncture in the investigation. These claims when added to other lapses in the course of the investigation are what likely led to the Bombay High Court releasing Khan, saying that he has already served seven years in prison, the maximum sentence for alleged destruction of evidence.
