Taapsee Pannu Feels If Perpetrators Aren't Punished, The Spirit Of #MeToo Movement Will Get Shattered

Just two days ago, director Vikas Bahl got a clean chit in the sexual misconduct case against him. It was also announced that he would get his credit as the director of the film. Well, he wasn't the only person who was in news as Tanushree Dutta started one havoc of a movement in India.

While many rightly were rusticated from their respective jobs, a few were still intact in their respective jobs. Even actor Alok Nath, who was accused of rape by writer-director Vinta Nanda, appeared in the film De De Pyaar De.

Talking about the same, actress Taapsee Pannu says people must not stop raising their voice against sexual harassment at workplace and continue the #MeToo movement. Taapsee Pannu said,

Agencies

"Look, if the person who is accused of sexual harassment, doesn't get punished, of course the spirit of the movement, the spirit of every woman who comes out with the story of abuse in public, gets shattered. However, that should not stop other girls from raising their voices if they are abused...because girls have stayed silent for ages.”

She added that even though nothing will change overnight, the movement still is an important one. She said,

Agencies

"We all can see how a collective consciousness has come into the picture since the #MeToo movement started. Nothing will change overnight, but we should not give up on the situation and tolerate abuse."

Taapsee, who has been vocal about women empowerment, said it takes a lot of time to break the momentum in such matters.

Instagram

"Obstacles will come, but we should not give up. This is a transformative time and therefore it is difficult but if we do not continue, the change will not come," she added.

On the professional front, Taapsee has a lot of exciting projects in her kitty including Saand Ki Aankh, Mission Mangal and Game over.

(Also read: Taapsee Pannu Explains What Shatters The Spirit Of #MeToo Movement And We Agree!)
