Extradition hearing starts for terror suspect

There was heightened security at the Eastern Magistrates' Court yesterday - the first day of the extradition hearing of Indian terror suspect Ramanjit Singh.

The hearing is expected to last 10 days.

Magistrate Pang Leung-ting authorized to exempt the limitation of media coverage over the case at around noon.

The defense lawyer and the prosecution, which is the Indian government, argued whether the magistrates' court has the jurisdiction to deal with the human rights issues related to the torture claimant and the United Nations' Convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

The Indian government representative believes it is outside the court's jurisdiction, but the defense had a differing view.

The defense lawyer said there is evidence Singh, 29, was tortured in India, and added human rights issues are the focus of this case.

The prosecution said unless the defense can prove the Indian government requested the extradition of Singh over a movement involving national separatism or that Singh will receive unfair or inhumane treatment, he should be sent to India and put on trial there.

It also offered to use the unified screening mechanism, a process the Hong Kong government uses to screen all claims lodged by people who fear they will be harmed upon returning to their countries of origin.

The defense lawyer said the court can decide if the grounds for extradition are sufficient while the unified screening mechanism is used to process the issue.

It said if the torture claimant aspect is successfully applied, Singh cannot be extradited to India. Singh is a permanent Hong Kong resident and holds an Indian passport.

Crowd-control barriers were erected outside the court while officers, police dogs and police vehicles were on standby. Those attending the hearing were checked.

Singh appeared to be calm in the prisoner's dock, guarded by two to four officers.

charlotte.luo@singtaonewscorp.com
