Dalit boy tied with rope, mercilessly thrashed for entering local temple in Rajasthan's Pali district

Officials with the Ras Police are probing the matter (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Jaipur: Less than a day after police in Pali district of Rajasthan arrested five men for the alleged gang-rape of a 30-year-old woman, yet another instance of mindless violence has come to the fore from the district. A Dalit boy was thrashed by a group of men after he reportedly tried to enter a local temple. Since this is a developing story, more details in this regard are awaited pending further police inquiry.

A preliminary investigation has revealed that the incident took place in Dhaneriya village of Pali district on June 1. Reports suggest that the victim's uncle filed a complaint with the police two days later but no action has been initiated against the culprits as of yet. However, a video of the brutal assault is being widely circulated on social media inviting the ire of social activists and citizens alike.

In the video which was shot by a bystander, the men can be seen thrashing the boy who has been tied with a rope in a bid to stop him from escaping. The boy can be seen pleading for mercy, screaming that he would not enter the temple in question again. However, his pleas do little or nothing to dissuade the assailants from beating the boy. Dhaneria, the place where the incident took place, is a village located about a hundred kilometres from the district headquarters of Pali district and falls under the limit of the Ras Police Station. Contrary to initial reports, police officials maintained that the boy who was thrashed by locals allegedly molested a minor girl and has been booked under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

Raj:Minor boy in Pali beaten up by locals allegedly for molesting a girl. Police,"Case registered under POCSO Act against him.After probe,he has been sent to juvenile protection home.A viral video has come to light where locals are seen beating him, they've been taken on remand." pic.twitter.com/SC1dz38i2K — ANI (@ANI) June 5, 2019

Earlier this month, the Rajasthan government and Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot came under fire over the deteriorating condition of law and order in the state. This outrage was triggered by the mind-numbing gang-rape of a Dalit woman in Alwar district. The woman and her husband were returning home when their motorcycle was halted by a group of six men who assaulted the husband and dragged the woman to the side of the road where they took turns at raping her. One of the accused recorded the heinous crime on his cell phone and used to threaten the couple into remaining silent. However, a complaint was later filed and a special investigation team (SIT) formed to probe the case. This led to the arrest of all six men within days of the formation of the team.
