PM’s SAARC remark irks Delhi; Jay Shankar terror grips; Kashmir in OIC notice

By NP Upadhyaya

Nepal Prime Minister KP Oli has tentatively fixed his ouster himself from the current post and that too while he was visiting India recently.

If things go as per Nepal’s “past experiences” then PM Oli may be sacked any time soon as he has spoken on an issue to which he should have diplomatically avoided and that too being in the Indian soil-the seat from where Nepal and its politics are being controlled since 1947 August, to be more precise. If Nepal needed a change, Delhi sponsors such changes for the Nepali population.

The local Indian embassy in Kathmandu though remains in action round the year to take up the issues if per chance left unattended by the Delhi’s central command.

The Indian mission generally buys some “on sale” Nepal’s key persons

(Including the men from the media sector, it is talked) who could later be used in order to destabilize the host country-almost a protectorate a la Baby Bhutan and the Maldives now after the elections.

Some media veterans have suddenly become nationalists. A designed ploy?

This though remains yet to be substantiated.

Nepal Prime Minister thus has committed a crime for which the Indian penal action remains in the pipeline as is believed in Kathmandu’s political circuit as per the Indian tradition.

Now look at the crime what poor PM Oli has committed.

KP Sharma Oli while talking to Geeta Mohan, an Indian journalists working for the India Today June 1, 2019, said clearly that “I don’t want to talk about regional and other issues. But, as the Chair, Nepal wants to revive SAARC and make it effective again. Developing relations in the region is better than anything else.”

Thanks that India did not unseat Oli right when he was in Delhi. India needs to be appreciated for this unexpected loving gesture.

This means that Oli still prefers to award a new lease of life to the clinically dead SAARC and in saying so he perhaps forgot that he was making such a statement which goes contra to what those who invited him for the swearing-in-ceremony of the Chief of the BJP led Hindu terror machine PM Modi.

For many in Nepal, SAARC has already been mercilessly killed by PM Modi and his South Block mandarins – the former Britain trained diplomats.

PM Modi and his subordinates at the foreign ministry have many a times in the past hinted the SA population to forget SAARC but instead concentrate on taking steps on how to strengthen the Indian tail-the BIMSTEC.

Time permitting the Indian tail-the BIMSTEC shall also die an unnatural death.

To recall, the regional organization SAARC was not a pleasing political grouping for Mrs. Indira Gandhi who took the initiative taken in the early eighties by late Bangladesh President (Military ruler) Zia Ur Rehman and Nepal King Birendra as a group of India’s smaller neighbors to gag the Indian union to which it was not.

Mrs. Gandhi and her stooges occupying the South Block took the emergence of the SARC (later made SAARC) as a grand ploy of the Chinese regime to encircle India through India’s own neighbors.

In fact, Pakistan’s inclusion in the SAARC body was what had been pinching India more so to the Iron ladyMrs. Gandhi.

Mrs. Gandhi though gave her positive nod for the establishment of this regional grouping of the SARC but always kept a vigilant eye on the proceedings of the regional body whose central secretariat was unanimously agreed to be stationed in Kathmandu.

The Indian Minister N. D. Tiwari had attended the function when King Birendra formally inaugurated the SAARC Head Quarters in Kathmandu in the mid-eighties.

Now that PM Oli claims that he will “revive” the SAARC body which must have by this time alarmed the Indian hawks who rule Nepal through their pseudo henchmen in Kathmandu.

The Indian agents in Kathmandu must have already been told by the newly appointed Indian foreign minister S. Jay Shankar through mobile phone to devise schemes at the earliest to dislodge PM Oli from the current chair and install Comrade Prachanda, the NOIDA dweller of the not so distant part whose Bharatiya Janata party connection remains no longer a secret now, who would do all he can in order to make the ailing BIMSTEC a vibrant one under the guidance of PM Modi and his handpicked foreign minister S Jay Shankar.

The Indian foreign Minister may have done so in that he is a declared enemy of the SAARC regional body.

Back home, Prachanda in tacit collaboration with former UML leader Bam Dev Gautam has begun creating troubles for PM Oli. Is this a mere coincident or a calculated Indian design?

And Sher Bahadur Deuba, Nepal’s former Prime Minister congratulated Mr. Shankar for having appointed the foreign minister of India. Deuba in doing so exposed his real surface that equals to a mere bureaucrat.

Nepali leaders, we have been told, tremble as and when the Indian diplomat with the second secretary rank makes a phone call to him on a private basis. Our leaders run to attend to the calls of the junior level clerks.

Let’s look what he, Mr. Shankar, had said of the SAARC organization on November 22, 2018 at a program organized by the India Foundation in Delhi in the capacity of the Indian Foreign Secretary.

“I would be very honest with you, Indian Foreign Policy has not always approached regionalism comfortably because the manner in which SAARC was devised, there was a lot of worry that our smaller neighbors would all get together and somehow push us in directions which are not to our advantage”.

So this is what he had said while he was just a junior level bureaucrat. And now with the changed and elevated ranks, this beaming Shankar is sure to guarantee the death of the SAARC body and in a subtle manner challenge Nepal PM Oli to try his political cards under his sleeves if he can?

This means that the SAARC body will soon receive its death certificate.

However, our own source claims that India prefers now not to talk even of the SAARC for fear of being gagged by smaller neighbors who have in many more ways than one inched closer to the Chinese regime-a recognized world power now much to the discomfort of the Indian regime.

High placed sources claim that Jay Shankar has ever remained in the good book of the USA from his stint in Washington D. C as India’s Ambassador to America and thus he is talked to be the preferred choice of the current American regime. Has the US lobbied for Jay Shankar? Why not. It could have been.

His elevation for the USA, it is believed, is important in that since Jay Shankar has gained expertise on the Indo-Pacific Strategy and thus he could be the point man in India for the IPS to expand its sphere of influence in the South Asian region, Nepal-India’s declared political choukidar included.

Though Nepal feels uncomfortable in admitting that the country has already become an active partner in the US designed Indo-Pacific Strategy but the fact is that the fresh Pentagon report published June 1, 2019, just the other day daringly claims that “Nepal is already an active partner in the IP Strategy. Nepal has no space left to breathe.

Observers say that Nepal must not shy in admitting the fact that she has indeed become a partner in the Indo-Pacific Strategy, however, if the country fears that its long adhered policy of Non Alignment shall have to be left in the cold then Nepal can say straight “no” to military alliance (if any) but can remain linked to the IPS as a peace maker among the countries housed in the said strategy.

Nepal can bring in immense benefits for the nation from the IPS, a section of the Nepali observers claim. However, it should refrain from teasing its neighbors more so China. And it is here that Nepal’s diplomatic acumen shall be tested.

Jay Shankar has been elevated by BJP’s Hindu machine so that India comes closer to the US Administration because India believes that only Shankar could restore the preferential treatment of the US for the Indian goods.

And ties with Japan could also be established in a subtle manner simply because Mr. S Jay Shankar is married to a Japanese national Mrs. Kyoko.

India hopes that Mr. Shankar’s diplomatic wisdom could win the hearts of the US administration in three different but very significant areas for the Indian regime, namely, first; he can negotiate the restoration of the preferential status for the Indian goods in the US that has just been lifted; secondly, Mr. Shankar could lure the US that he will serve for the US led I-P-S through the effective use of his diplomatic acumen and bring countries like Sri Lanka and Bangladesh-the two countries who have expanded their connections with the Chinese regime much to the discomfort of the Indian and the US regime.

India still fears Sri Lanka to have gone to the fold of China.

Nepal is now a flunky nation under the control of the namesake communists who virtually are under the control of the Indian regime since 1990, to be more precise after the India sponsored movement that “taught a lesson” to sitting King Birendra during Rajiv Gandhi.

Madhav Nepal was even of the view to invite Indian military to frighten the then King. This speaks of Mr. Nepal’s allegiance.

Nepal’s India connection is so high that even the Indian leaders of differing colors and shades plus the men who are seated in various branches of the Delhi based RAW agency on occasions feel ashamed in greeting the third class Nepali leaders who drop in Delhi on a regular basis even uninvited who meet the Indian leaders receive instructions on how Nepal is to be damaged?

No wonder, Nepal Maoists is the creation of the BJP regime when India was ruled by PM Atal Bihari Vajpayee. The old connections remain intact which is expected to scale new heights during Modi’s second term as Indian Prime Minister.

Shyam Saran though appears sidelined in the present day Indian politics but yet he commands authority in the RAW agency.

He can play a role for sure.

Thus in short, the elevation of Jay Shankar to the ministerial post, and the retention of Ajit Doval for more five years as National Security Advisor with cabinet rank minister, it appears that India is thinking something big for this region whose net result shall be traumatic. Both Doval and Shankar are known hardliners of the Indian bureaucratic machine and they know how to tame the smaller countries. They both are trained arm twisters.

The fate of the South Asian region shall come to our knowledge on how the Hitlerite Indian PM Narendra Modi and his devilish team pounces upon Sri Lanka and the Maldives.

Then Nepal is the real target for Shankar as he has to settle several scores with the Nepali leaders who had insulted him when he had come to Kathmandu to order the halt of the promulgation of the New Constitution for an indefinite period to which our leaders summarily rejected and Mr. Shankar left Kathmandu saying “prepare yourselves for an economic blockade” and the lay men were penalized eventually.

Mr. Shankar, a BJP Hindu party active member now, will come to Nepal either with a mission of regime change and if not then he at least would serve stern warning to Nepal to “behave” and keep China at a distance. Nepal must act to please India, this is what he will order the Nepali ruling corrupt elites.

In all, Pakistan appears to be the single country in this part of the South Asian region which can compete with the Indian diplomacy which apparently has taken a new height with the elevation of Mr. Shankar and re-emergence of the numero uno Indian spy turned NSA Ajit Doval.

Interestingly, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) meet held in Makkah, Saudi Arabia, listening to the Pakistani modest appeal has appointed Saudi Arabia’s Yousef Aldobeay as its special envoy on Jammu and Kashmir, reiterating its support for the legitimate right to self-determination of the Kashmiri people in accordance with UN resolutions, news agencies have reported, June 1, 2019.

The OIC meet has already concluded.

The Pakistani Foreign Office said the summit communique called for expediting establishment of a UN commission of inquiry to investigate grave human rights violations and urged India to allow the commission and other international organizations access to Indian Occupied Kashmir (IOK).

This does mean that the OIC conglomerate now has taken up the Kashmir issue in a grave manner which is an added diplomatic tension to the new Indian regime under PM Modi.

According to Express Tribune dated June 2, 2019, the conference also commended the report of OIC’s Human Rights Commission, highlighting rights abuses in IOK.

It welcomed Pakistan’s offer to host 48th session of the Council of Foreign Ministers in Islamabad in 2021, adds the Tribune.

The Former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister and PDP leader Mehbooba Mufti on Monday said Kashmir is a political problem needing a political redressal and the new Home Minister Amit Shah expecting a “quick fix” through brute force is “ridiculously naive”.

“Since 1947, Kashmir has been looked through the prism of security by successive governments. It’s a political problem that needs a political redressal by involving all stakeholders including Pakistan. Expecting a quick fix through brute force by newly appointed HM is ridiculously naive,” she tweeted, reports the Asian Age dated June 3, 2019.

Thus it could be seen now that Indian government is being exerted pressure on peaceful resolution of Kashmir imbroglio by its own high flying nationals.

The Kashmiri leader Mufti lost in the recently concluded Lok Sabha elections from the Anantnag parliamentary constituency, writes the newspaper.

In yet another political development, the U.S. special representative for Afghanistan reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad, visited Pakistan June 2, 2019, at the beginning of his 16-day multi-nation trip that will also take him to Qatar for another round of peace negotiations with the Taliban.

The Afghan born US envoy Ambassador Zalmay keeps on visiting Pakistan searching for an advanced role of Pakistan government in the restoration of peace in Afghanistan which would allow the US to say good bye from long stay from the entire area once and for all.

Since there is no progress in restoration of peace in Afghanistan which forces one to guess that either the US envoy has failed to convince Pakistan of the benefits that shall accrue to it if and when peace is restored in the troubled valley or Pakistan is knowingly dilly dallying the peace efforts as demanded and expected by the US for certain calculated reasons which could be the formal announcement of the US that it would behave Pakistan at par with the Indian regime. Observers in Nepal fail to understand the inner diplomacy that is going in between the US and Pakistan.

The Pakistani government takes credit for arranging the U.S.-Taliban peace dialogue by using its contacts with the Afghan insurgent group.

This means that US counts on Pakistan and expects the country to play a key role in settling the Afghanistan issue.

It is high time that Pakistani diplomacy exhibited its acumen and help support the US in restoring peace in the troubled Afghanistan.

A strong Pakistan is more or less a guarantee for the prevalence of peace and stability in South Asian region.

Pakistan can also, if she so desires, mediate in between the US and Iran and concurrently play a role in patching up the differences that have gripped Iran and Saudi Arabia.

Question now then is: Has Pakistan the capabilities enough to satisfy all these countries and convince them all to work for peace in the entire region?

In the meanwhile, The Saudi economic blockade on Qatar continues. It is here also that Pakistan has some space to play a role if time allows.

For the Road: 1984 remains one of the darkest years in modern Indian history. In June of that year, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi ordered a military assault on the most significant religious center for the Sikhs, Darbar Sahib (i.e., the Golden Temple) in Amritsar, Punjab. The attacks killed thousands of innocent civilians mostly the Sikhs.

Later on October 31, 1984, Mrs. Gandhi was unexpectedly gunned down by her own Sikh body guards.

In the meanwhile, the Delhi Sikh Gurudwara Management Committee (DSGMC) president and Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) leader Manjinder Singh Sirsa on Monday has written to Prime Minister Narendra Modi requesting a judicial inquiry into how circumstances were created by the then Indira Gandhi government against Sikhs to execute Operation Blue Star in 1984. He also mentioned that the Sikh community is expecting an apology from the Indian government for the “barbaric” operation.

A rally of the US based Sikhs are all set to observe the 35th anniversary of the Sikh genocide carried out in India during 1984. That’s all.
