Stone-pelters clash with security forces in Kashmir, wave banners supporting Masood Azhar

Srinagar:

The celebrations of Eid-ul-Fitr were marred by violence in Kashmir as clashes broke out between security forces and protestors in Srinagar and some other parts of the valley. According to reports, stone-pelters also waved flags of Pakistan and held banners in support of banned Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar and slain militant commander Zakir Musa.

Clashes between protestors and security forces were reported after Eid prayers in Srinagar's near Jama Masjid. There were no reports of anyone getting hurt in these clashes, they said.

Similar clashes were reported in Sopore in north Kashmir and Anantnag in south Kashmir, the officials said.

The protestors, mostly youngsters, had their faces covered and pelted stones on security personnel, who were trying to disperse them.

Jammu and Kashmir: Stones pelted at security forces near Jamia Masjid in Srinagar; and posters supporting terrorist Zakir Musa and UN designated terrorist Masood Azhar seen in the area. pic.twitter.com/qu7uea90YO — ANI (@ANI) June 5, 2019

Stone-pelters held posters with their photos and placards saying "Kashmir Banega Pakistan" and "Musa Army", reported ANI.

Hafiz, chief of Lashkar-e-Taiba, was the key mastermind behind 2008 Mumbai attacks which claimed around 164 lives. Masood Azhar is the head of Jaish-e-Mohammed, terror outfit that carried out Pulwama attack killing over 40 security personnel.

Security forces exercised maximum restraint while dealing with the law and order situation and the situation elsewhere in the valley remained peaceful, officials said.

Meanwhile, a woman was shot dead and a man was injured after the terrorists targeted civilians in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on Wednesday.

“Terrorists fired upon a man and a woman at Singoo-Narbal in Pulwama district today. While the lady succumbed to injuries, the injured man has been rushed to a hospital," a police official was quoted as saying by PTI.

The victim has been identified as one Nigeena Bano. A report by Times Now said that the woman was allegedly targeted for being an informer of the Indian forces. The report said that Nigeena was shot outside her home in cold blood. In the scuffle, one of her family members was also injured.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
