I know what you did in Cyprus! Virar man blackmailed with foreign trip pictures

MUMBAI: Getting sloshed on a trip to the island nation of Cyprus landed a man from Virar in a net of blackmail and extortion. The 45-year-old man, Amit Parasher, has claimed that when he travelled to the European nation in February with a group, the tour operators filmed him in the company of women in his hotel room. He lodged a complaint with the police after the tour operators-Shrey Srivastava (43), his brother Vinit (45) and their accomplice Nitin Shourie (43)-started blackmailing him using the photos and sought Rs 10 lakh from him. The trio is absconding, said the police.The police said that Vinit is friends with Parasher, a real estate agent, and introduced Shrey to him as a film director. In November 2018, Parasher lent Rs 15.6 lakh to Shrey to produce a movie. However, when there was no sign of any movie being produced, Parasher demanded the money back, he told the police."In February, the Srivastava brothers offered to take Parasher to Cyprus on a fully paid holiday and adjust the loan against the trip. On landing in Cyprus, Parasher realised that the brothers were actually into the business of conducting tours to foreign destinations. Around 40 people were part of that tour," said a police officer.Parasher has told the police that in Cyprus, the brothers got him drunk one night and took pictures of him with some women in objectionable positions after he had passed out."After returning to India, the brothers began blackmailing him. They told him they had recorded videos and clicked photographs of him with women in Cyprus," added the officer. The complainant has said that the trio did not show him any photographs and videos but demanded Rs 10 lakh.On April 22, Vinit and Shrey called Parasher to a hotel on the Mumbai-Ahmedabad National Highway in Virar. "Parasher says that he was assaulted by the brothers and their accomplice here. They demanded money and threatened to make the videos and photos viral. They even threatened to kill his parents, who live with him," said the officer.Parasher then approached the police, following which a complaint was registered at the Virar police station. A case under sections 384 (extortion), 352 (assault) and 323 (causing hurt) has been registered against the three accused.
