Fresh row as Army veteran-ADM spat cases go to Meerut

NOIDA: A dispute between a retired colonel and a bureaucrat that had turned ugly in 2018 and brought ex-servicemen out on the streets in protest against the government officer has taken another twist, with the cases that were registered being transferred to Meerut and the Army veteran moving the high court against it.The 77-year-old colonel and the bureaucrat — an additional district magistrate — are neighbours in Noida’s Arun Vihar and had been at loggerheads for years over alleged illegal constructions at the latter’s house. On August 14 last year, the Army veteran was arrested after the ADM’s wife filed a police case accusing him of molestation and attempted kidnap. His arrest drew protests from ex-servicemen, who alleged he had been framed because of the festering dispute. They also handed over CCTV footage showing the Army veteran being assaulted by the ADM at a park the same day he was arrested. The UP government subsequently suspended the ADM and a case was filed against the bureaucrat, his wife and some of his aides.Noida police had filed a final report (FR) – a precursor to a closure report — in the abduction and molestation case at the local Surajpur court, concluding the charges against the Army veteran did not hold. The court rejected the FR but police filed a fresh one with the same conclusion.Subsequently, the bureaucrat’s wife approached the state SC/ST commission, demanding that the case be transferred out of Noida as she did not expect a fair probe. The commission had on October 1, 2018 asked the IG (Meerut) to transfer both cases to another district. The cases were finally transferred to Meerut in April this year after the commission directed the principal secretary (home) to take action against police officers for the delay.In the meantime, the ADM’s wife had also approached the high court with the same demand. But the court order dated March 29 this year says it has dismissed the plea, and the petitioner has been “granted no liberty to file fresh petition on the same prayers”.The Army veteran has now moved the high court, alleging in his petition that the ADM’s wife had “adopted coercive mesures” and concealed the court’s order from the SC/ST panel. Uttar Pradesh SC/ST commission chairman Brij Lal told TOI he was unaware of the court’s order and directions were issued to the principal secretary (home) and ADG (Meerut) as the petitioner had alleged Noida police was prejudiced against her.
