Six held for extorting money from two Padra farmers

VADODARA: Five women and a man were held on Thursday evening for extorting money from two farmers in Padra by blackmailing them of registering a false complaint of rape against them. The six accused have been identified as Pritul Suthar, Jyoti Sharma According to the complainant, who owns a farmhouse at Patod village in Padra, his brother-in-law often visited his farmhouse with a female friend named Maya. On May 31 too, he had come to the farmhouse with Maya and another female, named Sonu, who claimed to have come from Dubai.While the duo went inside a room, Sonu and the complainant were sitting in the living room where she told him that she will charge anything between Rs 5,000 and Rs 10,000 for spending time with him. When he said he was not interested in her, she said that he can even pay her Rs 2,000. When he again showed his disinterest, Sonu started removing her clothes and started touching him inappropriately even when he protested and asked her to stay away.Some minutes later, two other women along with Suthar turned up at the farmhouse alleging the complainant and his brother-in-law of raping Maya and Sonu. The two women also started making allegations of rape leaving them shocked. The accused then told the complainant that they will wind up the case there and then if they pay them Rs 10 lakh. At this, the complainant told them that he will be able to give them of a cheque of Rs 5 lakh only, to which the accused agreed.On June 3, they again went to the complainant’s house asking for more money. He told them that he did not have money and asked them to return after a few days. After his friend warned him of their blackmailing tactics, the complainant approached Padra police station on Thursday after the six accused asked the duo to come to Bil village in the evening to pay them an additional Rs 50,000.On getting Solanki’s complaint, Padra police kept a vigil near Bil village and arrested all the six accused.
