Man kills friend in drunken brawl

They were abusing each other before the incident

A 25-year-old man, nephew of Delhi Police’s multitasking staff, was stabbed to death allegedly by his friend after a drunken brawl in north Delhi’s Kashmere Gate on Sunday night, the police said on Monday. The accused has been arrested.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (North) Nupur Prasad said the victim has been identified as Sharad alias Sonu, resident of Kashmere Gate police staff quarters, and the accused has been identified as Harish alias Koel. The incident happened when five friends, including the victim and the accused, were returning after dinner and drinks from Ashok Vihar.

Accused flee

The police said a PCR call was received around 11 p.m. from a man who said that his brother-in-law had been stabbed. When the police reached the spot, they were informed that friends of Sharad had taken him to a hospital where he was declared brought dead. The accused had allegedly fled after stabbing the victim.

The victim’s friends told the police that after dinner and drinks, they were on their way to Kashmere Gate when Harish and Sharad started abusing each other. “There was no particular reason. Sharad abused Harish and continued to do so even after the latter asked him to stop. Later, Harish retaliated. When the friends stopped at a petrol pump near a park behind old Hindu College, the argument turned violent. The other friends tried to intervene,” said a senior officer.

Attacked with knife

Harish allegedly went inside an eatery, picked up a knife and attacked Sharad in the neck before fleeing. The friends rushed him to the hospital and also informed the family.

The police said that a case under Section 302 (punishment for murder) was registered and teams were formed to nab the accused. With the help of technical and human surveillance, Harish was arrested from Burari, within hours of the incident, the police said.

The police said that Harish works in a private company and Sharad was unemployed.
