Air-hostess rape case: Police may drop gang-rape charges

Police

gang-rape charges

Andheri

Hyderabad

investigation in the airhostess rape case has revealed that it was not a gang-rape as alleged by the victim. However, the police are still awaiting the medical report of the victim to confirm this. If the report aligns with the probe then the police are likely to drop the charges of gang-rape, sources said.On Wednesday, the MIDC police had arrested a 23-year-old man working as the ground staff security officer of a domestic airline company after his female colleague had alleged that she was raped by the accused and his room-mates.“So far, our probe has revealed that there is only one person who had established physical relationship with the victim. We will not be making any further arrests, unless we find concrete evidence of involvement of more than one person in the case. We are awaiting medical report of the victim which will further clarify the matter,” said a police officer, requesting anonymity.He added, “If only one person is involved in the case, then we will drop thefrom the case but that would happen at the time of filing the chargesheet in the court.”On Tuesday, the MIDC police were informed by the staff of a government hospital that a woman had come to the hospital alleging that she was raped by her colleague. She further told the doctors that she was taken to a flat inwhere she was sexually assaulted. A police team immediately rushed to the hospital and recorded the statement of the victim.According to the victim, she has relocated fromto Mumbai and landed via flight at the international airport in Mumbai on Monday at around 7 pm. She met the accused, who is known to her, at the airport and they left together for the victim’s residence in a northern suburb by car. She later dropped the accused colleague at Malad, went to her home, kept her luggage and returned back to meet him.According to her complaint, they went to a bar where they consumed rum and beer and were there until the restaurant closed. She also said she was too drunk to know what had happened to her when she woke with bruises on her body, bite marks and a wound near her left eye. She also said she felt pain in her private part and asked her colleague what had happened to her. The accused told her that he had brought her to his home as she was too drunk. She further stated that she saw two of his colleague’s roommates at his residence. The woman alleged that the accused and his roommates took advantage of her inebriated condition and raped her, a police officer had said.The police had registered a case of gang-rape and assault in the matter and arrested the victim’s colleague.
