Woman accuses IPS officer in Rajasthan of harassment, stalking; police yet to lodge complaint

Top brass of the Rajasthan Police is yet to comment on the matter (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Jaipur: Damning allegations have come to light against a senior police official deployed in the state of Rajasthan who has been accused of harassing and stalking a 30-year-old woman. The officer has been identified as Inspector General (IG) of Bikaner, BL Meena, an Indian Police Services (IPS) officer from the 1999 Rajasthan cadre.Prior to this, Meena was the IG of police (Training) at the Police Headquarters in the state capital of Jaipur.

In her complaint, the woman has alleged that she met Meena in January of this year in connection with a case and that he had been stalking her ever since. Accompanied by her lawyer, the woman met the superintendent of police (SP) of Bikaner, Pradeep Mohan on June 3 and stated her wish to register an official complaint against the senior police official. She further alleged that apart from calling her incessantly on instant messaging application WhatsApp, Meena had also been sending her lewd messages over the past couple of months.

However, the woman now claims that she is being pressurised to withdraw her complaint against the IG-level IPS officer ever since she approached the SP of Bikaner with her grievance. Meanwhile, the accused IG of Bikaner has gone on a month's leave even as no official complaint in this regard has been registered against him as of yet.

Call records of the woman accessed by the Times Network show a slew of calls made by Meena to her, some even in the middle of the night. More details in this regard are awaited as this is a developing story.

These allegations have emerged at a time when law and order in the state of Rajasthan are being examined with a microscope following multiple cases of brutal crimes against women and children. One such instance was the Alwar gang-rape where a woman was sexually assaulted by five men in front of her husband in Alwar district of the state.
