India’s 'Conditional' Right to Abortion, Health News, ET HealthWorld

New Delhi: Abortion has always been and continues to be an extremely controversial subject. Whether one should be permitted by law to have an abortion, if yes, under what circumstances? Secondly, how does the law interpret the rights of an unborn child?Abortion is opposed on the grounds that lives need to be saved and not destroyed. Proponents who oppose abortion, believe that life begins with fertilization. On the other side of the fence, there are people who support abortion on various grounds. They believe that the fetus is an incomplete human being and so can't be equated at par with humans. They are supportive of abortion for various reasons. These are mostly based on medical conditions like serious defects.The world is divided between the issue of abortion. A country like Japan allows abortion where a woman's will is more than enough to carry forward but on the other hand, there are countries which allows abortion under various degrees of conditions. The set of conditions are again a variable.The death of 31 years old, Savita Halappanavar from septicaemia-an infection she contracted after she was denied an abortion as it was illegal to terminate the pregnancy with the fetus having a heartbeat ripple the devastating effect of the restrictive law.Halappanavar was refused an abortion despite knowing the baby would not survive. This news of her death set off outrage and resulted in Irish abortion laws being reformed.Living in India you might find yourself lucky as abortion is legal here. But is it? Is the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act really as liberating as you think?The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act (MTP Act) was formulated in 1971 and took into consideration the mother’s safety according to the technology available at that time.According to the MTP Act, abortion can be granted for women facing the birth of a potentially handicapped or malformed child within a 20-week gestational period. Under Section 3 of the MTP Act, 1971, abortion is allowed if continuation of the pregnancy could involve a risk to the life of the pregnant woman or cause grave injury to her physical or mental health, or there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped.Section 3(2)(b) of MTP Act prohibits the abortion of a foetus after 20 weeks of pregnancy unless a direction to that effect is given by a high court after considering a report from an expert medical team of any state-run hospital.The stringent abortion laws in India have been a matter of debate and have been challenged multiples times as the current law does not recognise a woman as an individual with autonomy over her own body.The current MTP law makes any woman who seeks an abortion beyond the guidelines prescribed under the Act can be prosecuted by the law, says Anubha Rastogi, Practising Lawyer, Mumbai.Case 1: On January 2019 Calcutta High Court allowed a 32-year-old woman to terminate her 24-week-old foetus, which, according to the petitioner, had a severe brain anomaly.Case 2: In May 2017, the Patna High Court denied abortion of a 26-week-old foetus of an HIV-positive rape victim as the court felt that it was the responsibility of the court to keep the child alive. After which, the victim appealed to the Supreme Court who heard her plea but denied her an abortion.Case 3: On February 2017, the Supreme Court interceded in the case of a 37-year-old mother, who requested abortion of her 26-week-old foetus detected with Down syndrome at 22 weeks. Here it is important to note that the couple already had a differently-abled child in the family.The Supreme Court bench “sympathised” with the woman’s plight but regretfully claimed they could not permit her to abort as “it was a life in their hands”. The bench observed that though “everybody knows that children with Down syndrome are undoubtedly less intelligent, they are fine people”.Though the court may have given more nods in abortion cases but till when will people actually continue to appeal to the court if judgements are passed on ethical and moral values. Denying the right to abortion and forcing to continue the pregnancy despite knowing that the foetus’s abnormality not only kills the joy of motherhood but also disrupts the quality of life. Who is to be blamed for the family’s mental and financial burden caused by the outdated Act?“The quality of life of such newborns and mental trauma to the parents must be considered before turning down a case completely citing the law as the reason,” says Dr Ajoy Raj Malpe, Group Medical Director, BR Life. He further believes that the correct decision can only be taken if opinions of obstetricians, paediatricians and medicolegal experts with appropriate qualifications and expertise are considered before taking the final decision.Today, of the about 26 million births that occur in India yearly, approximately 2–3% involves severe congenital or chromosomal defects. Many suffer intrauterine foetal death (IUFD). Certain abnormalities may be detected before the 20-week mark but are confirmed only after that period. Now with the recent medical advances in maternal and fetal medicine, there are several safer options for abortions even in later stages of pregnancy.Keeping in view that modern medicine can detect many foetal anomalies only after the 20th week, on October 29, 2014, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare released a draft of the MTP (Amendment) Bill. One of these is to increase the time period for legal abortion to 24 weeks of gestation. This will help in decreasing maternal morbidity and mortality and may also help in preventing wastage of resources invested in pregnancy and preserving the woman’s health.The proposed amendments are aimed for better sexual health and safe abortion for women in India.“MTP (Amendment) Bill addresses the need to eliminate the requirement for consent of two medical providers for terminating pregnancy above the 2nd trimester. We specifically addressed this for women living in rural areas where getting access to even one medical provider is difficult,’’ says Dr Nozer Sheriar, Gynecologist & Obstetrician, Aviva Clinic for Women.However, the proposal is yet to be enacted as a law. While some believe it has been rejected due to insufficient evidence, the main reason could be the fear of misuse of the Act for sex-selective abortions.“The revaluation of the MTP Act is necessary and overdue. Presently, The MTP Act does not allow termination of pregnancy beyond 20 weeks, even if the presence of major congenital anomalies is verified on antenatal ultrasound,” emphasis Dr Sita Rajan Kumar, Senior Consultant Obstetrics & Gynecology at Columbia Asia Hospital.Today we are in the second decade of the 21st century, why should a woman be forced to suffer the irregularities of the 19th-century law?According to Dr Ajoy Raj Malpe, “Today there are several safer options for abortions. Hence, given the scenario that if the fetal defect is incompatible with neonatal life or poses a definite handicap to the newborn and their family, there should be a provision for consideration of termination after 20 weeks,” he added.The very purpose of the MTP Act is wildly different from the PCPNDT Act. While the former help to aid genuine cases of abortion, the latter aims to stop sex determination and sex-selective abortion. “MTP Act does not allow sex determination of the child. Thus, it is imperative for law enforcement agencies to understand the purpose behind both the laws and apply it accordingly,” said Dr Suchitra Pandit, Director – Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Surya Hospitals.There is no direct overlapping of guidelines of these three Acts, but the lack of clear understanding among the users of services, government officials (gatekeepers), and the providers of services.According to PFI’s Executive Director, Poonam Muttreja, “Abortion is a reproductive right for every woman. Abortion-related stigma and the lack of awareness on the legality of abortion are key factors that need to be addressed to improve access to safe abortion services.Unlike in India, the abortion laws have been modified with the advancements in the technologies available. France, the UK, Austria, Ethiopia, Italy, Spain, Iceland, Finland, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland and even Nepal, allow for termination beyond 20 weeks on the diagnosis of foetal abnormalities.In the United Kingdom, abortions are allowed at up to 24 weeks, with abortion guidelines formulated by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists including procedures for termination of pregnancies older than 20 weeks. It states that, in pregnancy older than 21 weeks and 6 days, an injection to cause foetal death is given before the foetus is evacuated.“Someone taking a decision for a woman contravenes the very essence of women’s right. It is a women’s right to seek an abortion when she feels it is necessary,” urges Dr Suchitra Pandit.Delaying the MTP amendments Act would not protect the babies but would only increase unsafe abortions thus posing the risk to the life of the mother as well.Today, the decision by the doctors and medical boards appointed by the Supreme Court may vary, and one does not know if their decisions are guided by ethical and moral values, as there are no set guidelines for the same.There needs to be more discussion on laying down legal guidelines in MTP Act for doctors and courts to follow while deciding on abortion after the 20-week mark rather than imposing decisions on the mother based on individual understanding. Judgments, especially in abortion cases should ideally be based on scientific data, which are not yet available in India.Dr Sita Rajan Kumar believes that the decision to allow/overrule the termination cannot be given to judiciary alone, neither can it be delayed due to procedural delays in the court.MTP amendments need to work in line with the Act so that women rightfully access the safe abortion practices without any fear,” says Anubha Rastogi, Practising Lawyer in Mumbai. According to Dr Rastogi, there needs to be a balance in considering these acts so that the woman doesn’t bear the brunt of the conflict of interest.
