Delhi HC calls woman's testimony 'untrustworthy', notes she called rape accused 529 times before police

Reportedly, the incident happened in a hotel and even thought there was 24-hour security the woman did not raise an alarm or inform the police. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: The Delhi High Court has upheld the acquittal of a man by a trial court in a rape case claiming that the woman's testimony was untrustworthy. Reportedly, the woman had called him 529 times between the date of alleged rape and the filing of the complaint.

A bench of Justices Manmohan and Sangita Dhingra Sehgal said it was in agreement with the trial court's view that the woman's testimony was highly unreliable, untrustworthy and it inspires no confidence. The court has also dismissed her appeal against the man's acquittal.

News agency PTI reported that the trial court had acquitted the man on January 5. meanwhile, the High Court judgement further noted that there were several contradictions in the woman's statement. These included basics like how she met the man, how the incident happened and why there was a lapse in reporting the case with local police.

Reportedly, the woman told the trial court that she had met the man on LinkedIn, however, the same was not stated by her in the complaint to the police. Reportedly, the incident happened in a hotel and even though there was 24-hour security the woman did not raise an alarm or inform the police.

The other inconsistencies in her allegations were that after she got her phone from the accused man she did not call the police for over 30 days and in-between called him 529 times. The court further told PTI that being a daughter of a retired Commandant of CRPF and herself being a professor, could not make a call to the police or any other person after receiving her mobile phone.

Reportedly, she had not handed over her mobile phone to the investigating officer of the case and had deposed before the trial court that the police had not asked for it. However, the bench claimed that the testimony of the appellant is unreliable and inspires no confidence and there are compelling reasons for rejecting of her testimony. And the benefit of the doubt will have to enure to the benefit of the accused.
