Three murders in 24 hours keep Chennai police on their toes

In another incident, A history-sheeter who recently came out of prison was hacked to death in Arumbakkam on Monday morning.

Chennai: Three murders in the city in 24 hours have kept the city police on their toes. In the first incident, a senior citizen was stabbed to death at J.J. Nagar allegedly by his relatives over a domestic quarrel.

The deceased was identified as Yesurajan( 70) a resident of Collector Nagar in Anna Nagar west extension.

According to the police, Yesurajan lived with his wife and Kala( 50) and it was alleged that the couple was not on speaking terms. Sources said Yesurajan’s son Arokiya Arulraj and his wife Ruby who lived nearby took care of him. Kala who was unhappy with this rued to her relative Gopal in Perungalathur.

On Sunday night around 8 pm, when Kala had gone out, Gopal who had visited their house to resolve the issue. However, later when Kala returned she found Yesurajan with stab injuries.

When she asked her neighbours, they told Gopal had come. The J.J. Nagar police who came to the spot sent the body to KMC for postmortem. Further investigations are on to nab Gopal, who absconded.

In another incident, A history-sheeter who recently came out of prison was hacked to death in Arumbakkam on Monday morning.

According to police, Kumaresan( 30) a resident of Choolaimedu has several attempts to murder and murder cases against him. Sources said the Pallikaranai police have arrested him on a murder charge month ago. Previous enmity could be the reason for the murder since he was one of the prime suspects in Pallikarani Yuvaraj murder.

Sources said on Monday morning around 10.45, when he was travelling to his house in Choolaimedu after appearing in the Ponnamallee sub-court, a gang of three men chased and murdered him with a machete.

After the passers-by attempted to catch the men, the fled the spot. Kumaresan who was injured on his head and neck died on the spot. Arumbakkam police rushed to the spot and sent his body to Kilpauk government hospital for postmortem. Further investigations are on.

In the third incident, An auto driver was brutally murdered by his cousins over a dispute in the wee hours of Monday.

Arumugam( 46), an auto driver, was murdered by his cousins at their residence in Nandhavanamedu in Avadi. Sources said Arumugam and his cousins Murali and Devaraj had been fighting over property issue over a period of time.

In the early hours of Monday, Murali and Devaraj who came home in an inebriated state started arguing with Arumugam

As the argument intensified they knocked him with a wooden log and fled the scene. After a few minutes, Arumugam died on the spot. The Avadi policeregistered a case and are investigating.
