Indian Air Hostess raped by fellow Airline Staff Member

following the interaction, she had no memory of what happened next.

A 25-year-old Indian air hostess filed a complaint against a staff member working for the same airline as her after he allegedly raped her.

It was heard that the suspect took the woman to his home in Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC), Andheri after they both got drunk.

The suspect was identified as 23-year-old Swapnil Badoniya, a security staff member for a private airline. He was arrested on June 4, 2019, for allegedly raping the woman.

The woman registered a case of gang rape as she met others prior to the alleged rape. Officers are verifying her complaint.

In her statement to the police, the air hostess explained that she had landed in Mumbai on the evening of Monday, June 3, 2019, where her colleague Badoniya was waiting for her.

After they met, the two decided to meet later in the night after they have dropped off their luggage at their respective accommodation.

The woman then met Badoniya near a shopping mall and went for drinks. They both got drunk and Badoniya took his colleague to his apartment as it was late.

The woman claimed that at the flat there were two men and a woman. Badoniya introduced them as his roommates.

She said that following the interaction, she had no memory of what happened next. The woman woke up the next day at around 10:30 am where she found a number of injuries on her body.

The woman told the police: “I was unable to walk properly. There were scratches on my shoulder and bite marks on my right hand. I also found acute pain in my private parts.”

After looking at her injuries, the Indian air hostess realised that she had been sexually assaulted by Badoniya and one of his roommates.

When she returned home, the woman’s parents took her to King Edward Memorial (KEM) Hospital in Mumbai where the doctor contacted the police.

At approximately 10:25 pm, the police got a call from KEM Hospital stating a woman working for a private airline had been raped by her colleague.

A police team went to the hospital and registered an FIR under several sections of the Indian Penal Code.

An officer said:

“An initial inquiry has revealed that only Badoniya is behind the crime, so we have arrested him.”

MIDC Senior Inspector Nitin Alaknoore added: “As per the complaint by the victim, we have registered an offence and arrested the accused. A further investigation is on.”
