Nine arrested after clash leaves 13 dead in Jalalpur Pirwala on Eid day

MULTAN: Thirteen people were killed and 15 others injured after a group ambushed their rivals in Jalalpur Pirwala after Eid prayers on June 5.

The members of the Jaffar Kala group, including ringleader Jaffar Kala, left a congregation of Eid prayers in a mosque in Basti Jaffar, Mauza Duraabpur, when the rival group - Ghulam Nazik - opened fire on them. Both parties exchanged fire. In the firing, two people from the Nazik group and 11 people from Jaffar Kala group were killed.

Both groups are stated to be involved in land dispute, which created enmity between them.

When guns fell silent, Rahat Abbas, Saleem Akhtar, Aqib Javed, Muhammad Younas, Naveed Akhtar, Jaffar Kala and three unidentified people were found killed, while Allah Ditta, Munawar Abbas, Amir, Sajid, Zohaib Akhtar, Amjad Pervaiz, Ilyas, Orangzaib, Samiullah, Majid Pervaiz, Basit, Naseebullah, Hasnain, Amir, Azhar and Saifullah were found injured.

Thirteen injured people were shifted to the Nishtar hospital.

A police contingent arrived at the scene.

MNA Rana Qasim Noon and City Police Officer (CPO) Imran Mahmood visited the Jalalpur Pirwala Tehsil Headquarters Hospital where the bodies and injured were shifted after the firing.

Chief Minister Usman Buzdar took notice of the incident and directed Regional Police Officer (RPO) Waseem Ahmed Khan to submit a report.

Commissioner Imran Sikandar also visited the hospital.

Inspector General Police (IGP) Arif Nawaz suspended the deputy superintendent of police and sought a report into the incident. In a statement issued here on Friday, the IGP expressed his strong displeasure on the unfortunate incident which led to murder of 13 people after the armed men ambushed them outside the mosque when they came out after offering Eid prayers.

The IGP called an emergency video link conference which was attended by DIG Operations Punjab Atta Muhammad Mayo, RPO Waseem Ahmad Khan Sial, CPO Imran Mehmood and other senior officers.

Mr Arif sought from them the details of the incident and the action taken by the police to prevent deaths.

The Multan RPO briefed the IGP the police arrested nine nominated suspects immediately after the incident, including Khurram, Azhar, Jawad, Hanif, Saleem, Haseeb, Yaseen and Shahid, besides dispatching police teams for raids to arrest other culprits. A murder case was registered from the Kala Jaffir group against 18 people.

However, the IGP expressed his displeasure and issued the suspension order of sub-divisional police officer of Jalalpur Peerwala Saleem Akhtar.

He also called an explanation from the CPO, SSP Operations Kashif Aslam and SP Sadar Multan Mustafa Pahore for not playing due role in preventing the incident.

On the occasion, the IGP also ordered to establish a temporary police chowki in the area to make sure police presence for an effective action to prevent such incidents in future.

Separately, the IGP met families and other relatives of the martyred police officers on Eid, distributed cash and Eid gifts among them besides paying visit to the Yadga-e-Shuhada at Police Lines Qila Gujar Singh Lahore where he also offered Fateha for the departed souls.

He said his department has already distributed cheques of martyr package among the families of the police martyrs before Eid who lost lives in Data Darbar blast incident.

“The martyrs who sacrificed their lives for the future of the nation are asset of Punjab Police and the entire nation is ready to support their families at the joyous occasion of Eid to honour their courage and resolve”, the IGP said.

Published in Dawn, June 8th, 2019
