Ex-Lover of Woman tried to Blame Husband for ‘Train Bomb’

"We picked up a person who claimed innocence."

Anand Wankhede, aged 28, from Buldhana, Maharashtra in India, was arrested on Thursday, June 6, 2019, for allegedly planting a train bomb.

He planted explosive-like materials on the Kolkata-Mumbai Shalimar Express then tried to pin the blame on his former girlfriend’s husband.

The Maharashtra Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) investigated the case before they arrested Wankhede.

The device was discovered on board the train when it was being cleaned after it arrived in the city of Mumbai.

There were five plastic pipes filled with what looked like firecracker powder and connected to batteries with wires.

On the explosives was a note which had a phone number and a photo of a man. The police were immediately alerted.

According to an official from the Government Railway Police (GRP), the phone number led the police to a man located in Vikhroli, Mumbai.

The official said: “We picked up a person who claimed innocence.”

When the man was being questioned, he stated that he was being harassed by a man on Facebook for a number of days.

They traced the Internet address to a location in Nandura in Buldhana district and arrested Wankhede.

The suspect admitted being responsible for planting the train bomb and explained that he put the blame on the man out of anger.

Wankhede said he was in love with a woman but she got married to another man who lived in Vikhroli in April 2019.

He became consumed by anger and jealousy as a result. The suspect, therefore, set out to teach the woman’s husband a lesson.

Wankhede made the train bomb and planted it on the train. He added a note with the woman’s husband’s details in a bid to frame him.

A police official said:

“Wankhede made a fake Facebook account and began harassing him, but that did not satisfy him.”

“So, he decided to trap him in a big case.”

It had been thought that there was a terror angle to the case but Mumbai Police spokesperson Manjunath Singe clarified that this was not the case.

Singe said: “The ATS has detained him in Buldhana and we are taking him into custody.”

An FIR was lodged against Anand Wankhede and he was booked under section 285 (negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter) of the Indian Penal Code.

He was also booked under section 164 (unlawfully bringing dangerous goods on a railway) of the Indian Railways Act of 1989.
