Former Neighbours star Brooke Satchwell 'SPLITS from fiancé David Gross'

Advertisement

Brooke Satchwell and her film editor fiancé David Gross have reportedly gone their separate ways.

The pair split earlier this year almost seven years after they got engaged on a holiday in Cambodia in 2012, The Daily Telegraph reported.

Brooke, 38, and David have now also sold the home they bought together for $1.65million in 2010, located in the eastern Sydney suburb of Queens Park.

Parting ways: Brooke Satchwell and her film editor fiancé David Gross have split following their 2012 engagement (pictured together in 2013)

The picturesque California bungalow set in a quiet cul-de-sac sold for an undisclosed price last month.

The home, which has development approval to become a two-storey home, was expected to collect $2.25million at its May 9 auction, according to Domain.

It comes complete with three bedrooms, a stylish Caesarstone kitchen, a sundeck and its own pool and spa.

The couple started dating in 2008, having met while the actress was still with Matthew Newton, the son of Australian TV legend Bert Newton.

Moving on: Brooke, 38, and David have now also sold the home they bought together for $1.65million in 2010 in the eastern Sydney suburb of Queens Park

Hot property: The home comes complete with three bedrooms, a stylish Caesarstone kitchen, a sundeck and its own pool and spa

Matthew, 42, was arrested for the alleged physical assault of Brooke in 2006 before the troubled actor pleaded guilty to common assault.

Prosecutors withdrew three more serious charges, including assault occasioning actual bodily harm.

The conviction was later overturned on mental health grounds.

Going, going, gone! The picturesque California bungalow set in a quiet cul-de-sac sold for an undisclosed price last month

David and Brooke shared a joint trauma when they were trapped inside The Taj Hotel, India when it was stormed by gunman in the Mumbai terror attacks in 2008.

Brooke launched her career on Neighbours in 1996 and spent four years on the iconic Australian soap before moving on to different projects.

In recent years, she is known for playing Ally in the Foxtel comedy drama Mr Inbetween.

Daily Mail Australia has contacted Brooke's representatives for comment.
