Rajkot: Mob pelts stones at police to shield liquor den from raid; four cops injured

When the police did not return, the mob allegedly threw stones at them (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Rajkot: A mob allegedly attacked a police team in Rajkot allegedly gone to the area to raid a liquor-making unit. The unit was operational in the Pipardi village of Jesar taluka, Bhavnagar. The incident came to light on Saturday, June 8.

The police team was being led by sub-inspector DB Vaghela. The mob was allegedly constituted mainly by women of a particular community. After the team was attacked, Vaghela fired four rounds in the air.

The mob was allegedly pelting stones at the police. One of the police officials was seriously injured in the incident and was taken to Sir T hospital in Bhavnagar. The injured official was identified as Ganpatsinh Dolanka.

The Jesar police said that they had sent four cops to Pipardi. Investigation revealed that around 40 families of the village were involved in manufacturing country-made liquor.

The raid was planned after the police received several complaints against the liquor manufacturing units operational in the village. When the police reached the village, a mob constituted primarily by women approached them. The mob allegedly asked the police to leave. When the police did not return, the mob allegedly threw stones at them.

While talking to Times of India, Jaypalsinh Rathod said, "Police fired four rounds in the air to disperse the unruly mob. One of our men suffered a head injury due to stone pelting. Many of the villagers are against these families which are brewing country-made liquor and have complained to us several times."

Apart from Dolanka, three other cops also sustained minor injuries. The injured cops were identified as Constable Kanubhai Kamavia, Head Constable Deepak Sakavia and Vaghela. The police booked 80 people for rioting, attempt to murder and obstructing a government employee from performing his/her duty.
