Amid Uproar Over Aligarh Case, 5-YO Girl Raped & Thrown Into River In MP, Three Nabbed

While the entire nation is enraged over the brutal murder of a 2-year-old girl in Aligarh, a news from Madhya Pradesh has pushed the people in further shame. Another heinous crime agaist a minor girl was reported from Ujjain where a 5-year-old girl was allegedly raped and thrown into river on Friday. After initial investigation, police have confirmed that the victim was raped.

The Superintendent of Police (SP), Ujjain, Sachin Atulkar told media that the crime took place under the jurisdiction of Mahakal police limits and the minor had been raped and murdered.

A Special Investigation Team (SIT) was formed to investigate the case and two men were arrested who are being interrogated by the police. The new agency AN reported. According to the report, the girl went missing on Friday after which her family lodged an FIR. The police later found her body without cloths floating in the river Shipra.

The prime facie injuries indicated towards the possibility of sexual assault and the police have detained three people including uncle of the deceased. Madhya Pradesh was the first state in India to pass the law of death penalty in case a minor is raped and the accused is proven guilty.

Later the President of India, Ram Nath Kovind signed the ordinance in which death penalty was made a provision in rape case where the victim is below 12 years in age. The minimum punishment for the rape was also increased from seven years to 10 years which remains extendable to life imprisonment.

Bhopal: Body of a 8-year-old girl was found in a drain at Kamla Nagar earlier today. Akhil Patel, ASP says,"Body has been sent for post-mortem. Reason of her death can be ascertained once medical reports come." One policeman has also been suspended. #MadhyaPradesh pic.twitter.com/CxWhdBwb6B — ANI (@ANI) June 9, 2019

In another crime, the body of an 8-year-old girl has been found in a drain in Bhopal today. One policeman has been suspended and body has been sent for postmortem.
