Backpacker Sarah Groves was stabbed to death in India. Will her distraught family ever get justice?

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss out on the big stories from Manchester's courts with our weekly newsletter

The distraught family of a backpacker stabbed to death in India in 2013 have told how they fear they will never see justice.

Sarah Groves, who was born in Alderley Edge, was murdered on a houseboat on Dal Lake in Kashmir.

The 24-year-old former fitness instructor had been stabbed 46 times.

Dutch man Richard de Wit now stands trial for her murder - but there have been multiple delays and the trial has now seen over 150 hearings.

(Image: Sunday Mirror)

Civil unrest in Srinagar, where the trial is being held, has accounted for a large portion of the delays.

But Sarah's parents Victor and Kate Groves have spoken about their concerns over how the trial is being conducted.

Speaking to CheshireLive Mr Groves, said: "I don't know if justice will be done because we don't have any confidence in the way the trial is being conducted.

(Image: Sunday Mirror)

"It’s not easy to live with and it doesn’t get any easier with the passage of time - it doesn’t lessen the impact of the tragedy or our feelings towards the system or what we’re up against."

Sarah was killed while living on a houseboat on a lake with the family of her boyfriend Samir Shoda.

De Wit, a Dutch tourist, who stands nearly 7ft tall, was arrested after allegedly fleeing the scene but denies being the culprit.

Mrs Groves, who has travelled to India on several occasions, believes others could have been involved in Sarah’s death.

(Image: Sunday Mirror)

No one on the boat raised the alarm for more than an hour, and Mrs Groves has previousy told how she is tortured by images of her daughter’s screams for help going unanswered.

The trial has now been appointed a fourth judge following a 'wholesale reassignment of judges from existing areas of responsibility to alternative placements', Sarah's parents say.

Mr and Mrs Groves have fought for justice since the beginning of the trial, launching a petition to raise awareness of proceedings.

(Image: Sunday Mirror)

But Mr Groves means the numerous delays and other complications means they don't have confidence in the legal proceedings

He added: "We're not sure even if the verdict was passed either way if we could trust it with the evidence that has been presented - or the lack of evidence - that has been presented to the court.

"The longer it goes on the more problems there are going to be in reaching a safe verdict."

Sarah, whose family moved from Alderley Edge to Guernsey when she was eight, was travelling through Asia when she met Shoda in Goa in early 2013.

He persuaded her to move to Kashmir to live on his family’s houseboat on Dal Lake.

The fourth judge is expected to oversee the case next week.
