Rape has its nature, says UP Minister; claims ‘allegations made by married women not always true'

Uttar Pradesh Minister Upendra Tiwari

Lucknow: Uttar Pradesh Minister Upendra Tiwari sparked row for saying that “rape has its nature”. The minister further said that if a minor girl is raped then it can be considered a crime but if the same allegation is made by 30-35-year-old women then they can't always be trusted.

Speaking to ANI the minister said, “Very often 30-35-year-old married women when they fall out of relationship make such allegations of rape. Such charges cannot be taken on face value.”

This statement comes at a time when crime against women has increased in the state.

#WATCH UP Minister Upendra Tiwari: Dekhiye rape ka nature hota hai, ab jaise agar koi nabalig ladki hai uske sath rape hua hai toh usko to hum rape manenge, lekin kahin-kahin pe ye bhi sunne ko aata hai ko ki vivahit mahila hai, umar 30-35 saal hai....uska alag-alag nature hai pic.twitter.com/Ou1AMPsvGB — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 9, 2019

In Kanpur, a 16-year-old girl was allegedly raped by a Muslim cleric inside the premises of a madrassa. After registering the complaint of the victim the police arrested the cleric and filed a case under Sections 376, 506 of IPC and POSCO Act.

In a separate incident, a 12-year-old Dalit girl was allegedly gang-raped by six men in UP’s Kushinagar today. As per the media reports, the accused had a dispute with the girl's family over the construction of the drainage channel. Later, they dragged the girl in front of the family and committed the heinous crime. They also thrashed the family members when they resisted. Later, all the six accused were arrested and the girl was sent for a medical check-up.

In Aligarh, a toddler was brutally tortured for eight hours and was later killed by two men. Due to this incident tensions are running high in the city and the state administration has deployed PAC and RAF in the area.

Criticizing the Yogi Adityanath-led BJP government BSP chief Mayawati said that the law and order in the state under the current government has completely failed. Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav also slammed the CM for his failure to control the increase in rape-related incidents in the state.
