Parents desperate for justice for murdered daughter who was stabbed 46 times

Sarah Groves, 24, from Alderley Edge in Manchester was stabbed 46 times on a houseboat on Dal Lake in Kashmir six years ago

Parents desperate for justice for murdered daughter who was stabbed 46 times

The devastated family of a backpacker stabbed to death in India in 2013 fear they might never see justice served.

Sarah Groves, from Alderley Edge in Manchester, was murdered on a houseboat on Dal Lake in Kashmir in 2013.

The 24-year-old fitness instructor died after being stabbed 46 times.

Dutch man Richard de Wit is facing trial accused her murder.

But continued and repeated delays and more than 150 hearings have caused distress for her family.

Sarah's parents Victor and Kate Groves have shard their concerns about how the trial has been conducted.

Image: Sunday Mirror) Sunday Mirror) Image: Sunday Mirror) Sunday Mirror)

Speaking to Cheshire Live, Mr Groves said: "I don't know if justice will be done because we don't have any confidence in the way the trial is being conducted."

Civil unrest in Sringagar, where the trial is being held, has accounted for much of the delays.

Miss Groves was killed while living on a houseboat on Dal Lake with the family of her boyfriend Samir Shoda.

Sarah met Mr Shoda in Goa in early 2013, after which he persuaded her to move to Kashmir to live on his family's houseboat.

Image: Sunday Mirror) Sunday Mirror)

Dutch tourist De With, who stands at almost seven feet tall was arrested after allegedly fleeing the scene, but denies murder.

Sarah's mother Kate, who has travelled to India on many occasions, believes others could have been involved in her daughter's death.

No one on the boat raised the alarm for more than an hour.

Mrs Groves has previously told how she is tortured by images of her daughter’s screams for help going unanswered.

The trial has now been appointed a fourth judge following a 'wholesale reassignment of judges from existing areas of responsibility to alternative placements', Sarah's parents have said.

Image: Sunday Mirror) Sunday Mirror)

The repeated and numerous delays and other complications have weakened the family's confidence in the legal proceedings.

Mr Groves said: "We're not sure even if the verdict was passed either way if we could trust it with the evidence that has been presented - or the lack of evidence - that has been presented to the court.

"The longer it goes on the more problems there are going to be in reaching a safe verdict."

The fourth judge is expected to oversee the case next week.
