Aligarh turns a fortress as tension rises over murder of toddler

The Aligarh administration has deployed more than eight companies of Rapid Action Force (RAF), Uttar Pradesh Provincial Armed Constabulary and police to maintain law and order situation in Tappal town following the brutal murder of a three-year-old girl.

The security forces carried out a flag march in the area on Sunday in order to ensure the security of people and prevent any untoward incident. Anti-riot vehicles were also put in action.

Over the last two days, a message has been doing the rounds on social media calling for a 'Mahapanchayat' in wake of the murder. The police, however, claimed that the said gathering has been called off.

We have talked to prominent people of the society and they have expressed their satisfaction over the police action so far. The Mahapanchayat has been called off," Rural Superintendent of Police Manilal Patidar said. Sadhvi Prachi who tried to visit the girl’s house was stopped in Jewar toll plaza.

Sadhvi said she was unhappy after being stopped. The accused should be burnt or they should be hanged to death in the next 24 hours, said Sadhvi.

Even after the deployment of forces, people took to the street to register their protest against the crime. The protesters were controlled by the security forces and were sent back home.

The security forces made sure no untoward incident took place. Meanwhile, the family of the girl was called in by Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister's Office (CMO) on Sunday.

The sub-divisional magistrate (SDM) also visited the house of the victim and asked for a list of family members who would go and visit the CM. However, the victim's father told India Today TV that the family will not be going to visit the CM.

The girl’s father said that he wants the accused to be hanged.

Uttar Pradesh minister Upendra Tiwari on Sunday said rape has its nature. Rape has its nature. If a minor is raped then we consider it a case of rape. But, if you come across an incident where a married woman aged 30-35 is raped, then the matter is different, he said.

The minister said that there are instances where people are in a relationship and after a few years they allege that they have been raped; that matter is different from the rape of a minor then.
