After Aligarh minor’s murder, 3 more minor girls raped in UP, 2 in Madhya Pradesh

Crime against minor girls is on the rise with three more rape cases reported in Uttar Pradesh and two in Madhya Pradesh. This comes amid outrage over the brutal murder of a three-year-old in Aligarh's Tappal village.

The three cases of crime reported in Uttar Pradesh against minor, a 12-year-old Dalit girl was allegedly raped by six men in Kushinagar district of the state, a 15-year-old was allegedly raped by a teacher inside a seminary in Kanpur and body of a 7-year-old girl was found in the bushes outside Bijbaha village of Jalaun in UP on Sunday.

In Madhya Pradesh, a 10-year-old girl was raped and murdered. She went missing from a slum in Bhopal on Saturday night. In another case in MP, a four-year-old girl in a village in Jabalpur district was allegedly sexually assaulted by a 16-year-old boy who has been detained on Sunday.

According to reports, the accused in UP's Kushinagar district had a dispute with the girl's family over the construction of drainage channel on Friday morning.

In the evening, they dragged the girl in front of the family and raped her and also thrashed the family members when they resisted.

The mother of the girl gave a written complaint to the police on Saturday and the case was registered on Sunday, the police said.

In the second case in UP, a madrasa teacher allegedly raped a 15-year-old Class 9 student inside a seminary in Kanpur on Sunday. The accused was arrested after the victim's parents lodged an FIR. The accused has been charged under POCSO act, apart from charges of rape, the police said.

In Jalaun, body of a 7-year-old girl was found in the bushes outside Bijbaha, police said. Superintendent of Police Swami Prasad said the minor had gone missing on Saturday.

"The girl's body was spotted by the locals Sunday morning. A case has been registered against two persons following a complaint by the victim's father, Prasad said.

The body has been sent for postmortem. The child was raped or not will be clear only after the post-mortem, the SP said.

Also Read | 12-year-old Dalit girl dragged from home, raped by six men in UP's Kushinagar

Also Watch | List of horrific incidents that prove how unsafe schools are for your children in India! | NewsMo
