Postgraduate medicos in a fix

Ernakulam medical college yet to get MCI recognition for some PG courses

Two batches of postgraduate doctors passed out from Government Medical College, Ernakulam, are finding it difficult to register with the Travancore Cochin Medical Council owing to lack of recognition of PG courses offered by the college.

A student from one of the PG departments of the college has approached the High Court alleging failure of the government in complying with the Medical Council of India (MCI) directives on conducting medical courses. Without registering their PG degree with the Travancore Cochin Medical Council, the doctors cannot practice or pursue further studies in the State.

A total of 11 students in five disciplines are taken in every year in the medical college for the PG courses that began in 2014. The first and the second batches of students had taken the final examinations in 2017 and 2018, but they continue to work with their graduate degrees. While a few from the first batch have joined the Health Services as graduate doctors, those in the second batch are executing the one-year bond with the government after passing out.

The MCI had pointed out various lacunae in each of the five disciplines of Medicine, Psychiatry, Paediatrics, Pathology and Microbiology at the time of the final examination held for the courses. The government had given an undertaking about providing required facilities at the college on the basis of which the examinations were held. However, it had filed no compliance report after the MCI inspected the college during the PG examinations in the disciplines last year.

Lack of MRI scanning machine, absence of superspecialty disciplines, lack of adequate faculty and other staff were cited by the MCI inspectors for denying recognition for the courses.

Compliance letter

Speaking to The Hindu, Director of Medical Education Ramla Beevi said that with the cardiology department functioning in full swing and the nephrology department having a dialysis wing now, the government could now send a report to the MCI. The government’s intent on setting up superspecialty departments was also evident since the work on building a superspecialty block had begun, she pointed out.

A compliance letter would be sent in a couple of months before fixing the examinations schedule for the next PG batch, she said.
