IIT Professor rapes former student, asks the woman her price

(MENAFN- NewsBytes) IIT Professor rapes former student, asks the woman her "price"

10 Jun 2019

A 45-year-old assistant professor at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, was arrested for allegedly raping a 35-year-old woman, who claims to be his former student, on the pretext of giving her a job.

The accused, identified as Vivek Vijayvargiya, works at the institute's Electronics department and was arrested from Noida Sector 16A on Saturday morning.

Here are all the details about the incident.

Vijayvargiya allegedly asked the woman her 'price' for job offer

Incident

The woman went to meet Vijayvargiya at the GAIL India Institute in Noida Sector 16A on Thursday, where the latter was attending spiritual speaker Dr. Chinmaya Pandya's motivational talk, IANS reports.

The police said that Vijayvargiya then took her to a hostel in GAIL's guesthouse to discuss the job offer, only to later ask her her "price." He then allegedly forced himself on her.

'I resisted. He forced himself on me and raped me'

Quote

According to The Times of India, she mentioned in the FIR, "When I reached the room, he asked me what price I could pay for the job. He demanded sex from me. When I resisted, he forced himself on me and raped me."

Vijayvargiya's younger brother denied the allegations, saying that they belong to a "respected family" and his brother is "100% innocent."

Guards outside hostel room spotted her crying

Fact

On her part, the woman claimed she arrived at the room with her resume and other documents, but Vijayvargiya started making advances on her and raped her. She was later spotted crying outside the room by security guards and event staff, Hindustan Times reported.

Case registered under IPC Section 376

Arrest

Police officials were informed by the institute's staff and the woman lodged a complaint.

An FIR was registered under Section 376 (rape) of the Indian Penal Code against Vijayvargiya.

"He was arrested on Saturday afternoon from Sector 16, which he often visits," Rajveer Singh Chauhan, Sector 20 police station, told HT.

Vijayvargiya was presented before a Noida magistrate court and later sent to jail.

Police gathering evidence; questioning sweeper, institute officials

Investigation

Reportedly, the police ordered a medical examination of the woman and is awaiting the report. According to TOI, the police believe the woman was in contact with Vijayvargiya, days before he came to Delhi. They're now looking into the communication and gathering more evidence.

Reportedly a sweeper, who was seen entering the room during the duo's meeting, will be questioned along with institute officials.

Woman attended tuition under Vijayvargiya in Kota in 2000-2001

History

According to the woman, she first came into contact with Vijayvargiya at a private academy in Kota, Rajasthan, in 2000-2001 where he taught her Mathematics. Both hail from Rajasthan.

The woman later worked with him at a contractual job for three months before shifting to Delhi's Sarita Vihar after her marriage, TOI reported.

The two reportedly came into contact again in 2011.
