Mumbai: Suspected thief made to drink phenyl; robbed of cash, mobile phone

Dubey alleged that the victim had stolen his footwear (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A teenager was allegedly abducted by three men who suspected him to be a thief. The accused allegedly forced the victim to drink phenyl after they abducted him. The victim was released near the Virar police station. The incident took place on Tuesday, June 4.

The victim is a class 9 student and stays with his parents. The victim had taken up the job of a delivery boy in his summer break. The victim had gone to deliver water bottles to an apartment when the alleged incident took place.

The victim had delivered the bottles and had reached the ground floor when one of the accused, Sumit Dubey approached him. Dubey accused the victim of stealing his footwear. When the victim denied the allegations, Dubey allegedly beat him and robbed him of the cash that he was carrying.

Following this, the victim was forced to get into a car that had stopped at the gate of the building. The accused allegedly tied the victim's hands and took him to the Virar railway station. When the accused were taking the victim to the Virar police station, they forced him to drink phenyl.

According to the Hindustan Times report, the victim was taken to a private hospital after the incident. The victim was discharged on Friday, June 7. The victim's parents approached the police on Sunday, June 9.

In another incident, a youth from Agra allegedly staged his own kidnapping and demanded a ransom of Rs 1 lakh from his parents. The incident came to light in May. The accused had left his house on April 22. The accused said that he was going to join a private company.

The accused was identified as Abhishek Kumar. The accused's father received a call from his son's mobile phone on April 28. In the phone call, the accused asked his father to deposit Rs 1 lakh in the bank account of the accused. The father of the accused approached the police and informed them about the incident. The accused was nabbed using the location of his mobile phone. The accused was arrested from Gurugram.
