From retired govt officials to police officers; these are the convicts in Kathua rape case

People demanding justice for the deceased in the Kathua rape case. | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Amid nationwide outrage over the savage killing of a minor in Kathua district of Jammu and Kashmir in January 2018, the Pathankot District and Sessions Court announced the verdict in the case on Monday. The court has convicted six out of seven accused in the case. While the juvenile accused has been acquitted by the court.

The case became controversial after a right-wing group, Hindu Ekta Manch held protests in support of one of the accused. The accused in the case included police officers, retired government officials and a minor.

Punjab: Quantum of punishment for 6 convicts in Kathua rape and murder case to be delivered at 4 pm at Pathankot* Court https://t.co/Xvic1HY9Vn — ANI (@ANI) June 10, 2019

Meanwhile, two ministers of the Bhartiya Janata Party of the state's coalition with the PDP also attended the rally supporting the accused. The nation was shocked over the barbarity of the crime and later, after the appeal by the deceased's family the Supreme Court shifted the case to Pathankot District Court. After a year of the day-to-day basis of trials, with 114 witnesses by both prosecution and defence counsels, the verdict was announced by the bench headed by the Judge Tejwinder Singh.

Here is the list of accused in the case

Sanjhi Ram: 61-year-old former revenue officer and the village head, who was the mastermind of the crime has been convicted by the Pathankot District and Sessions Court. He has been booked under section 302 (murder), 376D (gang rape), 363 (kidnapping), 120b (criminal conspiracy), 343 (wrongful confinement) of the RPC, news agency PTI reported.

Deepak Khajuria, Surender Verma: They were special police officers in the Jammu and Kashmir police department and have been convicted for the direct involvement in the heinous rape and murder of the eight-year-old minor.

Anand Dutta: Sub-Inspector of police who allegedly took Rs 4 lakh from Sanjhi Ram to destroy the crucial pieces of evidence in the case. He has been convicted under section 201 of the Ranbir Penal Code (RPC).

Tilak Raj: Head Constable of the police, who was not directly involved in the crime but along with Dutta he destroyed the evidence against the prime convict in the case. He has been convicted under section 201 of the Ranbir Penal Code (RPC) for causing destruction of evidence

Kathua rape & murder case: Accused Vishal has been acquitted by the Court. https://t.co/XJyJlqOMAA — ANI (@ANI) June 10, 2019

Parvesh Kumar: Sanjhi Ram's friend who was directly involved in the crime was also convicted by the court. Meanwhile, his minor son has been acquitted due to lack of evidence against him.
