UP Minister Classifies Rapes And Apparently Marital Rape Doesn’t Count

If you ever wondered about the reasons behind India’s chronic, untreatable rape problem, an Uttar Pradesh minsiter’s views on sexual assault will give you a clue. Water Supply, Land Development and Water Resources Minister Upendra Tiwari, held forth on the “nature” of rape and which kinds he think are legitimate.

In a clip which has now gone viral, the minister says: “There is a nature of rape. Now if a minor is raped, it will be considered as rape. But at times we hear that a married woman in the age-group of 30-35 years too has been a victim of a similar incident, that’s different...for 7-8 years there would be an affair, then complaint of rape comes...Such matters should have been raised then.”

The conversation about sexual assault has reached a fever pitch in our public discourse, thanks to gruesome attacks on women of all age, some as young as 8, like Asifa of Kathua. While public outrage may be peaking, it is clear that the men in power, are in no mood to listen. Marital rape is still not a punishable crime in India and the majority of policy makers, who have the onus of protecting women and their rights, are men, who clearly believe in blaming the victim instead.

Comments like these are symptomatic of a society which is innately misogynistic, where the position of power is always occupied by a male (like this minister), who thinks he has the right to negate a female experience.

In 2018, the Central government took a stand against criminalising marital rape, stating that it would “destabilise the institution of marriage” and could become an easy tool to “harass husbands”.

In the minister’s statement, there is also the unsaid assertion that only sexual assault on women who are virginal counts. “Sexual purity” is still considered a woman’s most valued asset in large swathes of the country and therefore a sexually active woman’s assault is deemed less significant.

Women’s autonomy in public life will be compromised till men like Upendra Tiwari are in power. There was outrage around the world when 25 Republicans, all men, voted to ban abortion in Georgia, USA. The comments by the UP minister are part of the same problem. Men will continue to make decisions about the lives of women, till we have as many seats at the decision-making table.

The current national government has an abysmal track record when it comes to equal representation of women, with only 3 women getting ministries after the 2019 elections. Until that number changes, male politicians will keep spewing misogynistic bile.
