Kathua Rape and Murder Case: Trio including mastermind get life imprisonment – KashmirWatch

CNS reports from Indian occupied Jammu & Kashmir

Pathankot, June 10, CNS: Six of the seven accused in the brutal rape and murder case of an 8-year-old girl in Kathua in Jammu and Kashmir were convicted by a special court here on Monday.

These includes Sanjhi Ram, Parvesh Kumar, police officer Deepak khajuria 302;376-D;120-B;363; 328; 34. (Criminal conspiracy, rape, murder) Anand Dutta; Tilak Raj; Surinder Verma under 201 RPC. (Destruction of evidence) while the son of head village Sanjhi Rami, Vishal Jangotra was acquitted. The court pronounced life imprisonment of 25 years to Sanji Ram, Parvesh Kumar and Deepak Khajuria. Three others, who have been found guilty for destruction of evidence, have been sentenced to five years in jail.

The acquitted minor will be tried separately in accordance with juvenile act. His trial is stuck because of a dispute over his age; he claims he is a minor and a petition on his age is yet to be heard. Sanji Ram, 61, a retired revenue officer who was the priest of the temple was the mastermind of this gruesome incident.

The child’s mother had demanded capital punishment for two of those convicted – retired government officer Sanji Ram and police officer Deepak Khajuria – claiming that they were the “masterminds” behind the crime.

After the conviction of six accused, senior Congress leader Abhishek Manu Singhvi hit out at the BJP leadership in Jammu for coming in support of the accused in 2018. “Never forget that BJP leadership in Jammu rallied around these 6 monsters, gave them support and attempted to prevent law from taking its own course,” he tweeted.

Pertinently, an eight-year-old girl, who was kidnapped on January 10 last year, was allegedly raped in captivity in a small village temple in Kathua district after having been kept sedated for four days before she was bludgeoned to death.

The abduction, rape and killing of the child was part of a carefully planned strategy to remove the minority nomadic community from the area, the 15-page charge sheet said.

The Crime Branch arrested village head Sanji Ram, his son Vishal, juvenile nephew and his friend Anand Dutta, and two special police officers Deepak Khajuria and Surender Verma. Head constable Tilak Raj and sub-inspector Anand Dutta, who allegedly took Rs 4 lakh from Sanji Ram and destroyed crucial evidence, were also arrested.

The case had become a bone of contention between the then ruling alliance partners PDP and the BJP after two ministers of the saffron party, Chowdhury Lal Singh and Chander Prakash Ganga, participated in a rally organized by the Hindu Ekta Manch in support of the accused, arrested by the Jammu and Kashmir crime branch.

The closed-door hearing in the case was completed on June 3, during which district and sessions judge Tejvinder Singh had announced the date of verdict.

As per the chargesheet filed in the case, the girl was abducted on January 10, 2018 and held captive at a temple in a village in Kathua district. She was kept unconscious for almost four days, during which she was raped. Following the heinous act, the child was brutally murdered.

The hearing in the case was conducted on a day-to-day basis in the district and sessions court in Pathankot in Punjab. The case was transferred to Pathankot on the orders of the Supreme Court.

Kathua Rape and Murder Verdict: Tweeples hail role of police officers, welcome court judgment

Srinagar, June 10, CNS: Soon after the special court convicted six out of seven accused in the Kathua rape and murder case including mastermind village head Sanjhi Ram and police officer Deepak Khajuria, people from different shades of society expressed satisfaction and said that justice has been ultimately delivered. People hailed the role of police officers part of investigation.

The two former chief ministers of Jammu and Kashmir Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti welcomed the decision.

The vice president of National Conference Omar Abdullah in a tweet said; “Amen to that. The guilty deserve the most severe punishment possible under law. And to those politicians who defended the accused, vilified the victim and threatened the legal system no words of condemnation are enough.”

Similarly, Peoples Democratic party president Mehbooba Mufti welcomed the decision and said; “High time we stop playing politics over a heinous crime where an 8 year old child was drugged, raped repeatedly & then bludgeoned to death. Hope loopholes in our judicial system are not exploited & culprits get exemplary punishment.

Jammu Kashmir Peoples Conference Chairman Sajad Lone said that justice served in Kathua. “This is real good news.”

Jammu Kashmir Peoples Movement leaders too expressed satisfaction over the conviction.

“I would have liked to congratulate everyone who sided with justice in the Kathua case. But my heart doesn’t allow me to celebrate when I think of the little girl and her innocent face. Hope the sentence is exemplary, and sets an example for child rapists wherever/whoever they are,” said Shehla Rashid.

Shah Faesal while hailing the role of police took to Twitter and wrote: “Congratulations to Jammu and Kashmir Police for getting Rasana Kathua rapists convicted. Politicians tried their best to sabotage the movement for justice to A. But the Honble Court and the law enforcement agencies stood their ground. Also, not to forget the role of activists and media.”

Jammu Kashmir Police officers who are tech savvy and known for giving a vent to their ideas on Twitter also hailed the role of investigative agencies and justice delivered in the case.

Former police officer turned politician Riyaz Bidar said that a ray of of Hope, finally justice has prevailed. “Well done JK Police, you deserve all praise.”

Imtiyaz Hussain retweeted a tweet stating that:

“Truth Triumphs and Justice Delivered. Need for speedy trials for all such barbaric heinous rape crimes against minors.”

Sheikh Adil said wrote that finally Justice delivered! “I Hope all such cases will be dealt on fast track basis without any delay.”

Senior politician and MLC Yasir Reshi while hailing the role of police officers welcomed the court verdict saying that democracy is still alive in India.

He said the verdict is an eye-opener for those who question the credibility of judiciary. Reshi said that those convicted should be awarded stringent punishment.

“Despite rape accused being supported by BJP, the court pronounced its verdict and delivered justice. This amply makes it clear that minorities are safe everywhere in India,” Reshi told CNS.

Kashmir Press Club Head Shuju-ul-Haq said that Kathua case should serve as an eye opener to those who shamelessly tried to defend the rapists and even used the tri-colour to peddle their ugly agendas.

Former Minister and senior PDP leader hailed the role of police officers shortly after court pronounced its verdict. He commended the role of J&K police, then DGP Mr Ved, @Ahfad11, SSP Jalla, SSP Naveed, Dysp Shweta and all others.

“The monsters should rot in hell. Shame on the politicians who took part in a rally in 2018 in support of Kathua Rape Case accused and called the police action against the culprits as “Jungle Raj,” said National Conference leader Sarah Hayat Khan.

The police officer Afhadul Mujtaba himself took to twitter and wrote: “The dead cannot cry out for justice. It is a duty of the living to do so for them.”

Pertinently, an eight-year-old girl, who was kidnapped on January 10 last year, was allegedly raped in captivity in a small village temple in Kathua district after having been kept sedated for four days before she was bludgeoned to death.

The abduction, rape and killing of the child was part of a carefully planned strategy to remove the minority nomadic community from the area, the 15-page charge sheet said.

The Crime Branch arrested village head Sanji Ram, his son Vishal, juvenile nephew and his friend Anand Dutta, and two special police officers Deepak Khajuria and Surender Verma. Head constable Tilak Raj and sub-inspector Anand Dutta, who allegedly took Rs 4 lakh from Sanji Ram and destroyed crucial evidence, were also arrested.

The case had become a bone of contention between the then ruling alliance partners PDP and the BJP after two ministers of the saffron party, Chowdhury Lal Singh and Chander Prakash Ganga, participated in a rally organized by the Hindu Ekta Manch in support of the accused, arrested by the Jammu and Kashmir crime branch. (CNS)
