Young bird’s flight cut short, says judge in Kathua case, gives accused life in prison

Pinha tha daam-e-sakht qareeb aashiyaan ke, Udne hi na paaye the ki giraftaar hum hue

PATHANKOT: His heart in pieces after the horrific gang rape and murder of his little daughter last year, the man, a nomadic Bakarwal from the higher reaches of Kashmir, had promised he would never return to Kathua. On Monday, moments after a local court in Pathankot sentenced three of the six men involved in the crime to life in prison, the father of the dead girl told TOI from somewhere near Kargil that when he goes to Kathua again, he will sit by his daughter's grave for a long time, in benediction and gratitude.District and sessions judge Tejwinder Singh ordered five years of imprisonment for the remaining three men convicted in the case that shook the country after sordid details of the girl's torture, rape and killing started tumbling out after chilling events of January 10, 2018.The seventh accused, Vishal Jangotra, son of main conspirator Sanji Ram, a retired revenue officer, was acquitted. The eighth accused, who claims to be a juvenile, is yet to face trial as his plea on determination of his age is yet to be heard by the Jammu and Kashmir high court."In the present case, facts are many but the truth is one -- that under a criminal conspiracy , an innocent eight-year-old girl has been kidnapped, drugged, raped and ultimately murdered. Perpetrators of the crime have acted in such a manner as if there is a 'law of the jungle' prevalent in society," said the judge in his order.Comparing the victim to a "young chick who wanted to fly high", judge Singh quoted a Mirza Ghalib couplet: "". The judge himself translated it thus in English: Near the bird's nest, the young chick was caught in a hard net placed by the hunter before it could take flight.Sanji Ram, who doubled up as the priest of a local temple where the girl was kept during her torture, his friend Parvesh Kumar and special police officer Deepak Khajuria were held guilty under sections 302 (murder), 376 (rape) and 120B (criminal conspiracy) of the Ranbir Penal Code (RPC) that is in use in Jammu and Kashmir. The three men were awarded multiple sentences for various related aspects of the crime, but these would run concurrently with the life sentence. They were also fined Rs 1 lakh each. This means they will be in jail till the end of their lives.Three police personnel - sub-inspector Anand Dutta, special police officer Surender Verma and head constable Tilak Raj - were also held guilty under Section 201 (destruction of evidence) of the RPC.During argument, defence lawyers pleaded for milder punishment for the accused on the grounds that "the entire case was based on circumstantial evidence and wrong facts created by the Jammu and Kashmir police". The prosecution, however, sought death sentence, terming it a "rarest of rare case".When the quantum of sentence was finally pronounced at about 4.50pm, Jangotra started crying in the courtroom. But Sanji Ram raised slogans, shouting that he is innocent and was framed by police. Outside the court, Sanji Ram's daughter protested loudly and said she will take the fight to the Supreme Court.No one from the girl's family was present in court though relatives of most of the convicts were there. Considering the sensitivity of the case, around 1,000 cops were deployed in and around the court. Armoured vehicles and commandos from the special security group of Punjab police were also roped in for security.Meanwhile, reacting to the judgment, the Hindu Ekta Manch that had last year taken out processions in Jammu demanding the release of the accused, said the six men were innocent. "It was all done to tarnish the image of people of Jammu region," Kant Kumar, vice-president of the Manch, said.Vijay Tagotra, state secretary, Jammu and Kashmir Panchayat Conference, a grouping of certain panchayat heads that had also come out in support of the accused, said they will hold a meeting to arrange finances for the convicts "as they cannot afford to appeal in the high court against ". He added that only a CBI probe could unveil the truth.Back in Kashmir, the father of the girl, who was on his way to Kargil and resting at Kokernag with his cattle in south Kashmir where he found a patch of water for his animals, said, "Justice has been done though we don't know how Sanji Ram's son went free. We miss the sweet soul that we lost. All we can now do is hope for her peace."
