Vadodara police arrest 3 boys for blackmailing, extorting and raping school girl using objectionable pictures

Vadodara police with the accused boys | Photo Credit: ANI

Ahmedabad: Police in Vadodara city of Gujarat have arrested three boys and are on the lookout for two others accused of blackmailing and raping a student of class 12. Confirming the detention, a senior city police official told media outlets that three boys have been arrested, one detained and a search is underway for two others in connection with the case.

Those arrested have been identified as Nikunj, Pradip and Pradip Chouhan. A preliminary investigation has revealed that Pradip was in a relationship with the girl while Nikunj and Chauhan are her batchmates. Police officials familiar with the matter confirmed that the accused clicked objectionable pictures of the victim which they then used as leverage to blackmail, extort and rape her.

Police: She had 2 batchmates-Pradip Chouhan&Nikunj Rohit&was in a relationship with Pradip who clicked her objectionable pics.He extorted Rs 50000 from her&sent pics to a Bhavans Prajapati via Nikunj who blackmailed&raped her. It was also sent to other accused who blackmailed her pic.twitter.com/VuYHAufyHV — ANI (@ANI) June 10, 2019

Pradip, who was in a relationship with the girl, used the objectionable pictures to extort a sum of Rs 50,000 from her. He then shared the pictures with Nikunj who in turn sent them to one Bhavans Prajapati. It was Prajapati who then used the pictures to blackmail the victim and raped her, said Vadodara police.

Assuring speedy action in this regard, an official investigating the matter said that the remaining accused will be arrested soon. Investigators are most likely to charge the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Information Technology (IT) Act, 2000. More details in this regard are awaited.

A similar case had emerged from the state of Bihar in July of 2018 where two students, a school principal and a teacher were arrested for the alleged gang-rape of a minor girl in an area near Chhapra. In her complaint to the police, the girl had claimed that she was blackmailed and gang-raped by the accused principal, two teachers and as many as 15 students for over a period of seven months.
