Jabalpur: Ex-army serviceman brutally thrashed by goons, BJP blames Congress for assault – Watch

Ex-army serviceman brutally thrashed by goons in Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh | Photo Credit: Times Now

Jabalpur: An ex-serviceman, working as a security guard at the Jabalpur Municipal Corporation in Madhya Pradesh’s Jabalpur, was thrashed allegedly by Congress workers on Monday. As per the police, around six to seven people had badly beaten up the security guard inside the Corporation premises. The victim, Harish Patel, was admitted to a hospital after suffering severe injuries due to the assault.

According to a few media reports, witnesses claimed that the men who attacked the guard were supporters of Congress leader and Madhya Pradesh's energy minister Priyawat Singh. Blaming the Congress for the violent incident, BJP MP from Jabalpur, Rakesh Singh said, “While we were protesting against the deteriorating law & order situation in the state, some Congress workers beat up an ex-serviceman working as a security guard. How long will this continue?”

The incident took place when Minister Priyavrat Singh, who is also minister in-charge for Jabalpur district was on a visit to Jabalpur and JMC premises, as per reports. BJP’s Rakesh Singh, who visited the victim after the attack, also alleged that the supporters of the Congress minister were responsible for the assault.

“It’s shocking as well as shameful that an ex-serviceman has been attacked by the supporters of those who are running the government in the state. Entire law and order situation in the state is in tatters, owing to which we staged protests across the state on Monday when this shocking episode unfolded in the JMC premises,” Singh was quoted as saying by The New Indian Express.

Giving details of the incident, SP Jabalpur Amit Singh said that assault occurred due to an anti-encroachment drive carried out by the JMC. He told the daily, “On January 17 the JMC anti-encroachment team removed the encroachments from near the Stadium in Wright Town area. What happened in JMC premises on Monday evening was Part Two of January 17 incident, as Shakti Chowkse, whose encroachment was removed by the JMC team, along with 6-7 goons assaulted the ex-serviceman so brutally that he fell unconscious and has been hospitalized.”

Patel had served the Indian Army for 24 years. Post his retirement, he has been working as a security guard at the JMC.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
