Cops among those arrested by Uttar Pradesh police for running 'fake rape extortion' racket in Noida

Uttar Pradesh police accompanying the suspects to court | Photo Credit: ANI

Noida: Senior police officials in the state of Uttar Pradesh have busted a racket of extortionists. Members of this gang reportedly trapped commuters and intimidated them with the threat of fake rape cases, said an official familiar with the investigation. However, what is even more appalling is that those arrested include UP police personnel.

Going by reports, authorities have arrested two women, three police control room (PCR) drivers and three police constables in connection with the extortion racket. Their modus operandi (MO) reportedly revolved around trapping commuters in the area between Sector 39 and Sector 44 of the New Okhla Industrial Development Authority (NOIDA). Members of the gang, in connivance with the erring police officials, laid traps for the commuters before scaring them with the threat of a fake rape case.

Former Deputy General of Police (DGP) of Uttar Pradesh, Vikram Singh told Mirror Now the good thing is that police did what was expected from them and the bad thing is that the same officers who are the keepers of law and order, are using it to threaten the people they are supposed to protect. Singh also clarified that the police officers part of this racket likely threatened the victims with the threat of a fake rape case instead of filing an official complaint or lodging a case.

"Not taking action against erring police officers is counter-productive," said Singh. The former top cop's advise for the top brass of the UP police seems worthwhile, considering that this is not the first time such a situation has come to light. Meanwhile, all 15 suspects have been sent to 14 days' judicial custody by a court.

15 persons including one inspector, 3 constables of UP Police, 3 PCR drivers & 2 women who were arrested for extorting money from commuters by threatening to implicate them in rape case, were produced in Anti-Corruption court in Meerut yesterday & sent to 14 days judicial custody pic.twitter.com/gQ1ORac0s4 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 12, 2019

In April of this year, police in Ghaziabad lodged a case against six persons for allegedly registering a fake rape case against a property dealer in Loni. Among those accused was a sub-inspector, a head constable and a constable. The sub-inspector was a chowki in-charge of Inderpuri police post under Loni border police station limits.
