Upper-caste strongmen allegedly torch 25 homes at behest of land mafia in Bihar's Sanjheli village

The incident took place at Sanjheli village on Sunday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Patna: Residents of the Sanjheli village in Katihar district of Bihar have alleged that a mob of miscreants set their houses ablaze on Sunday at the behest of the land mafia. In their complaint to the police, locals claimed that their homes were burnt by 'upper-caste strongmen'. However, the same is yet to be confirmed by police officials probing the matter.

A case has been filed against unidentified persons in this regard with the SC/ST police station based on the complaint by distraught villagers. Preliminary investigation has led police to believe that the instance could stem from a dispute over land. Mourning the loss of their homes, locals claimed that whoever orchestrated the attack had been eyeing the properties owned by their forefathers for several decades.

Villagers are sticking to their version of events which indicate how scores of armed bike-borne assailants arrived at the village and torched as many as 25 houses on Sunday. Superintendent of Police (SP), Katihar, Vikas Kumar told Mirror Now that a first information report (FIR) has been registered against seven unidentified persons. The accused have been charged with sections 727, 436, 427, 436, 341 and 323 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) along with relevant sections of the Prevention of Authorities (SC/ST) Act, 1989.

Kumar also said that police suspect the role of the complainant's neighbours in this case and are investigating all angles. "The homes which were burnt had no belongings inside them," claims Kumar adding that the ownership of the houses is also a bone of contention. Commenting on the alleged involvement of the land mafia in this incident, the policeman said that the matter is under active investigation and any such allegations are unverified as of yet. The attack was the result of a land dispute, reiterated Kumar. More details in this regard are awaited as this is a developing story.
