Girls at high risk in Birgunj

BIRGUNJ, June 12: The rise in rape, kidnapping and sexual assault, among others, in recent times shows how the safety of young girls is at risk in Birgunj Metropolis. They have become victims of girls trafficking, unsafe sex and unsafe pregnancy, among others.

On May 26, a 15-year-old girl was found near Birgunj check-point, traveling on her own to India. A Maiti Nepal social worker suspected some foul play. So she quizzed the girl. It was later discovered that the girl had planned to elope with a 19-year-old boy to India. Rs 50,000, stolen by the girl from her house, was also recovered.

"We have handed the girl over to her parents," Maiti Nepal's Birgunj Office Chief Sangita Puri said, adding, "At this age, children can get influenced in the wrong direction so parents must be careful."

In another case that occurred on April 26, a 15-year-old was found in suspicious circumstances and taken to Maiti Nepal by Ward Police Office Shripur. She was sick and when taken to Narayani Hospital for treatment, i twas discovered that she was pregnant with a 5-month-old baby.

Rape and attempt to Rape

According to statictics provided by the police, 12 rape vicitims were taken to Maiti Nepal last year. Among them, 11 were found to be under the age of 18.

"Incidents are increasing day by day," rights activist Nila Ram said, adding, "The cases have begun to worry us." She emphasized the need for the local units to play a more significant role to bring the situation under control.

District Police Office (DPO), Parsa, has filed a case against Sukhuwa Parsauni Ward Chairman's son for his alleged involvement in a gang rape. The victim says she was raped by three men in a nearby sugarcane field.

Suicide

Nilam Kumari Sah, 14, the daughter of Sikindra Sah, a local of ward 21, Birgunj Sub-metropolitan City, was found hanging from a ceiling in her house at 6 :30 pm on May 27. Her uncle immediately took her for tratment to Birgunj Health Care. But she died an hour later. the District Police Office, Parsa, has stated that an investigation into the suicide is underway.

Similarly, on December 23 last year, two 11th graders of Birgunj Public College died standing in a railway track near Raxaul. The deceased were identified as 18-year-old Kiran Kumari Chaurasiya of Ward 3 and 17-year-old Niva Kumari Sah Gupta of Ward 2 Kalimamai Rural Municipality. They were living together on rent in Ranighat near Birgunj Municipality. A suicide note was also discovered by the police. According to Superintendent of Police (SP) Rewati Dhakal, the note said that no one was to be blamed. Police confirmed it as a suicide and closed the case, without discovering the reason behind it.

Another case of suicide took place on March 1. Thirteen-year-old Ramita Kumari (name changed), a local of Patewasugauli Rural Municipality Ward 4, consumed poison but was luckily saved. A 27-year-old girl, who had consumed poision died. The incident took place at Sedhawa, Jirabhawani-2.
