Yogi orders revival of anti-Romeo squad

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Lucknow, June 11

Amid a spurt in crime against minor girls across Uttar Pradesh, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has asked the state police to revive anti-Romeo squads against anti-social elements targeting young women at public places.

Chairing a review meeting of the state’s Home Department, CM Yogi asked the police to run an intensive campaign across the state, with the help of the state’s Department of Women Welfare, before the start of the next academic session in July. Yogi had set up anti-Romeo squads on assuming office in March 2017. Police personnel in mufti were stationed at public places to keep a watch on anti-social elements.

However, the initiative invited criticism with several cases of moral policing coming to light. In one case, a brother and sister duo travelling in an auto were taken to the police station for questioning.

Principal Secretary (Home) Arvind Kumar said the squads would not take action against men and women willingly together at public places or transport.

Four senior women IPS officers in the rank of ADG will keep a watch on gender crime. Dividing the state into eight zones, each of these ADG-level women officers will be in-chargee of two zones each. The Principal Secretary said these officers — Renuka Kumar, Tanuja Srivastava, Neera Rawat and Anju Gupta — would monitor police action and progress of cases registered under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POSCO) Act and keep tabs on the district police.

Taking serious note of the rising incidents of crime against minors, the CM said that these would be referred to fast-track courts for speedy action. He ordered stepping up foot patrolling in rural areas.

To check domestic violence, he directed further strengthening of helplines 181 and 1090. The CM will hold another meeting tomorrow to be attended by district police chiefs.

Meanwhile, after Aligarh, Hamirpur, Jaluan, Kushinagar and Kanpur, yet another rape of minor has been reported from Sitapur. The police have arrested a 20-year-old man.
