Fisticuffs in petrol pump over water from cooler

bike rental service

petrol bunk

Bangalore

By By Amit KumarFour employees of athrash cashier when he forbids them from taking away water from the dispenserThe water wars have begun.Four employees of a self-drive bike rental service thrashed a cashier and a female staff of a privatefor not allowing them to fill water from the water dispenser kept on the premises. The incident took place on June 9, when the accused Jhanardhan, Shanthakumar, Shiva and Ram Kumar, visited the Thriveni petrol bunk located on Hesaraghatta main road. One of the accused, Jhanardhan, was trying to fill water in a bottle from the mineral water dispenser installed at the petrol bunk for public use. However, the cashier of petrol bunk, Maruthi (23), told him that since there was water shortage, Jhanardhan could drink as much water as he wanted on the spot but could not fill up a bottle as a takeaway.An argument broke out between the two over this, and one of the accused assaulted Maruthi with a helmet. The fight grew more intense with the others joining in to trash Maruthi. Meanwhile other staff members of the petrol bunk intervened and tried to stop the fight. A female staff member, Shalini (name changed), was also assaulted by the accused when she tried to defuse tensions. The whole act was recorded on the CCTV camera installed at the petrol bunk and a complaint was filed against the accused at the Bagalgunte police station.The victim Maruthi toldMirror, “The accused started the fight for a small reason. I just told them not to fill water in their bottle as it was meant for drinking only, and not to be used as a takeaway. That made one of the accused to start abusing me. When I told him not to use filthy language, all the four started assaulting me. They also assaulted a female staff of our petrol bunk when she asked them to leave the place and not disturb the customers. This is the first time such an incident has taken place at our petrol bunk.”One of the officials from the Bagalgunte police station told Bangalore Mirror, “We are verifying the CCTV footage. The accused were known to the victim and they had a fight over a small reason. A female staff member was pushed by the accused during the fight. Officials are also inquiring with the other staff of petrol bunk about the events and the accused will be taken into custody soon.”An FIR has been registered at the Bagalgunte police station under sections 506 (punishment for criminal intimidation), 341 (punishment for wrongful restraint), 324 (voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means), 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace), 323 (punishment for voluntarily causing hurt), 354 (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage modesty of women).Further investigations are on.
