Abducted while sleeping outside her home, 10-year-old girl raped in Dholpur city of Rajasthan

The child is being treated for injuries to her private parts (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Jaipur: Officials with the Baseri police station in Dholpur city of Rajasthan have launched an investigation into the alleged abduction and rape of a minor girl who was found lying in an unconscious state near her residence on Monday night. While a first information report (FIR) has been registered in this regard, the police are yet to make any arrests.

Going by reports, the girl and her family members decided to sleep on charpoys outside their home in Dholpur on Monday night owing to the rise in mercury. However, someone abducted the girl around 11.30 pm and took her to a nearby shed where she was allegedly raped. The girl's kin woke up after midnight and found her missing.

They launched a search for her and found her lying under a nearby shed with her clothes torn. Blood from her private parts prompted the parents to rush her to a nearby hospital where a medical examination revealed that she had been sexually assaulted. The family then approached the police and registered an official complaint in this regard. More details are awaited as this is a developing matter.

On hearing about the incident, Superintendent of Police (SP) Ajay Singh rushed to the spot and assured the parents of a speedy investigation into the matter. He further instructed Baseri police station personnel to identify and track down the accused as soon as possible.

A similar instance had come to light from Karauli district of Rajasthan in May of this year where police had arrested a 15-year-old boy for the alleged rape of a nine-month-old girl. The accused lived in the same neighbourhood as the girl and abducted her when the child's mother was cooking and asked her mother-in-law to look after her. Doctors examining the minor said that she was being treated for injuries to her private parts.
