UP SHO urinated in my mouth, claims scribe

FIR based on scribe’s plaint, probe ordered

We have come across a video where a journalist has been beaten up & put up in a lock up. DGP UP OP Singh has ordere… https://t.co/XoVh2nvcVl — UP POLICE (@Uppolice) 1560312510000

Delhi based journalist Prashant Kanojia was arrested

Government has no control over cops: Akhilesh Yadav

Shocking: Journalist thrashed by GRP cop, goons in Shamli

MEERUT: In yet another case of police brutality on journalists , a mediaperson with a local news group, was allegedly assaulted by Shamli GRP SHO and his aides on Tuesday evening.The incident happened after two wagons of a goods train derailed near Dhimanpur in Shamli at around 9pm on Tuesday. A team of policemen led by SHO Rakesh Kumar and a contingent of local journalists was at the spot covering the derailment story when an argument broke out.SHO Kumar can be seen attacking Amit Sharma in one of the several videos of the incident that has gone viral on social media. Later, Sharma was attacked by one of the aides of the SHO who was present at the spot.According to local journalists, also witnesses to the incident, Sharma was not only beaten but dragged to the local GRP station and locked up. The victim also claimed that he was stripped by the cops and Rakesh Kumar urinated in his mouth. "The SHO attacked me in vengeance after I ran a story which upset him. He initially attacked at the spot and threw my mobile phone away. He later abused, assaulted stripped and urinated in my mouth," Amit Sharma said.Reacting to the allegations, UP police have condemned the incident and DGP OP Singh has suspended SHO Kumar and a constable.Though scores of journalists assembled at the GRP station on Tuesday night to protest against the illegal detention of Sharma, he was released only on Wednesday morning. ADG (Railways) Sanjay Singhal confirmed to TOI that an FIR based on the complaint of the journalist had been registered. A departmental probe under DIG (Railways) Subash Chand Dubey, who reached Shamli on Wednesday afternoon, has also been ordered . “We have come across a video where a journalist has been beaten up and put up in a lock up. Strict punishment shall be accorded to policemen misbehaving with citizens,” UP Police tweeted.A huge ruckus ensued at the GRP police station in Shamli where scores of journalists had gathered to protest the attack and detention of Shamra. The protest continued on Wednesday morning as several organisations led by local mediapersons continued protest at the GRP police station premises.This comes days after afor his 'objectionable' post against UP chief minister Yogi Adiyanath. The episode turned into an embarrassment for UP police department after wife of the incarcerated journalist approached Supreme Court for relief. Rapping UP govt for their highhandedness in the arrest of the journalist, the apex court ordered Kanojia's immediate release.SP chief Akhilesh Yadav on Wednesday accused the BJP government of turning dictatorial to hide its failures and suppress the Opposition’s voice. "The inhuman behaviour with the journalist, Amit Sharma, during coverage of the derailed goods train in Shamli district is condemnable. The journalist was beaten in custody and his camera was also broken. This act of GRP soldiers shows that the government has no control over its own police forces,” he tweeted. He said their punishment should not be limited to suspension only. He said, “The behaviour of the BJP government is extremely undemocratic. The party gets irked by freelancers."
