Shimla horror! 15-year-old raped by Facebook friend; arrested

After raping her, the accused confined the girl in the hotel room and fled in the morning. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Shimla: A 23-year-old man was arrested for allegedly raping a 15-year-old girl whom he befriended on Facebook. The accused, who was identified as Rajneesh, is a college student. The police registered a case against the accused. He was arrested on Saturday.

After befriending the girl on Facebook, Rajneesh lured her to meet him at a hotel. After raping her, the accused confined the girl in the hotel room and fled in the morning, according to a report in Amar Ujala. When the girl did not return home, her family started looking for her. They found her on the Mall Road on Saturday. After going back home, the girl narrated her ordeal to her family.

After the family reported the crime to the police, a case was registered against the accused at Dalli police station. The police acted promptly and tracked down the whereabouts of Rajneesh. He was arrested from Rohru's Chirgaon in Shimla district.

Also Read: CAUGHT ON CAM! Man brutally murdered in broad daylight on busy Chennai street; onlookers stand mute

In a similar incident reported from Meerut in Uttar Pradesh, a 13-year-old girl was allegedly abducted and gang-raped by her Facebook friend and his associates in December last year. The girl, belonging from Delhi, decided to meet the main accused and went for a drive with him. He took her to a hotel room in Meerut.

He and his friends allegedly sexually abused her for two days after which she managed to escape and return to Delhi. In her complaint to the police, the minor girl said that the prime accused tempted her to meet him on the pretext of marrying her.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
