Bhopal rape and murder: 'Mujhe goli maar do,' accused under suicide watch

BHOPAL: “Mujhe maaro…Mujhe goli maar do. Aap mujhe kuch to saza do, aap mujhe maarte kyun nahi…” The accused in the rape and murder of 10-year-old, Vishnu Prasad, kept repeating these lines during interrogation.Saying that he is in a state of depression, SHO Kamla Nagar, Alok Shrivastava , told TOI Vishnu kept asking the cops to beat him up and punish him. He even pleaded that he be shot at.The accused has suicidal tendency, he said, adding that police have kept a watch on him, so that he does not harm himself.The accused also confessed to his crime and narrated the incident before the cops. Here are the excerpts of Vishnu’s confession: “I cooked my food, had liquor and dinner after which I was sitting outside my house. I saw the minor girl going to a shop... After a while, she returned and again went to the shop. When she was on her way back, the power supply in the area tripped”“When the girl passed by my house. I pounced on her in the dark and smothered her face. I kept my hands on her mouth and nose to prevent her from raising an alarm and dragged her inside.”“I was not in my senses, and while covering the girl’s face and mouth firmly I raped her. She was unconscious and after committing the act, I went to sleep. When I woke up, I realized what I did.”“The locals and family members were looking for the girl and I too joined them. When everybody was tired and unable to find her, they returned.”“Then, I quietly kept the body over the drainage chamber and fled. I was terrified that I would be caught. I went straight to the railway station and took a train to Indore. I passed some time in Indore and left to Mortakka by bus.”“My wife had left me and was living with her parent’s. I do not know what happened to me after I spotted the girl. I wanted to commit suicide but cops nabbed me.”Vishnu was produced before the court on Tuesday morning from where he was sent on judicial remand. Police have completed formalities and will present the charge-sheet in the case on Wednesday. The Bhopal district court Bar Association has made it clear that no advocate will appear for the accused.DIG Irshad Wali said that police have collected all the primary evidence in the case and have received the FSL report. The samples were being sent for DNA sampling and charge sheet will be filed in the case on Wednesday.He said that police had information that accused could be assaulted by advocates in court so he was produced before court in heavy security.Prosecution counsel Sudha Bhadouria said that Vishnu was produced before the court of ADJ Suresh Singh from where he was sent on judicial remand for a day.“I was not in my senses... She was unconscious, and after comitting the act I went to sleep. When I woke up, I realised what I did... The locals and family members were looking for the girl and I too joined them... Unable to find her, they returned... I quitely kept the body over the drainage chamber and fled,” reads the accused’s statement
