Two Uttar Pradesh GRP personnel suspended for beating up journalist covering derailment of goods train-India News , Firstpost

Director General of Uttar Pradesh Police OP Singh ordered to place under suspension the GRP's Shamli Station House Officer (SHO) Rakesh Kumar and constable Sanjay Pawar, after the two GRP personnel thrashed Amit Sharma.

Lucknow: Two Government Railway Police (GRP) personnel allegedly thrashed a television journalist after an argument with him when he was covering the derailment of a goods train at Shamli in Uttar Pradesh, following which they were suspended, an official said on Wednesday.

Director General of Uttar Pradesh Police OP Singh ordered to place under suspension the GRP's Shamli Station House Officer (SHO) Rakesh Kumar and constable Sanjay Pawar, the state police tweeted Wednesday morning.

A senior Uttar Pradesh government official, quoting Shamli senior superintendent of police Ajay Kumar Pandey, said the action was taken after the two GRP personnel thrashed Amit Sharma.

In a purported video of the incident which went viral on social media late last night, the accused GRP personnel, in plain clothes, can be seen repeatedly slapping and punching Sharma. Subsequently, the GRP personnel detained him.

#WATCH Shamli: GRP personnel thrash a journalist who was covering the goods train derailment near Dhimanpura tonight. He says, "They were in plain clothes. One hit my camera&it fell down. When I picked it up they hit&abused me. I was locked up, stripped&they urinated in my mouth" pic.twitter.com/nS4hiyFF1G — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 11, 2019

"The incident took place when the journalist had gone to cover the derailment of a few bogies of a goods trains in Shamli. There was a heated exchange of words among them and hurling of abuses," said Ram Lakhan Mishra, the Circle Officer, GRP, Saharanpur.

A senior GRP official said the journalist was released around 7 am on Wednesday.

The Uttar Pradesh police tweeted, "We have come across a video where a journalist has been beaten up & put up in a lock up. DGP UP OP Singh has ordered for immediate suspension of SHO GRP Shamli Rakesh Kumar & Const. Sanjay Pawar. Strict punishment shall be accorded to policemen misbehaving with citizens."
