Jaguar sets Delhi roads on fire with the 'Art of Performance' event

After successfully completing the Art of Performance tour in Indian cities like Hyderabad, Bengaluru, Coimbatore, Mumbai and Rajkot, Jaguar thrilled Delhi with the 'action-packed' experiential event.

What is the 'Art of Performance' tour?

Jaguar retails a number of high-end products in India. The most affordable Jaguar is the XE (starting at INR 40.61 Lakh), and the range extends up to XJ (starting at INR 102.58 Lakh). Jaguar organizes this event across length and breadth of the country to give its potential and existing customers a thrilling driving experience of its entire product line-up in India. The participants are allowed to experience the Jaguar's entire portfolio (XE, XF, XJ, F-PACE and F-TYPE) under the guidance of trained instructors in a controlled test track environment.

There are three very thoughtfully set track activities, namely speed-run, slalom exercise, and lane change and brake test. All three tests highlight cornering abilities and grip, agility, braking and safety, along with the acceleration of the cars.

The Jaguar F-Type takes the centre-stage, and participants are also allowed to do a quick acceleration test on the Jaguar's ultimate sport car which is rated to do the 0-100 km/h run in just 3.70 seconds. Other than that, the F-Pace, XE and XF are made to be pushed hard on the slalom exercise. The company's ultra-exotic luxury saloon, the XJ/XJL demonstrates its instant lane change and braking abilities, along with other cars.

Speaking about the event Rohit Suri, President & Managing Director, Jaguar Land Rover India Ltd. (JLRIL), said: "We are pleased to state that The Art of Performance Tour has garnered great response across all our city visits so far. This experiential tour is specifically designed to showcase the agile performance of all our Jaguar cars and I am delighted that the objective is being fulfilled through an event that promises excitement through performance."

Also Read: Jaguar I-Pace confirmed for India, to be launched in 2020

The Jaguar Art of Performance tour (Delhi) was a two-day event which was held on 8th and 9th June at Huda Ground 19-20, Leisure Valley Road, Sector 29, Gurugram.
