Bihar Horror! Khap Panchayat orders beating of two girls for resisting eve teasers; calls them ‘characterless'

To add further insult to injury, the family of the victims have been fined Rs 2,00,000 for the ‘behaviour’ of the girls. | Photo Credit: Getty

Patna: In another ghastly tale of horror being reported from Bihar, a Khap Panchayat in Madhubani district passed a draconian order against two girls who were being eve-teased. The victims were punished for resisting two molesters from their village and shockingly, were beaten up and their hair cut for the ‘crime’ they committed.

The girls were first termed characterless by the Khap Panchayat before they were inhumanly beaten up and their brother was also thrashed for opposing the obnoxious diktat. The incident was reported from Jhanjharpur area where humanity was shamed with the draconian diktat.

The cousin sisters were collecting wood for fuel from a field when they were eve-teased by two youth from the village. Offended by the behaviour, one minor girl resisted the eve-teasers and enraged by the resistance, the molesters asked the Khap Panchayat to convene.

What happened next was nothing short of a heinous crime, the Khap Panchayat held the two girls guilty and ‘characterless’. The villagers then chopped off the girls’ hair and also beat them up. When their brother objected to such inhumane treatment, he was badly whipped with sticks till he fell unconscious.

To add further insult to injury, the family of the victims have been fined Rs 2,00,000 for the ‘behaviour’ of the girls. The victims narrated their horrific ordeal and said that their brother was thrown on a roadside after villagers thought he had died from their beating. The girls were brutally beaten up with blows to their stomachs.

They were also verbally abused by the villagers and the Khap Panchayat tried to justify this barbaric incident by calling it a ‘lesson’ to the ‘unruly and characterless’ girls.

The family of the girls has registered an FIR against 12 people with the police but they are yet to take any action on the same. Meanwhile, the entire family of the victims is living under constant treat to their lives at the hands of the villagers.


