Amidst doctors' protest at NRS Medical College and Hospital, another student injured in attack at Burdwan

Junior doctors protesting at NRS Medical College and Hospital | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: A day after junior doctors at the NRS Medical College and Hospital in West Bengal called for a strike on Tuesday, yet another instance of an attack on medical professionals has come to light from the state. Demonstrators at the NRS Medical College and Hospital initiated the strike after one of their colleagues was allegedly assaulted by family members of a 75-year-old woman.

Going by reports, the latest incident has come to the fore from the Burdwan Medical College and Hospital where a junior doctor was severely injured after stones were pelted at the institution by protestors on Wednesday afternoon. The injured individual has been identified as one Dr Anirudha Hazra who is reportedly undergoing treatment for injuries incurred during the stone pelting.

Kolkata: Patients are left at lurch as strike of junior doctors at NRS Medical College & Hospital enters second day. A patient's attendant says,"my patient is not receiving any treatment from last 3 days. I am not allowed to enter the hospital. Many patients are dying." pic.twitter.com/pJPyUDuR7N — ANI (@ANI) June 12, 2019

Meanwhile, protesting doctors at the NRS Medical College and Hosptial continued their demonstration for a second day today. Demanding protection for medical professionals, the resident doctors refused to attend classes or tend to patients. This left patients arriving at the Medical College and Hospital in the lurch. A large number of patients and their attendants claimed that no treatment was being given out to the patients for the past three days now. One even claimed that he was not being allowed to enter the hospital. Reports hinted that the protest spread to other medical colleges and hospitals across state capital Kolkata. On Tuesday, the resident doctors locked the gates of the NRS Medical College and Hospital. However, patients later broke open the gates and staged a dharna in response to the protest by doctors.

Responding to the demands, West Bengal Health Minister Chandrima Bhattacharya told media persons that the Emergency ward of the NRS Medical College and Hospital is open and functional. She also said that the state government is in touch with the resident doctors and their demands are being considered. Four arrests have been made in connection with the attack on the junior doctor, she added.
