J&K: 5 CRPF personnel martyred, 1 terrorist gunned down in Anantnag

Ishna Jan, the 23 year old lady who provided food and logistics to Pulwama bomber

Reinforced, markings of Karachi, Pak hand all over in tunnel used by JeM terrorists

Who was Viplav Tripathi? The Colonel died in ambush by terrorists in Manipur

J&K: 5 CRPF personnel martyred, 1 terrorist gunned down in Anantnag

India

oi-Vikas SV

Srinagar, June 12: Five CRPF personnel were martyred after terrorists attacked security forces in Jammu and Kashmir's Anantnag on Wednesday, said reports. One terrorist was also shot down. Two terrorists may have carried out the attack, said reports.

Heavy exchange of fire was underway and a terrorist was killed. Both CRPF personnel and police personnel are among the injured. One of the injured is said to have sustained splinter injuries. The terrorists also lobbed grenades, said reports. SHO Anantnag has also been critically injured.

Five CRPF personnel have been killed and three others injured were evacuated to the 92 base hospital. A joint team of the bravo company of CRPF's 116th battalion and state police were deployed for a picket duty in the area when the attack took place, said reports.

"The terrorist was gunned down on the spot. 5 CRPF personnel attained martyrdom while repulsing the attack. Area has been cordoned, search is underway. Case has been registered," reports quoted Jammu and Kashmir Police as saying.

"Three security forces personnel including SHO Anantnag, Inspector Arshid Khan sustained gunshot injuries," the statement added.

The martyred personnel are ASI Ramesh Kumar from Jhajjar, Haryana, ASI Nirod Sarma from Nalbari, Assam, Constable Satendra Kumar from Muzaffarnagar, UP, Constable Mahesh Kumar Kushwaha from Ghazipur, UP and Constable Sandeep Yadav from Dewas MP.

The attack assumes significance as Anantnag falls in Amarnath Yatra route.

On June 11, two terrorists were killed in an encounter between terrorists and security force in Shopian, Jammu and Kashmir. The two bodies were identified as Sayar Ahmad Bhat, son of Sanauallah of Manchowa Kulgam, and Shakir Ahmad Wagay of Awneera affiliated with Ansar Gazwatul Hind (AGH) militant outfit.

In February this year, JEM terrorists had attacked a CRPF convoy in which over 40 CRPOF jawans were martyred.
