Accused drives into court in his father’s car escorted by a PSI

In a clear break from protocol and a serious lapse in security, a police officer attached to the Paud police station chose to escort couple of accused to the Shivajinagar court in a vehicle belonging to one of the accused. If this was not bad enough, he brazenly had the car parked outside the court hall — a place barred for even judges to park their cars. He pulled it off despite the presence of 145 policemen guarding the three open gates of the court and patrolling its premises.It was left to a group of lawyers to spot the parked vehicle at the wrong place and unravel the compromising positing of the cop. When they did so, they locked horns with the police present over the breach of security. High drama ensued for an hour, before the president of Pune Bar Association, advocate Subhash Pawar, stepped in to mitigate the situation.~~69762987~~As it happened, a case had been registered at Paud police station related to advocate Ravindra Pawar being assaulted and robbed at Mulshi on May 25. Working on the case, Paud police had arrested Ramchandra Dange and Akshay Ranwade, while two others, Bharat Gharade and Ganesh Ranwade, are absconding.The duo was remanded to police custody until Wednesday, when they were to be produced before the judicial magistrate court again.In a blatant disregard for protocol and ethics, police sub-inspector Mohite brought them to court travelling in a car belonging to one of the accused — Akshay Ranwade’s father. The car was driven by Ranwade’s brother while Mohite sat next to him. The two accused were being ferried in the back-seat. “The accused have to be brought to court in police vans as per protocol. Accepted, there is a paucity of government vehicles and cops do use private vehicles. But it cannot be that of the accused, compromising the position of the law enforcer. The cops are quick to act against common people for breaking any rule, who will check their own culpability,” pointed out advocate Atul Gunjal, who was part of the Wednesday’s confrontation.The lawyers had surrounded the car, accosting police sub-inspector Mohite, who was yet to emerge from the vehicle. While the Bar Association president refused to speak on the incident, former president, advocate ND Patil reiterated, “The police are required to be impartial in the course of investigating any case. Here we witnessed a policeman actually using the accused’s vehicle to get to court.”He also questioned the security being given to the court. “There are three gates to the court premises, each of them guarded by five-six cops. So how did this police officer gain access to this space which even the judges cannot avail? The police officer is gravely out of line here,” he highlighted.As the first to spy the erroneously parked vehicle, advocate Kishor Petil harped on the court’s security getting compromised by Mohite’s act. “It is worrying that despite deploying a squad of 145 on the premises, the cops allowed a private car with dark tinted glasses to come right up to the court hall. Action needs to be initiated against the owner of the car. When we checked we found that it belonged to Akshay Ranwade’s father and the PSI was travelling seated next to the accused’s brother who was driving the car.”When the issue was taken up with Sandip Patil, superintendent of police, Pune (Rural), all he said was, “If any lapse is found on the part of the police department, action will be initiated against the concerned officials.”As for police inspector Prabhakar Dhage, who is in charge of the Shivajinagar court police chowki, he defended, “We look after the security on the premises and work to prevent illegal activities. Many police officers visit the court in private vehicles for their work. Our constable saw that a police officer was seated in the car, so he did not stall the vehicle.”
