Journalist stripped, thrashed, urinated upon

Lucknow: Two railway policemen were suspended for allegedly thrashing a television journalist after an argument with him when he was covering the derailment of a goods train in Shamli, officials said Wednesday.

Journalist Amit Sharma also alleged that “they forced me to take my clothes off and urinated on me.”

However, this charge has been denied by the Government Railway Police (GRP). Director General of Uttar Pradesh Police OP Singh ordered that Rakesh Kumar, the GRP’s Shamli Station House Officer, and constable Sanjay Pawar be suspended, the state police tweeted Wednesday morning.

A senior UP government official said the action was taken after the two GRP personnel thrashed Sharma.

In a purported video of the incident which went viral on social media late last night, the accused GRP personnel, dressed in plain clothes, can be seen repeatedly slapping and punching Sharma. Subsequently, the GRP personnel detained him.

“The incident took place when the journalist went to cover the derailment of a few bogies of a goods trains in Shamli. There was a heated exchange of words among them and hurling of abuses,” said Ram Lakhan Mishra, Circle Officer, GRP, Saharanpur.

A senior GRP official said the journalist was released around 7 am Wednesday.

The Uttar Pradesh police tweeted, “We have come across a video where a journalist has been beaten up & put up in a lock up. DGP UP OP Singh has ordered for immediate suspension of SHO GRP Shamli Rakesh Kumar & Const. Sanjay Pawar. Strict punishment shall be accorded to policemen misbehaving with citizens.”

Amit Sharma, the journalist, later released a video in which he says, “GRP and railway officials were at the spot when I had gone for the coverage. The GRP personnel along with other cops beat me up. The mobile phone, which I used for shooting the news clip was hit and is missing. They also hurled abuses at me.”

Sharma added, “I was put in a lock up. They forced me to take off my clothes, and then they urinated on me.”

However, Ram Lakhan Mishra denied the allegations levelled by the journalist.

Journalist Prashant Kanojia released

Journalist Prashant Kanojia was released from a jail here on Wednesday, four days after his arrest for allegedly making objectionable comments against Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on social media.

He was freed on bail on the Supreme Court’s directive Tuesday to release him immediately. Kanojia stepped out of Lucknow jail wearing a T-shirt with “deshbhakt” (patriot) written on it. When approached by PTI, his wife Jigisha Arora said, “We will not like to talk today, will speak tomorrow.”

Kanojia, who spent four nights behind the bars, was allowed bail after furnishing two sureties of Rs 20,000 each and a personal bond for the same amount.

The release order was sent to Lucknow jail earlier in the day by the Chief Judicial Magistrate here. While issuing the order, the CJM directed him not to repeat the offence, influence witnesses or extend a threat to any witness while on bail.

Earlier, a certified copy of the Supreme Court order directing his release was filed at the CJM’s court.

The apex court had slammed the UP government for the “excessiveness” of its action, asking, “Is this a case of murder?”

The Supreme Court, however, said proceedings against the journalist will go on as per law. The bench gave the order while hearing a habeas corpus petition — a writ for producing a person who is under arrest or in unlawful detention – filed by Kanojia’s wife.

While Prashant Kanojia has been released on bail, five others arrested by Uttar Pradesh police in recent days remain behind bars for posting or sharing alleged objectionable remarks against Adityanath. They include three journalists and two Gorakhpur residents. (PTI)
