Indian Medical Association to hold nationwide protest after attack on student doctor

Indian Medical Association to hold nationwide protest after attack on student doctor

The IMA has demanded for stricter security measures to be in place in view of the rising attacks against doctors.

Health Health

The Indian Medical Association (IMA) has called for a nationwide protest on Friday in order to protest against the rising number of violent attacks against doctors in the country. This comes after a student doctor in Kolkata was attacked by a mob, leaving him with a grievous injury to the head.

“The gruesome incident in NRS Medical College, Kolkata is of barbaric nature. Dr Paribaha Mukharjee who was brutally attacked is critical and fighting for his life. IMA condemns the violence perpetrated on a young doctor. Entire medical fraternity expresses our solidarity with the Residents who are on strike. Our National President, Dr Santanu Sen has visited all the medical colleges in Kolkata and has been in touch with the government and the police which has led to the arrest of four culprits in this regard. National President Elect Dr Rajan Sharma and Honorary Secretary General Dr RV Asokan are travelling to Kolkata to identify with the Residents. IMA Headquarters hereby declares All India Protest Day on Friday 14.06.2019,” reads the notice issued by the IMA.

Speaking to TNM, Dr Sanjeev Singh Yadav, President of the IMA’s Telangana wing explained the protocol which will be followed by all those taking part in the protest.

“All the state branches will be organising a Dharna between 10 am and 12 noon. A memorandum addressed to the Prime Minister will be handed over by the IMA representatives to the District Collector. All doctors will be wearing a black badge as a sign of protest against the attacks. We will all be writing to the Prime Minister and Union Home Minister demanding that action be taken and security measures amped up in view of such attacks on doctors,” he said.

Dr Paribaha Mukharjee is an intern at Kolkata’s NRS Medical College and Hospital. He was attacked by relatives of a deceased patient in the early hours of Tuesday. He was assaulted with a brick which left a dent in his skull and left him in critical condition. His condition has stabilised since then according to doctors tending to him at the hospital.
