Sisters gang-raped by 4 men in India who threatened to shoot them if they cried

The two girls, aged 13 and 15, were raped in a village near Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh

Sisters gang-raped by 4 men in India who threatened to shoot them if they cried

Two young sisters have been gang-raped at gunpoint in a sickening sex attack in India.

The two girls, aged 13 and 15, were gang-raped in a small village in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh, according to the Times of India .

The girls had reportedly been accosted by the men as they went to search for their mother near a sugarcane field.

Rural police superintendent Alok Sharma alleged the four men brandished guns at the girls and gang-raped them in the village in the district of Muzaffarnagar.

According to a complaint filed with police, the four men allegedly threatened to shoot the girls if they cried for help or told anyone about the incident.

Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images)

The Times described the four as "booked," adding that efforts are still underway to apprehend those accused of the crimes.

The reports of the latest attack comes amid a reckoning for India, where women face high risk of sexual and domestic violence.

Indian women have led public protests in response high profile cases in the vast country, where a complex caste system and cultural taboos sees rape go under-reported.

International scrutiny has also been building since the notorious 2012 Delhi tragedy, when a 23-year-old physiotherapy student was fatally gang-raped on a bus.

Image: FAROOQ KHAN/EPA-EFE/REX) FAROOQ KHAN/EPA-EFE/REX)

In recent days seven Hindu men were convicted of the rape and murder of an eight-year-old Muslim nomadic girl Asif Bano in a temple the Kathua district of India's Jammu and Kashmir last January.

In Uttar Pradesh, a string of rapes of minors have also been reported in recent weeks, according to local media.

That had prompted its chief minister Yogi Adityanath to ask police to increase foot patrols in rural areas of the state, shortly before the latest attack.
