Crisis deepens in Bengal as doctors refuse to call off strike, CM warns of strict action

The Indian Medical Association (IMA) led by Santanu Sen, national president of IMA and Rajya Sabha MP of Trinamool Congress has called for a nationwide protest calling the incident of beating doctors at Kolkata’s one of the premiere NRS Medical College and Hospital on Monday as ‘unacceptable and gruesome’ in nature. However, Sen could not be reached for comment.Two junior doctors were critically injured after a mob of hundreds of men with bricks, stones and sticks attacked the junior doctors in the hospital following the death of an 87 year old patient. Family members along with hundreds of neighbours of the deceased patient pelted stones at the doctors at NRS medical college. One of the injured doctors slipped into coma initially and is still in critical condition.The protesting doctors at NRS hospital demanded chief minister’s intervention, though chief minister Mamata Banerjee on Thursday visited SSKM hospital, where thousands of doctors are also protesting.Banerjee asked the junior doctors to resume work within 4 hours, failing which strict action will be taken. Protesting junior doctors at SSKM Hospital shouted “Mukhyamantri hai hai” slogan as she ignores them and meets patient families.“Don’t teach me andolan (movement), I have done enough andolan in my life. If you don’t give service to people, you cannot be doctors. Many police personnel die, but they don’t go on strike. Doctors, who will not join work, will have to leave hostels. Government will not be with them. It takes around Rs 25 lakh to make a doctor who later joins corporate hospitals. What does the state get? Moreover, there are some outsiders here who are creating trouble. This is a politically motivated protest organised by BJP and CPM,” said chief minister Mamata Banerjee.“I arranged police outposts in every hospital.But after election commission brought new CP Rajesh Kumar, all outposts were withdrawn. I was trying to defuse the situation, but the doctors refused to talk to me. BJP brought Hindu-Muslim in it. This strike is political. They are trying to make the issue political,” she added.The junior doctors are on strike in the hospital since Monday night and the protest spread to all government hospitals across districts. The OPD and emergency services in all government hospitals in the state were badly hit rendering the patients and their family members helpless. With around 18 doctors submitting their resignations in Sagore Dutta Medical College and hospital in North 24 Paragana, senior doctors from all government hospitals expressing solidarity with the protesters, and hospital superintendents joining the protest, the present situation has become really critical in the state.A team of junior doctors met Bengal governor Keshari Nath Tripathi. The doctors claimed that they do not have any political colour and that they have only three demands. “We expected sympathy from the government, an assurance that the attackers would be arrested and a proper infrastructure would be built to ensure the security of the doctors. This is not the first incident in which hospitals were attacked , ransacked and doctors were beaten up. We want an end to this lawlessness,” said a junior doctor, who was in the team that met Governor Tripathi.
