Team of 40 cops unable to trace eight policemen

SURAT: Thirteen days into the Khatodara custodial death case, a team of 40 cops headed by deputy commissioner of police is yet to make a headway by nabbing at least one of the eight policemen accused of torturing a suspect in their custody to death.City police commissioner Satish Sharma formed a team of police personnel including officers to nab the errant cops. However, they are yet to make a breakthrough. The eight police personnel had fled the police station soon after a case was lodged against them and are now getting enough time to plan their early release from jail while staying underground, said sources.“Six teams, each headed by a sub inspector, were already searching various locations for the accused, while new teams comprising 17 cops joined us to expedite the process. A police inspector and two police sub inspectors with crime branch sleuths have joined the investigation now,” deputy commissioner of police, Chintan Teraiya, who is investigating the case, told TOI.Omprakash Pandey, 23, a theft suspect, was admitted to hospital in critical condition on May 31 and he was declared dead the next day.In fresh findings, the forensic postmortem revealed that Pandey’s body bore 36 injury marks inflicted by by belts and broad belts and wooden bats. Forensic post-mortem revealed that Pandey had died from the injuries in two days confirming that he had been tortured during police custody. “The postmortem revealed that Pandey died 12 hours ago, so it matches with the time registered by police. We will go by the findings in forensic postmortem,” said Teraiya.Police have so far checked at the absconding cops’ residences and other possible hideouts without any results. “The accused are cops and they know how police trace accused’s location. They might be using various means to delay the arrest,” said a senior police officer.Police booked Mohanlal Bhagwanram Khileri, inspector, Chirag Pruthviraj Chaudhary, sub-inspector, along with six junior cops Haresh Chaudhary, Kanaksinh Diyol, Paresh Bhukan, Aashish Dihora, Kalpesh Garmabha and Dilu Sangani for torture as well death of the victim. Earlier they had been booked under various sections of Indian Penal Code including 330 - voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession, 342 – wrongful confinement, 324 - voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons, 348 - wrongful confinement to extort confession and others. After the suspect died, death sections of murder IPC 302 was added.
