Mamata Banerjee's nephew Dr Abesh joins doctors' protests at Kolkata hospital

Dr Abesh Banerjee joins the protests at the KPC Medical College in Kolkata. (Image: Twitter)

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee's nephew Abesh Banerjee, who is a student at Kolkata's KPC Medical College Hospital, joined the doctors' protest on Friday as the protests entered the fourth day.

On Thursday, Kolkata Mayor Firhad Hakim's daughter Shabba Hakim posted on Facebook, demanding safety at work for doctors in the state. Shabba, who is a doctor herself, said she is deeply ashamed as a Trinamool Congress worker.

On Friday, Mamata Banerjee faces further embarrassment as her nephew himself has joined the protests that she claimed were a conspiracy of the BJP. Abesh was seen leading the protests at the KPC Hospital this morning.

Dr Abesh Banerjee, nephew of Mamata Banerjee at KPC hospital Kolkata!!#SaveTheDoctors https://t.co/qdweyyM9xa pic.twitter.com/wpG1nTNSiw Dr Dev D (@neo_natal) June 13, 2019

Doctors in Kolkata and other parts of West Bengal are at loggerheads with Mamata Banerjee and her administration after a mob attacked resident doctors at the NRS Medical College on Monday night and critically injured a doctor.

FOLLOW LIVE UPDATES ON DOCTORS' PROTESTS

Doctors at the NRS hospital started a strike on Tuesday which has snowballed and spread across the state and other parts of the country and has now reached Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad and other prominent cities.

AIIMS Delhi along with hospitals in other cities has joined the protests against Mamata Banerjee's inaction in protecting the doctors.

Mamata Banerjee, meanwhile, has cried foul and accused Opposition BJP and CPI(M) of hatching a conspiracy against the Bengal government.

She reached the SSKM Medical College and Hospital on Thursday instead of visiting the NRS hospital from where it all started. She threatened the doctors with severe action if they do not end the protests.

However, her words failed to resonate with the agitators who continue with the demonstrations. They demand armed police protection at hospitals and immediate action against culprits of the NRS hospital incident.

A junior doctor on Monday night was left with a fractured skull after a 200-strong mob attacked the NRS hospital following the death of a patient.
