After brazen daylight terror attack in Anantnag, CRPF to overhaul deployment technique in J-K: Report

New Delhi:

Days after the brazen terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Anantnag, the CRPF is set to bring in major changes in the way its personnel are deployed across the state. According to a report by The Hindustan Times, the Central Reserve Police Force is planning to tweak the current drill pattern. On June 12, terrorists carried on a daylight attack on one of the busiest roads on Anantnag. Fiver CRPF jawans were killed and a terrorist was gunned down in the attack. This is the major attack on the CRPF personnel since the Pulwama blast, which killed 40 troopers.

The HT report said that the changes that CRPF is planning include not deploying the jawans out in open as it makes them easy targets. So, in coming future, CRPF jawans will be positioned in a police station or a ‘fortified area’, the HT report said. The report also added that a little-known group taking responsibility of the attack is mere an eyewash so that India can’t link it to Jaish-e-Mohammed.

Five Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were martyred and four other security personnel suffered injuries on June 12. Three injured personnel were shifted to Army's Base Hospital in Srinagar. An AK series assault rifle was also recovered from the terrorist, they said.

Those who were martyred were - 1. ASI Ramesh Kumar r/o Jhajjar, Haryana; 2. ASI Nirod Sarma R/O Nalbari, Assam; 3. CT Satendra Kumar r/o Muzaffarnagar UP; 4. CT Mahesh Kr Kushwaha r/o Gazipur UP; 5. CT Sandeep yadav r/o Dewas MP

According to officials, two masked terrorists attacked a patrol party of the CRPF on the busy KP Road in Anantnag with automatic rifles. They also hurled grenades at the patrol team.

Pro-Pakistan terrorist group Al Umar Mujahideen has claimed responsibility for the Anantnag attack. However, police said that they believe its handiwork of Jaish-e-Mohammed.

The Station House Officer of Anantnag Police Station, Arshad Ahmed, was also injured in the attack and has been shifted to Srinagar for treatment, they said.

A joint team of the bravo company of CRPF's 116th battalion and state police were deployed for a picket duty in the area when the attack took place.

Jammu and Kashmir Police had shared an intelligence input about a possible terror strike on security forces around the general bus stand which is located on KP road.

Though Al-Umar Mujahideen, a defunct terror group, has claimed responsibility for the strike, officials, however, said that it was a handiwork of Jaish-e-Mohammed.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
