Doctor’s strike live updates: 80 doctors in Kolkata submit mass resignation; demand apology of Mamata Banerjee

The doctors’ strike that started in Kolkata earlier this week has now spread across India with the doctors’ association of AIIMS showing full support to their West Bengal colleagues.

After entire healthcare system in West Bengal was crippled over the past four days, now doctors’ in Delhi, Mumbai and other cities in India especially AIIMS hospitals in the national capital, Raipur, Patna and Punjab are observing protest shutdown.

Junior doctors in West Bengal are on a strike since Tuesday after two of their colleagues were attacked and seriously injured at the NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata.

LIVE UPDATES

04:25 AM | Calcutta High Court gives 7 days to West Bengal government to respond while hearing a petition on doctors’ strike in the state. Court has asked the state about the steps that have been taken to end the impasse.

01:30 AM | 80 doctors in Kolkata submit mass resignation; demand unconditional apology of CM Mamata Banerjee

Intensifying the protest, at least 80 doctors at Kolkata’s RG Kar Medical College and Hospital submit mass resignation. They are demanding an unconditional apology of CM Mamata Banerjee for her statement yesterday.

01:15 PM | West Bengal: 16 doctors of the RG Kar Medical College & Hospital resign

16 doctors of the RG Kar Medical College & Hospital, Kolkata submit their resignation stating, “In response to prevailing situation as we are unable to provide service, we would like to resign from our duty.”

01:00 PM | Medical services at several hospitals in Delhi, Mumbai, Goa, Telangana, Banaras expected to hit

Healthcare services at several hospitals in Delhi, Mumbai, Goa, Telangana, Banaras are expected to be delayed as doctors from several hospitals are taking part in the nationwide protest against the attacks on junior doctors in NRS Medical College, West Bengal.

12:30 PM | Nepal doctors’ body expresses solidarity with West Bengal medicos, condemns violence

Condemning the violence in West Bengal against doctors, Young Doctors Association of Nepal has supported protest of IMA. YDA has requested the Indian government to provide a safe and secure environment for doctors so they can provide their best services to mankind.

11:50 AM | Union health minister Harsh Vardhan meets delegation of medicos, urges them to resume duty

Union Heath Minister Harsh Vardhan condemned the violence against doctors in Kolkata and urged patients and their attendants to exercise restraint. The minister met a delegation of doctors from the AIIMS Resident Doctor Association and said he will take up the matter of doctors’ security with all chief ministers and asked the doctors to ensure that essential services to the people are not disrupted
