Nair Hospital: Mumbai police rescues kidnapped five-day-old boy within 7 hours

Mumbai Police

Agripada police

Agripada

Agripada police station didn’t take long to trace the five day old child of Sheetal Ramesh Salvi from the accused,… https://t.co/70NjRomtvr — Mumbai Police (@MumbaiPolice) 1560495807000

Nair hospital

Mumbai

Accused Hazel Corriea was arrested by Agripada police within 7 hours https://t.co/IpWbRh40J3 — Mumbai Police (@MumbaiPolice) 1560496205000

A five-day-old boy who was abducted from BYL Nair Hospital on Thursday was rescued byin seven hours.Thearrested Hezal Donald Corriea who kidnapped the baby from the hospital ward while his mother was asleep. She was caught at VN Desai hospital where she went for a check-up, claiming the baby to be hers.The accused walked into VN Desai hospital claiming she wanted a check-up done for her child who was delivered at home. But the alert constable at the hospital and the staff noticed that the baby had a tag that helped them identify that the baby was delivered in a BMC hospital. This made them suspicious and they started probing her with more questions, which is when the inconsistencies in her responses came to the fore. The constable was also aware that there was a kidnapped baby case registered at thepolice station. The lady and her husband are residents of Nallasopara and do not have children of their own.The Agripada police have registered a kidnapping case under section 363 of the IPC. "Agripada police station didn’t take long to trace the five-day old child of Sheetal Ramesh Salvi from the accused, who abducted him from. Accused Hazel Corriea has been booked under section 363 of IPC,"police said in a tweet.Police informed that around 4:30 pm on Thursday when the baby’s mother— Sheetal Ramesh Salvi, 28, a resident of Gurav Chawl, Dahisar — who was admitted to Ward No. 7, was asleep with her sister-in-law, a woman entered the ward and fled with the baby.“When Sheetal woke up, she started looking for her son. She could not find the baby despite making inquiries with the hospital authorities and finally approached the police station,” a police official from Agripada police station said.CCTV footage played an important role in helping the police identify the suspect.
