Booked under POCSO, convict flees police custody in Jodhpur; two officers suspended for negligence

The accused was identified as one Om Prakash Jat (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Jodhpur: Authorities have suspended two police officers over alleged negligence which led to an eve-teasing-accused fleeing from custody in Rajasthan's Jodhpur district. An official with the state police told media persons that the convict is one Om Prakash Jat, accused of sexually assaulting a minor girl.

Jat was taken to the Bhopalgarh police station in Thursday afternoon for interrogation in connection with the alleged eve-teasing of a minor girl. In her complaint to the police, the child had alleged that she was eve-teased on her way to school. She further claimed that the accused sent her obscene messages.

Confirming that the criminal fled custody, superintendent of police (SP) of Jodhpur (rural), Rahul Barhat told news agency ANI that Jat fled by claiming to answer nature's call. The top cop also clarified that a female guard and a constable have been suspended for dereliction of duty which enabled the convict to escape. More details in this regard are awaited as this is a developing story.

Earlier this year, a man was apprehended by police officials after he tried to escape from police custody in Kanpur city of Uttar Pradesh. Identified as a history-sheeter with multiple cases against him, the criminal snatched a pistol from a sub-inspector and attempted to flee in the Chakeri area of the city following an encounter with police personnel.

However, cops managed to shoot the criminal in his leg, rendering him incapable of walking. The history-sheeter was then taken to the Kanshiram Trauma Centre in the city for medical treatment. A policeman familiar with the matter said that the accused and his accomplice were wanted in connection with several highway robberies which took place in the region. The suspects were identified as Chand, a resident of Babupurwa and his accomplice Munna, a resident of Khajua locality of Fatehpur district in Uttar Pradesh.
