Mumbai: Alert nurse helps find abducted baby

Examination of a female patient's health condition at VN Desai Municipal Hospital, Santacruz who stated that she delivered a baby at home two days ago, helped to solve a kidnapping case of a five-day-old baby from BYL Nair Hospital, Mumbai Central.

An alert staff nurse Bhakti Tare from VN Desai Municipal Hospital helped to find a five-day-old baby who was kidnapped from Nair Hospital, on Thursday. After examination of the baby's umbilical cord and the kidnapper Hazel Corriea's health condition, the hospital staff found out that she was lying and suspected that this baby is the same as the one kidnapped from Nair Hospital.

Bhakti Tare said, "We were aware of a baby getting kidnapped from Nair Hospital. His photo was circulated in the hospital. Looking at Hazel, we could find out that she was lying because of which we did further examination on her. She was not bleeding after delivery and further examination revealed through her sonography report that her uterus was of normal size."

TIMELINE June 13 – at 5.30 pm the baby was abducted from ward no. 7 at BYL Nair Hospital.



– at 5.30 pm the baby was abducted from ward no. 7 at BYL Nair Hospital. June 13 – at 7 pm the kidnapper came with the baby to VN Desai Municipal Hospital



– at 7 pm the kidnapper came with the baby to VN Desai Municipal Hospital June 14 – at 4.30 am the baby was given back to his mother Shital Salvi at Nair Hospital.



– at 4.30 am the baby was given back to his mother Shital Salvi at Nair Hospital. June 14 – at 10.30 am the kidnapper was taken under custody by Agripada police.

She further added, "Usually after delivery, the size of the uterus is larger than normal which also hinted that she did not deliver a baby. The baby's umbilical cord was dry and did not look like two days old." While the baby was abducted from BYL Nair Hospital at around 5.30 pm from ward number 7, Hazel along with her husband and aunt went to the emergency ward of VN Desai Municipal Hospital around 7 pm to get admitted. "As it was a home delivery case, we had to file a police complain before admission, She had brought the baby wrapped in a bag," added Tare.

The baby was abducted from the ward when his mother, Shital Salvi (34) was sleeping. A case was later registered at Agripada police station. Video footage from CCTV cameras spotted Hazel taking away the baby wrapped in a bag. Hazel has been booked under IPC section 363 (kidnapping) by the Agripada police.

Manoj Malik, a security guard at VN Desai Municipal, said, "When she arrived at the hospital, she stated that she came from Virar to give medical treatment for the newborn. She got scared after several questions were asked to her about herself and her baby. Around 4.30 in the morning, the baby was given back to his mother in Nair Hospital and around 10.30 am the kidnapper was shifted to Agripada police station."
