Strike on, West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi meets injured doctor

West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi Friday said he called up Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee to discuss the issue of junior doctors’ strike but got no response from her.

Tripathi paid a visit to injured junior doctor Paribaha Mukhopadhyay at the hospital where he is undergoing treatment. “I have tried to contact the chief minister. I have called her up. Till this moment there is no response from her. If she calls me, we will discuss the matter,” he told reporters after visiting Mukhopadhyay at the hospital.

Mukhopadhyay is one of the two junior doctors attacked by relatives of a patient, who died at the NRS Medical College and Hospital here on Monday night, triggering the ongoing agitation by medicos across the state.

NO INTERIM ORDER The Calcutta High Court on Friday refused to pass any interim order on the strike by junior doctors.



It, however, asked the state government to resolve the issue so that patients can get health services.



A division bench also directed the Mamata Banerjee-led West Bengal government to apprise it of the steps taken following the attack on junior doctors.

ANOTHER DOCTOR ATTACKED

A junior doctor, sitting on protest outside Kolkata’s National Medical College and Hospital, was attacked on Friday evening.

Abhishek Sahoo, a fourth-year resident doctor, was protesting with his colleagues out the Emergency Ward department when a group of people gathered outside the college gate. They pelted stones and bricks on the protestors and ran away from the scene, said sources.

Following the incident, doctors posted in National Medical College and Hospital’s Emergency Ward have stopped working, shared another medical practitioner on Facebook. The situation continued to remain tense in the area.



Patients stranded outside the OPD at AIIMS on Tuesday —PTI

VARDHAN FOR CENTRAL LAW

Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan on Friday supported the medical fraternity’s demand for a central law to check violence against health care workers in hospitals and said such crimes should be made non-bailable.

“Heinous repeated attacks on doctors across India esp WBengal have led to this situation. Govt must pass a Law to make any attack on Docs a non-bailable offence with min 12 yr jail. Draconian Clinical Establishment Act that treats Docs as criminals must be withdrawn (sic),” Vardhan tweeted.

His tweet came hours after the IMA wrote to Home Minister Amit Shah demanding enactment of a central law to check violence against health care workers in hospitals.
