Time to test waters in the boardroom?

It’s the first drop in an ocean yet to be filled. But some of the world’s major companies have finally brought into their boardrooms corporate sustainability targets, including ones related to water, which means tying water issues to executive performance.Among notable measures is one by German chemicals company Symrise AG, which now ties 10% of its C-suite bonuses to achieving corporate sustainability targets. Another is of UK consumer goods company, Reckitt Benckiser, which has committed to raising a third of its net revenue from ‘more sustainable’ products by 2020.In its latest report, nonprofit CDP, which runs a global disclosure system to measure corporate environmental impacts, talks of a new index from European stock exchange Euronext, with Goldman Sachs, that has become the first globally to base its selection on how companies perform on water security and climate. CDP notes that when businesses ensure water management and incentivise key executives, water practices of companies will be impacted greatly.Among Indian companies alert to water issues, CDP says Tata Steel has a comprehensive water-risk assessment in place.That said, it’s a very long, and dry, road ahead. Not even a third (31%) of global companies serious about their waterresilience have incentives in place for C-suite executives on water-related issues. Further, despite more companies setting targets to reduce withdrawals, they are all using more water year-on-year. Between 2015 and 2018, there has been an almost 50% increase in the number of companies reporting higher water withdrawals, CDP said. Such spikes are most pronounced in Asia and Latin America, and in the food, beverage and agricultural sectors, besides manufacturing and mining. As for India, a WWFIndia and WWF-UK study cites a 2018 Niti Aayog report that India’s current water crisis is its ‘worst-ever’. It says by 2020, 21 cities are expected to run out of groundwater. By 2030, the country’s water demand is projected to be twice the supply. The report estimates water scarcity may result in a 6% loss to India’s GDP.The first impact of responsible water use is often reported in a rise in cost of operations, but companies are also realising the risk they face if they do not wake up to the water crisis.Globally, the retail sector has emerged as the least concerned about water, with next to no monitoring of its supply chain of food, beverage, farm products, apparel and gadgets, which are all water-guzzlers.The other sector lagging is energy. The International Energy Agency has said global water consumption for power generation and fuel production is expected to more than double from 66 bcm in 2010 to 135 bcm by 2035. Coal alone accounts for 50% of this. Add to that the risk of pollution of both surface and groundwater. If business leaders ignore water management at this juncture, they may soon be staring at dry assets.
