‘Get Rs 5cr from Hindu Munnani for damage caused during riot’

Coimbatore: The co-ordinator of the Forum for Coimbatore People’s Unity, C Padmanaban, Thanthai Periyar Dravidar Kazhagam (TPDK) general secretary Ku Ramakrishnan and advocate R Kalaiarasu on Tuesday submitted a petition to collector TN Hariharan, requesting him to collect compensation from Hindu Munnani (HM) for damaging public property during the funeral procession of its functionary C Sasikumar three years ago.

Sasikumar, spokesman of HM, was hacked to death at Subramaniyampalayam near Thudiyalur on September 22, 2016. Thousands of Hindu Munnani cadres conducted a rally the next day to take the body to Thudiyalur from the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital (CMCH).

The petition said that HM functionaries used the funeral procession to create a riot-like situation. “They tried to get political gain by the riot. They damaged six vehicles of the police department, 34 buses, 39 shops belonging to Muslims, 15 shops belonging to Hindus and 10 private vehicles. They damaged properties worth about Rs 5crore. As many as 237 cases were registered against HM cadres at Race Course, Saibaba Colony, Kuniyamuthur, Thudiyalur and other police stations and 642 cadres were arrested,” the petition said.

“The Madras high court had instructed the city police commissioner and superintendent of police to assess the damage caused to the properties and collect compensation. Last year, the Supreme Court had ordered that political parties that conduct protests and rallies are responsible for the damages caused and compensation should be collected from them. But the district administration and police have failed to implement the court orders. We request the district administration to form a committee to collect Rs 5crore from HM,” Ramakrishnan said.

Meanwhile, Hindu Makkal Katchi founder president Arjun Sampath on Tuesday told reporters that compensation should be given to those, who were affected during the riot. “We agree to the demands of the forum,” he said.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
