NIA searches in Coimbatore: One more arrested for pro-ISIS activities

NIA searches in Coimbatore: One more arrested for pro-ISIS activities

This is the second arrest made by the investigating agency after searches were conducted in seven locations across the city.

news Terror

The National Investigation Agency (NIA) arrested another person from Coimbatore for pro-ISIS activities. The man arrested was one of the six persons who was booked on Wednesday for allegedly plotting a terror attack in south India.

According to a press release by NIA, Y Sheik Hidayathullah (38) was arrested for pro-ISIS activities. “Scrutiny of the documents from his house has revealed that A-3 has remained associated with proscribed terrorist organization Student Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) as well,” read the statement.

He will be produced before the special court for NIA cases in Ernakulam.

On Wednesday, the NIA conducted searches in seven locations across Coimbatore and registered cases against six men for allegedly plotting a terror attack in Tamil Nadu. The agency also arrested a 32-year-old Mohammed Azaruddin after the searches. Azaruddin was allegedly the leader of the terror module, and has been running a Facebook page named “KhilafahGFX” through which ‘he had been propagating the ideology of ISIS/Daish’. He is also friends on Facebook with Zahran Hashim, a suicide bomber and the mastermind of the Sri Lanka Easter terror attack.

The NIA found 14 mobile phones, 29 SIM cards, 10 pen drives, 3 laptops, 6 memory cards, 4 hard disc drives, 1 internet dongle and 13 CDs/ DVDs during the search. They also seized a dagger, an electric baton, 300 air-gun pellets and a large number of incriminating documents apart from the gadgets. A few PFI/ SDMI pamphlets were seized from the houses and workplaces of accused persons, the NIA stated.

The other accused in the case are Akram Sindhaa (26), Abubacker M (29) and Sadham Hussain (26) and Ibrahim alias Shahin Shah (28).

The searches, which led to these arrests, began at 5.30 am on Wednesday and continued till the afternoon.
