Study: Most Indians not happy about having to care for parents or in-laws

MUMBAI: A worrying 35% of respondents to a recent nationwide survey by NGO HelpAge India on care provided to senior citizens said they "never" felt happy or satisfied taking care of the elderly, while nearly 14% said they "rarely" felt happy. Asked to rate the job of taking care of the elderly on a "burden scale" that offered three options-"mild to moderate," "moderate to severe" and "severe"-15% checked the box for "severe."The survey, released on Friday on the eve of World Elder Abuse Awareness Day which falls on June 15, covered 20 cities across India. A total of 2,050 "caregivers" were the respondents, chiefly sons, daughters, daughters-in-law and sons-in-law between the ages of 30 and 50 who live with one or more senior citizens.The annual survey is usually focused on abandonment and abuse of elders, but this year, the NGO chose to probe caregiving because, "despite the abuse elders might face at home at the hands of their adult children, they choose to remain within the family ambit", said Mathew Cherian, CEO, HelpAge India. Cherian said only when caregivers are understood can they be empowered, so it was important to know their needs and attitudes.To know if they genuinely enjoyed serving the elderly, caregivers were asked if they "feel happy or satisfied taking care of the elderly".From the options given-"never," "rarely," "sometimes" and "quite frequently"-almost a third of them ticked the first one, and nearly 14% opted for "rarely". Mumbai's caregivers had almost the same view as in those in other cities: of the 106 people surveyed in the city, 12% found looking after elders a "severe burden."Nationally, each family, the report found, spends an average of Rs 4,125 per month looking after the needs of elders and there was often a "lack of love" for the dependent elder on the part of the spouse of the primary caregiver (usually the son). Nearly half the respondents said they have to foot the medical bills of the seniors. Over a quarter of the caregivers blamed "fatigue" and "frustration" for behaving aggressively towards their elders."I can't understand how kids can say 'we are unhappy' about what should come naturally to them," said actor and silent supporter of the NGO, Shamita Shetty, at the survey report's launch. Known to visit, often quietly, various old-age homes every month to play "Housie and Antakshari" with elders for a few hours, Shetty found the grudging tone displayed by caregivers in the report to be "against our culture". "I've grown up seeing my parents give respect to their parents. There needs to be more awareness. Unfortunately, we seem to be aping the West," she said.But it's not as if the data revealed only negatives. While the resentment of many caregivers' spouses towards the dependent elders came through, the survey showed a majority of daughters-in-law were caregivers themselves. Over half of the daughters-in-law interviewed said they assisted elders in crucial ways such as using the telephone, shopping, preparing meals, housekeeping, washing clothes, transportation and taking medicines, among other things.In Mumbai, in fact, a majority of the daughters-in-law and daughters said they supported elders not only emotionally but also financially. Besides, while nearly 85% of caregivers said they leave the elderly at home in the care of domestic help, almost one-third of caregivers surveyed said they helped seniors in daily activities-for instance, by providing help in changing clothes, walking, eating and bathing.A telling figure in the report reflected the helplessness of what the survey calls the "sandwich generation"-people who have aging parents and children. Almost 80% of the caregivers felt their workplace did not have policies that made executing their duties towards elders any easier. Many suggested the administration step in by subsidizing medicine, ensuring better medical transportation facilities, building government-supported old-age homes, providing tax-free medicines and improving staff in government hospitals, among other things.As for the yawning need for emotional support for the elderly who often suffered from anxiety, lack of confidence and depression, the report found less than half of the caregivers actually listened to elders' personal problems. "Your family is your biggest strength," said Prakash Borgaonkar, director, HelpAge India. "Share at least one meal a day with the elderly."
