All-India doctors' stir: Here are six demands made by agitating doctors in Kolkata

They have threatened that if the condition worsens they will go on an indefinite strike from June 17 | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: In the ongoing agitation of hundreds of doctors across the country in solidarity with their colleagues in Kolkata the medicos have put forward six demands to the West Bengal government. These six demands include:

1: Safety of doctors and medical practitioners. There should CRPF deployed in hospitals to ensure doctor's safety. They have also demanded the implementation of the Doctor's Protection Act.

2. Urgent intervention of West Bengal Chief Minister in the Kolkata doctor's assault case. Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee should apologise the agitating junior resident at the Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College.

3. Better health infrastructure and services in the government hospital.

4. There should be ample proofs of police action against accused in doctors' assault case.

5. There should be judicial probe against erring cops and in cases of assault on doctors.

6. There should be an unconditional withdrawal of false cases against doctors.



Reportedly, the doctors at the Kolkata hospitals have been demanding that the Chief Minister Banerjee must visit the injured doctors at the hospital and issue a statement condemning the attack on them. Members of the AIIMS Resident Doctors Association (RDA) have resumed work on Saturday, said that if the demands of the West Bengal doctors are not met within 48 hours, they would be forced to resort to an indefinite strike.

Amrinder Singh Malhi, President, RDA (Resident Doctors' Association), AIIMS: All resident doctors are back to work but we will continue with symbolic protest by wearing black badges, bandages&helmets. If condition worsens we will go on indefinite strike from June 17. pic.twitter.com/nOxcqPCSsi — ANI (@ANI) June 15, 2019

Amrinder Singh Malhi, President, Resident Doctors' Association, AIIMS told news agency ANI that all resident doctors are back to work but they will continue with symbolic protest by wearing black badges, bandages and helmets. They have threatened that if the condition worsens they will go on an indefinite strike from June 17
