Top news of the day: MHA issues advisories to West Bengal, PM Modi chairs Niti Aayog meeting, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has sought a report from the West Bengal government on growing incidents of political violence in the State. In an advisory to the Mamata Banerjee administration, it stated that the “unabated violence” over the years was a matter of deep concern.

Addressing the first meeting of the Niti Aayog governing council after he was re-elected, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday said the goal to make India a $5 trillion economy by 2024 was challenging but could be achieved with concerted efforts of the States.

Terrorism poses the “gravest threat” to the people in Asia and terrorists and their victims must never be equated, External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar said here on Saturday. Addressing the fifth Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA) Summit in the Tajik capital, Mr. Jaishankar said that the CICA members are the victims of terrorism.

Hong Kong's embattled leader Carrie Lam on Saturday said a divisive bill that would allow extraditions to China would be "suspended" in a major climbdown from her government after a week of unprecedented protests.

India and Pakistan have met six times in the quadrennial event, with the former coming up on top in every single encounter. As the teams gear up to face for a seventh time on Sunday at Old Trafford, here is a comprehensive recap of all six encounters.

The over 100-hour stand-off between doctors across India and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee continued on Saturday, with the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) resident doctors association (Delhi) giving “an ultimatum to Ms. Mamata Banerjee to agree to the doctors’ demand or face indefinite nation-wide strike by doctors”.

Seven people, including four sanitary workers, died on Saturday while cleaning a sewer line at a hotel near Vadodara. The police have registered a case.

Chief of the Air Staff Air Chief Marshal Birender Singh Dhanoa on Saturday said there was need to review and ascertain the cause of the crash of an AN-32 aircraft in Arunachal Pradesh earlier this month and ensure it did not occur again.

Thirty years since Ganghei Amaren’s epic blockbuster ‘Karakattakaran’ hit the screens, we ask Ramarajan, the film’s hero, to take us back in time.

A 30-year old woman civil police officer (CPO) died after she was set ablaze by a man at Kanjipuzha near Vallikunnam in Alappuzha on Saturday. The deceased has been identified as Soumya Pushkaran, a CPO with the Vallikunnam police station.
