#MenToo movement: Karan Oberoi joins the dharna at Azad Maidan in Mumbai

A large number of people from various fields, including actors and several men's rights activists, gathered at the Azad Maidan, Mumbai, yesterday for a peaceful dharna to voice their support for the #MenToo movement . The purpose of this dharna was to create awareness about the misuse of law, in cases where men are falsely accused of rape and other such charges by women. Recently, TV actor Karan Oberoi was accused of rape and extortion by a tantrik-and-healer. He was granted bail by the Bombay high court on June 7, about a month after his arrest.Talking to Bombay Times, Karan said, "After being wrongly accused, I realised that I'm not the only one. There are so many men out there who are falsely accused. After being in prison for all those days, I can say that no one should go through such an ordeal ever. When I was in jail, the ones who suffered the most were my mother and sister. So, when you are fighting for men's rights, you are also addressing the whole family that has been affected. I'm here today to support #MenToo, because I believe that justice shouldn't be determined on the basis of one's gender. Every man is vulnerable if the law is misused. We are fighting for gender-neutral laws here. When I was in jail, there were so many people fighting for me outside. However, there are many voiceless people, who do not have a support system, the means or money to help them. How can you just let them suffer for no fault of theirs? So, this fight is not just mine, and it doesn't end with me getting out of jail."(L-R) Amit Deshpande, Dolly Thakore, Karan Oberoi, Namrata Thakker, Maneck Contractor, Pooja Bedi and Barkha Trehan (Courtesy: Prashant Jadhav)Pooja Bedi, who has been at the forefront of this movement and is one of Karan's best friends and strongest supporters, said, "Movements like this are initiated because there is a need for it. There is a serious problem that needs to be addressed. What this movement needs at this point is support, visibility, and among many agendas, the most important one is to put a stop to fake cases.This is possible by modifying laws and strictly punishing those who file fake cases."The event, organised by a foundation, saw several known names lend their voices to the #MenToo movement, like equal rights activist Barkha Trehan, activist Amit Deshpande, theatre personality Dolly Thakore, Karan's sister Gurbani, his friend Sherrin Varghese (member of Karan's music band, A Band Of Boys ) and Maneck Contractor, among others. Said Sherrin, "I support my bandmate Karan Oberoi; it's not about men or women, male or female, it's about equality for all genders."Added Barkha Trehan, "I'm here to show support to all my innocent brothers who have been falsely implicated in fake cases. Their lives are ruined."Activist Amit Deshpande explained that the aftermath of such false cases could lead men to take drastic steps in their life. "These false cases affect men so badly that it even leads them to suicide. We have a suicide helpline for men and the maximum calls are from those who are falsely accused," he said.
