Aiia Maasarwe’s sister’s heartbreaking Instagram post after brutal rape and murder in Melbourne

The sister of slain Israeli exchange student Aiia Maasarwe has shared a heartbreaking social media post as the woman's body returns to Israel.

Noor Maasarwe made a series of emotional posts to Instagram after her sister Aiia, 21, was allegedly raped and murdered in Melbourne.

Aiia's half-naked body was found dumped near a shopping centre in the suburb of Bundoora on January 16. Homeless rapper Codey Herrmann, 20, was later arrested and charged with her brutal rape and murder.

Noor Maasarwe (pictured) made a series of emotional posts to Instagram after her sister Aiia, 21, was allegedly raped and murdered in Melbourne

Aiia's (pictured) half-naked body was found dumped near a shopping centre in the suburb of Bundoora on January 16

In an Instagram post, Noor shared paintings created by Aiia (pictured) in 2014

Noor Maasarwe posted photos of signs calling for Aiia's body to be returned to her family, alongside a pair of white canvas shoes

Noor said she and Aiia bought the white canvas shoes at the same time, sharing similar pairs

Noor Maasarwe posted photos of signs calling for Aiia's body to be returned to her family, alongside a pair of white canvas shoes.

'This is not just a pair of shoes, this is a pair of shoes with a meaning, this is the same shoes Aiia was wearing when she got murdered, and her sister Noor has the same shoes, they bought them together,' Noor wrote on Monday.

Aiia Maasarwe's body will arrive in Israel for her Islamic funeral at 10am on Wednesday local time.

In another Instagram post, Noor shared paintings created by Aiia in 2014.

'A little girl with big dreams, that['s] how Aiia was,' Noor wrote.

'She was living a dream in Melbourne, a dream that ended up being worst (sic) than a nightmare.

Aiia Maasarwe's body will arrive in Israel for her Islamic funeral at 10am on Wednesday local time

Noor thanked all those who had supported her family in Australia and their home town of Baqa al-Gharbiyye in Israel. Pictured: Aiia Maasarwe

'Violence against women is not a women issue, it is a men issue.

'We tell women if they feel unsafe to make a call so that they can feel safe. But Aiia was on the phone with my sister Ruba when all that happen[ed].

'But what do we tell me to do? Do we tell the[m] how to behave? We tell them nothing! That's what we tell them. But [we] need to tell them something from now on!'

Noor thanked all those who had supported her family in Australia and their home town of Baqa al-Gharbiyye in Israel, reminding her 'there are still good people in the world'.

Ms Maasarwe, a Palestinian Arab of Israeli citizenship, will be buried in line with her Muslim faith after a funeral in Israel on Wednesday

Relatives boarded a flight out of Melbourne on Tuesday to head back to Israel

'Let's make the world a better place for us to survive in and for the next generation. I pray and hope that this won't happen again. No one deserve[s] to be treated like that,' she said.

'No matter where they come from, where they are, what they believe in. We are all humans at the end and that's what matter[s].'

Ms Maasarwe, a Palestinian Arab of Israeli citizenship, will be buried in line with her Muslim faith after a funeral in Israel on Wednesday.

Relatives boarded a flight out of Melbourne on Tuesday and a companion of her father Saeed Maasarwe told reporters a selection of items left in tribute to Aiia will be taken to the family's home at Baka al-Gharbiyye, an hour north of Tel Aviv, with plans to use them as part of a shrine.

Her father Saeed Maasarwe (pictured) told reporters a selection of items left in tribute to Aiia will be taken to the family's home

He told reporters up to 20,000 people were expected to gather in her home town upon her arrival.

Ms Maasarwe had caught a tram and was walking home after visiting a city comedy club on the night she died.

A small vigil was held on Tuesday night near where Ms Maasarwe was allegedly murdered, with plans for a memorial tree and plaque at the site.
