West Bengal: Striking doctors to meet CM Mamata Banerjee on Monday, demand meeting to be ‘open to media’

Junior doctors of NRS Hospital in Kolkata address reporters on Sunday | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: Doctors in West Bengal, who had been on strike for almost a week, on Sunday said that they were ready for talks with the Mamata Banerjee-led government. However, the doctors demanded that the discussion with CM Mamata Banerjee should not be held behind closed doors and that the media should be allowed to cover it.

Junior doctors in state-run hospitals and many of the private hospitals had been protesting since Tuesday after their colleague was assaulted on Monday evening by a group of grieving relatives of a deceased patient at NRS Hospital in Kolkata. Healthcare services had been hit throughout the state, while the protest was backed by doctors across the country, including the Indian Medical Association.

Following a meeting today, the junior doctors of the NRS Medical College and Hospital, Kolkata said, "We want an immediate end to this impasse by a discussion with the CM, which, to maintain transparency, shouldn't be behind closed doors, but open to media under camera coverage."

The meeting between the junior doctors and CM Mamata Banerjee has been scheduled for 3 pm tomorrow (Monday) and will be held at a conference hall in the state secretariat. Doctors from 14 medical colleges across the state and 28 student representatives are expected to attend the meeting. As per reports, Banerjee had refused the doctors' demand to have a media presence during the meeting.

Meanwhile, the Indian Medical Association (IMA) has decided to go ahead with the nationwide strike tomorrow (Monday), which would include the withdrawal of non-essential services across the country. The IMA has demanded a comprehensive central law to deal with cases of violence against doctors and healthcare staff in hospitals.

On Friday, the doctors on strike had rejected CM Banerjee's invitation for a meeting at the state secretariat at 5 pm on Saturday. The doctors had said that they would not meet the chief minister unless six of their demands were met, including CM's unconditional apology to the doctors of NRS College for her previous comments and an account of the action taken against the assaulters of the junior doctor at the NRS Hospital.

Arindam Dutta, spokesperson of the joint forum of junior doctors, had told a news agency, "We are not going to the secretariat upon the invitation of the chief minister for the meeting. She will have to come to the Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital and deliver an unconditional apology for her comments made during her visit to the SSKM Hospital on Thursday."

In a controversial statement, Banerjee had claimed that the doctors' protest was a "handiwork" of the BJP and the CPI(M) and that "outsiders" were involved in the assault of the doctor to stir trouble in the state.

Ever since the Monday incident, doctors in the state have been protesting seeking better security arrangements for the doctors and action against the accused who attacked the junior doctor in the Kolkata hospital.
