EXCLUSIVE | Had to cut cable, cancel newspaper: Kolkata injured doctor's kin on trauma his family is facing

As West Bengal remained on edge soon after the June 10 incident where a junior doctor, Dr Paribaha Mukherjee, was attacked over alleged medical negligence, now the injured doctor's cousin brother, in a first exclusive interview to India Today TV, has stated that the family has undergone tough times in the past week.

Doctor Paribaha Mukherjee had suffered a major skull injury when a deceased patient's family assaulted medical staff at Kolkata’s NRS hospital on June 10.

Sanjit Chatterjee, Paribaha's cousin, who is a doctor himself by profession, echoed the concerns of his fraternity and brother too.

While requesting West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee to stay grounded, Sanjit Chatterjee, said, "I would like to look at both the sides. I’m a doctor and also a student of NRS. Mamata Banerjee has to keep her ego aside. Also, the incident had occurred at NRS. Mamata Banerjee didn’t go either to NRS or IMK to see the injured doctor. The representatives had gone. Whatever the young doctors are demanding the Chief Minister should address them herself. Two-three days ago, Trinamool Congress chief (TMC) went to SSKM, which is near her home. Her behaviour infuriated the young boys. Mamata Banerjee said that the government pays for them but the money actually belongs to everyone."

He held Mamata Banerjee's ultimatum to doctors as the reason for the nationwide spread of the protests.

He explained, "After Mamata Banerjee’s ultimatum and attitude, the doctors got more furious. It’s my earnest request to the Chief Minister as she is the health minister as well as the home minister of the state, to become a little down to earth and listen to people’s demand. The kids have gotten emotional and hence the Chief Minister should understand the situation in an apolitical manner. These students are just young interns but the senior doctors and professors have also been angered. Huge mandate is behind her selection, why is she feeling so shaky?"

Sanjit added, "This is not happening for the first time. This has happened several times. This was a strike which took place soon after the assault on doctors, but this has happened earlier in various parts across the country. Doctors all over the country have extended support to the protest."

He also claimed that the injured doctor Paribaha is making a speedy recovery, however, some injuries might cause a problem in the future.

"Paribaha is in a stable condition right now. However, damage caused to his frontal lobe might create an issue in the future. I feel this won’t be a problem because he has been healing quickly. He was first admitted by his classmate to NRS, but as his situation became terrible he was shifted to IMK, where he was provided further treatment."

Sanjit Chatterjee has been looking after his patients amid doctors'agitation in West Bengal while addressing the need of the hour too.

He said that mental pressure on the family forced them to discontinue cable services and newspaper in order to ensure that the parents did not face any additional stress.

While explaining the trauma, he said, "Paribaha Mukherjee's father is a blood sugar patient and with age, he has got dementia and his mother is suffering from Parkinson’s. We had cut their cable lines but their neighbours and the reporters were always behind them. They had severe mental pressure. Also, too many rumours were being spread. Someone spread the news that the doctor had died, which was not true."

Explaining the need for government support for his cousin's treatment he explained, "If the monetary issues become extreme then I would like the government to help, otherwise I think it’s okay. We fill our stomach, we run our houses only through the money that we get from these patients."

On the need for security for doctors, Sanjit said, "I entered this profession keeping in mind that I have to treat the patients. It is my duty. We want to work and we do so, but we require protection."

"Doctors are not the people to fight. As leaders, it is important that they keep control over their language. If the leaders don’t have correct behaviour, their followers will have a wrong behaviour too. This affects the entire country. We need some protection as we protect the people. Be it patients from parties or any other politician," he further said.
