To fund his acting career in, Noida youth fakes own abduction

NOIDA: An aspiring actor, who wanted to star in Hindi TV serials, faked his own abduction in an attempt to squeeze money out of his family for funding an acting career in Mumbai, police said.Vijay Pratap (21), who has been working as a security guard at a shipping company in Sector 63, allegedly sent WhatsApp messages to his brother and father, demanding Rs 6 lakh “to get him released from the abductors”.An inter-pass, Vijay was in touch with an agent in Mumbai, who had asked him to arrange for Rs 6 lakh, to give auditions and sustain himself in Mumbai. A resident of Kola Rota village in Farukkhabad, Vijay has been staying in Noida for the past four months with his elder brother Uday Pratap, who works as a labour supervisor under a contractor.Circle officer II Piyush Singh said Vijay wanted to act in television serials and was in touch with an agent from Mumbai who had informed him about the expenses for auditions. “He left the room where he lives around 7.15 pm on Saturday without informing his brother, who then lodged a missing person’s complaint in the phase III police station,” he said. Though both phone numbers of Vijay were switched off till late Saturday evening, Uday started receiving WhatsApp messages and images from one of his numbers in the night. In the photos, Vijay could be seen sitting with his hands tied and his T-shirt upturned, police said.According to police, Vijay approached his friend Arvind — an embroidery worker who resides in a rented accommodation in Sector 24 — claiming that Uday was going out of station for two days and he needed a place to stay. “His friend helped him get a room for two days where he faked his abduction. Arvind was unaware of his plans,” the circle officer said.Vijay’s plan was exposed after cops put his number on surveillance. They found him in a room in Sector 24. “We asked him why did he fake his own abduction, Vijay said he wanted to be an actor and needed Rs. 6 lakh to pay his agent in Mumbai and take care of his expenses there,” the circle officer said. The SHO said an FIR will be lodged against Vijay for filing a fake complaint.
