OPDs to remain closed for 24 hours from 6am today

Ludhiana: After two young doctors were brutally attacked in Kolkata recently, city doctors have stood in solidarity with the medical fraternity in the demand for justice, and safe and improved working conditions for doctors all across the country.

A call has thus been issued by the Indian Medical Association (IMA) and Indian Dental Association (IDA) to observe ‘complete bandh’ for 24 hours in the city. The OPDs of all hospitals, nursing homes, and clinics will remain closed for 24 hours from 6am on Monday to 6am on Tuesday. Various hospitals like Dayanand Medical College and Hospital (DMCH), Christian Medical College and Hospital (CMCH), Fortis, Apollo, GTB, Pahwa, Ramachandran, and Raghunath Hospitals have assured that they would keep OPD services closed. However, only emergency services and casualties will be attended.

IMA president Dr PS Jassal said: “The attack by attendants of the patients is increasing every day. The unfortunate events in West Bengal and the repeated attacks on medical professionals is a big cause of worry. Time and time again, such acts have created a scare among medical professionals about practising in a fearless manner. Also, I have appealed to all members to gather at IMA Hall near Orient Cinema BRS Nagar on Monday at 10am. Considering the seriousness of the issue, if any doctor is found missing, the association would presume them to be busy with the OPD running,” he added.

Demanding a central act on violence against doctors and hospitals, IMA secretary Dr Bhim Kanish said: “The law should provide a minimum of seven years imprisonment for hospital violence, and ensure that cases are registered, and culprits arrested. Hospitals should be declared as special zones and provision of appropriate security should be the responsibility of the state.”

IDA president Aman Goyal said: “I have appealed to all dental surgeons to abstain from clinical practice on Monday morning in OPDs across all dental clinics as a sign of protest.

Meanwhile, the Alliance of Doctors for Ethical Healthcare (ADEH) too expressed shock and sorrow at the grievous assault on junior doctors — Dr Paribaha Mukherjee and Dr Yash Tekwani — in NRS Medical Hospital in West Bengal. “The Alliance of Doctors for Ethical Healthcare condemns, in the strongest terms, the escalation of the violence and attempts at intimidation that have ensued in West Bengal in the aftermath of the protests by junior doctors in the past 48 hours.” read a press reslease issued by the ADEH.

“We appeal to the West Bengal government to act speedily to acknowledge the concerns of junior doctors, to take stern action against perpetrators of this heinous crime, and take measures to provide a safe working environment for all doctors to enable them to carry out their duties without apprehension or fear,” added the release.

Dr Arun Mitra, core committee member of ADEH, said: “In wake of the increasing violence against doctors across the country, we also urge the government to acknowledge the gravity of this crisis and take proactive and comprehensive steps to ensure the safety of the medical community. Along with enacting legislation for prevention of violence to healthcare professionals and institutions, the government should also focus on long-term investment in medical infrastructure, human resources and system reforms that ensure transparency in treatment, billing, and effective grievance redressal mechanisms. These actions will go a long way in mitigating the deficit in the doctor- patient relationship.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
