India pays homage to martyrs of Jallianwala Bagh massacre

AMN / AMRITSAR

President of India Ramnath Kovind: ‘A 100 years ago today, our beloved freedom fighters were martyred at Jallianwala Bagh. A horrific massacre, a stain on civilisation, that day of sacrifice can never be forgotten by India. At this solemn moment, we pay our tribute to the immortals of Jallianwala’

Prime Minister Narendra Modi: Today, when we observe 100 years of the horrific Jallianwala Bagh massacre, India pays tributes to all those martyred on that fateful day. Their valour and sacrifice will never be forgotten. Their memory inspires us to work even harder to build an India they would be proud of.

Vice President of India Venkia Naidu: “It is a reminder to each one of us as to how hard won & precious our freedom is. It is an occasion to shed a silent tear for each of the innocent Indians who lost their lives that #Baisakhi day in 1919. It is a poignant moment of reflection on colonial cruelty & irrational anger”

Congress President Rahul Gandhi paid homage to the martyrs of the Jallianwala Bagh massacre at the memorial in Amritsar. Today is the centenary of the tragic incident. Punjab Chief Minister Capt. Amarinder Singh also accompanied him.

“Today is the centenary of the brutal Jallianwalla Bagh massacre, a day of infamy that stunned the entire world and changed the course of the Indian freedom struggle. The cost of our freedom must never be forgotten,” Congress chief said in a tweet after his visit.

‘Today is the centenary of the brutal Jallianwalla Bagh massacre, a day of infamy that stunned the entire world and changed the course of the Indian freedom struggle. The cost of our freedom must never be forgotten.

British High Commissioner to India Dominic Asquith also visited the memorial.

Earlier on the eve of the centenary, Punjab Governor V.P.S Badnore and Capt. Amarinder Singh participated in the candlelight march in Amritsar.

On April 13th, 1919, hundreds of innocent people were killed and many more injured after British troops led by Reginald Dyer opened fire on a peaceful gathering at Jallianwala Bagh.
