Congress manifesto unimplementable, aims at ‘Balkanisation’ of India; says Arun Jaitley

Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley on Tuesday called the Congress manifesto for the upcoming Lok Sabha elections “un-implementable” and an agenda for ‘balkanisation of India’.

It seems some of the important points have been devised by ‘tukde-tukde’ gang,” Jaitley said,

Some of the ideas in the manifesto are “dangerous, meant to break up the country”, Jaitley, said at a press conference in the national capital.

“2019 Congress Manifesto is a Charter to Weaken India. After reading Congress Manifesto my worst fears have come true. The repeal of S.124A of the IPC, diluting AFSPA & “bail is the rule jail is the exception” for terrorists & hardcore criminals will compromise national security,” Jaitley added.

Jaitley further said, “Nyay, in the Manifesto, has now become a joint scheme of Central & the State govts. thereby diluting the initial announcement that Nyay will be over & above existing schemes. It is visible through Manifesto that “Nyay” is an all-time big Congress bluff.”

“The Congress is the principal creator of the Jammu and Kashmir problem. It created a special status; it unconstitutionally brought in Article 35A. It rigged 1957, 1962, 1967 as also the 1988 Assembly elections. This eroded the confidence of the people of Jammu and Kashmir and now its Manifesto only brings smiles on the faces of the separatists and the terrorists. A reference to “Kashmiri Pandits’ and their ethnic cleansing from the Valley is conspicuously absent in the Manifesto,” the finance minister said.

“The Congress does not commit to the loan waiver but says that it has done so in several States. If you look at the track record of Karnataka, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, a miniscule effort has not even been put. Even the PM-KISAN is on hold in Congress States,” Jaitley added.

“The Congress Manifesto undermines national security and has sham and bluff promises with little detailed understanding of the subjects involved. It is an irresponsible document which has never to be implemented since Congress looks a certain loser,” Jaitley said.

The remarks came hours after the Congress released its manifesto for the Lok Sabha polls.
