IT raids at Bishnoi’s homes illegal, claim Cong leaders

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Hisar, July 27

Haryana Congress leaders have alleged that the BJP governments at the Centre and in Haryana have been trying to intimidate them through raids by different agencies. Today, the Congress leaders staged a demonstration in protest against the income tax raids at the residences of Adampur MLA Kuldeep Bishnoi here. They termed the raids as illegal aimed at harassing and intimidating party leaders.

State Congress president Ashok Tanwar, AICC media in-charge Randeep Singh Surjewala and former state minister Savitri Jindal termed the raids that continued for four days as ‘petty tactics’ of the BJP. They said that Congress workers would not be intimidated by this misdemeanour of the ruling party.

They submitted a memorandum, addressed to the President of India, to the Deputy Commissioner after the demonstration, requesting for a judicial inquiry into the raids at the residences of Kuldeep Bishnoi. They alleged that the raids were conducted purely for political reasons. “The raids showed that it’s not ‘Ram Rajya’, as claimed by the BJP, but a ‘raid rajya’ prevailing in the country nowadays,” they said.

Tanwar said, “The BJP is mistaken if it thinks that it can intimidate Congress leaders by misusing government agencies such as the Enforcement Directorate or the Income Tax Department against our leaders, including former Chief Minister Bhupinder Hooda, Kuldeep Bishnoi and Naveen Jindal. “The party is united behind our leaders and we have decided to protest against the misuse of government agencies”.

Tanwar said, “The state government is neck deep in corruption, as is evident from the mining scams that have taken place in the last five years. A mining scam worth about one lakh crore of rupees has occurred in the Aravalli hill range and the Morni hills. Besides, the drug mafia has established itself in Haryana,” he said.

He alleged that the mining and drug mafia were flourishing under the protection of state BJP leaders and the Congress, on coming to power in Haryana, would get all scams probed.

The Congress is set to regain power in Haryana. Sensing its imminent defeat, the BJP is now misusing agencies such as the CBI, ED, and the IT Department to oppress and harass Congress leaders. —Randeep Surjewala, AICC media in-charge
