Article 370 Kashmir: India begins process to revoke region's special status

T he Indian government has started the process of revoking a law that gives special privileges to the Kashmir region.

Article 370, which gave Jammu and Kashmir its own constitution and many decision-making rights, will be revoked once the President approves the bill, the government said.

Home minister Amit Shah said the government had also decided to split the state into two union territories - Jammu and Kashmir, which will have a legislature, and Ladakh, which will be ruled directly by the central government.

Pakistan's foreign minister Sohail Mahmood said India's revocation of Kashmir's special status violates a UN resolution.

Barricades are set up by Indian police to prevent the moment of vehicles during curfew like restrictions in Jammu / AP

It comes amid uproar in parliament and a huge troop deployment in the area.

Phone and Internet services were also suspended and restrictions imposed on public movement in Srinagar - the state's largest city - as officials tried to quash unrest ahead of the move.

The move is the most far-reaching on the troubled Himalayan territory in nearly seven decades.

The law forbids Indians outside the state from permanently settling, buying land, holding local government jobs and securing education scholarships.

The removal of this part of the constitution ends special status for Kashmir, which was key to its accession to India in 1947.

Fayaz Ahmad Mir (C) member of Parliament representing the state of Jammu & Kashmir protests outside the Parliament / AFP/Getty Images

Kashmir is divided between India and Pakistan and both claim the region in its entirety.

Thousands of soldiers have been deployed to the Indian-controlled portion, with thousands of newly deployed soldiers camping in police stations and government buildings around the increasingly tense region.

The deployment in recent days added at least 10,000 troops in Kashmir, already one of the world's most militarised regions.

India has also ordered thousands of tourists and Hindu pilgrims to leave the region.

There has been no word on the clampdown from the federal government in New Delhi, which rules the troubled state since last year after Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) withdrew from a coalition with a local party.

India's Home Minister Amit Shah greets the media upon his arrival at the parliament in New Delhi / REUTERS

Some regional leaders around midnight tweeted saying they have been or feared being arrested.

Omar Abdullah, a former chief minister of the state, said he believed he was being placed under house arrest, appealing to people to stay calm.

Mehbooba Mufti, another ex-chief minister and Modi's former ally, said it was "ironic that elected representatives like us who fought for peace are under house arrest."

A spokesman for India's federal home ministry in New Delhi did not respond to a request for comment.

"To place two former Chief Ministers under house arrest is unprecedented and unacceptable. Would it happen in any other state of India? Is this how we build trust among the Kashmiris?" prominent historian and columnist Ramachandra Guha said on Twitter.

Tensions in Kashmir, claimed by both India and Pakistan, have risen since Friday, when local Indian officials issued an alert over possible militant attacks by Pakistan-based groups.

Pakistan has rejected those assertions, but thousands of Indian tourists, pilgrims and workers left the region in panic over the weekend.
