The wild west of Mumbai’s property market: Water, electricity are guaranteed, but not your life

illegal buildings

Ten-storeyed Gulistan in Pydhonie which is being demolished (left) after being declared illegal. Close to a hundred families will be rendered homeless; (far right) Kesarbai Mansion in Dongri that collapsed in July, killing 13 people

MHADA

Residents of Gulistan Apartments, which the BMC has started to pull down, protest against the demolition (Photos by Satish Malavade)

GR Khairnar

Pydhonie’s Ismail Cultay Road, on which Gulistan Apartments stands, is thronged by residents resisting the BMC’s demolition drive, as the police takes stock of the situation; (R) ‘Demolition Man’ GR Khairnar tried to bust the illegal construction racket in the 1990s by knocking down many buildings

An aerial view of Kesarbai Building in Dongri, a portion of which collapsed in July, killing 13 people; BMC workers clear the debris (Photos by Raju Shinde)

ByYou may think of them as the black sheep of society, but to us, they are like Amitabh Bachchan — heroes who provide a roof over our heads,” says Mohammed Sohail. The 58-yearold engineer is referring to builders who have constructedall over Wards B and C, in the heart of south Mumbai, and are currently in the news after BMC started the demolition on Monday, of the 10-storeyed Gulistan Apartment, deeming it unauthorised. Sohail acknowledges that he lives in an illegal building too, but refuses to reveal its location, lest it gets pulled down. “It’s a compromise,” he says of the matchbox-sized apartment he shares with his wife. “If you stretch your legs, you’ll cover the length of the bedroom. If you stretch out your arms, you’ll touch the kitchen on one side, and the washroom on the other. But it’s no more unsafe than any other concrete structure in the city, so why single us out for demolition?”Sohail grew up in a 100 sq ft flat in Dongri, in the same neighbourhood where, in July, the fourstoreyed Kesarbai Mansion collapsed, leading to the death of 13 people. The incident brought the area under BMC’s scanner yet again, eventually leading to the Gulistan demolition. When Sohail and his brother decided to move out of the family home, they looked for places in the neighbourhood. Mainly because it was all they could afford. Wards B and C – which cover Dongri, Pydhonie, Nagpada, Masjid Bunder, Mandvi and others – are a hotbed of illegal constructions. While half a dozen structures are on the BMC’s hit-list today, officials say, the number of buildings with illegal portions – some floors, some additions or alterations – could be in the hundreds in these two wards.Illegal construction is nothing new in Mumbai. All over the city, there are buildings which have unauthorised portions. In fact, experts argue that the BMC may itself have ‘institutionalised’ this by introducing the concept of fungible Floor-Space Index (FSI) — the additional area that a builder can develop over and above the allocated FSI. The illegal constructions in Wards B and C stand out because entire buildings have been put up with no permissions. According to a BMC vigilance committee report, the process starts with the owner of a warehouse or an existing two or three-storeyed building seeking permission from the civic body to make some repairs. Then, almost overnight, one finds a seven or eight-storey highrise in its place. Sometimes all it takes is an extended weekend, and a brand-new building — mostly concrete slabs placed over steel or iron girders, instead of the regulation Reinforced Cement Concrete (RCC) pillars, and often without a foundation — comes up, with little regard to safety or rules. Unlike a legitimate redevelopment project, where the minimum size of an apartment must be 350 sq ft, here the ‘flats’ range from 100 sq ft to 300 sq ft — and the buildings themselves are rarely more than 10 or 12 storeys high, so as not to stick out in the skyline and draw unwanted attention to themselves.The flats, largely because of their illicit nature, are sold well below market rate. Schoolbus driver Altaf Batliwala, who lives with his wife, two children and ailing mother in a 250 sq ft apartment in Gulistan, paid only Rs 27 lakh for the brand new home. Elsewhere in Mumbai, a property of a comparable size would cost at least three or even four times as much. “There was a water connection, electricity and people had been living here for more than a year. The builder even told us that the building is legal till the fourth floor, which is why we purchased a flat on the second,” says Batliwala. So when a demolition notice was served to them on September 21, the family was caught off-guard. Now that the entire building is going to be razed, the Batliwalas will soon be homeless. But flat purchasers are always at a disadvantage; they have no ownership papers or titles deeds, and the purchase is usually in the form of an ‘understanding’ with the builder, which is never registered. This, therefore, leaves them with no rights when a building is being pulled down.Officials say that at least 30 illegal buildings have come up in Wards B and C in the last five years — in neighbourhoods that have also seen horrific incidents of collapse. Apart from Kesarbai, in September 2017 the seven-storey, 117-year-old Husaini Building in Bhendi Bazaar caved in, killing 33 people. Yet, according to BMC records, there is only one dilapidated building in B Ward. The reason other dilapidated buildings don’t feature, is that they’re illegal. The recent vigilance report also notes that just a few metres from Hussaini, illegal constructions are taking place in the localities of Nishanpada, Memonwada, Bhat Bazaar, Narayan Duruv Marg and Chavalwali Galli, among others. Rais Shaikh, a Samajwadi Party corporator from Madanpura, Byculla, who has lived in this area for some 20 years, says: “Over the last few decades, the area has seen haphazard redevelopment of many old buildings, which have no permission. These buildings weigh down on the original old structure, and weaken it.”According to a senior civic official, about 10 or 12 cases of blatant, unauthorised constructions were pointed out by the vigilance report, which was submitted to Municipal Commissioner Praveen Pardeshi in July. Based on this, Pardeshi suspended Vivek Rahi, assistant municipal commissioner of B Ward, for not having acted on this. The incident points to something builders here bank on: complicity from officials. “BMC, police andofficials are all paid for every foot constructed, so that there is no disruption to work,” says a broker who operates in the area. “If the cost of construction per square floor is, say, Rs 1,600, another Rs 1,000 is spent on bribes.” The greasing of palms is so effective, adds an official, that “if there is a complaint, the BMC serves a notice and may even demolish a portion of a building, and cut power and water lines for a few days. But shortly after, a deal is struck and construction resumes. So action on the BMC’s part, is never taken to its logical conclusion”.Corruption aside, in certain cases, ward officials are also afraid of taking action. In 1996, some B Ward officers were attacked by a mob while overseeing a demolition in Bhendi Bazar. Although such incidents of violence are few, “there is always stiff resistance from residents and tenants… even conducting a basic inspection becomes risky. Everyone here knows what is legal and what is not, but they all operate within an ecosystem which doesn’t tolerate external interference”. Uday Shiroorkar, a former B Ward officer who, in his two years in the area from 2016, had supervised the razing of a couple of buildings, says he would receive death threats every time he ordered a demolition in Dongri. The threats (which targeted his daughter as well) made Shirookar start to carry a gun, and became infamously known as the only BMC officer to have been allowed a licensed firearm. “The builders usually get away by ‘managing’ certain officers,” says Shiroorkar, who has now retired. “But if someone stands up to them, he is coerced and intimidated by goons citing either political or gangland connections.”This rough-and-tumble world is a throwback to the time when these neighbourhoods were also the badlands of Mumbai — from the 1960s to the late ’90s — and were overrun by gangs led by Dawood Ibrahim, Karim Lala and Haji Mastan. According to an Intelligence dossier (accessed by Mirror), Dawood owns 13 residential properties around the world, and two of these are in Bhendi Bazaar (Pakmodia Street) and Nagpada (Temkar Street). There are also reports of builders here with alleged ties to Dawood and his kin, who send ‘protection’ money — in amounts small enough to go undetected by the crime branch monitoring hawala transactions — to both Dawood and Chhota Shakeel. Dawood may have started a trend: In June 2007, a city special court acquitted Iqbal Kaskar and five others, including four BMC officials, of all charges in a case relating to the alleged unauthorised construction of the twin shopping malls, Sara and Sahara, in Crawford Market. According to the prosecution, Kaskar and the others, with the help of Dawood and Shakeel, forcibly acquired properties belonging to the Central Public Works Department in the market area, and even got permission to construct illegal structures on properties reserved for a municipal school. Till 2005, aware of the underworld’s alleged interest in construction activities in these localities, civic authorities would run all major proposals they received by crime branch officials, to be okayed before permissions were extended. “The practice was later discontinued; it must have become inconvenient for some sections, obviously,” a crime branch officer says.Today, though the underworld’s influence has waned in the area, it’s been replaced by an aggressive land mafia. “There is still a lot of bhaigiri here,” says a senior civic official, adding that both the BMC and the police are wary of confronting them. It took someone of the calibre of ‘Demolition Man’to bust this racket by knocking down several buildings — including Al Faraz, a hotel that belonged to local don Salim Talwar — when he was deputy commissioner in the 1990s. But as soon as he was transferred, the racket proliferated unabated. “The underworld has had such an impact on south Mumbai, that no reputed builder wants to operate in this area today, and it is still the old builders or people who were once close to Dawood Ibrahim, that are running the construction business here,” says retired top cop Pradeep Sharma. Indeed, most well-known builders have steered clear of this prime locality of Mumbai, though many have come up with projects on the fringes of this area, in Byculla and Mazgaon. If Wards B and C have to rid themselves of their gangland notoriety, they will have to allow legitimate builders to come in.The problem is that nobody wants to. “Established developers don’t want to venture into [this area] because of multiple reasons,” says Rajan Bandelkar, president of the National Real Estate Development Council (Naredco), Maharashtra. “The area has under-developed infrastructure, lack of amenities and a high population density, so it is not lucrative enough compared to other parts of the city. Underworld involvement in illegal constructions is also a reason, but that’s not the primary reason.” Bandelkar adds that illegal buildings have existed here for several decades, and it’s not practical for any developer to try and reconstruct these.According to Parth Mehta, managing director of Paradigm Realty, the murkiness of ownership and title deeds of the buildings here, is a big deterrent. “It is not one complex housing 1,000 families, but each building has different tenants and different landlords, and it is difficult bringing everyone on the same page [for a project]. On paper, 51 per cent consent is required from tenants, but banks and financial institutions funding the project insist on 100 per cent consent, clear titles and completely vacated land.” None of which is possible in this overcrowded, rabbit-warren of a neighbourhood. Things are made tougher by the high density of population here: In B Ward, for instance, some 1.28 lakh are packed into just 2.84 sq km. “Given this kind of density, developers can only opt for 30 or 40-storeyed buildings,” says Mehta. “With transit accomodation and high premiums, it makes any project unviable, particularly in today’s sluggish real estate market. Infrastructure support is also poor; the lanes are very narrow, and the mandatory open spaces that have to be maintained for fire exits are not there, so environmental clearances will be hard to acquire. Projects in areas with poor or no infrastructure are bound to be unviable.”The only possible solution, builders say, is ‘cluster redevelopment’ — where a swathe of properties is acquired by one developer for reconstruction. In Bhendi Bazar, such a project has been taken up by the Saifee Burhani Upliftment Trust (SBUT) — though people attribute its success to the fact that it was initiated by the Syedna, the religious head of the Bohri community, which comprises a large section of the population here, and it was easier to get their consent for the project for largely this reason. A decade on, the project is plodding along — its progress still hard to guage by watchers.For people like the soon-to-be-destitute Batliwalas and their neighbours in Gulistan (many of whom are sitting in protest outside their building), or Mohd Sohail, this provides little comfort. “If the state can’t provide a roof over our heads, it shouldn’t take away the one we have,” says Sohail. When Mirror met NCP’s South Bombay Minority president Ayub Memon on Thursday, he held out his phone to show a video clip. “A resident from an adjoining building sent this to me today. Construction is on in full swing on a highrise in this area — at 3 am,” he says. “I have forwarded this clip to the ward officer, but I can guarantee that no action will be taken.”and
