Aarey Protest: Section 144 Imposed In Nearby Areas Post Agitation Over Cutting Trees; 29 Arrested

ntry into

Aarey

from Marol Maroshi Road has been restricted.

#WATCH: People gathered in protest at #AareyForest against the felling of trees there, earlier tonight. They were later removed from spot by police. Bombay HC has dismissed all petitions against BMC decision which allowed felling of more than 2700 trees there, for metro car shed. pic.twitter.com/saT4MaHWsq — ANI (@ANI) October 4, 2019

Lathi Charge done for the first time at the peaceful protests for Aarey. People have been detained inside, gates have been closed and the authorities are abusing the protestors. Women have been pushed and detained by the police at this hour, which is lawfully wrong. #SaveAarey — Jignesh Mevani (@jigneshmevani80) October 4, 2019

Just reached home. 100s of Mumbaikers were lathi charged, mauled, arrested,detained. Some of r yet to be released. This night of terror was brought to us by - @Dev_Fadnavis. Special effects by @AshwiniBhide & @MumbaiPolice, And of course backed by r very own #PappuThackeray — Preeti Sharma Menon (@PreetiSMenon) October 4, 2019

The @ShivSena ‘s @sheetalmhatre1 ji & Shubha Raul ji at Aarey. Even @prabhu_suneel ji has been standing up for it with the citizens. Wonder why @MumbaiMetro3 is treating Mumbaikars like criminals and not listening to sensible demand of sustainable development. https://t.co/ZdjF8ttKTk — Aaditya Thackeray (@AUThackeray) October 4, 2019

The police on Saturday arrested as many as 29 people near the Aarey colony who were protesting against the felling of trees in the green zone in Mumbai for a Metro car shed. According to reports, the police have also imposed section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code in Aarey Colony and surrounding areas on October 5, banning unlawful assembly. Mumbai Police PRO has said that prohibitory orders under Section 144 of CrPC have been imposed in the area near the metro-rail project site in Aarey Forest. The eIn a press statement, the police said that there were around 100 to 200 people protesting and some of them got into a scuffle with police officials and assaulted them, following which 29 were arrested. Six of the arrested are women. Police said the arrested people will be produced in a local court. Merely hours after the Bombay High Court's verdict dismissed all petitions against the felling of over 2,500 trees for a Mumbai metro depot, the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) late on Friday night started cutting trees in Aarey in the state capital. The cutting of trees took place amid massive protests by activists who alleged that 300 of over 2,600 trees were felled by the end of the day. Police had booked 38 protesters under various sections of the IPC since late October 4 night, the official said. Another official said over 60 people protesting against the felling of trees have been detained.Hundreds of people gathered at the site of the proposed car shed after they were informed that trees were being axed by authorities late Friday night. The protests continued during the wee hours of Saturday in an attempt to stop authorities. The site also has heavy police deployment who started dispersing the crowd and had to forcibly remove the protesters, the official said. When the situation worsened, police started taking protesters into custody. Police have cordoned off the area and people are not allowed to enter the locality. Additional police personnel were called in to prevent untoward incidents, the official said. Protesters gathered at the spot asked why can’t the authorities wait until a petition can be filed in the Supreme Court regarding the matter. "What is the hurry that they are cutting down trees in the middle of the night," one of the protestors said. "It is saddening to see that the trees which provide life to others are being cut. This is happening when the government itself is urging people to plant more trees,” another protester, said.Taking to Twitter, several activists uploaded images and videos of the protest. Some activists claimed on Twitter Police lathi charged at the peaceful protesters for Aarey. Taking to Twitter, Dalit leader Jignesh Mevani condemned the lathi charge on protesters.Stalin D, member of NGO Vanaskakti and whose petitions were among those that were dismissed, said, "Why can't the Environment minister under your party stop the work since there is a clear violation of terms of MPCB consent to establish? You can LEGALLY stop the work. Are you willing to walk the talk, Sir? Call me if you are." To which Yuva Sena president Aaditya Thackeray replied and voiced his protest against the cutting of trees in the past, accusing the Mumbai Metro of destroying everything India said at the United Nations.The Bombay High Court had, on Friday, dismissed all petitions against the proposed cutting down of over 2,500 trees in Aarey Colony of Mumbai to make way for a Metro car shed and refused to declare the colony as a forest. Scores of locals including environmental activists have been opposing the cutting of trees for the construction of the car shed of the metro station. They are demanding the relocation of the bus depot, which is a part of the Metro III project.Several B-town actors and political leaders have also extended their support to activists by participating in the protests against the cutting of trees. Meanwhile, actors like Amitabh Bachchan and Akshay Kumar had supported the Metro project. (with inputs from agencies)
