In pay protest seeking parity, docs and nurses beg on road

Noida: In a unique protest, hundreds of contractual workers under different programmes of the National Health Mission ( NHM ) took to the streets on Monday and begged for money from commuters to deposit in the state treasury. They alleged the government did not have money to pay their salaries.The protesters, comprising doctors , auxiliary nurse midwives (ANMs), nurses and lab technicians, took out a march under the aegis of NHM Sangh from the office of the chief medical officer (CMO) in Sector 39 to City Centre metro station.Contractual health workers have long been demanding pay parity with their counterparts employed on a permanent basis, job security and end of outsourcing. Monday’s protest was part of a state-wide protest, in which as many as 75,000 workers took part. In Gautam Budh Nagar, nearly 500 workers are working on a contractual basis to implement around 72 schemes of the government in the district.While workers had first protested by wearing black bands, they have been sitting on an indefinite strike since last Monday. Last week, they also held a ‘hawan’ to “make good sense prevail over health department officials”.On Monday, the protesters stopped everyone on the streets — from motorists , pedestrians and metro commuters to auto drivers and vendors — begging for money for the state government, which has failed to address their concerns.They collected a total of Rs 975, which they have decided to deposit in the state treasury. “The government does not have money for us, but the hearts of the public are not small. They are donating as much as they can,” said Sarita, a protester.According to NHM Sangh members, there is a huge gap between the salary structure of permanent and contractual employees. Block president of NHM Sangh Dr Arun Sharma told TOI that while a doctor on contract is paid about Rs 35,000, those on permanent basis are earning anywhere between Rs 65,000-70,000. Similarly, while a regular nurse earns around Rs 60,000, those on contract are paid about Rs 20,000. G B Nagar district president of the orgabisation Dr Matloob said there is no human resource policy for contractual employees. “We can’t avail benefits like health insurance, provident fund or employee state insurance. We have been raising our demands since 2016, but to no avail,” he said.Workers said they met state NHM director Pankaj Kumar on Saturday, but the meeting was a failure. “We were told that some of our demands had been sent to the Centre for approval. But they told us that salary increase and stopping outsourcing were not in their hands. We will continue our indefinite strike as we don’t have any other option,” said state president Mayank Thakur. The protesters have warned of a state-wide stir on January 30, when workers from across the state will arrive in Lucknow to raise their demands.
