Maharashtra government appoints panel to study viability of metro car shed, axing of trees

The site of the proposed metro car shed in Aarey (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Locals and activists came out in protest against the felling of trees Bombay HC granted relief to MMRDA for chopping over 2,000 trees in Aarey The panel will also suggest alternative sites for the metro car shed

Mumbai: The Maharashtra state government has announced the formation of a committee to study the Mumbai Metro car-shed project which sparked nationwide demonstrations by activists earlier this year. This four-member panel will be headed by the additional chief secretary of the state Finance Department and has been asked to submit a report in this regard in 15 days.

The panel will study the financial aspect of the project apart from recommending alternatives for the metro car shed. It will also ascertain the method used by the Mumbai Metro Rail Development Authority (MMRDA) to axe trees for the project. In October, the Bombay High Court gave a clean chit to the metro authority on a PIL filed against it for cutting down over 2,000 trees within 48 hours in Mumbai's Aarey Milk Colony.

Spread across an area of 1,287 hectares, the Aarey forest shares its boundaries with the Sanjay Gandhi National Park and is otherwise known as the 'last green lung' of India's economic capital. Hundreds of locals took to the streets in protest after the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation's (BMC) Tree Department granted permission to MMRDA to axe trees in Aarey.

During these protests, Section 144 was imposed in the area and a number of activists and locals were detained by police. Cases lodged against the demonstrators were dropped at the behest of newly-appointed Chief Minister Uddhav Thackerey who opposed his former ally Devendra Fadnavis' stance on the issue. A PIL was filed in the Supreme Court regarding a similar issue on Wednesday. While hearing the case, a bench of the apex court directed the Bombay HC to revisit its judgement granting metro authority the permission to cut down trees for the construction of the Metro IV-line that is slated to start from New Thane metro station.
