Citizenship Amendment Act Protests: Police Violence At Delhi's Jamia Millia Sparks Outrage Across India

> Culture

For the past few days, you must have been hearing or reading the words Citizenship Amendment Bill/CAB uttered everywhere and on everything you looked at. So, let's correct that a little because it's no more a bill. It's the Citizenship Amendment Act now. What does it do? Well, if you want the long version, you can click right here: Citizenship Amendment Bill - What Does the Lok Sabha’s Decision Mean? And if you want the shorter version, here's the primer: A Citizenship Amendment Bill was introduced on 19 July 2016 to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955, thereby providing citizenship to religious minorities from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. The intended religious minorities were explicitly listed as Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis, and Christians, but not Muslims. This Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on 10 December 2019 and subsequently passed by the Rajya Sabha on 11 December 2019, leading to country-wide protests.

The biggest news about the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests started to come in from Assam since Thursday, where four people have died as of now. The Assam Police has so far arrested around 175 people and detained around 1460 protesters for "indulging in violent agitations" while 50 policemen have been injured, as per India Today. This sparked further protests around colleges around universities in India with Jamia Millia Islamia campus being at the eye of the storm. And the police reacted to the protests at Jamia with insane levels of violence.

Spoke with a student inside Jamia who sent me this video along with other videos. He claimed that the students were stuck inside library with the library filled with tear gas smoke and they were having a difficult time breathing. And that some could finally get out of there. pic.twitter.com/1XaD9jPrdt — Pratik Sinha (@free_thinker) December 15, 2019

After news of the police violence at Jamia Millia Islamia hit the internet, college and university students from all the country marched out in protest in their respective states. Some of the colleges in question were Aligarh Muslim University, Hyderabad's Maulana Azad Urdu University, Tata Institute of Social Sciences in Mumbai, Benaras Hindu University, Pondicherry University, Lucknow's Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama, IIT-Bombay.

Following the country-wide protest, it is being reported that the students of Jamia Millia who were detained have been released. However, that doesn't mean the whole situation has de-escalated. Those at Jamia Millia have formed a police chain outside the campus to protest "police brutality". The students of Nadwa college in Lucknow have clashed with the police. Student protestors from Delhi University have been lathi-charge while 21 students have been arrested from Aligarh Muslim University after their anti-CAA clash.

Just gutted watching this video from AMU sent by a student pic.twitter.com/WyLrsYOvhD — Rana Ayyub (@RanaAyyub) December 15, 2019

Banaras Hindu University students protesting against Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019 & nationwide NRC #RejectCAB #BHU

pic.twitter.com/UPyJFfruH2 — Tarique Anwer (@tanwer_m) December 14, 2019

Another video from Lucknow's Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama with the police vehicle in sight as students protest in solidarity with #JamiaMilia and #AligarhMuslimUniversity #CAA2019 pic.twitter.com/XzpxbCEvFH — Yusra Husain (@yusrahusainTOI) December 15, 2019

Students from Tata Institute of Social Sciences protest against police crackdown at #JamiaUniversity.



Follow live coverage on https://t.co/Fbzw6mR9Q5 and NDTV 24x7#CitizenshipAct #JamiaProtests #TISS pic.twitter.com/0IvN46KNCW — NDTV (@ndtv) December 16, 2019

And Chief Justice of India S.A. Bobde's reaction to all this that if violence and destruction of public property continues, then they'll not hear it. According to India Today, he has said,

"Just because they happen to be students, it doesn't mean they can take law and order in their hands, this has to be decided when things cool down. This is not the frame of mind when we can decide anything. Let the rioting stop."

According to recent updates from News 18, Vice Chancellor of Jamia Millia Islamia University Najma Akhtar has said that whatever has happened is not acceptable and in addition to property loss, the whole altercation has left an emotional toll on the students. She has also requested everyone to not pay heed to rumours and that there'll be an inquiry into the incident at the Jamia Millia University library.

Cover artwork by Dhawal Bhanushali/Mashable India
