Ajay Devgn on CAA: Violence is not the answer. This is a democracy

Over the weekend, we've seen images and videos of police brutality on students of Jamia Milia Islami as well as Aligarh Muslim University, who had gathered to protest the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). Following which, several actors and filmmakers from the film fraternity condemned the way the protests were handled by the administration.

Today, as Ajay Devgn took the stage at Day 1 of Agenda AajTak, he spoke about the same, reiterating the fact that "violence is never the answer."

Ajay was joined by Kajol on stage, at a session titled You, Me Aur Hum.

When asked about his views on the violence that is mushrooming in various parts of the country, Ajay said, "This is a democracy. The establishment has an opinion, and there are those who do not agree with that opinion. Everyone should have the right to express their opinion. Violence is not the answer. Instead of fighting, things should be settled amicably, so that the aam janta doesn't suffer."

The conversation steered towards Ajay Devgn and Kajol's upcoming film, Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior, and the recent complaint filed against the historical drama with the Delhi High Court. "Ek toh communities itni hai ki koi na koi hurt ho hi jayega. Then there are those who do it for fame. The genuine ones, you can still have a conversation with. But at the end of the day, we will never be able to make everyone happy," Ajay said.

Kajol, Ajay's co-star in Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior, agreeing with him, added, "I agree with Ajay, we cannot make everyone happy. It's a choice you have to make and stick to it."

ALSO READ | Ajay Devgn on Tanhaji row: Ek toh communities itni hai. Koi na koi hurt ho hi jaata ha

ALSO READ | Jamia: Anurag Kashyap calls govt fascist, Rajkummar Rao condemns police violence

ALSO READ | Kajol and Ajay Devgn share emotional posts on son Yug's birthday: It’s a joy watching you grow

ALSO SEE | Ajay Devgn and Kajol take off for Tanhaji The Unsung Warrior Delhi promotions. See pics
