FTII pupils go on hunger strike over hiked fees

Say will withdraw protest only when authorities roll back increased charges



After the institute management refused to hear their grievances over hike in entrance exam fee, the students of Film and Television Institute of India (FTII), Pune, have now resorted to an indefinite hunger strike since Monday to draw the attention of the authorities to their objection to the surge in both tuition fees and entrance exam charges.



Stating that the increased sum in both the scenarios is difficult for them to cough up, the students have yet again requested the management to reconsider their decision. The administration, however, does not see any justification behind the protest.



“Since its inception, FTII has been a space where film education has been made available to anyone who has sought it. This year, while the annual fee has touched Rs 1,18,323, the entrance exam charges have shot up to Rs 10,000. The exorbitant hike makes it impossible for numerous aspirants across the country to afford the courses on offer,” said Rajarshi Mujumdar, general secretary, FTII students’ association.



From noon on December 16, Mujumdar and three other students — Vivek Allaka, Aadhith Sathvin and PR Manikandan — sat on the strike, demanding the 10 per cent annual fee hike for the present academic year be revoked and immediate suspension of the Joint Entrance Examination (JET) for 2020 until the fees are brought down.



Mujumdar also said that a letter was submitted to the director last week, putting forth their demands. “Since we did not receive any response from the authorities, we decided to go on the strike,” he added.



“We will continue the strike and urge other students to support in any capacity they can,” said Aadhith Sathvin, president, FTII students’ association.



Stating that the JET in two courses cost Rs 1,500 until 2015, Sathvin added, “Now aspirants have to pay Rs 10,000 for the same. Also, the hike is almost 115 per cent and will keep increasing in the coming years. This is unfair.”



“We will withdraw the strike only after getting an assurance from the administration on bringing down the costs,” said another student Vivek Allaka.



However, Bhupendra Kainthola, the director of FTII, termed the protest “totally unjustified”.



“We received a letter from the students’ association on Monday, informing us about the strike. However, their demands cannot be fulfilled,” he added.



On revoking the 10 per cent fee hike, Kainthola said that the decision to increase the fees by 10 per cent per annum was taken by the FTII governing council in 2008. “Any decision to review the fees or its rollback can, therefore, be taken only by the said body,” he added.



Kainthola also said the representation by the students’ association can be placed before the next meeting of the governing council with the permission of the chairman.



Regarding curtailment of entrance examination fee, the director said a review of the entrance exam fee was done in the governing council meeting held on December 10. “While the request to halt the entrance exam process immediately was not accepted, the council recommended to the JET committee that JET fee hike may be suitably reviewed for 2021,” Kainthola told Mirror.



Stating that no prior notice to the administration was sent by the students, the director appealed the agitating students to call off the protest and resume their studies.


