Kota: Train gets delayed, exam aspirants create ruckus at Railway station

Hundreds of youths travelling to Kota from Jaipur by Kota–Jaipur passenger train to appear for lab assistant and reserve police force (RPF) exams in Kota created ruckus at Kesoraipatan railway station of Bundi district on late Sunday morning.

The aspirants halted the passenger train for about half an hour. Angry over the delay in train’s arrival, the aspirants came on the track demanding re–examination and protested against the railway administration.

The local police and GRP from Kota rushed to the spot and convinced the protesting youths following which they agreed to leave the track and allowed the train to move on. The police did not lodged any case in this connection.

The examinations for reserve police force and lab assistants were scheduled to start in centers at Kota from 11 am to 2 pm and the Kota- Jaipur passenger train which was scheduled to reach Kota at 6 o’clock in the morning. However, the train got delayed and reached Keshoraipatan railway station at around 11 pm which was about over four hours delay forcing the aspirants to miss their respective exams.

Hundreds of youths travelling from Jaipur to Kota by Kota-Jaipur passenger train then created ruckus at Keshoraipatan railway station as the train stopped, said circle in charge at Keshoraipatan police station Abhishek Pareek said.

The aspirants alleged that they failed to reach the examination centers on time due to delay in train’s arrival at Kota.

The angry aspirants came on the railway track protesting against the railway administration and halted the train for about half an hour, the CI said.

The aspirants did not damage the railway property and were pacified after they were convinced by police and GRP personnel, said a GRP personnel at Kota. GRP has not lodged any case in this connection, he further added.

FAIL TO WRITE EXAM

The examinations for reserve police force and lab assistants were scheduled to start in centers at Kota from 11 am to 2 pm and the Kota- Jaipur passenger train which was scheduled to reach Kota at 6 o’clock in the morning. However, the train got delayed and reached Keshoraipatan railway station at around 11 pm which was about over four hours delay forcing the aspirants to miss their respective exams.
