CAA Protests: Entry, Exit Gates Of Several Delhi Metro Stations Closed

New Delhi:

Entry and exit gates of several metro stations have been closed in view of a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act. "Entry and exit gates of Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Chandni Chowk and Vishwavidyalaya are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations," the DMRC tweeted. Gates of Jamia Millia Islamia, Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh, and Munirka were also closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations, it said. Now, entry and exit gates of Vasant Vihar and Mandi House are also closed.

"Entry and exit gates of Patel Chowk, Lok Kalyan Marg, Udyog Bhawan, ITO, Pragati Maidan and Khan Market are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations," DMRC said in another tweet.

Meanwhile, Delhi Police has imposed prohibitory orders under CrPC Section 144 near Red Fort amid protest against the amended Citizenship Act. The prohibitory orders have been imposed as two rallied are scheduled to be held in the national capital today, from the iconic Red Fort and Mandi House. The city police on Wednesday denied permission to Left-backed students' body AISA and Swaraj Abhiyan to hold a protest march citing law and order issues, officials said.

DMRC: Entry & exit gates of Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Chandni Chowk and Vishwavidyalaya are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations. https://t.co/6EFy6nChIp — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

"Permission has not been granted for the march to be held under the banner of 'Hum Bharat Ke Log' against Citizenship Ammendment Act from Lal Quila to Shaheed Bhagat Singh Park (ITO)," Delhi Police said.

However, a functionary of the All India Students' Association (AISA) said the group will go ahead regardless. The permission for the protest march was denied due to law and order and traffic issues, the police said.

The march will commence from Red Fort and culminate at Shaheed Park near ITO. Other civil society groups will also take part in it, the AISA functionary said.

"December 19 is the martyrdom day of (freedom fighters) Ram Prasad Bismil and Ashfaqullah Khan. We will unite on the special day to resist CAA and also raise our voice against the police brutality in Jamia and AMU campuses," the AISA functionary said.

Hundreds, including students, were injured as protesters clashed with police during protests against the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) near Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia University and in Uttar Pradesh's Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) on Sunday.

With PTI Inputs
