Capital flare-up: Anti-CAA protests grip Delhi

Largely peaceful protests against the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) turned violent in Delhi late on Friday evening. Protesters pelted stones and torched a car in front of a police station near Delhi Gate in Delhi's Daryaganj.

The walled city became the epicentre of the protest as a large number of people held a massive protest around the Jama Masjid after the Friday prayers at the mosque, defying prohibitory orders and police clampdown.

They were supported by the Bhim Army chief, Chandrashekhar Azad alias Ravan. Delhi Police used water cannon and resorted to lathicharge to control the protesters.

Delhi Police claimed to have detained 40 persons for setting vehicles on fire and pelting stones at the police personnel. The car was torched in front of central districts DCP office. The road leading to Jama Masjid was littered with footwear and stones as police chased away the protesters from the area. At least 15 protesters were injured during the lathicharge and two of them were taken to nearby LNJP hospital for treatment.

Police personnel use water cannons to douse a burning vehicle torched allegedly by protesters at Daryaganj in Delhi on Friday. (Photo: Pankaj Nangia/Mail Today)

Mandeep Singh Randhawa, the DCP of central district and PRO of Delhi police, one of its joint commissioners and several other personnel sustained injuries during the stone-pelting incident.

"The situation is by and large peaceful in the area. Some of the fringe elements have pelted stones and set vehicles on fire. Subsequently, we have dispersed them with the use of force in order to bring the situation under control. We will not allow people to take law in their hands," Randhawa said on Friday.

CALL FOR PEACE, HARMONY

An announcement was made from a nearby mosque in Delhi Gate hours before the violence broke out, urging people to maintain peace and go back home as they had already expressed their anguish over the new law. The protest on Friday was centralised in Old Delhi. Azad, who also met Shahi Imam, was seen at gate number 1 of the iconic place of Delhi, holding a poster of BR Ambedkar. After a meeting with Imam, Azad, in a tweet had said that he will never allow the Narendra Modi government to change the Constitution. He was later detained by the Delhi Police.

The Congress general secretary, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, accompanied by her daughter Miraya, joined the protesters at the India Gate lawns on Friday evening. This is the second time in the week that the Congress leader has protested against the new law, at the India Gate. The Delhi Mahila Congress chief and former President Pranab Mukherjee's daughter, Sharmistha, and some other members of the party were detained near the residence of the Union Home Minister, Amit Shah, during a protest against the new legislation.

Delhi Police had a tough time as the situation remained tense in Northeast Delhi's Seelampur, and Shaheen Bagh. "We are monitoring the entire area through drone cameras to identify goons," said AK Thakur, DCP of south district.

Prohibitory orders were imposed in 12 police station areas of Northeast Delhi, officials said, adding police used drones to keep a tab on the law and order situation in the district.

(With agency inputs)
