Five dead in UP as anti-CAA protests turn violent

Five people were killed in Uttar Pradesh on Friday as anti-Citizenship Amendment Act demonstrations turned into violent clashes between police and protesters in several districts of western and eastern UP and a few places in Maharashtra , leading to arsons, stone pelting and lathi-charging . Additional chief secretary of UP Avanish Awasthi confirmed the deaths to ANI news agency. Internet service was suspended in at least 15 districts of the state, including state capital Lucknow, even as prohibitory provisions under Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code remained applicable in the entire state.A day after violent protests led to one death in Lucknow, more towns including Gorakhpur, Bulandshahr, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Bhadohi, Firozabad, Kanpur, Bahraich and Jaunpur witnessed violent agitations against CAA and the proposed NRC, with angry mobs burning vehicles and pelting stones. The situation got particularly tense in Bulandshahr and Firozabad. A police van was torched in Bulandshahr while Firozabad saw the torching of seven motorcycles. The events on Friday unfolded a day after the state capital Lucknow saw massive outburst leading to destruction of public property and death of one.State DGP OP Singh said there could be “outsiders” involved in the violence in Lucknow on Thursday. “We have indication that some people came from places like Barabanki and Bahraich,” Singh told PTI. “Some were speaking Bengali and it will be found out if they came from West Bengal. In Kanpur, police had resorted to preventive arrests and keeping an eye on “anti-social elements” even as around 8,000 police personnel were deployed to keep law and order situation under control. “We had reached out to imams and maulvis in mosques to intimate people to remain calm and not indulge in violence and go straight home after the Friday prayers,” a senior police official of Kanpur said. “We had deployed force at strategic locations and used Aerostag (drone) to monitor locations.”Police had reached out to Muslim clerics in many towns to ask citizens to exercise restraint and abide by the limitations of Section 144 that prohibits gathering of four or more people in an area. “We tried to contain a protest march since section 144 was in place. When they did not adhere to our instructions, we used force which led to stone pelting from their side,” a police official in Bhadohi said. Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray has appealed for peaceful protests as cases of vandalism were reported in at least three places in the state even as several towns saw massive anti-CAA protests for the second consecutive day. In Beed, a march turned violent near Shivaji Chowk when the mob went on a rampage. At least three policemen were injured and three buses damaged in the stone pelting. It took the police more than an hour and a 'light' lathi charge to bring the situation under control. Local residents, though, said the situation is tense due to fake messages being circulated in the Maratha community that a Shivaji statue was damaged by the protesters. The Beed administration has requested for more police personnel to be rushed to prevent further violence. Parbhani and Hingoli — both communally sensitive zones in the Marathwada region — also saw agitations against CAA turning violent. In Hingoli, protesters attacked state transport buses and resorted to stone throwing against police personnel.They also tried to set one of the buses on fire. There were massive but peaceful demonstrations in Bhiwandi , Aurangabad, Pune and other locations. BJP and affiliated outfits carried out counter protests in favour of CAA in Solapur, Nashik and Jalgaon. The chief minister appealed for calm. “The CAA is being challenged in the courts,” he said in the state assembly on Friday.
