Bengaluru: Miscreants attack CPI office, torch six bikes

5 held for trying to block BSY’s convoy

BENGALURU: Miscreants attacked the Communist Party of India’s Karnataka headquarters in Vyalikaval, near Malleswaram, past Tuesday midnight and torched six motorcycles of workers parked on the premises.The CPI has alleged that right-wing activists were involved in the arson. Police sources said the incident took place around 1.30am Wednesday when a man entered the compound of Ghate Bhavan, the CPI state office, and set the bikes and office godown on fire before running away.CPI members, including state executive committee member Shivaraj Biradar, were sleeping on the first floor and the guard was asleep on the ground floor. The guard woke up to the stench of the smoke and rushed out to find the bikes in flames.He woke up CPI members of the building. They doused the fire with water from the overhead tank. Two bikes were gutted and others partially damaged. Party posters in the godown were reduced to ashes.A video of a man walking into the CPI office compound and setting the bikes on fire has gone viral. The accompanying post said the arson was to avenge the left workers move to stop Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa’s convoy in Kerala.Following a complaint from the CPI state unit, Vyalikaval police registered case under IPC sections 427 (mischief causing damage), 447 (punishment for criminal trespass), 444 (lurking house-trespass by night) and 435 (mischief by fire or explosive substance).Deputy police commissioner (central) Chetan Singh Rathor said they are looking into all angles, including whether arson was a response to Tuesday’s incident where leftwing students tried to block Yediyurappa’s car in Kerala. Biradar alleged four people came on two Royal Enfield Bullets and one entered the office premises to set the bikes on fire. CPI state secretary Sathi Sundaresh said, “We’ve staged protests against central policies like CAA and NRC, and we will continue to do so. Those offended by it may have burnt the bikes. All the bikes belonged to our party workers.”Five members of the ruling CPI(M) and Congress youth wing in Kerala have been arrested for protests targeting Karnataka chief minister BS Yediyurappa’s convoy on Tuesday. They waved black flags, chanted slogans and tried to block his car. Yediyurappa had travelled to Kerala to visit temples. The group tried to block Yediyurappa’s convoy to protest what they called were illegal detention of Kerala journalists in Mangaluru last week.
