India lodges protest against Hafiz Saeed's anti-India rally in Lahore

India lodged a strong protest with Pakistan over an anti-India rally organised by UN designated terrorist and 26/11 mastermind Hafiz Saeed in Lahore on February 5, marking 'Kashmir Solidarity Day'.

On Wednesday, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) issued a note verbale to the Pakistan High Commission in New Delhi and registered India's strong protest at the "continued use of Pakistan controlled territory by extremist and terrorist elements" to freely "propagate" and "promote" violence and terror against India.

The note sent to the Pakistan mission read, "The Ministry registers its strong protest at the continued use of Pakistan controlled territories by extremists and terrorist elements to freely propagate and promote violence and terror against India. Government of India once again calls upon government of Pakistan to fulfil its international obligations and abide by its bilateral commitment to not allow any territory under its control to be used for terrorism against India, in any manner."

On Tuesday, UN designated terrorist Hafiz Saeed, chief of banned terrorist outfit Jamaat-ud-Dawa, addressed a rally, urging his followers to stand up against India's alleged "crackdown on Kashmiris".

The Ministry drew reference to reports in Pakistani media about the address in Lahore on February 5 by Hafiz Saeed and so called "Amir" of Jamaat-ud-Dawa, alias Lashkar-e-Taiba, a UN designated and internationally prescribed terrorist group, advocating violence and terror against India.

India, on numerous occasions, has raised the issue of Hafiz Saeed roaming freely in Pakistan. And despite all the overtures of peace by the Pakistani leadership, these actions expose Pakistan's duplicity, an official told India Today TV.

In the recent past, Pakistani ministers have been seen sharing public space with Hafiz Saeed and other terrorists. In September 2018, Pakistan's Religious Affairs and Interfaith Minister Noor-ul-Haq Qadri shared a platform with Hafiz Saeed, with both making anti-India statements.

In December 2018, Pakistan's Minister of State for Interior Shehryar Khan Afridi had openly expressed support of his government to Hafiz Saeed and his terror outfit.
