T4 Tigress Dies After Getting Tranquilised By Untrained Professionals In Maharashtra

The Maharashtra forest department is once again in the news for its lack of preparedness when it comes to rescuing tigers. Last year, protests against ‘shoot-on-sight’ order of T1 tigress Avni by the Maharashtra government had rocked the nation.

Five-year-old tigress was declared a ‘man-eater’ by the government and was ultimately killed by controversial shooter- Shafath Ali Khan’s son named Asghar Ali. In the most recent incident, an injured T4 tigress has died in a failed attempt of tranquilisation by Maharashtra forest personnel.

The tigress was frail and weak when she was tranquilised, local media reported. The incident took place in Tipeshwar wildlife sanctuary (180 km from Pandharkawada) and is reported to be the sixth such incident in the state since January this year.

Photo: BCCL/T1 Tigress Avni

The tigress was first spotted on September 11, 2017 with a nylon rope in her neck. It was observed in the sanctuary area during night till May 05, 2018 after which she wasn’t sighted. After 18 months, the tigress was seen again on Saturday. The fresh camera trap images revealed that the tigress was really weak.

On Sunday evening, the tigress was seen again and in a haste operation, the forest department attempted to tranquilise her. Without the presence of any senior forest officials, a Livestock Development Officer (LDO) Dr Udarraj Nakade from Jamb, eight guides and a driver named Suraj Mahakulkar attempted to catch T4.

The guides tried to capture T4 using a net when she attacked two guides named Irfan Sheikh and Ashwin Bakamwar. Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) Pramod Panchbhai told TOI, “Her reflexes were weak and movement was sluggish. Hence, we decided to dart the animal so that it can be treated. Dr Nakade prepared the dart and Mahakulkar fired it at 6.30pm.”

Photo: BCCL/Representative Image

It is believed that the wild cat died of a drug overdose. Before an animal is tranquilised, its body weight has to be assessed however, that wasn’t done in the current situation. The driver fired two darts at the tigress who is not a trained professional.

Such operations need a skilled team comprising wildlife managers, biologists, trained veterinarians, and most preferably an individual specializing in animal anaesthesia. However, the Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) Panchbhai defended the driver’s actions by saying that he used to get training at base camps.

He argued that T4 was so serious that it would have died the following day and he was guiding the team along their way to the sanctuary, though he wasn’t present at the spot. The DFO added that the snare around her neck had caused a lot of injury and it was infested with maggots.

The incident reminded the killing of T1 tigress Avni which had created a lot of controversy over alleged violation of standard operating protocol. It was alleged that no attempts were made to tranquilise her and she was directly shot at from a very close distance. Moreover, the veterinary drugs were handled by non-professionals.
