Silent protest planned on June 15 to highlight elder abuse

To mark World Elder Abuse Awareness Day on June 15; Elders Mela on June 16

Senior citizens will stage a silent demonstration at Necklace Road near Imax Circle here on June 15 to focus on the harassment and discrimination of the elderly on the occasion of World Elder Abuse Awareness Day.

According to national survey, about 90% of senior citizens were being victimised either by their own family members or by the society, said Elders Club International Foundation secretary general Mandadi Krishna Reddy. The silent protest will be held from 7.30 a.m to 9.30 a.m on Saturday.

On June 16, the foundation will organise Elders Mela 2019, a fun-filled activity from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. at A.V. College, Domalguda, where thousands of senior citizens from both Telugu States are expected to participate. The event will be marked by mega health camps, health talks, seminars, games and sports, yoga, meditation and cultural programmes and exhibition.

‘Pada Puja’ will be performed to those who have completed 100 years and mega joint families with not less than 20 members in the family would be felicitated. A matrimonial meet will also be organised for senior citizens in the age group of 50 to 80 years interested in getting married.

Several NGOs and three government departments have extended their cooperation to the Elders Mela and with the help of GHMC and TSRTC, free bus services will be provided on June 15 from 7.30 a.m from different parts of the city to Necklace Road to enable the elderly to reach the venue for the silent protest and also on June 16 to take them the Elders Mela venue.

Three generations of a family can participate in the mela on June 16, Mr. Krishna Reddy said.

Justice Chandraiah, honorary chairman of the foundation, said the elderly were facing rejection not only within their own families but even the government and society was being indifferent to their plight. The UN passed a resolution in 2011 to observe World Elder Abuse Awareness Day to focus on the problems and neglect being faced by them and create awareness that the elders should be treated with respect and love.

Mr. Prashant Reddy of Anvaya, an NGO for senior citizens, said they were extending services to over 700 families and also to cities like Bangalore and Chennai. He said if children do not take care of the elders personally or make arrangements to look after them, it would be considered abuse of elders.

Former Chief Minister and Governor Rosaiah, Deputy Chief Minister Mahmood Ali, Minister Koppula Eshwar, Mayor Bonthu Rammohan, GHMC Commissioner Dana Kishore and other senior bureaucrats and representatives of senior citizens’ associations are scheduled to participate in the event.

More details can be sought on 83096-34283.
