EXPOSED! Woman who accused TV actor Karan Oberoi of rape arrested for pressing false allegations

Woman who accused Karan Oberoi arrested | Photo Credit: Instagram

While most of us believe that the #MeToo movement is quite the need of the hour. There are also a few who are misusing the movement for their own selfish needs. Like in the case of TV actor Karan Oberoi. As per the latest report, the Mumbai Police has confirmed that the woman who had accused Karan of rape and extortion has been arrested over false allegations and helping orchestrate an attack on herself shortly after the initial FIR was filed.

For those unaware, on May 6, 2019, the woman in question had filed an FIR against Karan Oberoi at Oshiwara Police Station in Mumbai under sections 376 (rape) and 384 (extortion). She alleged that he had duped her under the pretext of marrying her and had raped her, filmed the act and threatened to release the video unless she paid him the money he demanded. That's not all. On May 25, she had also informed the police of being attacked by two men on a bike who slashed her with a paper cutter, threatened to throw acid on her and left a paper chit which read "take back the case".

However, all of this now turns out be a well-planned conspiracy by this woman, to defame Karan Oberoi. On May 27, the police nabbed the youths involved in the attack, with one of them revealing that it was a pre-planned conspiracy. One of the men, who is the cousin of the woman's lawyer, said that he was paid Rs 10,000 to carry out the attack. Woman's lawyer too has surrendered to the cops, admitting that the woman had hired his cousin for the attack.

The woman however is yet to plead guilty despite all evidences proving against her. She has refuted the allegations and said that she has written to the commissioner and the Oshiwara police claiming innocence. She also accused her lawyer of framing her.

Meanwhile, Karan Oberoi along with many other actors and men activists participated in a peaceful Dharna at Azad Maidan yesterday for voicing their support in the #MenToo movement. The purpose of this gathering was to spread awareness about the misuse of law and falsely accusing men of rape and other charges.

It's left to see what turn does this case take hereafter. Keep watching this space as we bring you more updates.
