Gaya police arrest lover of man who butchered his minor daughter, claim she aided with disposal of body

The 16-year-old's body was retrieved on January 6 (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Patna: A little over a fortnight after her beheaded body was recovered from near her residence on January 6, new developments have emerged in the murder case of a 16-year-old who hailed from the weaver's community in Bihar's Gaya district. Protests had erupted after police deemed this as a case of 'honour killing' and arrested the victim's father and one of his friends for the crime.

Police officials on Tuesday arrested a 35-year-old woman who they claim were engaged in an illicit relationship with the victim's father and his friend who has been arrested for murder. The woman told a section of the press that her paramour confessed to murdering the girl after she found out about the affair.

Bihar: A 16-year-old girl was allegedly gang-raped and killed in Gaya's Patwatoli on 12 January. Police say "A detailed investigation will be done based on all inputs. Everything is being verified. We will uncover the truth soon." pic.twitter.com/WX0dF9k3gr — ANI (@ANI) January 13, 2019

They hatched a plan to murder the girl due to fear of her exposing the illegitimate relationship between her father, his friend and me, the woman told police officials. A report by Times of India asserts that the 35-year-old is a mother of three.

Gaya Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Rajiv Mishra told the national daily that the investigation into the girl's brutal murder has reached a point where investigators have established the identity of the killer and the exact spot where the heinous crime was committed. Referring to the arrest of the 35-year-old woman, Mishra said that they have reason to believe that she may have aided the prime accused, the girl's father, in disposing of the body.

A resident of Patwatoli, the 16-year-old victim's decomposing body was recovered from near her residence in Bihar's Gaya district on January 6. She had been missing since December 28. She was beheaded and there were deep cuts on her chest. However, an autopsy report had ruled out sexual assault.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: WATCH - Chennai on high alert after 5 sensational murders in 24 hours
