Mumbai police to issue look out notice; Binoy trying for anticipatory bail

Kannur: Mumbai police are likely to issue a look out notice for Binoy Kodiyeri, accused in a sexual assault case filed by a Bihari woman. In the wake of the complaint, Binoy went absconding. Thus, police are planning to issue a look out notice. Reports said that Binoy might approach the Mumbai Sessions Court for anticipatory bail on Friday.

A rape and sexual abuse case was filed against Binoy at Oshiwara police by a Bihar native woman who was working in a dance bar in Dubai. In the complaint, she said Binoy cheated her after promising to marry and she has an eight-year-old son in this relation. However, Binoy responded that the complaint was fake and it was an attempt to blackmail him.

Based on the complaint, Oshiwara police in Mumbai registered a case against Binoy. Following that she gave statement to police and the recording of statement lasted for two hours.

The woman had submitted documents and evidences to prove their relationship. However, Binoy filed a counter petition with Kannur police stating that the documents she submitted were forged. Owing to this, Mumbai police had interrogated her. An affidavit of their marriage on October 18, 2009 according to Hindu Marriage Act, attested by a notary, an advertisement given on January 1, 2015 in Free Press Journal newspaper to change name, details related to the birth of their son and passport details are the evidences she had submitted to police.

The documents she submitted are from a period when the two lived together at Preetham Cooperative Housing Society in Malad West. She was living at Meera Tower near Oshiwara in Andheri West when Binoy used to send an amount through ICICI bank for her daily expenses. Police also received evidences that he had lived with the woman for many days every month during this period. Images of Binoy with woman and child, and images of Binoy bathing the child were also submitted.

Police have also began investigation over the sharing of images of the woman with a Bhojpuri actor. These images started doing rounds in social media after the case came up. Mumbai police said that case will be registered against those who share the images.

Meantime, Binoy has begun attempts for anticipatory bail with the help of a famous criminal lawyer in Mumbai. He is expeced to submit the anticipatory bail plea at Mumbai Sessions Court on Friday.
