A year after Kerala SFI member Abhimanyu’s murder, father alleges laxity in probe

A year after Kerala SFI member Abhimanyu’s murder, father alleges laxity in probe

Abhimanyu’s brother, meanwhile, stated that his family had complete faith in the party and believed they would nab all accused.

news Probe

Family members of Abhimanyu, the slain SFI student of Maharaja’s college, have expressed concerns over the investigation of the case. One year into Abhimanyu’s death, the police have not nabbed all the accused in the case.

According to reports, Abhimanyu’s father Manoharan demanded that all the accused be tracked down and arrested. He also wrote that some of the accused are said to have fled to other countries and that he was unaware of the status of the investigation.

He also complained that the police was not responding when they tried to contact them and that a response from the minister is expected.

Clearing the air on any blame on the party or government, Abhimanyu’s brother Parijit Manoharan wrote a post on his brother’s death on Facebook:

“When our party and government are going to take legal action against the forces that have eliminated Abhimanyu, some are deliberately trying to undermine the movement which he loved the most. Today we have a nice house to sleep in, a library in his name and our sister’s wedding was conducted spectacularly. All this was possible because of the party.”

“We all know that the majority of the accused were caught by the police and booked under non-bailable sections. We all have seen the court rejecting bail to the accused. We do not believe that the police are deliberately trying to let the other accused persons escape. We have complete faith that they will nab all the accused soon,” he wrote.

He also added that his family believed in the party and had a good sense that the party leaders will not abandon them.

Abhimanyu, a 20-year old BSc Chemistry student in Maharaja’s college was stabbed to death in July 2018 during a clash between SFI students and Campus Front of India (student wing of PFI) inside the college. The incident was triggered by an argument over sticking posters on the walls of the campus to welcome freshers.
