Delhi: Doctors of Bara Hindu Rao Hospital stage strike after attack by patient's kin

Meanwhile, the woman succumbed and the family was informed by an intern. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Days after nation-wide doctors' strike condemning attacks on medicos, doctors have staged a strike at the Bara Hindu Rao Hospital in the national capital on Monday. Following a clash that broke out between doctors and relatives of a patient on Saturday night, the doctors have decided to boycott all services.

To condemn such repeated incidents of attacks, the doctors had gone a similar strike earlier in June. The resident doctors have boycotted the emergency ward services and the out-patient department (OPD). Mirror Now reported the doctors are demanding a written assurance from the authorities and a permanent deployment of police officials in the hospital premises.

An eye-witness doctor, told Mirror Now that a 49-year-old woman was suffering from chronic kidney disease and she knew that they were late for arriving at the hospital. The woman was given primary care and was incubated and later she was referred to medical emergency. Meanwhile, the woman succumbed and the family was informed by an intern. After which the woman's family and relatives began attacking the hospital staff.

Delhi: Resident doctors of Hindu Rao Hospital are on a strike since yesterday, alleging that attendants of a patient assaulted a doctor there on Saturday. Doctors say that only emergency services will be operational. pic.twitter.com/oyXdhF3jg4 — ANI (@ANI) July 1, 2019

Reportedly, two doctors named as Rajesh Kumar and Pranay were allegedly beaten up by the relatives of the deceased woman on Saturday. The police officials said that chronic kidney failure patient, Rajbala, a resident of Roop Nagar was admitted in critical condition in the casualty ward of Hindu Rao Hospital on Saturday at around 11.40 pm but she died during the treatment.

Following this incident, the woman's husband, son and other relatives began arguing with doctors. Meanwhile, the deceased's son slapped one of the resident doctors. Soon after a scuffle broke and two doctors were injured. However, a case was registered against the deceased's relatives based on the complaint of Dr Jagmohan from the hospital's human resource wing.

Meanwhile, the deceased's relatives of Rajbala submitted a written complaint, alleging negligence by the hospital staff and delay in treatment by the doctors resulting in her death. The body has been sent to the mortuary for post-mortem and the autopsy report will ascertain the claims of negligence.
