Delhi communal tension: 3 arrested, including a minor, for vandalising temple in Chawri Bazar’s Hauz Qazi

Communal tension in Delhi's Hauz Qazi area | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The Delhi Police on Tuesday made three arrests in connection with the communal clashes that rocked an area in central Delhi on Sunday night. Among the three arrested is a minor.

The clashes had broken out late on Sunday night in Hauz Qazi area in Chawri Bazaar’s Lal Kuan locality between groups belonging to two communities over a parking issue. The issue took a communal turn after a temple was vandalised.

Union Minister and Chandni Chowk MP Dr Harsh Vardhan today visited the affected area, security was beefed up in view of the clashes. The police had appealed to the people to maintain peace and restore normalcy in the area.

Dr Vardhan described the incident as “unfortunate” and stated that those behind vandalism at a temple will be punished.

“It is very unfortunate and painful. The kind of thing done to the temple is unforgivable. I have been told that the police is already in action. Culprits will be arrested soon and punished. I appeal to the people to maintain harmony,” the Union minister stated.

Delhi: Union Minister & Chandni Chowk MP, Dr Harsh Vardhan visited Hauz Qazi area this morning, where a clash broke out between 2 groups over parking, and a temple was vandalised in the locality on Sunday night. Security in the area has been tightened. pic.twitter.com/HIj3WY8rvB — ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

As per news agency PTI, the incident happened on Sunday night when a person named Aas Mohammad (20) was parked his scooter outside a residential building. Sanjeev Gupta, who owns a house in the building and runs an eatery stall there, raised objections, eye-witnesses said.

According to Gupta's wife Babita, Mohammad left the site immediately but then came back with more men. Babita said the men appeared to be "drunk" and thrashed her husband.

However, another local Saqib (27), a software engineer by profession, narrated a different version of the events and said it was Mohammad who was beaten up. He said, “When Mohammad was beaten up, he and his other family members went to police station and filed a case."

Later, a video emerged on social media that purportedly showed a man allegedly being thrashed by some people, who appeared to be drunk, over a parking matter.

"When Mohammad parked his scooter, Gupta asked him to move it somewhere else or he will set it on fire. Thereafter, a quarrel broke out and Gupta, along with some other person, took Mohammad inside the building and beat him up," Aqib Hassan (25), another local, was quoted as saying by the news agency.

As the two indulged in a fight, locals called the police and both Mohammad and Gupta were taken to the police station.

"When Mohammad and Gupta were at the police station, some unknown people gathered outside the temple and vandalised it. This led to tension in the area," Saqib claimed.

The temple is situated near Gupta’s residence, on the Durga Mandir Street.

"A mob came to the temple last night around 12 am. They vandalised the temple and left the place," temple priest Anil Kumar Pandey said.

The report said the vandals damaged the temple’s shutter and also defaced some idols.

"After some altercation & scuffle over a parking issue in Hauz Qazi, tension arose b/w two groups of people from different communities. We have taken legal action & all efforts are being made to pacify feelings & bring about amity. People are requested to help in restoring normalcy (sic)," Deputy Commissioner of Police (Central), Mandeep Singh Randhawa, said on Monday.

In total, the police filed three separate cases. While one was filed basis Mohammad's statement, the other case is based on Gupta’s statement. The third case was registered against unknown persons for rioting and damaging public property.
