Thane: Woman stabbed to death by bike-borne assailants, incident captured on CCTV

The whole incident was captured in a CCTV camera installed in the APMC market. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Police identified accused from victim's cell phone Police say murder appears to be a case of a soured romantic relationship

Thane: In yet another case of crime against women, a 24-year-old woman from Ulhasnagar was stabbed to death by bike-borne assailants at APMC market in Kalyan. Police have arrested one person in connection with the murder.

The woman was murdered when she was waiting for someone at the market. The bike-borne assailants stabbed the woman multiple times. The victim was immediately rushed to Fortis hospital where she was declared brought dead.

According to a report, the whole incident was captured in a CCTV camera installed in the APMC market premises. The police managed to reach Dhake after checking into the victim's phone.

The footage shows the woman standing near a 'scooty' as two men on a bike approach her. The assailants stab her multiple times and fled the spot.

The police arrested the accused within an hour of the murder. The police are now hunting for another accused who was the main rider of the bike.

According to Assistant Commissioner of Police Anil Powar (Kalyan Region), prima-facie the murder appears to be a case of the love affair, but an investigation is underway in the case.

According to police, the accused Babu Dhakne said he was in love with the victim, but he decided to kill her after she refused to divorce her husband and marry him. Dhakne also hails from Ulhasnagar. Additional Commissioner of Police Dattatrey Karale, said they have formed a crack team to nab the other accused.

Also Read: Jilted lover posts morphed pictures of ex-girlfriend on social media to avenge break-up

In a similar case, on May 17, a jilted lover allegedly raped and attacked a woman with acid after she allegedly expressed her wish to end their relationship. The incident was reported from Shahjahanpur in Uttar Pradesh. The accused, who had been dating the woman for the past five years, asked her to meet him at an orchard where he allegedly raped her. When she protested and told him that she wanted to end the relationship, he threw acid on her.

Jilted lover runs over woman and her mother with his car

A man allegedly ran over a woman and her mother more than once and stoned them to death in Rajasthan's Jodhpur district on May 10 after her marriage was fixed with someone else. The accused, Sukharam, jumped into a canal after the incident near Tiwari village of Osian area in the afternoon. Prima facie, it appears that Sukharam had a relationship with the woman and wanted to marry her. But the victim's mother fixed her marriage somewhere else, said Deputy Commissioner of Police (East) Dharmendra Singh.
