Free at last! After 41 years of legal battle over Rs 20, MP man cleared by court

In April 2019, he was arrested by the police and he was in jail from the last three months. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Ismail Khan, a resident of Gwalior was accused of theft in 1978 The complainant stated, incident happened when they were standing in a queue to purchase a bus ticket.

Bhopal: After a 41-year legal battle, a man was released of the charges levelled against him in a Lok Adalat held in Gwalior district of Madhya Pradesh. The man was accused of theft of Rs 20 in 1978.

This man was identified as Ismail Khan, a resident of Gwalior. Judicial magistrate of first class, Anil Kumar ordered to release the accused on Saturday. The court took an undertaking from Khan to not indulge in any kind of illegal activities in future. The complainant in the case was identified as Babulal, who is now 61-year-old, claimed that Ismail had stolen Rs 20 from his pocket in 1978, who is now 68-year-old. He stated the incident happened when both of them were standing in a queue to purchase a bus ticket.

According to a report, the complainant said that he had registered a case against Khan in 1978 and he was released after a few days on bail. Post-2004 Khan stopped coming to the court hearings and eventually, the court issued him a warrant. In April 2019, he was arrested by the police and he was in jail from the last three months.

Babulal further mentioned that Khan does not have any family and his financial condition was bad, he had no money to file an application for his bail. However, the Judicial magistrate called both of them for a hearing in the Lok Adalat and he was released.

In another case reported from Madhya Pradesh

The state High Court granted permission to a gang-rape survivor to abort her nine-week-old foetus. The order was announced in May 2019. Responding to the writ petition filed by the 19-year-old woman, Justice Virender Singh, presiding over the vacation bench allowed the woman to terminate her unwanted pregnancy. The petitioner was permitted to approach the District Hospital, Dewas within a period of one week for termination of pregnancy, said Justice.

He further added that the DNA sample of the foetus can be preserved so that it can be used in the trial of the case. Meanwhile, the woman's advocate claimed that his client was in a mental shock after being gang-raped and she wanted to rid herself of the unwanted pregnancy. Keeping her future in mind and the young age, the advocate demanded permission to terminate this pregnancy.

Reportedly, the woman was allegedly abducted and raped by two men in the neighbouring Dewas district of the state. And a trial court in the district is currently hearing the case.
