Three minors arrested for sodomising two boys

assaults

Mumbai Police

complained

Indian Penal Code

Sexual Offences

Three minor boys have been arrested by thein two separate cases on charges of sodomising two underage teenagers. All the three accused have been sent to a remand home and are awaiting a hearing by the Juvenile Justice Board.The parents of the two victims – 11 and 13 year old – lodged a complaint with the police on July 8 following a visit to the doctor.The matter came to light after the boysof discomfort while passing stool. The older of the two victims, the 13-year-old boy, told the police that he had been sexually abused on multiple occasions – twice by two cousins.According to the police, a 15-year old and a 17-year-old boy abused the 13-year-old repeatedly taking advantage of the fact that they were neighbours. And since the boy hadn’t told anyone of the abuse, the 17-year-old’s cousin, who lived in the area, also forced himself on the boy. The younger of the two victims, the 11-year-old, fell prey to him only because he was with the older victim when the accused accosted him.The latest assault took place on July 3.“The parents had taken the boys to a doctor and the questions he asked made the kids speak of the abuse that took place on July 3,” said a police officer.“The kids told us that the accused took them home under the pretext of watching TV. There, he showed the kids porn and forced them to replicate what they saw,” added the police official.The accused had also threatened them against telling anyone about the assault and warned them that if they did, they would be thrashed by the older boys in the locality.Earlier, the police were informed only of the July 3 assault. But during the course of the investigation, the 13-yearold victim told the police that the accused had attacked him because he knew that his cousin and a friend of his had abused him. He was emboldened by the fact that he though the two got away with the assault.“Since he had not spoken to his parents about the earlier instances of abuse, the third accused might have thought of him as easy prey. Unfortunately, the younger kid was with him when he came looking for him,” said the official.Subsequently, the third accused was booked under sections 377 (molestation), 292 (possession of obscene material) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of, other than the provisions of Protection of Children from(POCSO) Act. The two other alleged abusers were booked separately for molestation under IPC 377 and POCSO.
