Cop shield for women in Odisha

BHUBANESWAR: The excitement of entering SKCG College at Paralakhemundi in Gajapati district had turned into a nightmare for Sarita Mohanty (name changed). She would dread to step into college with ruffians lurking outside all day long. Today as she looks back, she can’t thank the SHE Team of Gajapati Police enough for putting an end to her harrowing experience.Sanjukta Mandal (name changed), a teacher, in a private school at Jeypore in Koraput district , had a similar experience. Going to school was no less than running the gauntlet with goons waiting outside to assault her with their lewd remarks. With that experience behind her now, she says, “Had it not been for the timely intervention of the Anti-Romeo squad of Koraput Police, I would have quit teaching and perhaps left the town altogether.”Pragyan Mohanty (name changed), who had just started moving around in her scooty to run small errands, soon attracted unwanted attention from the goons of Sambalpur town. But before things could take an ugly turn, the WE (women empowerment) squad of Sambalpur Police came to her rescue. She now rides around the town without any fear.The SHE team, the Anti-Romeo and the WE squads --- the dedicated women safety wings of different police stations in the state --- have underscored the need to shift to new-age policing in the wake of rising instances of crimes against women in the state and elsewhere.These squads have been formed by police in the districts concerned by diverting their personnel from different police stations to carry out the tasks at hand. Though police stations are required to deal with all types of crimes, the dedicated wings have helped them undertake their routine jobs more effectively. These newly formed wings largely handle cases of eve-teasing, stalking and women harassment.“Though our officials were attending to distress calls from women earlier as well, the Anti-Romeo squad is handling such cases much more effectively. The results are for all to see. Incidents of harassment against women have come down drastically with the Anti-Romeo squad regularly patrolling schools, colleges, marketplaces, cinema halls and shopping centres in uniform and plainclothes,” SP (Koraput) Kanwar Vishal Singh claims.Currently, the Anti-Romeo squad is present only at Jeypore town in Koraput district. Launched in September last year, the squad has eight to 10 cops. It has registered 29 cases so far and arrested at least 25 persons for harassing girls and women. More than 400 speed bikes used by the miscreants were detained and fines imposed on the accused. “Our squad makes regular visits to educational institutions and makes students aware of women safety laws and penal provisions,” Singh says.In Sambalpur town, the WE squad has so far rounded up 103 persons since the programme’s launch in June last year. The SHE team, launched in June this year, has arrested at least eight persons for harassing women in Paralakhemundi. A number of suspects were let off following strict warning by the police.“We formed the SHE team as we had been receiving complaints of eve-teasing and stalking from Paralakhemundi town. This has helped check such incidents to a great extent,” says SP (Gajapati) Sarah Sharma, who also lent her voice to an Odia song in a bid to sensitise people to the safety of women.Students feel secure when dedicated police teams patrol their colleges several times a day. “Earlier, a number of youths would hang out in front of our college and pass comments on us. They have all disappeared now,” says Pragyan, a Plus III student.Lauding the women-friendly policing in different districts, director general of police RP Sharma, says, “We have been emphasising on women safety and encouraging SPs to take initiatives to create a safe ambience for women and children across the state,” he says.Women activists believe the dedicated policing schemes should continue and be replicated in other districts. “We had seen the launch of Mo Sathi mobile application, pink auto-rickshaw and self-defence training programmes by the commissionerate police for women in Bhubaneswar in 2014 and 2015. The initiatives are virtually defunct now,” says Sujata Nayak, a human rights campaigner. She also criticizes the police for the poor functioning of Mahila and Sishu desks in most police stations, especially in rural areas.Experts believe that the state government should make it mandatory for police in all districts to open cells dedicated to ensuring the safety of women. “Since the police stations often have shortage of staff, the government should sanction more posts for the smooth functioning of dedicated wings like the SHE team, the Anti-Romeo Squad and the WE Squad. A new fleet of patrolling vans should be introduced for strict vigilance on anti-socials in vulnerable pockets,” says senior lawyer Sidharth Das.Though this seems like a good start, it can make a perceptible change only if it expands to more districts and rural areas. For now at least, women who have suffered in silence can find solace in the fact that their muffled voices have been heard, at last.
