Report: HIV Positive Girl Child Abused In Odisha Shelter

A shelter for HIV positive girls in Kalahandi, Odisha, is being investigated after one of the inmates of the home accused its superintendent of sexual abuse. The 8-year-old’s mother accused Saroj Das of abusing her daughter and several other inmates, and soon local news channels picked up the story.

Then the district administration, police, Child Welfare Committee (CWC) and District Child Protection Unit (DCPU) of Kalahandi initiated a probe against the superintendent.



The 8-year-old child’s mother told authorities that she brought her daughter back home to Bolangir, after she told her about the alleged abuse she faced at the hands of Das. He was summoned by the police for questioning and denied all allegations. The superintendent said that it was a conspiracy to defame him. According to the latest report on the matter, Das has been arrested after his bail plea was rejected.

Another story of sexual assault

Both the young girl and Das were sent for medical examination and their statements recorded. The shelter in question, run by an NGO called Vision, has been shut down and its nine inmates, including 5 minor girls, have been moved to a new home.



The young girl who accused Das was brought to the shelter in 2016 and stayed there for almost two years. The child’s mother has alleged that her daughter’s abuse continued for over a year.



The alleged crimes against the minors come to light a year after the country was shocked by the Muzaffarpur shelter case. The shelter in Bihar was the scene of the sexual assault and murder of 11 girl children.

The common factor here is the underprivileged status of the minors who were preyed upon. The Kalahandi shelter’s inmates were further disadvantaged because these children were also HIV positive. They were removed from their family units, who could not provide adequate care to them. Then there is the fact that our society still treats its HIV positive members with great derision, and their status is used as an excuse to treat them as second class citizens.

Child sex abuse in India

The numbers make it clear that sexual assault against children is on the rise in India. This was made clear by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data that recorded 33,052 Cases, 38,172 cases, and 58,224 cases during 2011, 2012 and 2013 respectively.




