Protests held to demand justice for Unnao rape survivor

/news/india/protests-held-to-demand-justice-for-unnao-rape-survivor/eventshow/70464689.cms

01

Hundreds of people took to streets at several places to demand justice for Unnao rape survivor, who was critically injured in a road accident - Photogallery

Hundreds of people took to streets at several places to demand justice for Unnao rape survivor, who was critically injured in a road accident. Her family members also organised a protest outside King George's Medical University trauma center, where she is being treated. The family alleged conspiracy behind Sunday's car accident in which rape survivor and his lawyer were severely injured while her two aunts were killed. "Kuldeep Sengar should be punished as soon as possible and Mahesh Singh (uncle of the victim) should be released from jail," said one of the family members of the victim. Congress party workers also staged a protest outside the hospital, holding placards with a slogan "Mahilao ke sammaan mein, hum ab maidan mein'. Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) chief Swati Maliwal also met the Unnao rape survivor at a hospital in Lucknow and demanded both the lawyer and the victim should be airlifted and shifted to a hospital in Delhi. She also slammed the Centre and the state government for not removing Sengar from the post of an MLA. "The most shameful fact has been that till date Kuldeep Sengar happens to be an MLA. Both the Centre and the Uttar Pradesh government are not taking any actions against him. He should be immediately removed from his post. The girl and her lawyer who have sustained injuries should be airlifted and shifted to the best hospital in Delhi." The state police have already registered a murder case against BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, his brother Manoj Singh Sengar and eight others in connection with the road accident. Sengar is the prime accused in the rape case of the minor girl. He is a BJP MLA from Bangarmau in Unnao and was arrested by the CBI in April 2018. The teen was allegedly raped by the MLA at his residence in Unnao on June 4, 2017, where she had gone seeking a job. (BCCL)
