SC transfers all cases related to Unnao rape to Delhi, trial to be completed in 45 days

The CJI led Supreme Court bench on Thursday took strong stance on the Unnao rape case and subsequent related incidents along expected lines. Supreme Court said, "' Taking into account the ground stated in transfer petition, and letter to the CJI, we order the transfer of all the cases from the CBI court in UP to Delhi.'The designated judge in Delhi will commence the trial on day-to-day basis and complete the trial within 45 days".

Court ordered compensation of Rs 25 lakh for the victim to be paid by UP govt by tomorrow.In the accident case, Court directed CBI to complete it's investigation preferably within a week and avail of an extension of one week if needed. The Court ordered CRPF to provide security to the victim and her family from now. SC ordered enquiry into how there was a delay in processing the letter of Unnao rape victim to CJI and whether any negligence was there on part of any officer of SC Registry.

The enquiry will be held within seven days and will be supervised by a sitting judge of SC to be nominated by CJI.

Chief Justice of India, Ranjan Gogoi asked Solicitor General Tushar Mehta, 'How much time do you need (for investigating the accident of Unnao rape survivor & others)?' Solicitor General said, 'A month'. CJI replied 'A month? No, investigate in 7 days.'

The 5 cases are linked to the rape of the victim, gangrape of victim and her mother, false Arms Act case against victim's father, case to investigate the death of father in custody, and finally the accident in which two aunts of victim died leaving both victim and her lawyer battling for their life.

The Court remarked, "what is happening in this country. Is what has happened as per law?" The remark came after an SC official indicated that compensation to the victim must come from NALSA. Court indicated that state government will be required to pay exemplary compensation to the victim.

CBI Joint Director Sampat Meena was present in Court to assist the Solicitor General on the individual cases.

During the court proceedings, Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi also sought full details of investigation about the status in the rape case and accident of the victim and also asked the Solicitor General to interact with CBI Director regarding the cases.

Solicitor General Tushar Mehta pleaded the CJI to adjourn the case for tomorrow arguing that CBI officers who are investigating the matter are in Lucknow. Mehta told the apex court that he spoke to the CBI director and the officers investigating the Unnao cases, and added that it will not be possible for them to reach Delhi by 12 noon. However, CJI refused to adjourn the case.

Supreme Court said that if necessary, chamber hearing may take place.

On July 28, a truck rammed into the vehicle in which the Unnao rape survivor, her counsel and two aunts were travelling to Raebareli. While she and her lawyer sustained grievous injuries, her aunts were killed on the spot. The Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer, who is being treated at King George's Medical University are stable, the hospital said on Wednesday.

The Uttar Pradesh Police filed a case of murder against BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and nine others in connection with the accident. Probe in the case was transferred to the Central Bureau of Investigation on Tuesday after which the CBI registered a case in connection with the rape survivor's accident in Raebareli.

Sengar, a legislator from Bangermau in Unnao district, had allegedly raped the girl at his residence in Unnao on June 4, 2017, where she had gone to seek a job. He is currently lodged in Sitapur district jail. (ANI)



With ANI inputs
