Shah Rukh Khan, Aishwarya Rai to pay tribute to martyrs of Pulwama attack with a special song Tu Desh Mera

SRK, Aishwarya to shoot for special song Tu Desh Mera | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Shah Rukh Khan joins Aishwarya Rai, Ranbir Kapoor, and others for a special song Titled Tu Desh Mera the stars will pay tribute to martyrs of Pulwama attack The teaser of the song is all set to release on August 15

Bollywood biggies like Amitabh Bachchan, Aishwarya Rai, Shah Rukh Khan, Aamir Khan, Ranbir Kapoor, Tiger Shroff, Kartik Aaryan along with many others recently shot for the patriotic song titled Tu Desh Mera. The song is a tribute to all the heroes who lost their lives in the Pulwama attack. Over 40 CRPF jawans lost their lives when a suicide bomber attacked on their convoy of vehicles.

The tragic incident had shaken the entire nation, further intensifying the Indo-Pak tension. But keeping political matters aside, the Bollywood stars have decided to pay their tribute to the fallen heroes with a special song.

As per the ETimes report, while Aishwarya Rai, Amitabh Bachchan and others shot for the video before, SRK too joined in and shot for the video at a studio in Mumbai. The makers of the video were full of gratitude for the superstar of Bollywood. Shah Rukh shot for the 4-minute long sequence last week, mentioned the same report. The producers of the song followed up with SRK and after the song, the actor told them that he was glad to be part of the shoot.

We thank @iamsrk for his contribution in the tribute song by @HAPPYPRODINDIA #TuDeshMera dedicated to the Pulwama Martyrs. pic.twitter.com/PGiSifoRcX — CRPF (@crpfindia) August 14, 2019

We thank Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, @TheAryanKartik, and @iTIGERSHROFF for their contribution in the tribute song by @HAPPYPRODINDIA #TuDeshMera dedicated to the Pulwama Martyrs. pic.twitter.com/SXPN8c8bgW — CRPF (@crpfindia) July 13, 2019



As per Abhishek Mitra, MD of the Happy Productions, “To say that we were excited by the prospect of Shah Rukh Khan joining us for the video is an understatement. He was travelling that week and was quite busy. We are grateful that he took out the time to shoot for the video. We shot Shah Rukh’s part of the video at the Mehboob Studios in Mumbai after midnight.” Shah Rukh’s verse in the four-minute-long video sequence comprises of some emotional lines.

The teaser of the song was to be released on CRPF Day but was later postponed. Tu Desh Mera is now all set to release on August 15th - Independence Day while the release date of it not finalised yet.
