West Bengal: Ahead of PM Modi’s rally, BJP accuses TMC of replacing his banners with Mamata Banerjee’s posters

BJP has blamed TMC of replacing PM Modi's posters with Mamata Banerjee's banners | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: Ahead of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to Durgapur in West Bengal to address a mega public gathering, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) accused the Trinamool Congress (TMC) of putting up West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee’s posters above the banners of PM Modi. The saffron party is scheduled to hold rallies in North 24 Parganas and Durgapur on Saturday.

BJP workers have alleged that TMC supporters removed the hoarding and banners announcing the Prime Minister’s visit to the state. They also claimed that a makeshift welcome gate had also been pulled down, reports said.

Speaking on this, BJP National Secretary Rahul Sinha told news agency ANI, "Just 50-70 metres away from the meeting venue of PM Modi in Durgapur, WB CM Mamata Banerjee's posters are being put above PM's banners. This is proof there is no democracy in West Bengal.” Sinha also alleged that a BJP worker was also attacked after he protested against the TMC supporters vandalising the BJP posters. He said that a complaint had been filed with the police in connection with the incident.

Rahul Sinha, BJP: Just 50-70 metres away from the meeting venue of PM Modi in Durgapur, WB CM Mamata Banerjee's posters are being put above PM's banners. This is proof there is no democracy in West Bengal. When one of our workers protested against such activities he was attacked. pic.twitter.com/d21M4o3o4a — ANI (@ANI) February 1, 2019

As per news agency PTI, clashes broke out between the BJP and TMC workers in West Burdwan's Durgapur over the poster incident, with both parties claiming that their activists had been injured in the incident.

Meanwhile, Union Minister of State for Heavy Industries Babul Supriyo also claimed that TMC supporters had assaulted BJP workers and had replaced the saffron party's posters with those of Mamata Banerjee. He alleged that a "jungle raj" was prevalent in the state.

PM Modi is scheduled to address an event in Thakurnagar in North 24 Parganas, which has been organized by Matua Mahasangha, at around 12 pm. Following this, he will address a rally at the Nehru Stadium in Durgapur at 2 pm.

West Bengal: Crowds begin to gather at Thakurnagar for Prime Minister Narendra Modi's public rally scheduled to begin at 12pm pic.twitter.com/mrdUaakNTy — ANI (@ANI) February 2, 2019

At Durgapur, PM Modi is expected to launch a 300km-long electrified stretch of the Railways, consisting of the Andal-Sainthia-Pakur-Malda and the Khana-Sainthia sections. The Prime Minister is also scheduled to inaugurate the 20km-long Hijli-Narayangarh third line.


