Man lures 10-year-old with money, sexually abuses her; arrested by Rawalpindi Police

A complaint was registered against the accused at the Wah Cantt police station (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A six-year-old was allegedly sexually abused my a man in Pakistan's Wah Cantt area The accused was arrested after the parents of the minor lodged a complaint against the accused

Islamabad: A man was arrested by the Rawalpindi police on Sunday for allegedly sexually abusing a minor girl. Allegedly, the accused had lured the minor with a Rs 10 note and had taken her to an isolated spot. He has been identified as Younas.

The accused, Younas has been booked under Section 377 of the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC). A complaint was registered against the accused by the Wah Cantt police.

The accused lured the six-year-old with money and after taking her to an isolated spot in Simon area of Wah Cantt, he allegedly sexually abused her.

Following this, a complaint was registered with the police. When Faisal Rana, Director General of Rawalpindi City Police learned about the incident, he directed Syed Ali, Superintendent of Police (Potohar) to take immediate action against the accused and nab him at the earliest.

According to a report, a team comprising police officials was formed to arrest Younas. The police arrested him and the survivor was sent for a medical examination. Rawalpindi CPO has asked Ali to produce the accused in a court to ensure that "the accused can be punished in a way that would make him an example for society".

Man molests minor girls by luring them with chocolates

A similar incident came to light from Mumbai where a man was arrested for molesting minor girls. The accused allegedly used to lure the minors with chocolates and ice-creams. Identified as Sachin Anant Sharma, the accused was arrested after the police received a tip-off.

Sharma was arrested from his residence in Bhatwadi area of Ghatkopar. The incident came to light after the parents of a minor girl approached the police and lodged a complaint against the accused. In the complaint, the parents of the 10-year-old alleged that their child had been molested by the accused when she was returning from her dance class. Sharma had allegedly lured the minor with chocolate and had taken her to a secluded spot in Bhiwandi, following which, he molested her.

Sharma was forced to run from the spot after the minor started crying. A local rescued the 10-year-old and took her to her parents. The minor narrated her ordeal to her parents after which, a complaint was registered against Sharma. The police booked him under Section 354-B (assault or use of force with an intention to disrobe a woman) of Indian Penal Code ) and provisions of the POCSO Act.
