Indian girl kidnapped and gang-raped then has head shaved and marched through streets as PUNISHMENT

A young girl has been gang-raped until she lost consciousness, before having her head shaved and being paraded through her village as punishment.

Six men kidnapped the child when she went to the toilet and dragged her to the roof of a Panchayat building - a local self-government system in place in India.

Police said the girl was repeatedly raped by the men until she passed out in Gaya district of Bihar, east India, on August 14.

Six men kidnapped the child (stock pictured) when she went to the toilet and dragged her to the roof of a Panchayat building - a local self-government system in place in India

A villager saw her a day after the attack and told her family - who took her home.

But the Panchayat, which is reportedly under the influence of the accused's family, called for the girl to be punished.

She had her head shaved and was marched through the village.

A first information report was made at the local police station on Monday, 11 days after the rape.

Police reportedly only stepped in after the victim and her mother contacted the top officer in the district on Saturday.

Officer Niranjana Kumari said six people have been arrested.

A villager saw her a day after the attack and told her family - who took her home. But the Panchayat, which is reportedly under the influence of the accused's family, called for the girl to be punished. Pictured: A woman holds a banner which reads 'no means no' during a rally to remember a woman gang-raped in New Delhi in 2014

She said: 'All the five panchayat members, who held the meeting and ordered the punishment, have been named as accused in the case under the POCSO [Protection of Children from Sexual Offence] Act and have been detained.

'Besides, Devlal Yadav, who was identified by the survivor as one of the six accused of the gangrape, has also been detained.'

But Ravibhusan, who is Officer-Incharge at Mohanpur police station, added: 'The survivor has so far not been able to identify the rest of the accused in the gangrape case.'

Bihar Women Commission's Chairperson Dilmani Mishra said she had requested a report on the handling of the case.

She asked Gaya Senior Superintendent of Police for all the those in the Panchayat to be put before the Commission on September 2.
