India declares 4 as terrorists under new law

2008 Mumbai terror attack mastermind Hafiz Saeed and Jaish-e-Mohammed Chief Masood Azhar AFP

They were declared individual terrorists by the government under the UAPA Act, 1967, on Wednesday

The Union government in India has declared four most wanted men as terrorists under a new anti-terror law.

The four are: Dawood Ibrahim, Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, Zakir-ur-Rahman Lakhvi and Masood Azhar, reports India Today.

Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar and Lashkar-e-Taiba(LeT) founder Hafiz Muhammad Saeed were declared individual terrorists by the government under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 1967, on Wednesday.

The decisions have been taken nearly a month after Parliament approved a crucial amendment to the UAPA law.

Earlier, only groups or organizations could be declared as terrorists. But under the new amendments in the UAPA act, individuals can now be declared as terrorists.

"And whereas, the central government believes that Maulana MasoodAzhar and Hafiz Muhammad Saeed are involved in terrorism and they are to be notified as a terrorist under the said Act," a home ministry notification said.

The government has issued red corner notices against all four terrorists. The government has said more such names will be included in the list in the coming days.

Case against Masood Azhar

The ministry cited a series of terror acts in which Pakistan-based Azhar was involved that include an attack on the Jammu and Kashmir Assembly complex in 2001, attack on the parliament in 2001, attack on Pathankot airbase in 2016 attacks on BSF camp in Srinagar in 2017 and explosion of a CRPF bus at Pulwama on February 14.

It said Azhar was also designated as a global terrorist by the UN under the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1267 on May 1, 2019, and was declared as a proclaimed offender by the special judge (POTA), New Delhi.

Case against Hafiz Saeed

The home ministry said Saeed was involved in various attacks including on the Red Fort in 2000, a CRPF camp in Rampur (Uttar Pradesh), the terror strike of Mumbai in 2008 in which 166 people were killed and the attack on a BSF convoy at Udhampur in Jammu and Kashmir in 2015.

The UN also designated Saeed, also the founder of Jamat-ud-Dawa (JuD), as a global terrorist under the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1267 on December 10, 2008.

Case against Lakhvi

On LeT commander Lakhvi, the ministry said he was involved in various attacks including Red Fort attack in 2000, Rampur CRPF camp in 2008, Mumbai in 2008 and on a BSF convoy at Udhampur in Jammu and Kashmir.

"And whereas, the central government believes that Zaki-ur-RehmanLakhvi is involved in terrorism and is to be notified as a terrorist under the said Act," the ministry said.

The LeT was listed as a terrorist organization under the First Schedule to the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.

Similar to the other two, Lakhvi was designated by the UN as a global terrorist under the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1267 on the December 10, 2008.

Case against Dawood Ibrahim

According to the Indian home ministry, Dawood runs an international underworld crime syndicate. He has been found to be involved in: perpetrating acts of terror, promoting religious fundamentalism, terror financing, arms smuggling, circulation of counterfeit currency, money laundering, narcotics, extortion and benami real estate business in India and abroad.

He was also involved in assassination attempts on prominent personalities to create social disharmony and terrorize the common man.

Dawood was designated as a global terrorist by the UN under the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1267 and he is listed in the al-Qaeda sanctions list on November 3, 2003, and the United Nations Security Council had also issued a special notice in his name on April 6, 2006.

Islamic State of Iraq and Levant and Al-Qaeda Sanction Committee of United Nations Security Council had listed Dawood for participating in acts that supported Osama Bin Laden, al-Qaeda and the Taliban.

It also said Dawood executed a series of bomb blasts along with his associates in Mumbai in March 1993, which resulted in deaths of 257 people and injured over 1,000 others apart from the destruction of properties on a massive scale.

"And whereas, the central government believes that Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar is involved in terrorism and Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar is to be notified as a terrorist under the said Act," the home ministry notice said.
