Dropping murder charge against Tabrez Ansari lynching accused unfortunate: MoS Home

Two days after the Jharkhand Police dropped the murder charge against 11 accused in the Tabrez Ansari mob lynching case, Minister of State (MoS) for Home G Kishan Reddy termed the development as "unfortunate" and demanded that the accused be punished.

In June, 24-year-old Tabrez Ansari was attacked by a mob in Kharsawan district of Jharkhand on the suspicion of theft. He was beaten up mercilessly for over 18 hours before being handed over to the police. He later succumbed to his injuries at a local hospital on June 22.

Speaking to India Today TV at the BPR&D function, G Kishan Reddy said that the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) would speak to the Jharkhand government over the development.

"I want those who are behind the criminal activity [Tabrez Ansari murder] should be punished. We will speak to the state government," G Kishan Reddy said.

Responding to a question on an alleged "increase in the lynching cases in the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) regime", the minister said, "All the governments [Central and state] should stop lynchings. This is happening not only in the BJP-ruled states. This has happened even in West Bengal."

G Kishan Reddy's reactions have come after the Jharkhand Police dropped the murder charge against the accused in the mob lynching of Tabrez Ansari.

The Seraikela-Kharsawan district police charge-sheeted 11 of the 13 named accused in the Tabrez Ansari lynching case on July 29, dropping the stringent charge of murder under section 302 of the IPC.

Seraikela-Kharsawan Superintendent of Police Karthik S said the murder charge against the 11 accused was dropped on the basis of the postmortem, medical and forensic reports that stated Tabrez Ansari died of cardiac arrest. The reports also stated that Tabrez Ansari's case was "not a case of premeditated murder".

On June 18, a mob in Dhatkidih village accused Tabrez Ansari of theft, tied him to a pole, assaulted him and allegedly forced him to chant "Jai Shri Ram and "Jai Hanuman". After the assault, Ansari was arrested on the charges of theft and sent to judicial custody.

Four days later, Tabrez Ansari was rushed to a local hospital, after his condition worsened, where he succumbed to his injuries.

Tabrez Ansari worked in Pune as a welder and a labourer and had come to his village in Jharkhand's Kharsawan district to celebrate Eid with his family. His family had also arranged his wedding during his visit.
