Tamil Nadu Congress chief opposes pleas for release of Rajiv Gandhi case convicts

CHENNAI : The demand for release of Rajiv Gandhi killers has once again taken centre stage in Tamil Nadu after PMK founder S Ramadoss, accompanied by his son and former Union minister Anbumani Ramadoss, met Prime Minister Narendra Modi last week and pressed for their early release.In a memorandum submitted to Modi, Ramadoss had pointed out that the Supreme Court had allowed the Tamil Nadu government to decide on the release of the seven convicts. While the state government had passed a cabinet resolution, recommending to governor Banwarilal Purohit for the release of convicts, on September 9, 2018, the governor was yet to act on it, Ramadoss said.Reacting strongly to such attempts by political parties to repeatedly intervene in the legal system, TNCC president K S Alagiri on Sunday wanted the law to take its course on the issue. “There are scores of convicts in various prisons. But, some of the political parties are specifically concerned only about the seven convicts, involved in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case. I see an ulterior motive in this,” Alagiri said.According to him, it is a legal issue and it should be allowed to be handled by the legal system. “If the courts decide to release them, we will not object to it. Why should there be political pressure for their release?” Alagiri asked.He also condemned Naam Tamizhar Katchi leader Seeman, for “justifying the assassination” of former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi at an election rally in Vikravandi. “Even though Rajiv Gandhi made all efforts to bring peace in Sri Lanka and resolve the Tamils issue, the LTTE killed him. He gave his life for trying to bring peace. The fact that Seeman is justifying his killing has to be condemned by all,” Alagiri said, while calling for appropriate action against Seeman and derecognizing NTK as a political party.“The DMK stand is clear and it is for the early release of the seven convicts,” said a DMK leader, who did not want to be quoted. “The Congress party had lost its leader and we can understand their different stand on the issue, even though Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi have magnanimously forgiven the seven convicts,” said the leader.While the AIADMK government had passed a resolution seeking the release of these convicts, the governor (Banwarilal Purohit) and BJP are playing politics by delaying any decision on it. Now, by not pressurizing the BJP government at the Centre, the AIADMK too has joined hands with the BJP and the governor, said the DMK leader. “If Ramadoss (PMK) is so keen to get their release, why is he not pressurizing the AIADMK government in the state,” he asked.
