West Bengal: Man set ablaze by son, daughter-in-law during sleep over property dispute

The deceased, Haripada Mallik was a resident of Betkundu village while his son Narayan used to live in Gopalchak (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A man allegedly set his father ablaze in West Bengal with the help of his wife Both the accused, Narayan Mallik and his wife Tanushree have been arrested The accused killed the man over a property dispute

Kolkata: A 78-year-old man was allegedly set ablaze by his son and daughter-in-law in Midnapore district of West Bengal on Saturday night. The police have said that the senior citizen was burnt over a property dispute. The victim has been identified as Haripada Mallik.

The accused have been identified as Narayan Mallik and Tanushree. Allegedly, Haripada Mallik was sleeping at his house in Geonkhali, Mahishadal when Tanushree and Narayan Mallik poured kerosene on him and set him ablaze.

Soloman Neshakumar, superintendent of police, East Midnapore said, "There was a dispute over property between Haripada Mallik and his eldest son Narayan. They used to live in different places." The police arrested both the accused for murder.

The deceased, Haripada Mallik was a resident of Betkundu village while his son Narayan used to live in Gopalchak. Reportedly, the accused couple poured kerosene on the 78-year-old man through a window and set him on fire.

The locals noticed fire coming out of Haripada Mallik's house and ran to help him. Some of them saw Narayan Mallik and Tanushree running away from the house. Dipak Mallik, one of the locals said, "We poured water and doused the flames but Haripada had already suffered severe burns. " The locals sent the 78-year-old man to the hospital but he was declared dead on arrival. The police took his body and sent it for an autopsy.

Man murders foster father over 10 bighas of land in Jalaun, Uttar Pradesh

A similar incident came to light from Jalaun in Uttar Pradesh in October after a man was murdered by his foster father over 10 bighas of land. The deceased, Nabi Baksh had adopted Shafi around 26 years ago. The 87-year-old man used to live with Shafi, his wife Akhtari and their four children.

Nabi Baksh had 14 bighas of land in his name and he had registered 10 bighas under his grandson Arif's name. Shafi was upset as he wanted the 10 bighas to be registered under his name. On the night of the incident, Shafi went to Nabi's room and asked him to give the 10 bighas to him.

Nabi, however, refused and the two had an argument. Shafi flew into a fit of rage and attacked Nabi with a stone. After attacking his head, Shafi took a lungi and strangled his foster father. Shafi's parents went to the neighbours who informed the police control room. Shafi was arrested and he confessed to killing his father.
