Telangana: 4 held for raping, burning body of vet; another body found at same area

shriaya.dutt@tribuneindia.com

Naveen S Garewal

Tribune News Service

Hyderabad, November 29

Two brutal rapes have shocked Telangana after horrific details of how these separate incidents of crime have come to light.

In the first instance, a 26-year old veterinary doctor, whose two-wheeler got punctured was raped and later burnt alive on the outskirts of Hyderabad by four men, who offered to help her get the deflated tyre fixed.

While in the second incident that happened in Warangal Urban district, a “friend” raped a 19-year old, killed her and kept her body in the back of his car till he could dispose it.

Priyanka Reddy called her sister after her two-wheeler got a flat tyre and told her that a few people near a toll plaza were making her uncomfortable.

“Please talk to me for a while...I am scared,”. But neither she nor her sister called the police, her charred body was found at an underpass — she had been allegedly gang-raped and burnt later to wipe out evidence.

The police have rounded up four suspects. Those detained include a truck driver and a cleaner. Police suspect the girl was gang-raped, strangulated and later her body was burnt.

Believed to be gang-raped and murdered near the Tondupally toll plaza in Shamshabad on the Hyderabad-Bengaluru National Highway, her body was burnt and dumped about 25 km away at the Chatanpally Bridge in the Ranga Reddy district.

The prime suspect has been identified as Mohammed Pasha, a native of Mahbubnagar district. He was arrested based on footage from the surveillance cameras which were examined as part of the investigation.

Police are suspecting the assailants had first punctured the veterinary doctor’s scooter without her coming to know about it and later kidnapped her on the pretext of helping her.

Police believe the accused took her to a secluded place near the Tondupally toll gate, raped her between the parked trucks and killed her. Police are yet to ascertain if Priyanka was bludgeoned or strangulated to death.

Police sources said the victim’s sister had advised her to leave the vehicle at the toll plaza and take a cab back home. However, when the sister later called her back to check on her, her mobile phone was switched off.

The family lodged a missing complaint with the police around 11 pm. Her body was found the next morning.

Assistant Commissioner of Police of Shamsabad Ashok Kumar said details of the crime would be known after the post mortem report.

The incident sent shockwaves across the state, drew all-round condemnation with “justice for Priyanka” campaign hitting the social media.

Telangana Home Minister Mohammed Mahmood Ali while describing the incident unfortunate, said: “she should have called the police instead of her sister as this could have saved her”.

State Cabinet minister KT Rama Rao, who is also the son of the chief minister, said he will personally monitor the case.

“Outraged and deeply anguished by the murder of Priyanka Reddy. I am confident that the police will catch the animals who committed this heinous crime and deliver justice at the earliest,” tweeted Rama Rao

Meanwhile, soon after Cyberabad police arrested four persons in connection with the rape and murder case of the veterinary doctor, another charred body of a woman was found in the same area. The dead body was found near a temple at a deserted place.

The victim is reportedly 35 years old. Her body was found on Siddulagutta road in Shamshabad area. Her body has been moved to a government hospital for an autopsy. It is yet to be established if the woman was sexually assaulted.

Cyberabad police commissioner VC Sajjana said, “Body was found in an open area on the outskirts of Shamshabad. It is being moved to a government hospital for autopsy, the case being registered.” The police are investigating all the angles in the case.

In another incident, a 19-year old girl, who went to meet her friend to celebrate her birthday was raped and killed by the friend.

He later told the police that he had raped her but not killed her.

“She died of a heart attack and I kept her body in the car till I could change her clothes and dump her body near her house,” he told investigators in Warangal Urban district

Warangal Police Commissioner V Ravinder said after committing the crime, the accused Sai Kumar called his two friends for help. However, after seeing the dead body, they refused to help and returned.

The accused carried the body in his car and drove around waiting for the sunset and then dumped the body near the girl’s house.

Claimed to be safe for women, Telangana has been witnessing strong protests by members of the civil society, students and women organisations’ accusing the state police of going soft on the perpetrators of heinous crimes.

Hyderabad has the highest number of CCTV cameras that make cracking of crime easy, but the focus is on apprehending people indulging in drunk driving.

In the next three years, Telangana will have 15 lakh CCTV cameras, with 10 lakh in just the Hyderabad metropolitan area.
