Hyderabad horror: Widespread lack of safe public spaces makes women second-class citizens

The 27-year-old government veterinary doctor who was brutally gang-raped, murdered and set ablaze in Hyderabad last week, was just on her everyday routine when the unthinkable befell her. Activists say that the Gachibowli-Shamshabad stretch where the heinous crime took place, has even been declared a safe corridor by government and police. This is why citizens of Telangana’s capital city are shocked and seething, emotions mirrored in many other parts of India.

As women go about getting an education, doing work, simply doing daily chores, the inability of state and society to provide them either safe passage or safe public spaces, effectively reduces theirs to a second-class citizenship. Fundamental rights like the right to equality and the right to freedom are severely compromised. Also last week a Ranchi law student was standing at a bus stop 8 km from the chief minister’s official residence, when she was abducted and gang-raped. The dark fact of the matter is that such incidents are not rare, although some cases set new benchmarks of horror.

Some of the protesters in Hyderabad are demanding ‘instant justice’. But vigilantism is obviously no solution. The sanest method out of this madness is to seriously improve policing. For example even as four men have been arrested for the veterinarian’s gang rape and murder, three policemen have been suspended on her family’s accusation that they delayed acting on the complaint citing jurisdictional reasons. This kind of apathy is all too common. Or consider how the Nirbhaya fund, earmarked after the gang rape and murder case of December 2012, is lying largely unused. Whether it is conviction rates or patrolling, it needs upgrading of police resources. Fill the vacancies and skill them better, if you really care for women’s safety.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
