From chemical castration and caning to prison and execution – A look at how other countries deal with rapists

Students of Maulana Azad National Urdu University (MANUU) stage a candle light protest against the gang rape and murder of a woman veterinary doctor, in Hyderabad, Monday, Dec. 2, 2019. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Child rapists in Indonesia face the death penalty and chemical castration Rape is one of the many crimes that can lead to capital punishment in China. In Singapore, a rapist can face up to 20 years in prison and a minimum of 12 strokes of the cane

The brutal gang rape and murder of a 26-year-old veterinary doctor in Cyberabad has triggered nationwide outrage. The woman was brutalised, killed and burnt in a chilling pre-planned assault by four men who punctured her scooter’s tyre and offered to repair it but instead dragged her away and took turns raping her before strangulating her and burning the body.

The brutality of the crime has brought thousands of Indians on to the streets. The protestors are not just demanding justice for the victim, but also accountability in the criminal justice system that is often seen as insensitive, non-responsive and at times even hostile to victims of sexual violence.

The protests against the crime in Cyberabad echo similar protests that followed the brutal gang rape of a young woman in Delhi in December 2012, later christened ‘Nirbhaya’, who barely survived the unbelievably vicious assault and succumbed to her injuries in hospital days later.

The protests following the 2012 Delhi rape led to the doubling of jail terms for rapists and made voyeurism and stalking of women criminal acts.

The outrage over the Cyberabad gang rape and murder was reflected in Parliament too, with MPs across party lines expressing their grief and anger over the crime. But some lawmakers went a step further, and seemingly endorsed extra-constitutional means to deal with rapists. “These types of people (rapists) need to be brought out in public and lynched,” Jaya Bachchan of the Samajwadi Party said in the Rajya Sabha. “The people want the government to give a proper and definite answer.”

Other politicians have come out in support of Bachchan’s remarks. While punishment must always be in accordance with the law, will the outrage in and out of Parliament lead to a more responsive criminal justice system? We will have to wait and see -- but let’s take a look at how some other countries deal with rapists.

Indonesia

Child rapists in Indonesia face the death penalty and chemical castration, after the law was changed in 2016. Previously, the maximum sentence for rape, irrespective of the age of the victim, was 14 years in prison. Those committing child sexual offences may also be tagged electronically after being released. In August this year, an Indonesian man, Muh Aris bin Syukur, became the first to be sentenced with chemical castration for raping nine minors.

Singapore

The city-state of Singapore is known for its strict laws to deter everything from littering on the streets to drug-peddling. When it comes to rape, a convict can face up to 20 years in prison and a minimum of 12 strokes of the cane. In July 2017, a 28-year-old man, Muhammad Iskander Ismail, was sentenced to 16 years jail and 24 strokes of the cane for raping a 19-year-old woman.

China

Rape is one of the many crimes that can lead to capital punishment in China. But the sentence can also be commuted to a life-term in a couple of years. Sex with girls under 14 is regarded as rape and the crime can carry the death penalty.

United States

The US does not have a common federal law for rape. States have their own laws that often vary. Instead of the word ‘rape’, phrases like ‘criminal sexual conduct’ and ‘sexual battery’ are usually used. Sentencing varies depending on the nature of the crime.

England and Wales

The UK does not have the death penalty. According to the Crown Prosecution Service, rape is a serious specified offence to which dangerous offender provisions apply and carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment, in England and Wales.
