Gang Rape Victim Set On Fire, Nirav Modi Declared Fugitive Economic Offender + More Top News

Even as the anger continues to boil across the country over the brutal gang rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor in Telangana, another shocking crime has surfaced.



In Unnao, Uttar Pradesh, a 30-year-old woman was set on fire when she was on her way to a court in Raebareli in connection with a gang-rape case which she had filed a year ago. The incident happened on the wee hours of Thursday when the rape victim and her family were on their way to catch an early morning train. Read More

PNB Scam Accused Nirav Modi Declared Fugitive Economic Offender

Nirav Modi, the prime accused in the Rs 13,000 crore Punjab National Bank (PNB) scam case has been declared a fugitive economic offender under the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act by the special Prevention of Money Laundering Act ( PMLA) court in Mumbai.

The development came a day after the court issued a summons to Modi, his brother Neeshal Modi and a close associate Subhash Parab, directing them to remain present before it by January 15. Read More

Charred Body Of A Suspected Rape Victim Found In Malda

The gang-rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor in the outskirts of Hyderabad, last week was one of the most shocking crimes against women in the country in recent times. She was gang-raped by four men, who then strangled her and set her body on fire.

Even as there is simmering anger in the country over the horrific crime a similar incident has come to light in West Bengal. A charred body of a woman was found in a mango orchard in Dhantala Kotwali under the limits of English Bazar police station in Malda district of West Bengal on Thursday. Read More

Kashmir Economy Suffered Losses Of Rs 15,000 Crore

The economy of Kashmir has suffered losses of Rs 15,000 crore since August 5, when the government abrogated Article 370 provisions, a commerce body has claimed, maintaining that this is just a "conservative estimate".

The Centre had repealed provisions of the article that gave special status to the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir, and bifurcated it into union territories of Ladakh, and Jammu and Kashmir. "Our conservative estimates put the losses to the Kashmir economy due to the situation after August 5 at Rs 15,000 crore. We will be coming up with comprehensive data about the losses within a week," Kashmir Chamber of Commerce and Industry (KCCI) president Sheikh Ashiq Hussain told news agency PTI. Read More

Those Skipping Exams Will Lose Studentship: JNU Tells Students Protesting Over Fee Hike

The Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students who have been protesting the fee hike are planning to boycott the semester examinations scheduled from December 12. In the wake of this development, the JNU authorities said that students not appearing in the exams will lose their studentship.

In a circular issued here, the university cautioned the students "about the consequences of completing academic assignments and tests, including end-semester examinations, as per the relevant academic ordinances and rules". Read More
