Gang-rape survivor suffers 90% burns as 'suspected abusers set her ablaze'

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

A woman who was gang-raped was allegedly dragged into a field and set on fire by three of her suspected attackers as she went to give evidence against them at court, according to reports.

The woman, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was reportedly doused in petrol and set ablaze as she walked with her parents to a court in the village of Unnao, India on Thursday morning.

The 23-year-old victim suffered 90% burns during the horrific attack. It is understood the woman is still alive, although she remains in SPM Civil Hospital in Lucknow where her condition is said to be critical.

She told cops that her attackers were assisted by two accomplices, Times of India reports, and five men have been subsequently arrested.

It is unclear if the two accomplices are among the group of five who stands accused of gang-raping the woman in horror assault last year.

Hospital director DS Negi said that the woman may be transferred to Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi for specialist treatment as her condition worsens.

"The next 48 -72hours are critical for the survivor as she has to be saved from a state of shock," he added.

"I have suggested that the girl be shifted to Safdarjung hospital in Delhi for better treatment. But there is no government nod on it as of now."

He added that the victim was in immense pain and restlessness but had not lost consciousness.

"When she was brought in, I asked her how she was and she replied to me," DS Negi explained.

"She said she was in pain which was a little better at that time because of the pain medication."

Dr Pradeep Tiwari added: "This is a crucial time for her survival."

Mass protests have erupted across India recently, as women take to the streets in an attempt to end what they describe as a "rape culture" in the country.

Demonstrators have held placards in support of rape victims across the country, with estimates suggesting that there may be as many as 40,000 cases of the crime each year, according to Government figures.

campaigners say the real number is likely to be far higher, with victims wary of filing cases because of the social stigma and a lack of faith in the justice system.
