From Nucleya To Alan Walker, 7 Of The Biggest DJs Spill Their Secrets To MensXP At Sunburn 2018

Arguably one of the biggest and most popular electronic music festivals in Asia, Sunburn, with its unique concept and star-studded guest-list, has enthralled EDM fans for the last eleven years. Thus, when the 12th edition of the music festival sprung to life in Pune this year, there was little doubt over its success in presence of the multi-cultural music devotees who congregated to surrender to their favourite artists. Hosted at the aesthetic 100-acre Oxford Valley and encircled by the beautiful valley of Lavale, the musical extravaganza ensured the EDM loyalists had inimitable and individualistic experiences, enabling them to begin their new year with zeal. With some of the biggest DJs in attendance, this year's edition had as many as four different stages - including the massive 5000-square-feet mainstage - to satiate the thirst of its attendees. The first day of the festival saw the likes of 'desi' bass king Nucleya, Israeli psy-trance perfectionist Vini Vici, Netherlands' electro wizard Don Diablo and Sweden's most prominent EDM duo Axwell & Ingrosso making full use of the LEDs, pyros and SFX at their disposal to send the fans into delirium and kickstart the three-day spectacle with a bang. © Sunburn If Day 1 left the fans reluctant to bid farewell to their music demons, the second day ensured they had more coming their way through another prominent line-up. If Sartek - India's first DJ to be signed by Hardwell's Revealed Recordings - set the ball rolling on Day 2, Bosnia's pride Salvatore Ganacci gave the crowd the time of their lives through his dramatic antics behind the decks. But, the biggest acts of the night undeniably came through Norway's rising talent Alan Walker and 'Trance King' Armin van Buuren who created unmatched intensity levels through their serene music and immersive visuals. For a festival that had the fans wanting for more on the first two days, there was no surprise to see the annual music fest carrying on the powerful momentum and leading to an extraordinary finale, ushering in the optimism of the New Year. This year's edition adequately repaid the faith of its fans - who had decided to celebrate the most important night of 2018 with Sunburn - via desi rap god DIVINE, Pakistan origin sister-duo Krewella and France's Grammy-nominated producer DJ Snake. While Jahan and Yasmine Yousaf had the fans screaming Krewella through widespread smiles, blissful dancing and their energy-thumping sounds, the headliner of the night - DJ Snake - was seen testing the sound system to its limits in what was arguably a relentless, sensory assault that lasted over an hour. On one hand, where the three-day festival - staying true to its reputation of being India's biggest music extravaganza - gave fans unforgettable memories, it also gave MensXP an opportunity to interact with some of the biggest artists on the EDM circuit and unravel their secrets at the event. Armin van Buuren © Sunburn Arguably one of the biggest names on the EDM circuit, Armin van Buuren needs to introduction to the music fests or the enthusiasts across the globe. The Dutch music maestro has been ruling the charts for two decades now. Thus, when Sunburn included the five-time winner of the DJ Mag's Top 100 DJs poll in their line-up this year, there was no surprise to see many fans circling the date and time of his performance on their calendars. But, while the 42-year-old made the Pune crowd to the beats, we grilled the Dutchman with some impromptu questions.

Man Crush: "That would be my Lego Millennium Falcon." Woman Crush: "My woman crush is Sandra Bullock from the movie Birdbox." Weirdest/Funniest Dating Story: "Well, I remember, I was really in love with this girl and I ordered a bracelet with her name. And, when we went to watch a movie together, I gave her this bracelet. But, she was so surprised or scared that she immediately ran away. She was like 'Oh, he wants something from me'." A Rumour About You That's Not True: "That I made 15 million dollars in one year. And, that I have a private jet. But, I don't." Biggest Guilty Pleasure: "My Lego Millennium Falcon." Funniest Pick-up Line: "How would you like to do an extended set at my place." Favourite Indian DJ/Musician: "My favourite Indian DJ is Ritviz." Krewella © Sunburn Back in 2007, when sisters Jahan and Yasmine Yousaf forged a partnership with Kris Trindl (who is no longer a part of the group), little did they know that Krewella would eventually reach the heights it has today. Producing a blend of electro house and dubstep with some shades of trap, Krewella has established its reputation as one of the biggest acts in the EDM scene. And, when they were roped in to bless the Pune crowd at Sunburn, there was little doubt that the American band would disappoint. Dropping one of the best sets at this year's festival, Krewella won over the attendees with mesmerising music. But, apart from what was arguably a standout performance, the sister duo spilled some secrets about their lives to us in a personal Q&A.

Woman Crush: While Yasmine was quick to answer: "My woman crush is American actress Tessa Thompson", Jahan took some time before seeking her sister's help to eventually reply: "Deepika Padukone from Bajirao Mastani". Man Crush: Without wasting any time, Yasmine replied: "Her (Deepika Padukone) husband Ranveer Singh. We were just googling him and staring at his photos". Jahan, on the other hand, added: "He (Ranveer) is so talented too. He is an amazing performer and rapper. And, him and Deepika are the best couple". Weirdest/Funniest Dating Story: "I was really jet-lagged or just sleepless. We had just finished shooting the 'Alive' music video and I think I'd been up for three days straight. And, I had just one sip of beer on this date and I blacked out. This was when my date thought that I was on some kind of a drug, which I wasn't," said Jahan. When we asked Yasmine, she claimed: "I went out on a date with this guy. He was so nervous that he crashed his rental car (while I was in it) into the side of a building as he was parking". A Rumour About You That's Not True: "There was a rumour that Jahan started five years ago that I was engaged. But, I'm not engaged," Yasmine said. Answering for her sister, Yasmine claimed: "There's no rumour about her. She's rumour-less which is a great thing", Biggest Guilty Pleasure: For Yasmine, it was: "It has to be Oreos because it's really unhealthy and I shouldn't be eating them". When we asked Jahan, she claimed: "Every time we are in India, at naashta (breakfast), I sit for two or three hours, eating four-meals worth of food". Funniest Pick-up Line: "I could really help you with your career, if you let me," Yasmine replied on behalf of Jahan. "I've never had a bad pick-up line used on me so I use hers (Jahan)," Yasmine said for herself. Vini Vici © Sunburn Undeniably one of the biggest names on the psy-trance scene, Israeli duo Vini Vici have been setting music festivals ablaze ever since founding the group in 2013. Comprised of Matan Kadosh and Aviram Saharai, these Israeli demigods continue to entertain fans with infectious chants and ear-splitting basslines in their music. Such has been their success in the industry that it earned them collaborations with some of the veterans including Armin van Buuren, W&W, Dimitri Vegas & Like Mike and Steve Aoki amongst others. But, despite their popularity, not many know them as a person or what do they like. While we missed out on Aviram (who didn't travel to Sunburn this year), MensXP did get hold of Matan to spill some secrets about him.

Current Man Crush: "I don't know, maybe Johnny Depp." Current Woman Crush: "It would definitely be Gal Gadot." Weirdest/Funniest Dating Story: "I remember, this one time, I was in a club. I was really young and then I take a number of a girl. The next day, we went for a date and she looked completely different. So I just picked her up in my car and dropped her back after five minutes at the same spot." Biggest Guilty Pleasure: "There's an Israeli Pop group called 'Static & Benel Tavori' who are a rage amongst the teenagers. But, I really like their production." Funniest Pick-up Line: "God Is A DJ." Nucleya © Sunburn Often labelled as desi bass king, Udyan Sagar aka Nucleya has carved his own niche in the ever-growing electronic music scene in India. From using the dialogues of old horror movies to carefully aligning street sounds in his tracks, Udyan's ability to bridge the gap between indie and mainstream music has made him a countrywide phenomenon. The 39-year-old has been the must-have artist for music festivals across the country which probably explains why we weren't surprised to see him kill the set at Sunburn this year. For an artist who has become a household name in the country, we expected Udyan to spill secrets about his life. While he didn't speak much as we would have liked, Udyan still gave us something to remember him by.

Current Man Crush: "Munna bhaiya (Divyendu Sharma) from web series Mirzapur." Current Woman Crush: "Radhika Apte from Sacred Games." Weirdest/Funniest Dating Story: "I got caught once...actually, you know what, I don't wanna talk about it." A Rumour About You That's Not True: "I don't think there are any rumours about me. I'm not so well known, no. I'm very weak at this game." Biggest Guilty Pleasure: "Pani puri, maybe." Funniest Pick-up Line: "None." Alan Walker © Sunburn For someone who had no musical background and learnt the art of producing music by watching YouTube tutorials, Alan Walker has undoubtedly come a long way to become one of the most prominent artists in the electronic music today. The Norwegian wonder kid struck a chord with electronic music enthusiasts through his track 'Fade' in 2014. But, it was 'Faded'- a remastered vocal version of 'Fade' released in 2015 - that earned him global recognition. The single received platinum certifications in over 10 countries and also topped the year-end charts in Austria, Germany, Switzerland and Sweden, iTunes charts in 32 countries, as well as entering Top 10 in Spotify Global Chart. Since then, life has never been the same for the 21-year-old genius. While many have come to know his music, not many can say much about him as a person. But, not anymore.

Weirdest Travel Story: "I don't think it's weird, it's more of a messed up story. It was basically like a bunch of delays and cancellations. And, rather than reaching home at (for example) 2 pm, I ended up getting there the next day." Favourite Musician: "It's gotta be Hans Zimmer." Favourite Indian Musician: "It's Lost Stories. They did a remix of my single 'Faded'. I really like how they used Indian instruments like flutes and all. I really like their style." One Thing You Always Carry With Yourself: "One thing that I just can't leave at home has got to be my cell phone." Funniest Thing A Fan Gave You: "A fan once gave a diary that had all my social media posts including Snapchat and Instagram stories. Everything was put together in that diary with handwritten captions." Biggest Guilty Pleasure: "It's undoubtedly food. I love food and my favourite dish is pizza." Have You Tried Indian Food: "I've tried Indian food a couple of times. But, I'm not a big fan of spicy food." Anish Sood © Sunburn Born and raised in Goa, Anish Sood began his innings with music at a tender age of 15 after getting some exposure from Armin van Buuren's podcast 'A State Of Trance'. Despite holding a bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering, Anish decided that it was through music that he was going to make his parents proud. At a time when dance music concept was at it's nascent stage in India, Anish was one of the first few breakthrough artists to make a mark in the rising circuit. Over the last decade, he has contributed majorly to the country's electronic music scene with his distinctive sound that also saw him winning an award at the Independent Music Awards (IMA), making him the first Indian to win in the Best Electronica/Dance Single category. But, apart from his DJing genius, Anish is a regular guy and these are his secrets.

Current Man Crush: "I think, it has to be Roger Federer. He's been my man crush for a while now. I look to everything he amplifies and he's just a super cool guy." Current Woman Crush: "As boring as it sounds, I just got engaged so my current woman crush (and my crush for a very long time or the rest of my life), so it is going to be my fiancée." Weirdest/Funniest Dating Story: "To be honest, I haven't done much dating in my life. I haven't been on crazy blind dates and all. But, I'd definitely not recommend an artist or a musician to take their new girlfriends to a music festival because things go out of control backstage." A Rumour About You That's Not True: "That, I'm gay. And, I'm absolutely not." Biggest Guilty Pleasure: "That's probably watching romantic comedies." Funniest Pick-up Line: "I was playing this show when two middle-aged women came up to me and gave me a note. And, usually when you're playing, you get these notes that generally have song requests and all. But, this one had a hotel's room number and key inside. I think that was pretty creepy." Sartek © Sunburn A New Delhi native, Sarthak Sardana was a studious kid who cleared major examinations to become a Chartered accountant. But, after working in reputed organisations for a while, he realised that it was producing music that he liked more than tallying the balance sheets. He traded his corporate job to don a music producer's hat and began his journey as Sartek. His efforts paid off when he became the first Indian DJ to be roped in by Hardwell's Revealed Recordings and has witnessed all his releases making a mark on the Beatport Top 100 charts. There has been no looking back for the 30-year-old as he has attracted massive support from the likes of David Guetta, Afrojack, Sander van Doorn and Bassjackers. In a bid to know him better, we grilled him on a rapid-fire round and he didn't disappoint.
