Unnao rape survivor death: Adityanath assures speedy justice through fast-track courts, condemns heinous act

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath. | File image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The 23-year-old woman was assaulted, stabbed and set ablaze by her culprits when she was on her way to a Raebareli court on Thursday She was airlifted from Unnao Civil Hospital for treatment at Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital, where she succumbed to her injuries late on Friday following a cardiac arrest The central government on Friday proposed the setting up of over 1,000 fast-track courts for the speedy resolution of rape and sexual offence cases

Lucknow: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Saturday condoled the death of the Unnao rape survivor and condemned the heinous act by her perpetrators, and claimed that all possible measures will be undertaken to ensure a speedy justice through fast-track courts. He added that all accused have been arrested.

The 23-year-old woman was assaulted, stabbed and set ablaze by her culprits when she was on her way to a Raebareli court on Thursday. She was airlifted from Unnao Civil Hospital for treatment at Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital, where she succumbed to her injuries late on Friday following a cardiac arrest.

Uttar Pradesh Justice Minister Brajesh Pathak said, “It is saddening that the victim is no more with us today. We will appeal to the concerned court today to take this case to fast-track court. We will also appeal to hear the case on a day to day basis.”

All five accused in the case have been taken to jail from the court on Friday night after being sent to 14-day judicial custody.

“These cases should not be politicised. We will not spare the culprits, however powerful they may be. We will take strictest action,” Pathak said, while commenting on reports of 86 rapes in the last 11 months in just Unnao.

Brajesh Pathak, Uttar Pradesh Justice Minister on reports of 86 rapes in last 11 months in Unnao: These cases should not be politicised. We will not spare the culprits, however powerful they may be. We will take strictest action. https://t.co/LWIkZVnIVO — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 7, 2019

The brother of the Unnao rape survivor demanded death sentence for his sister’s murderers. “I have nothing really to say. My sister is no more with us, my only demand is that the five accused deserve death and nothing less,” he said, according to news agency ANI.

“This is an extremely unfortunate incident. I can’t even imagine what the family of the victim is going through. I assure them that we will not spare the culprits...will get them punished at the earliest,” Deputy Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, Keshav Prasad Maurya, said.

Keshav Prasad Maurya,UP Deputy Chief Minister on Unnao rape victim passes away:This is an extremely unfortunate incident, I can't even imagine what the family of the victim is going through. I assure them that we will not spare the culprits, will get them punished at the earliest pic.twitter.com/w5J9Ac1QMR — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 7, 2019

The central government on Friday proposed the setting up of over 1,000 fast-track courts for the speedy resolution of rape and sexual offence cases.

The Justice Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice proposed a scheme to set up 1023 fast-track special courts (FTSCs). The special courts will be dedicated to the quick resolution of rape cases and other cases under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO), the government said in a statement.
