Bennett Rebello murder: In last bag, police find Mumbai musician's decomposed torso

File photo of suitcase stuffed with Rebello's body parts first found on December 2 | Photo courtesy: Mustafa Shaikh

The story of a brutal Mahim murder has come to an end as Mumbai Police has recovered all body parts of 59-year-old Bennett Rebello.

The third bag with decomposed human torso washed ashore near Prabhadevi on Friday. There was not much left to be identified but bones.

Rebello's brother Jude was able to identify the decomposed parts because of a metal rod which was seen in the upper portion in one of the thighs.

Jude told the police that Bennett suffered a fracture in his thigh when he was 12 years old. Hence, he was confident that body parts are of his brother. Adding to this, the remains had injury marks of assault inflicted during the incident.

Before this, on December 2, body parts of Rebello were recovered. On December 2, Bennett Rebello's leg, a hand and mutilated private part were found in a suitcase in Mumbai's Mahim, Maharashtra. Rebello was a guitarist and played music at local gigs.

On December 7, the police arrested two people, including the victim's adopted daughter, for killing Rebello. They had disposed off body parts, chopped and stuffed in three suitcases, in Mithi river, Mumbai.

Accused 19-year-old Riya (alias) and her 16-year-old boyfriend killed Bennett Rebello on November 27 at his house at Dwarka Kunj, in Mumbai's Vakola with a knife and bamboo stick.

Bennett Rebello lived alone in Vakola. He had married twice but was separated from his wives.

The two accused chopped Bennett Rebello, stuffed the severed body parts in three bags and threw the bags away in Mithi river.

They took three days to dispose off his body parts in the river.

The police found that Bennett Rebello had adopted Riya and sexually assaulted her because he did not agree to her relationship with her minor boyfriend.

All the bags with Rebello's chopped body parts have been now recovered.

POLICE FIND FIRST BAG

Riya and her boyfriend killed Bennett Rebello on November 27.

For the next three days, they kept cutting Rebello's body into pieces using hot kitchen knives. They also used a lot of incense sticks in the house to cover up the foul smell coming from the body. They then stuffed the body parts in the bags and disposed them off in Mithi river.

On December 2, the police found a bag. The floating suitcase was spotted with part of a leg sticking out of it at Mahim beach. A hand, part of a leg and mutilated private part were found in the bag.

The bag containing chopped body parts was found behind Makhdoom Shah Baba Dargah in Mahim at around 6 pm on December 2, the police said.

The police found a hand detached from shoulder, part of a leg and private part of Rebello inside the bag.

READ | Chopped in parts, packed in suitcase, body floats to Mumbai

INVESTIGATION KICKED OFF

The chopped body parts in the first bag were wrapped in a red sweater.

The sweater, stitched at a shop in Kurla called ALMO Men's Wear, was the first clue for the police. After reaching the shop, the police found a receipt in the name of Bennett.

Mumbai Police then used this name to carry out further investigation on social media and found him on Facebook.

Rebello was wearing a maroon sweater in one of his pictures which matched the sweater found in the suitcase. These leads confirmed that it was Rebello, the police said.

Rebello's visiting card was found on one of his Facebook posts through which the police reached his house which was locked.

Upon investigation, the police found that he had not been seen for 10 days.

Mumbai Police soon learnt that Rebello had adopted Riya who had a boyfriend. The crime branch is still verifying when Rebello had adopted Riya.

The cops did a sustained interrogation with Riya and her boyfriend who alleged that Rebello had sexually assaulted Riya and opposed their relationship.

POLICE FIND SECOND BAG

On Tuesday, the police recovered a suitcase from Mithi river in BKC area containing a limb and an arm of Bennett Rebello.

POLICE FIND THE LAST BAG

The third and the last bag with decomposed torso of Bennett Rebello washed ashore near Prabhadevi on Friday. The chopped body parts were identified as Rebello's.
