Chin CSOs demand immediate arrest of murderer who shot a teacher dead

Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) in Chin State demanded action against a murderer who shot an ethnic Chin primary school teacher dead on November 17 in Tui Byarl San village in Ton Zang Township, Chin State.

Mong Lan Thang from Zomi Youth Association (ZYO) said that teacher Lia Dim Lung Mang was the second murder victim killed by a member of an armed Manipuri insurgent group who illegally infiltrated into Myanmar from Manipur State, India.

“The murderer committed this crime in Myanmar territory so that he must be punished in accordance with the laws of Myanmar. If the organization of this murderer is in Myanmar territory they should abide by the law of the land. I don’t think he can be arrested but he is surely hiding in deep jungle on the border,” Mong Lan Thang from Zomi Youth Association (ZYO) said.

It is learned that since these armed Manipuri insurgent groups are staying and deployed in Tong Zang and other townships which are under the administration of the government, ethnic Chin people concern over the country will suffer grievance and loss because of these illegal immigrants.

Zomin Students and Youths Organization (ZSYO) In-charge Pau Kein Tuang said, “Now they are staying in Yangon and Muse. As a citizen of Myanmar, I would like to ask who issued them national identity cards.” Local residents in Chin State staged a demonstration in Tiddim town on December 1 in protest against these illegal immigrants and insurgent groups.

In reply to Mizzima’s call, Chin State Government, Social Affairs Minister Pau Lung Min Than answered that they had requested help from Myanmar Tatmadaw (Defence Services) and Indian Police Force to bring the murderer to justice.

“Our government gave 6.6 million kyats to the family of this teacher. It is very difficult for us to nab this accused. It can be solved only after we can put him under arrest. We have no sound evidence to go and arrest him. It will be useless to visit his wife. This is the usual difficulty and phenomenon of the border area,” the minister said.

Bi Naw from Manipur State, India, allegedly shot primary school teacher Lyar Deng Lung Mang dead at her house on November 17 at about 9:30 p.m. She died immediately on the spot.

Chin CSOs jointly organized a press conference in Yangon at Orchid Hotel on December 12 to deny the untrue stories and disparaging words said against the slain teacher.
