Alcohol traces found in Disha’s body: Forensic report confirms Hyd police’s probe

Establishing the investigation made by the Cyberabad police probing the rape and murder of Hyderabad veterinary doctor Disha, the Forensic Science Laboratories (FSL) confirmed that Disha was forced to consume alcohol by the perpetrators. According to reports, the liver tissue of Disha had traces of alcohol.

On November 27, the 26-year-old Disha had parked her scooter near Tondupally toll plaza at 6pm and took a cab to Gachibowli to visit a dermatologist. She then directly reached the toll plaza at 9.30 pm. “In between, she did not stop anywhere. So, the alcohol in her body was what the four accused had forcibly made her consume,” The Times of India quoted a police official as saying.

The forensic reports have also concluded that Disha was indeed raped by the four accused--Mohammed Areef, Jollu Shiva, Jollu Naveen and Chintalakunta Chennakeshavulu--who were gunned down by police on December 6. The seminal stains on the garments of the victim recovered by the police from the crime scene proved that the four accused had indeed committed the ghastly crime.

Earlier, police had revealed that the four accused who had parked their lorry at the toll plaza, consumed alcohol and had planned to sexually assault the victim by deflating her scooter’s tyres.

The accused forcibly took her to the bushes near the toll plaza, gagged and raped her. They even forcibly poured alcohol down her throat.

Though all the accused have been killed in an alleged encounter, these findings would be submitted before the court.

Meanwhile, the Telangana High Court has directed the police to preserve the bodies of the accused until further notice as the Supreme Court asked all other courts and agencies to halt their investigation.

In another development, Renuka, wife of Chennakeshavulu, one of the rape accused, has demanded the government to provide her a job since she was poor. Renuka is pregnant. She reportedly said that if the government could provide her with a job, she could meet her ends.
