Raped and set ablaze, 18-year-old girl battles for her life with 90% burns in Uttar Pradesh

The accused set her on fire in her own home, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Police have formed five teams to nab the accused and further investigation is underway The survivor is battling for her life at a hospital in Kanpur city It is believed that the main accused was a distant relative of the survivor

Lucknow: In yet another tragedy which is being reported from the state of Uttar Pradesh, an 18-year-old girl was allegedly raped and set ablaze by her distant uncle in Fatehpur district on Friday. She is battling for her life with 90 per cent burns, said police officials investigating the matter.

An FIR has been registered in this regard against the main accused, a 22-year-old who is also the victim's distant relative. Circle Officer Kapil Dev Mishra said that the girl was romantically involved with the accused and both their families had held a panchayat to reach a settlement and get them married. However, the accused barged into her home on December 13 when she was alone. He reportedly raped her and set her on fire.

Fatehpur: A woman was allegedly raped and set ablaze by her uncle in Husainganj. Police says, "FIR has been registered and five teams have been deployed to nab the accused. We will investigate the matter from all angles." pic.twitter.com/tOVlhS4oAi — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 14, 2019

Upon hearing her cries for help, neighbours rushed to the house and also alerted local law enforcement. She was taken to a local community health centre and later referred to a hospital in Kanpur where she was brought in with 90 per cent burns and is currently undergoing treatment.

Police have formed five teams to nab the accused and the matter is being investigated from all angles, an officer told media outlets. The incident took place under the jurisdiction of the Hussainganj police station. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and the police are still making efforts to nab the accused and ascertain what led to this vicious attack.

A similar tragedy in UP's Unnao earlier this month sent shivers down the spine of citizens who continue to place their faith in the power of law and order. A rape survivor was attacked and set ablaze while on her way to court by the accused. Out on bail, they set her on fire and left her to die. She was airlifted to Delhi and succumbed to 90 per cent burn injuries at the Safdarjung Hospital in the national capital.
