Amid unrest in West Bengal, BJP MP Arjun Singh's car attacked with bricks

BJP MP Arjun Singh | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The BJP MP was returning from Kankinara when his car was attacked There is no law and order in West Bengal, said Singh President's rule should be imposed in the state: BJP MP

Barrackpore: As violent protests over the amended Citizenship Act also engulfed West Bengal apart from Northeast, BJP MP from Barrackpore Arjun Singh’s car was allegedly attacked by some unknown miscreants on Saturday night.

The Barrackpore MP was returning from Kankinara when his car was attacked with bricks and a bomb was also hurled near it. The lawmaker, however, did not suffer any injury.

“Our car was attacked with bricks and then a bomb was hurled near it, while I was returning from Kankinara. There is no law and order in West Bengal,” Singh said, adding President's rule should be imposed in the state.

West Bengal witnessed violent protests against the amended Citizenship Act for two consecutive days – Friday and Saturday with several trains, railway stations and tracks, buses, other government properties being set ablaze and damaged.

Protestors mostly targeted railway properties with Murshidabad, Malda and Howrah districts bearing the brunt of their ire. As per official sources, public property worth crores of rupees have either been destroyed or looted, PTI reported.

When the protests turned violent, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who is a vocal critic of the Citizenship Amendment Bill, appealed to people to maintain peace and, also warned of stern action against those involved in vandalising public property.

"Once again I appeal to all not to resort to violence and disturb public order, tranquillity and peace," said Banerjee. "It must be kept in mind that police stations, railway stations, airports, post offices, government offices, public transport and likes are public property. Vandalising public as well as private property in any form will not be tolerated and will strictly be dealt according to law," she added.

Meanwhile, the opposition BJP threatened to seek President's rule in the state if the "mayhem by Bangladeshi Muslim infiltrators continued."

BJP national secretary Rahul Sinha said if such a situation continues, the party would be left with no option other than seeking the imposition of President's rule in the state.
