20 Indians kidnapped by pirates from on-board oil tanker off Nigeria; 'concerned' says MEA

MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said that the Indian Mission in Abuja has taken up the matter with Nigerian authorities | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights DUKE was attacked and boarded whilst on a voyage from Luanda, Angola to Lome, Togo, with a cargo of fuel oil - the operator said on its website This is the third incident in the recent past involving Indian crew members An alert has been sounded off in the shipping industry, warning of possible pirate attacks off Nigeria

New Delhi: The government, on Monday, expressed concern over kidnapping of 20 Indian crew members from onboard vessel MT Duke and said that the Indian mission in Abuja has taken up the matter with concerned authorities in Nigeria and neighbouring countries.

"We are concerned by the kidnapping of 20 Indian crew members (as reported by the Shipping agency) from the vessel MT Duke in the high seas off the western coast of Africa on 15th December 2019," MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said in response to a question on the matter.

"It's 3rd such incident this year in the region, affecting Indians. Our Mission in Abuja has taken up the matter with Nigerian authorities and authorities of neighbouring countries. Safety of hostages is paramount and we continue to engage with Nigerian authorities and other stakeholders," he said.

The incident comes just 10 days after 18 Indians on board a Hong Kong-flagged vessel were kidnapped by pirates off the Nigerian coast.

"Our vessel (oil tanker MT DUKE - IMO: 9262259) was involved in a security incident on Sunday at around 0700 UTC. DUKE was attacked and boarded whilst on a voyage from Luanda, Angola to Lome, Togo, with a cargo of fuel oil. DUKE’s crew is managed by V Ships, and Union Maritime is working closely with them and all relevant authorities to resolve the situation as quickly as possible. The safety and welfare of the crew remain the top priority of Union Maritime," Union Maritime, the operator of the ship wrote on its website.

According to a Reuters report, an alert has been sounded off in the shipping industry, warning of possible pirate attacks off Nigeria. On December 5, 19 crew members of a supertanker chartered by a French oil major Total to deliver oil to India, were taken hostage by pirates off Nigeria.
