Mumbai: Man shot dead, another injured during robbery at mobile shop; Rs 2.5 lakh looted

One of the suspected robbers was nabbed by the local shopkeepers after they were alerted by the commotion and sounds of firing. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Shopkeeper shot dead by robbers in Mumbai's Virar Robbers also took away Rs 2.5 lakh cash from the shop One of the robbers was caught by the locals and the shopkeepers

Mumbai: In a daring robbery in Mumbai, a man was shot dead and another injured by two robbers at a mobile shop in Virar area of the city on Sunday. Cash of Rs 2.5 was also looted from the shop.

One of the suspected robbers was nabbed by the local shopkeepers after they were alerted by the commotion and sounds of firing. The victim has been identified as 20-year-old Vishal Gupta.

According to a report in Times of India, Vishal used to work at the mobile and stationery shop of his brother-in-law Vijay in Kumbharpada in Virar East.

On Sunday, two masked men arrived on a motorbike and barged into the shop demanding all the cash kept in the counter. As Vishal and Vijay attempted to resist, Vishal was shot in the chest and abdomen by the robbers. He died on the spot.

Vijay also suffered two gunshot wounds and is being treated at a hospital in Mira Road. As the robbers tried to flee from the spot after looting Rs 2.5 lakh, one of them was caught by the locals and shopkeepers and handed over to the police.

The residents and shopkeepers were alerted by the sounds of the gunshots and surrounded the market to prevent the robbers from fleeing.

However, one of the robbers managed to flee on his motorbike with the cash. A pistol and three cartridges were recovered from the spot by police. According to Vijay's brother Ajay, the shop dealt in money transfer apart from selling stationery and mobiles.

Police say they are examining the CCTV footage from the area to get leads on the robbers. Cops say though the incident looks like a robbery, they are also probing other angles.



A case under section 302 (murder), 397 (robbery), 459 (causing grievous hurt while house-trespass) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).


