Bikes, Cars Set On Fire Outside Police Chowki In Old Lucknow's Hasanganj Amid Citizenship Protests

New Delhi:

The anti-Citizenship Act protests turned violent in Uttar Pradesh’s capital city Lucknow as agitators torched vehicles parked outside police chowki in Hasanganj area on Thursday. The police chowki was also vandalised by the agitators. The arson took place after the protesters clashed with the police. Stone-pelting was also reported from the area. Hasanganj locality is part of Old Lucknow. There are reports coming in that the police have also fired tear gas to disperse the protesters. It should be noted that the Yogi Adityanath government has imposed Section 144 in the entire state in view of the citizenship protests. Following the violent clashes, additional force is being deployed in the area. This is the second such incident of arson in Uttar Pradesh. Earlier in the day, two state-run buses were torched by protesters in Sambhal. Internet has been suspended in the area.

Central Delhi Turns Into Battlefield

Mandi House, located in the heart of National Capital, turned into a battleground with unprecedented deployment of security personnel to tackle the agitators during nationwide call of protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act in New Delhi on Thursday. From Delhi Police to the Rapid Action Force, boots were on ground in and around Mandi House, the cultural hotspot of Delhi. The entry and exit gates of the Mandi House Metro stations have been closed. Mobile internet has been blocked in Mandi House and ITO. There are reports coming in that the police have also detained large numbers of protesters, who had come to Mandi House.

They were taken in a bus, but the destination of that bus is still not known. The protesters have planned a march starting from Mandi House to ITO’s Shaheed Park. In neighbouring Red Fort area, several protesters defied the prohibitory orders.

Swaraj Abhiyan chief Yogendra Yadav was among those who were detained, officials said. "I have just been detained from Lal Qila. About a thousand protesters already detained. Thousands on the way. Am told we are being taken to Bawana," Yadav tweeted.
