Caught on cam: Bengaluru man assaults woman at petrol pump after altercation

Caught on cam: Bengaluru man assaults woman at petrol pump after altercation

CCTV footage of the incident, which happened on Jan 3, was released on Sunday and showed the man kicking the woman. A case was filed.

news Assault

The Basaveshwara Nagar police are tracking down a man who assaulted a 34-year-old woman on a scooter, while waiting in line at a petrol pump on Thursday night. The CCTV footage of the incident circulated online on Sunday showed the man manhandling and kicking the woman. The accused, who was also on a scooter, assaulted the woman after she questioned him for hitting and damaging her vehicle. The woman, identified as Shoba, a resident of Kamala Nagar in Bengaluru, filed a complaint with the police on January 3.

In the complaint lodged by the woman, she stated that she had gone to fill fuel in her vehicle near Siddaiah Puranik road at around 8:15 pm on Thursday. At the time, a man riding a scooter accompanied by a woman, presumed to be his wife, hit her scooter. When she questioned him about the same, he allegedly slapped her. Several bystanders took him aside, but he began to abuse her as he was leaving. When she snapped back at him, he came back and kicked her before riding away.

In the video, the man can be seen in a red sweater and shorts, as he lunges towards Shobha. At one point, he can be seen grabbing the fuel pump and walking towards the woman’s vehicle before stopping. The man and his wife are then seen leaving but shortly after, his wife returns and he follows suit and kicks Shobha before riding off.

“We have the bike details and efforts are on to nab the man. The woman said he was speaking in Hindi and Kannada, and that she had not seen him around the locality. Action will be taken against him,” said a police officer to TNIE.

Police have noted the number plate of the man’s scooter and have traced the vehicle, but have yet to capture the owner.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) Ravi D Channavar reportedly said that the accused would be punished. He added that a rowdy sheet would be opened against the man and that he would be made to appear before the police every 15 days. He also noted that the victim is not injured and that the man would be taken into custody soon.
