What Nayantara Sahgal would have said if she was allowed to address Marathi literary meet

Organisers of the prestigious All India Marathi Literary Meet (Akhil Bhartiya Marathi Sahitya Sammelan) withdrew their invitation to noted author Nayantara Sahgal for the inauguration ceremony of the event. Sahgal was to inaugurate the literary meet on January 11. The meet is a very prestigious event in Marathi literary circles. It is being held in Yavatmal in Maharashtra this year. Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis will be in attendance at the inauguration ceremony.

Organisers of the literary meet faced flak for withdrawing their invitation to Sahgal who is considered to be a critic of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

IndiaToday.in has accessed a copy of the speech that Nayantara Sahgal was due to deliver at the inauguration ceremony.

This is what Nayantara Sahgal would have said in her speech at the prestigious Marathi literary meet. This is not the complete speech.

"It is an emotional moment for me [to be present here] because of my own connection with Maharashtra through my father, Ranjit Sitaram Pandit...[who]...was a Sanskrit scholar." Sahgal also spoke about her father's participation in the freedom struggle.

"Do we have that same passion for freedom today?...I am asking this question because our freedoms are in danger...it is affecting every side of our lives: what we eat, whom we marry, what we think and what we write, and, of course, how we worship. Today we have a situation where diversity, and opposition to the ruling ideology, are under fierce attack."

"Inclusiveness has been our way of life...Today it is threatened by a policy to wipe out our religious and cultural differences and force us into a single religious and cultural identity. At one stroke this policy wipes out the Constitutional rights of millions of our countrymen and women who are not Hindus, and makes invaders, outsiders and enemies of them."

"[Our founding fathers] had the wisdom to declare India a secular democratic republic, not because they were against religion but because they understood that in our deeply religious country of many religions, only a secular state would provide the overall umbrella of neutrality under which every Indian would have the right to live and worship." She underlined that the Constituent Assembly, which carved out the Constitution, had a majority of Hindu members but they drew up the Constitution, which gave liberty, equality and fraternity to all Indians.

"That high ideal has now been thrown aside. The minorities, and those who don't support the Hindu rashtra agenda, have become targets for fanatics who roam the streets... Christian churches have been vandalized...Lynch mobs are openly attacking and killing Muslims on invented rumours."

"In Uttar Pradesh these mob attacks on the cow pretext have become common, while the authorities stand by and look on. When terrorism of this kind becomes official, as it has in Uttar Pradesh, where can we look for justice?"

"We are seeing that the questioning mind, the creative imagination, and freedom of expression have no place in the present political climate, and where there is no respect for freedom of thought or for democratic rights, writing becomes a risky activity"

"This has always been the case in authoritarian regimes all over the world where art is kept under state control and writers face punishment and persecution if they step out of line." She has cited examples of Russian authors Joseph Brodsky and [Aleksandr] Solzhenitsyn who were thrown in jail by the communist regime but later won Nobel Prize for literature.

"Three eminent Maharashtrian rationalists, Narendra Dabholkar, Govind Pansare, and MM Kalburgi, have been shot dead for rejecting superstition in favour of reason, and Gauri Lankesh of Bengaluru for her independent views and her opposition to Hindutva. Others have been threatened with death and forbidden to write. We are told, 'Don't publish your book or we will burn it. Don't exhibit your paintings or we will destroy your exhibition.' Film makers are told, 'Change the dialogue in this scene and cut out the next scene...In other words, they are saying: do as you are told, or your life and your art are not safe."

"A population of one billion people cannot be made to think alike. Every community has its own views and its own sensitivities on various issues. But sentiments cannot decide what is right or wrong."

"In some cases it is even our duty to hurt sentiments. If we had been forbidden to hurt sentiments, we would still be burning widows, and no reform of any kind would have taken place. Many sentiments were hurt when the Hindu Code Bill was being debated and sadhus threw stones at Parliament house. But if the Bill had not been passed, Hindu women would have had no rights."

"Historians are feeling the heat now that Indian history has been brought under state control. In some states large chunks of the past have been distorted or done away with altogether."

"Some textbooks have censored all mention of Nehru, whose governments laid the foundation of modern India, and Mahatma Gandhi was of course murdered by this mentality in 1948 for the blasphemy of the mantra he gave us: Ishvar Allah tere nam; Sab ko sammati de Bhagvan."

"Gandhi's non-violence is seen as emasculating Indians and making cowards of them. Personally I think that nothing needed greater heroism than the way unarmed Indians confronted the armed might of an empire. One of my novels called Lesser Breeds is my tribute to that unique time."

"With all that is being wiped out, so is the scientific frame of mind that we have cultivated since independence. It is being replaced by myths and legends, and a medieval frame of mind."

"We have been justly proud of the key institutions we have built up since independence, but they, too, have been brought under state control -- whether they concern art and literature, or history, or technology, or science, information, education and culture."

"The Nehru Memorial Museum and Library in Delhi was an early example of the damage that is being done to our institutions, and Jawaharlal Nehru University is an ongoing target of Hindutva hatred. As a Hindu and a believer in the great enlightened inheritance known as Sanatan Dharma, I cannot accept Hindutva."

"What can writers do in this situation? The answer is: we can write. Powerful fiction has been the result of writers stepping into controversy and taking sides, but not as polemics or propaganda...Writers don't live in ivory towers."

"Whether we are writing about our grandmother's cooking, or the rain on the roof, or describing the body of our beloved, every word we write makes it clear where we stand. Writing, like all forms of creative art, is a powerful form of political activism, and it is a means of revolt."

"I have to pay a special tribute to Maharashtrian women writers, because of the formidable obstacles that women have to overcome when they put their life experiences into words on a page. They run the risk of offending husband, family, and society, and suffering the consequences. May their courage and their creative energy go from strength to strength."

"[We are at crossroads] Which way we go -- towards freedom or away from it -- will depend, among other things, on what we write, and our refusal to be bullied into silence."

"In memory of the Indians who have been murdered, in support of all those who are upholding the right to dissent, and of the dissenters who live in fear and uncertainty, but still speak their minds, let us choose freedom."

After organisers of the literary meet withdrew their invitation to Sahgal, she hinted at "political pressure" on them.

Sahgal, who was at the forefront of the "award wapsi" campaign, said no reason was mentioned in the email addressed to her that cancelled her invitation to the event.
