Five soldiers injured in Pak shelling along LoC in JK post India's Balakot strike

As per latest update the villages close to the LOC are being evacuated. Loclas have been asked to move to safe zones. Jammu & Kashmir : Ceasefire violation by Pakistan in Nowshera sector and Akhnoor sector, Indian forces retaliate. #IndiaStrikesPakistan #AirSurgicalStrikes #IndianArmedForces pic.twitter.com/TbetOCPo68 — ABP News (@abpnewstv) February 26, 2019 Panic gripped the border areas and some locals have left their homes and moved to safer areas, multiple reports said. Authorities have ordered a temporary closure of educational institutions in a 5-km radius along the LoC in Rajouri and Poonch districts on Wednesday. Since last Wednesday, Pakistan has violated ceasefire everyday, barring Friday, the officer said. The year 2018 had witnessed the highest number of ceasefire violations numbering 2,936 by Pakistani troops in the last 15 years along the Indo-Pak border. Pakistan continues to violate the 2003 ceasefire agreement with India, despite repeated calls for restraint and adherence to the pact during flag meetings between the two sides. Amid mounting tensions between the two countries, following the Pulwama terror attack on Feb 14 and an Indian air strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed camp inside Pakistan Tuesday, people along the LoC and the International Border are living in fear. Earlier today, Pakistan vowed to respond "at the time and place of its choosing" and raise the issue at the United Nations and other international forums, even as it strongly rejected India's claim of targeting terrorist camp in the country and causing heavy casualties. At a hurriedly called special meeting of the National Security Committee (NSC)- the country's top security body - hours after India's air strikes in Balakot inside Pakistan, Prime Minister Imran Khan asked the armed forces and the people of his country to remain prepared for "all eventualities." India bombed and destroyed Jaish-e-Mohammed's (JeM) biggest training camp in Balakot in Pakistan's restive Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, about 80-km from the Line of Control, early Tuesday, killing a "very large number" of terrorists, trainers and senior commanders, officials said in New Delhi. The air strikes came 12 days after the JeM carried out the Pulwama terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir that killed 40 CRPF soldiers.

NEW DELHI: Five soldiers were injured as Pakistan violated ceasefire at multiple places in Jammu and Kashmir on Tuesday evening, hours after India decimated the largest terror camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed in a preemptive air strike. Pakistani forces opened heavy fire Nowshera sector, Akhnoor sector and Krishna Ghati sector of Jammu and Kashmir on Tuesday evening. Reports of shelling in Poonch have also been received. Ceasefire violation in Krishna Ghati sector took place at 5:30 pm today.
