DCPCR rescues four minor siblings who were starved, beaten and sexually abused by their alcoholic father

The children have been handed over to the CWC (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: Four minor siblings who were starved, assaulted and physically abused for over a year at their residence in northeast Delhi were rescued by the Delhi child rights panel earlier this month. The children, three sisters, and their toddler brother were rescued on March 6, an official with the panel told media personnel on Wednesday.

Rita Singh of the Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Rights (DCPCR) further stated that the sisters are aged four, eight and 14 respectively. All four siblings were confined to their home for about a year with minimal food and untreated wounds, she added. Singh also said that the four-year-old girl was found with an untreated skin disease which has extended up to her neck.

Going by reports, the siblings were sexually abused by their own father, landlord and his son after their mother passed away about a year ago. A daily wager, the children's father is an alcoholic who physically abused them almost regularly for over a year before they were rescued earlier this month.

The matter came to light when the eight-year-old girl, the only one out of the siblings enrolled in a corporation-run school, stopped attending her classes after her mother's demise. Officials with Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) wrote to the commissioner of DCPCR in this regard and a team was sent to the siblings' home to take stock of the situation.

Based on DCPCR's findings, a first information report (FIR) has been registered in this regard with the Adarsh Nagar police station. Meanwhile, the siblings were sent to shelter homes after they were produced before the child welfare committee (CWC). Ramesh Negi, chairperson of DCPCR told media outlets that the commission will ascertain whether the children were covered under the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS).

Must Read: Madurai police book doctor, his wife along with two others for 'stealing' kidney from 17-year-old boy
