Delhi: Man stabs wife to death; 'she was victim of domestic violence', says deceased's brother

Miraj claimed that Nasir was married before he tied the knot with their sister and he married her for money as he was under huge debt. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: In a case reported from the national capital, a 32-year-old woman was allegedly stabbed to death by her husband in South Delhi's Ambedkar Nagar area. The deceased was identified as Tabassum.

Miraj Khan, Tabassum's elder brother told news agency PTI that he got to know about the incident on Saturday and he immediately reached Delhi from Mumbai. He said, his sister was married to 47-year-old accused-Jamal Nasir in May 2016. After the marriage, they got to know that Nasir lied to them and the place where he was living was taken on rent.

He further added, that Nasir did not have a proper job and was under huge debt. The accused often took take money from their family and was a habitual drinker. Reportedly, accused often tortured the victim after consuming alcohol. Meanwhile, he shifted to another rented accommodation in Madangir area. Miraj further told ANI that the accused had threatened Tabassum multiple times that he was a professional killer and will kill her brothers if she would open her mouth in front of them.

Meanwhile, on April 2, her elder sister met with an accident in Lucknow and was brought to Delhi for the treatment. They asked Tabassum to come and visit her but Nasir refused and did not allow her to come. Later, he allowed Tabassum to visit her sister. Reportedly, a couple of days ago she left Nasir's house and said that she would not go there again. She also revealed that Nasir tortured and thrashed her many time after consuming alcohol.

Although, Nasir called Miraj last week and asked them to send Tabassum on April 20 and he allowed her to go even after she wanted not to go there. The PTI report mentioned, she went there with her younger brother Monu Khan and when they reached his place, Nasir took the victim to another room and stabbed her repeatedly at around 2.30 pm.

Monu saw this and cried for help but no one came to rescue and Nasir fled from the spot. The victim was immediately rushed to AIIMS in an auto-rickshaw where she died during the treatment. Miraj further added that the doctors in the trauma centre claimed that they have not seen such brutal murder before. The accused has one elder, a younger brother and a sister who works in a Madarsa in Zakir Nagar area.

Miraj claimed that Nasir was married before he tied the knot with their sister and he married her for money as he was under huge debt. However, the police have registered the case and further investigation is underway.
