Pune cops arrest Marathi film actress for extortion

After filing a sexual harassment case against actor Subhash Yadav, she allegedly demanded Rs 15 lakh to settle the matter permanently



Pune crime branch on Saturday arrested a Marathi film actress from Latur in an alleged extortion case where she, along with another actress and a sub-inspector of the anti-terrorism squad (ATS), tried to extort money from actor Subhash Yadav over an ongoing issue between the two.



When the crime branch team reached Latur to arrest accused PSI Amit Tekale, he allegedly fled from the spot while they found the actress instead. She was arrested and brought to Pune and PSI Tekale has been suspended.



The case between the accused actress and Subhash dates back to September 2018, when Subhash was arrested in an alleged sexual harassment case in Wanawadi. Thereafter, a meeting was arranged between the accused and Subhash, along with their family members, where Subhash claimed she had tried to extort money from him.



The actress had written to Pune police commissioner K Venkatesham in December 2018, in which she had alleged that Subhash was harassing her to take back her complaint. Yadav had allegedly harassed her on social media, defamed her with obscene messages on Facebook, and created groups on WhatsApp where she was allegedly humiliated. She said she was even attacked inside the Wanawadi police station by Subhash when she had lodged a complaint.



As per the case details, the actress met Subhash, her co-star on the sets of a movie they worked on. Yadav allegedly befriended her during the shoots. They had become good acquaintances and Subhash had allegedly developed a liking for her and expected her to reciprocate. When the actress did not accept the relationship, Subhash allegedly began harassing her. She had first approached Chaturshringi police station in July 2018, however, Subhash had apologised after which the police did not register the FIR.



Incumbents from the Marathi film industry too tried to pacify the duo and had arranged a meeting in August 2018. At the time, Subhash had apologised to her and promised not to harass her. However, another Marathi actress had allegedly recorded the incident as proof but the video hit social media where it went viral. Subhash had then claimed that the two actresses had demanded Rs 15 lakh from him to end the issue.



Back in August 2018, Subhash was arrested by police for allegedly physically assaulting the actress while at the Wanawadi police station. Subhash, whose dancing video had gone viral online, had filed a complaint against the actress claiming that she had recorded the video and circulated it. While the cops were recording statements, Subhash allegedly followed the actress into the ladies washroom and tried to assault her. The Wanawadi police had then arrested Subhash for sexual harassment under section 354 (A) and 341of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).



However, Subhash’s extortion complaint was transferred to the Pune crime branch by Sahakarnagar police station.



Inspector Gajanand Pawar, who is investigating the case, said, “Based on Subhash’s complaint, we found that the actress and her friends had received Rs 1 lakh from the total extortion amount of Rs 15 lakh. The meeting was arranged at the office of Ram Jagdale, who is in the construction business and was arrested earlier this month. PSI Tekale was also present at the meeting. Subhash had complained that the actresses were demanding extortion amount to permanently settle the matter.”


