Ahmedabad: Man burns girlfriend's privates with soldering iron

A complaint was lodged with Sola high court police station on Tuesday by a 26-year-old woman alleging that her boyfriend assaulted her and burnt her private parts with a soldering iron.

According to the police, the complaint was lodged by Rita (name changed), a resident of Hebatpur area and native of Gir Somnath. She stated in her complaint that in 2011, she got married to a person from Junagadh, but her marriage didn't work out as her husband was a drunk and used to beat her. In 2015, the couple got divorced and she shifted to Veraval with her parents. While she was staying in Veraval, she met the accused, identified as Kamlesh Parmar (30) and they started dating. Parmar was married to someone and Rita knew about it.

In 2016, Parmar told her to move to Ahmedabad with him, as there were more job opportunities. Rita agreed and they shifted to Ahmedabad and started living together in Thaltej area. Within a couple of days, she also got a job at Jewellery Studio on SG highway.

As per the statement, six months after they started staying together, Parmar's wife also moved to Ahmedabad and Rita had to move to another apartment in the Hebatpur area. Parmar's wife became suspicious about his relationship with Rita and there were several disputes between her and Parmar.

On April 24, 2019, at around 9pm, Parmar called Rita to a mall in Hebatpur, where he took her phone. Then, at around 9:30pm, he reached Rita's apartment and started shouting at her. Parmar started saying that she was having an affair with someone else and started punching her. According to Rita's allegation, Parmar even ripped her pants off and started kicking her. He later burnt her private parts using a soldering iron, while she was lying on the floor hurt.

After the incident, he left the place.

Regarding the matter, a complaint was lodged with the Sola high court police station by the victim against her boyfriend under IPC section 354 and further investigation is on.

Inspector PB Chauhan of Sola high court police station said, "We have taken the complaint and have started an investigation. The accused is absconding right now and the search for him is on."
