Bootleggers even robbed cops of cash, valuables

Some of the vehicles that were vandalized by the bootleggers

Surat: The bootleggers who attacked a team of state monitoring cell in Varachha on Monday, did not relent at just assaulting the cops. The also looted cash, their identity cards and purses of the policemen who had gone to raid the liquor den.

The state monitoring cell directly works under Gujarat DGP Shivanand Jha.

“The assailants not only injured the cops, but also looted valuables from the two cars in which they had arrived. They looted cash Rs 1,800, police identity cards, debit cards of different banks, purses of the cops along with the seized liquor boxes. They got their three associates freed, who escaped with handcuffs, said sources in the police department.

Police registered another offence in the incident and the accused were booked for attempt to murder on Tuesday. On Monday, police had registered a bootlegging offence after the attack.

Those booked for attempt to murder were Niranjan alias Niru Pradhan, Hitesh alias Hitendra Patel, Shankar Raut, Narayan alias Sando Jena, and a group of rioters. The complaint was lodged by Ashrafkhan Y Baloch, police sub-inspector of state monitoring cell. Baloch was leading the team that was attacked.

The accused were booked for rioting, dacoity and assault or criminal force to deter public servant from performing their duty.

In the attack, Nathu Bhavanbhai, a police constable, suffered head injury in stone pelting while Baloch suffered injury on the shoulder and leg as the attackers thrashed him with a blunt wooden object. Kiransinh Lakshmansinh and Gulab Gopalbhai, both head constables suffered body injuries caused by wooden objects.

“Police have formed three teams to locate the miscreants. The teams are searching for the accused in Amroli, Katargam and Navsari,” said a police officer of Varachha.

A number of residents in the locality where cops were attacked have disappeared after the incident fearing police action. The area around Utkal Nagar is notirious for bootlegging and drugs pedalling. In the past too, cops were attacked by those involved in illegal activities.


