Couple set on fire over inter-caste marriage in Maharashtra’s Ahmednagar

23-year-old Mangesh Ransing, and his wife Rukmini (19), were doused in kerosene and set on fire by three of Rukmini’s relatives, including her father and two uncles

A newly-wed couple was set on fire in a village in Ahmednagar district earlier this month, following opposition to their inter-caste love marriage.

According to the police, 23-year-old Mangesh Ransing, and his wife Rukmini (19), were doused in kerosene and set on fire in Ahmednagar’s Nighoj village by three of Rukmini’s relatives — including her father and two uncles — on May 1 in Nighoj village, 90 km from here.

While the girl’s father, Rama Bhartiya, is absconding, her uncles, Surendra Bhartiya and Ghanshyam Saroj have been arrested by the Parner police. An FIR has been lodged against all three.

The victims were later taken for treatment at the Sassoon General Hospital in Pune where Rukmini Ransing, who sustained more than 70% burns, succumbed to her injuries on Sunday night.

Speaking to The Hindu, Assistant Police Inspector Vijaykumar Botre of Parner police station said that Mangesh and Rukmini were married around six months ago amid strong opposition from the girl’s relatives, who vehemently objected to the inter-caste marriage.

On April 30, Rukmini had to come to her paternal home following a minor domestic quarrel with her husband.

“When Mangesh arrived to take her back the following day, Rukmini’s relatives refused. A heated altercation ensued after which Mangesh was brutally assaulted by Rukmini’s father and his two uncles. The trio then doused the newlyweds with kerosene and set them on fire,” said API Botre.

According to him, neighbours rushed them to a nearby hospital after hearing their screams. They were later taken to Sassoon Hospital for further treatment.

A case under sections 302 (murder) and 307 (attempted murder) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) had been registered, said API Botre, adding that further investigations were on.

This is not the first time Ahmednagar has witnessed caste-related killings.

In 2013, three Dalit youths — Sachin Gharu (24), Sandeep Thanvar (25) and Rahul Kandare (20) — were brutally murdered, and their mutilated body parts scattered in a septic tank and a dried-up well Ahmednagar’s Sonai village.
