Doctor arrested in Mumbai for alleged rape of 21-year-old actor, model

The doctor has been sent to police custody till May 10 (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A man has been arrested for the alleged rape of a 21-year-old model and actor in Mumbai, Maharashtra. Police officials familiar with the matter said that the accused is a 55-year-old practicing doctor who came into contact with the complainant while she was working in a serial.

A first information report (FIR) has been filed on the basis of a complaint by the woman and a case has been lodged in this regard under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). As per the latest reports, the accused has been sent to police custody till May 10 and further investigation into the matter is underway. An official probing the allegations against the doctor told sections of the media that he was arrested from his residence in Chembur on Sunday.

Mumbai: A 55-yr-old doctor has been arrested for allegedly raping a 21-yr-old model & actor. Police say, "They had come into contact while she was working in a serial. We've filed FIR under multiple IPC sections. He has been sent to police custody till 10 May. Investigation on." pic.twitter.com/VE021CaRKZ — ANI (@ANI) May 8, 2019

In her complaint to the police, the model/actor has claimed that she got acquainted with the doctor in 2017 when she was referred to him by a friend with respect to skin treatment. The two became friends but the complainant has alleged that she was raped and blackmailed by the doctor who clicked illicit pictures of her on at least one occasion in order to use them to blackmail her. The latest reports assert that the doctor has been interrogated by Mumbai police who are currently seeking technical evidence to build a "watertight case" against him.

An official investigating the matter told media outlets that a complaint was received by Versova police, in this regard, last week. We made the arrest on Sunday based on her complaint and the matter is still under active investigation, added the officer. In fact, a report by Hindustan Times quotes an official probing the matter claiming that the doctor even rented a house in Versova for the woman and account details have revealed that transactions were made from his account to hers.

Earlier this month, Uppal police in Hyderabad arrested a doctor practicing in Chilukanagar basti for attempting to rape a female patient when she visited him for the treatment of her headache. In her complaint, the woman had alleged that the accused doctor took her into a room where he tried to take advantage of her. Balaraju, the accused, was arrested on the basis of her complaint on May 4. This shocking case had emerged from Hyderabad, less than two days after a homeopathy doctor was arrested for molesting a patient at Chilkalguda.
