Home Secy personally liable for presence of convicts: HC

editorial@tribune.com

Saurabh Malik

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, June 13

Rapping the state of Haryana for coming out with a lame excuse for non-production of a convict before the Bench for hearing him on the quantum of sentence in a culpable homicide case, the Punjab and Haryana High Court has made Secretary, Home, “personally liable” for future presence of all those held guilty.

The direction by the Bench of Justice Rajiv Sharma and Justice Harinder Singh Sidhu came during the hearing of a 16-year-old appeal by Naresh and another appellant against the state of Haryana.

The two had challenged an order by Faridabad Sessions Judge convicting and sentencing them to life imprisonment in a murder case after a 10+2 student Ajay Sharma succumbed to his injuries.

The need to hear them afresh on the quantum of sentence arose after the Bench partly allowed their appeal and converted conviction of the appellants under Section 302 for murder to Section 304, Part I for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

In sequel to the judgment dated May 29, one of the convicts, Naresh, appeared before the Bench on his own to be heard on the quantum of sentence while the other convict, Surender Singh, was not present.

The Bench was told that he was lodged in Faridabad District Jail in connection with some other case. Speaking for the Bench, Justice Sharma asserted that the state again miserably failed to produce a convict before the court.

Justice Sharma added the lame excuse given by the state counsel was that Faridabad Commissioner of Police could not be informed on time as the judgment’s certified copy had not been supplied.

“It is not acceptable particularly when the judgment was pronounced in the presence of state counsel. Thus, we are left with no other alternative but to direct that the Secretary, Home, to the state of Haryana shall be personally liable to ensure the production of all the convicts in the future in court at the time of hearing on the quantum of sentence by issuing necessary directions. It is expected from every agency of the state to maintain rule of law”.

Justice Sharma took note of their counsel’s plea that Naresh was just 19 years of age and Surender Singh 18 at the time of the incident in October 2001 and that there was every possibility of reformation after coming into the mainstream.

Justice Sharma also noticed that both the convicts had undergone more than five years of actual sentence. “Having heard counsel for the convicts and considering the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, both the convicts are sentenced to imprisonment for the period already undergone by them for the offence punishable under Section 304 Part I of the IPC,” Justice Sharma concluded.

Convict in Faridabad jail

One of the convicts, Naresh, appeared before the Bench on his own to be heard on the quantum of sentence while the other convict, Surender Singh, was not present.

The Bench was told that he was lodged in Faridabad District Jail in connection with some other case.

Speaking for the Bench, Justice Sharma asserted that the state had again miserably failed to produce a convict before the court.

.
