Delhi Police arrests rape accused man found impersonating anti-narcotics officer on social media

Delhi Police arrested Priya on Saturday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: Police in the national capital have arrested a 26-year-old man in connection with a rape case. Officials familiar with the matter said that the accused Piyush Priya posed as the assistant commissioner of police (ACP) of the Narcotics Control Bureau on social media. He has been booked under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

At the time of Priya's arrest, police personnel recovered a number of fake IDs and stamps from his possession. It is being reported by sections of the media that police arrested the 26-year-old in connection with an instance of rape which occurred in Mayur Vihar earlier this year. More details in this regard are awaited as this is still a developing matter.

Delhi: 26-year-old Piyush Priya has been arrested in an alleged rape case in Mayur Vihar. He posed as ACP, Narcotics Control Bureau on social media. A number of fake IDs and stamps were recovered from him. pic.twitter.com/zRzDP8XeNg — ANI (@ANI) June 15, 2019

A similar arrest was made just earlier this month where a 53-year-old man was placed in police custody for allegedly impersonating an Indian Police Services (IPS) officer. Identified as Rajiv Gupta, a resident of Indirapuram in Ghaziabad, the man was arrested after a source informed the Delhi Police that he had been using a fake identity card. An investigation later revealed that Gupta was a failed IPS aspirant who got a forged identity card in order to impersonate an IG rank IPS officer.

Earlier this month, the Railway Police Force (RPF) arrested two people for allegedly impersonating government officials and forging documents in order to obtain railway tickets through the Emergency quota. Identified as MM Khan and Afsal Ahmed, the two men admitted to their crimes and were booked under relevant sections of the IPC.

In an unrelated matter, the Delhi Police also arrested a man for kidnapping and murdering a student. The victim, a first-year student of chartered accountancy (CA), was killed by the accused in Shakarpur area of Delhi on May 15. A statement by concerned officials is expected to furnish further details in this regard.
