Kashmir crisis: Downed Indian pilot Australia calls for restraint

An Indian fighter pilot shot down by Pakistan’s army has become the face of the Kashmir crisis, as Australia urged the two nuclear-armed countries to avoid further military action.

It comes as Pakistan's prime minister delivered a chilling message to India, warning that the arch-foes could not afford a "miscalculation".

Pakistani villagers and soldiers filmed the capture of the pilot, identified by Islamabad as Indian Wing Commander Abhi Nandan, in clips that have gone viral on social media.

The pilot and the Indian Air Force (IAF) are at the heart of the dangerous flare-up, which has seen Pakistan and India conduct air strikes on each other’s territory in the last two days.

Indian Air Force Wing Commander Abhi Nandan, who was captured after his plane was shot down by Pakistan Air Force, records his statement at an undisclosed location in Pakistan. (EPA/AAP)

A gun and other belongings recovered from the downed Indian pilot. (EPA/AAP)

The Pakistan government released a video of what it claimed was the downed pilot.

His face bloodied and blindfolded, the pilot gives his name and service number before telling a man questioning him: "I'm sorry, Sir, that's all I'm supposed to tell you."

India's foreign ministry said the pilot's treatment was a "vulgar display of an injured personnel of the Indian Air Force in violation of all norms of international humanitarian law and the Geneva Convention", ordering his immediate release.

The long-standing Kashmir conflict between nuclear-armed neighbours India and Pakistan is escalating. (Nine)

In a second video circulating on social media, a screenshot of which was shared by the same Pakistan government Twitter account, the pilot was seen sipping tea while praising his treatment by the Pakistani military.

Social media has been inundated with old videos and photos of the pilot, with the #BringBackAbhinandan hashtag trending and many Indians demanding his release.

Members of the National Disaster Response Force search for bodies near the debris of a crashed Indian military aircraft in central Kashmir. (AAP)

Australia urges restraint

It comes as Australia’s foreign minister Marise Payne said she was very concerned by the reports of the escalation in the conflict.

"If those reports are correct, we would certainly urge both sides to exercise restraint. To avoid further military action, this is a dangerous cycle of escalation," Senator Payne said during a visit to London overnight.

"I would encourage direct dialogue between both countries to endeavour to resolve these matters in a peaceful way."

Senator Payne said "the cycle of escalation ... is very dangerous for all concerned".

The Department of Foreign Affairs is monitoring the situation in the two countries but no travel advice has been issued for Australians as yet.

Foreign Affairs Minister Marise Payne. (AAP)

Escalating tensions

In the last two days, India and Pakistan have both said they shot down each other's fighter jets, ordered air strikes and instructed ground forces to exchange fire in more than a dozen locations.

Tensions have been running high since a suicide car bombing by Pakistan-based militants in Indian-controlled Kashmir killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police on February 14, but the risk of conflict rose dramatically on Tuesday when India launched an air strike on what it said was a militant training base.

A senior Indian government source said 300 militants were killed in Tuesday's strike. Pakistan says no one was killed.

Indian emergency workers inspect wreckage from one of the planes that crashed in Budgam in Kashmir. (AAP)

An Indian army soldier stands near the wreckage of an aircraft after it crashed in Budgam in Kashmir. (AAP)

Pakistani PM: 'Talk about differences'

Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan called for talks with India and hoped "better sense" would prevail so that both sides could de-escalate.

"No sovereign country can allow another country to become judge, jury and executioners. Therefore I prompted India in case of aggression, we would have no option but to respond," he said.

"All wars in world history have been miscalculated, those who started the wars did not know where it will end. So, I want to ask India, with the weapons you and we have, can we afford miscalculation?

He added: "Let us open the corridor of negotiations and settle all outstanding issues."

Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan. (AP/AAP)

History of war

Pakistan and India have fought three wars since independence from British colonial rule in 1947, two over the disputed Himalayan region of Kashmir, and went to the brink a fourth in 2002 after a Pakistani militant attack on India's parliament.

The latest escalation marks a sudden turnaround in relations between the two countries, that both claim Kashmir in full but rule in part.

As recently as November, Pakistan's Khan spoke of "mending ties" with India.

The conflict also comes at a critical time for Indian Prime Minster Narendra Modi, who faces a general election in a matter of months.

Mr Modi was accused on Wednesday by opposition parties of capitalising on conflict.

An Indian fighter douses the flames from plane wreckage at Budgam in Kashmir. (AAP)

Kashmiri villagers gather near the wreckage of an Indian aircraft after it crashed in Budgam area, outskirts of Srinagar, Indian controlled Kashmir, (AAP)

An Indian Air Force (IAF) MIG-21 fighter jet. (AAP)

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi criticised the "blatant politicisation of the sacrifices made by our armed forces", in a joint statement by 21 opposition parties, the first time they have broken ranks with the government over the issue.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo spoke separately with the foreign ministers of India and Pakistan and urged them to avoid "further military activity" following Tuesday's air strike.

"I expressed to both ministers that we encourage India and Pakistan to exercise restraint, and avoid escalation at any cost," Mr Pompeo said in a statement.

"I also encouraged both ministers to prioritise direct communication and avoid further military activity.”
