Pakistan and India suspend domestic and international flights as war tensions erupt

India Pakistan: Indian fighter jet shot down by Pakistan

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Coming days after a Indian air strike on a militant camp which Delhi claimed had killed 300 people, it illustrated the spiralling tensions between the neighbouring countries, with reports that a Pakistani jet had also been downed. India based journalist Aditya Raj Kaul tweeted: “Pakistan immediately stops its domestic and international flight operations to/from Lahore, Multan, Faislabad, Sialkot and Islamabad Airports.” The Indian air force has ordered Kashmir's main airport in Srinagar along with at least three others in neighboring states to be closed because of the two incidents, an official said.

Indian airline Vistara today confirmed flights to and from four cities in northern India had been put on hold.



Vistara, a joint venture between India's Tata Sons Limited and Singapore Airlines Limited said in a tweet: "Due to airspace restrictions, flights to and from Amritsar, Srinagar, Chandigarh and Jammu are currently on hold.”

Another Indian airline, Indigo, said shortly afterwards it had followed suit. The closures are certain to cause massive disruption to international travel.

Indian security guards are seen at the crash site after an Indian Air Force plane crashed in Kashmir

FlightRadar24's tweet warned of massive disruption

Air traffic monitoring webiste FlightRadar24 tweeted: "International flights that transit between Indian and Pakistani airspace now being affected. "Some flights returning to origin, while others appear to be seeking alternate routing." India said its warplanes struck a militant training camp inside Pakistan on Tuesday, raising the risk of conflict between the two countries.



Pakistan shot down two Indian jets on Wednesday, a spokesman for the Pakistan armed forces said, a day after Indian warplanes struck inside Pakistan for the first time since a war in 1971, prompting leading powers to urge the rivals to show restraint. Islamabad has also said two Indian pilots had been captured, although India has denied this, according to television station NDTV.

Tensions have been elevated since a suicide car bombing by Pakistan-based militants in Indian-controlled Kashmir killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police on February 14, but the risk of conflict rose dramatically on Tuesday when India launched an air strike on what it said was a militant training base.



The attack targeted the Jaish-e-Mohammed militant, the group that claimed credit for the suicide attack.



But although India said a large number of JeM fighters had been killed, Pakistani officials insisted the Indian airstrike was a failure and inflicted no casualties.



Indian air force planes strayed into Pakistani airspace on Wednesday after Pakistan had carried out airstrikes in Indian-occupied Kashmir, said Major General Asif Ghafoor, a spokesman for the Pakistan armed forces.



Another picture from the crash site in Kashmir

Michael Horowitz's tweet

He tweeted: ”PAF shot down two Indian aircrafts inside Pakistani airspace.”



One of the aircraft fell on India's side of Kashmir, while the second came down in Pakistani-held territory, and its pilot was captured, he added.



A spokesman for India's defence ministry was not immediately available for comment. However, defence analyst Michael A Horowitz suggested India had also shot down a Pakistani plane, tweeting: "Pakistan Air Force F-16 also downed."

Protestors in Pakistan burn an effigy of Indian PM Narendra Modi earlier this week

Police officials in Indian-occupied Kashmir said that two Indian pilots and a civilian had died after an Indian air force plane crashed in Kashmir, but did not confirm if the plane had been shot down by Pakistani forces. Indian officials said three Pakistani jets had also entered Indian airspace, before being intercepted and forced turned back.



On Tuesday evening, Pakistan began shelling using heavy calibre weapons in 12 to 15 places along the de facto border in Kashmir, known as the Line of Control (LoC), a spokesman for the Indian defence forces said.



He added: ”The Indian Army retaliated for effect and our focused fire resulted in severe destruction to five posts and number of casualties.”

Five Indian soldiers suffered minor wounds in the shelling that ended on Wednesday morning, he added.



India carries out airstrike on Pakistan following Pulwama attack

Avoid escalation at any cost US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo

Rahul Yadav, the deputy commissioner of the Poonch district where some of the shelling took place, said: "So far there are no (civilian) casualties but there is panic among people. ”We have an evacuation plan in place and if need arises we will evacuate people to safer areas.” Local officials on the Pakistani side said at least four people had been killed and seven wounded, though it was unclear if the casualties were civilian or military.



Meanwhile India has also continued its crackdown on suspected militants operating in Kashmir, a mountainous region that both countries claim in full but rule in part.



Mike Pompeo pictured with US President Donald Trump in Hanoi, Vietnam
