India-Pakistan tensions mount: 5 BIGGEST points so far

The Pakistan media was spreading fake news in relation with the incident. | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: A day after the Indian Air Force performed air strikes in Balakot, Pakistan targeting the camps of terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed, Pakistani jets crossed the Line of Control (LoC) and entered the Indian territory. The Pakistani jets entered the Poonch and Nowshera sectors of the Rajouri district in Jammu and Kashmir.

Yesterday, the Indian Air Force (IAF) had dropped 1,000 kg bombs in Balakot, Pakistan targeting the terror camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed. Here are five highlights of what happened today:

Also Read: Chennai: Drunk tea stall worker allegedly rapes stray dog; locals file complaint

1. The Press Trust of India (PTI) confirmed that the Pakistani jets entered the Poonch and Nowshera sectors in Rajouri and attempted to violate the Indian air space. The aircrafts were however warded off by IAF aircrafts on patrol duty.

2. The reports also confirmed that a Pakistan Air Force (PAF) F-16 aircraft was shot down by the IAF aircrafts. The news agency, ANI stated that a parachute was spotted when the F-16 aircraft was crashing. The aircraft crashed in Lam Valley, situated within 3 km of the Pakistani territory.

3. Soon after the Pakistani jets invaded the Indian air space, the Pakistani media started playing forged visuals of the incident, spreading false news on various platforms. The visuals were of an IAF MI-17 transport chopper which crashed in the Budgam district. Contrary to the Pakistani media's farce propaganda, it was confirmed that the chopper crashed due to a technical glitch.

4. As a safety measure, the airports in Srinagar, Jammu, Leh, Amritsar and Chandigarh have been shut down. Due to the increasing tension between the two countries, the administration took the step of shutting down the airports.

5. The National Investigation Agency continued to raid several places in the valley to catch a hold of people and agencies funding terror schemes. A raid was conducted today at the resident of militant Mudasir Khan.
