Defcon warning system INCREASES threat level as India and Pakistan tensions soar

India Pakistan: Pakistani Foreign Ministry issue statement

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The Defcon Warning System, a private organisation made up of experts monitoring nuclear threats against the US, said hostilities had “increased measurably” over the last few days between the historical enemies. They warned of an “escalation that has the possibility of spiralling” after India launched air strikes against militants in Pakistani territory. Pakistan officials said the airstrikes were carried out a day after Indian warplanes struck inside Pakistan. This is the first time this has happened since a war in 1971.

In their latest nuclear warning update, Defcon wrote: “Hostilities between India and Pakistan have increased measurably over the last few days as attacks have occurred between the two countries. “While there are often skirmishes between the historical enemies, these new attacks indicate an escalation that has the possibility of spiralling. “Although each country has made moves to try and de-escalate, military action indicate increased hostilities.” READ MORE: Does India have nuclear weapons?

Defcon Warning: Tensions are soaring between India and Pakistan

Defcon warning experts said the hostilities could spiral

These new attacks indicate an escalation that has the possibility of spiralling The Defcon Warning System

The private organisation, which monitors nuclear threats against the US, says the threat has risen to Level 4, stating that it is “unlikely” that all-out war will break out. Security experts said war was not “inevitable” and it would “be highly unlikely” that the US was involved. The Defcon Warning System report, made up of experts claiming to have contacts within the US security industry, said: “While India and Pakistan have fought wars in the recent past, and they have come close to war numerous times, this does not mean that war is inevitable. “Additionally, should war break out, it is highly unlikely that the United States will be involved. Russia and China, for their part, also have shown no sign of taking sides militarily. READ MORE: Is it safe to travel to India and Pakistan?

Defcon warning: India launched air strikes against militants in Pakistani territory
