India-Pakistan tensions: What we know so far about the escalating Kashmir conflict

Islamabad, March 1: A Pakistani man watches the latest video statement released by Pakistan's military authorities of the Indian Wing Commander pilot Abhinandan Varthaman. Pakistani officials returned the pilot to Indian officials at a border crossing.AAMIR QURESHI/AFP/Getty Images

The latest

Pakistani officials returned a captured pilot to India on Friday as a “gesture of peace” to de-escalate a resurging conflict in Kashmir. The pilot, identified as Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, had been shot down over Pakistani-controlled territory as the neighbouring nations traded air strikes. He was brought to a border crossing at Wagah on Friday and crossed over onto Indian soil, greeted by soldiers and officials.

India on Thursday banned the largest political and religious group in the part of Kashmir it controls, Jama’at-e-Islami, as Prime Minister Narendra Modi promised to crack down on terrorism. The current crisis ostensibly began with a Feb. 14 suicide bombing in Kashmir that killed at least 40 Indian troops.

On Friday, Pakistan’s civil aviation authority partly reopened the country’s airspace, which had been sealed Wednesday after the exchange of air strikes with India. The agency issued a statement saying all domestic and international flights will be allowed to and from Karachi, Islamabad, Peshawar and Quetta.





How the conflict escalated: A timeline

Kashmir CHINA IRAN PAKISTAN INDIA Bay of Bengal 0 550 KM TAJIKSTAN Area ceded by Pakistan to China, claimed by India 0 100 KM AFGHANISTAN Siachen Glacier PAKISTANI- ADMINISTERED KASHMIR Area held by China, claimed by India Line of control INDIAN- ADMINISTERED KASHMIR CHINA Jammu Islamabad PAKISTAN INDIA 0 20 Feb. 14, 2019 Pulwama - Suicide bomber rams car into a bus killing 40 paramilitary policemen. KM Muzaffarabad Srinagar Feb. 26, 2019 Jaba Top - India says the raid destroyed a training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) the group that claimed credit for the Feb. 14 attack in Kashmir. MURAT Yükselir / THE GLOBE AND MAIL, SOURCE: graphic news; tilezen; OSM contributers; reuters Kashmir CHINA IRAN PAKISTAN INDIA Bay of Bengal 0 550 KM TAJIKSTAN Area ceded by Pakistan to China, claimed by India 0 100 KM AFGHANISTAN Siachen Glacier PAKISTANI- ADMINISTERED KASHMIR Area held by China, claimed by India Line of control INDIAN- ADMINISTERED KASHMIR CHINA Jammu Islamabad PAKISTAN INDIA 0 20 Feb. 14, 2019 Pulwama - Suicide bomber rams car into a bus killing 40 paramilitary policemen. KM Muzaffarabad Srinagar Feb. 26, 2019 Jaba Top - India says the raid destroyed a training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) the group that claimed credit for the Feb. 14 attack in Kashmir. MURAT Yükselir / THE GLOBE AND MAIL, SOURCE: graphic news; tilezen; OSM contributers; reuters Kashmir CHINA IRAN PAKISTAN INDIA Bay of Bengal 0 550 KM TAJIKSTAN Area ceded by Pakistan to China, claimed by India 0 100 AFGHANISTAN KM Siachen Glacier Gilgit PAKISTANI- ADMINISTERED KASHMIR Area held by China, claimed by India Line of control INDIAN- ADMINISTERED KASHMIR CHINA Jammu Islamabad PAKISTAN INDIA 0 20 KM Feb. 14, 2019 Pulwama - Suicide bomber rams car into a bus killing 40 paramilitary policemen. Balakot New Balakot Muzaffarabad Mansehra Srinagar Feb. 26, 2019 Jaba Top - India says the raid destroyed a training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) the group that claimed credit for the Feb. 14 attack in Kashmir. MURAT Yükselir / THE GLOBE AND MAIL, SOURCE: graphic news; tilezen; openstreetmap contributers; reuters

Feb. 14: In Indian-controlled Kashmir, a convoy of Indian paramilitary police is attacked in a suicide bombing in the Pulwama region. At least 40 people are killed, the deadliest single attack on Indian forces in Kashmir in 30 years. An extremist group based in Pakistan, Jaish-e-Mohammad, claims responsibility. Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi also directly blames Pakistan, which he says is supporting Jaish. Pakistan’s government denies this.

Feb. 18: Indian forces in Kashmir kill three militants, including the suspected organizer of the attack, in a 17-hour battle. Four Indian soldiers, a policeman and a civilian are also killed.

Feb. 26: India launches air strikes in the Pakistani-controlled part of Kashmir to target what it says is a JeM training camp.

Feb. 27: India and Pakistan each launch air strikes and at least one Indian jet is shot down, though the countries offer different accounts of what happened. Major-General Asif Ghafoor, a spokesman for the Pakistan armed forces, says two Indian jets were downed after they entered Pakistani airspace while responding to a Pakistani aerial mission on targets in Indian-controlled Kashmir. One of the jets crashed on the Indian-controlled side, and the other on the Pakistani side, and two Indian pilots were captured, he said. But India’s military gives a different account, saying that India shot down one Pakistani plane that landed in Pakistani territory, which Pakistan denies. India does acknowledge that one of its MiG-21s, a Soviet-era fighter jet, was “lost” in skirmishes with Pakistan.

An image taken from video released by Pakistan's military shows what they claim to be an Indian pilot captured after his plane was shot down.The Canadian Press

Feb. 28: Under mounting international pressure to cool things down, Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan offers to release a captured Indian pilot the following day. Indian military officials welcomed the gesture, but Air Vice Marshal RGK Kapoor did not confirm when asked by reporters that India saw it as a de-escalation in the conflict. On Thursday night, India also issues a ban on Jama’at-e-Islami, a large Islamist political group in Indian-controlled Kashmir, accusing it of being an “unlawful association.”

March 1: Pakistani officials bring the pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, to a border crossing at Wagah to hand him back to Indian officials on the other side. He was greeted by Indian officials and a representative of the International Committee of the Red Cross.





Kashmir’s contentious history

May 14, 1995: An Indian paramilitary soldier guards the remains of a shrine outside Srinagar burned in a crossfire with militants.Kamel Kishore/Reuters

India, Pakistan and to a lesser extent China have been wrestling for control of the strategically important Kashmir valley ever since India’s partition in 1947. In the British colonial era, the diverse but mostly Muslim region was a princely state called Jammu and Kashmir, but when India and Pakistan gained independence each claimed authority over the area in its entirety. Since then, they have fought two wars and multiple skirmishes over Kashmir. Today, each country only administers part of Kashmir, separated by a Line of Control. A local insurgency has been fighting against India since 1989, pushing for either Pakistani rule or independence.





What is Jaish-e-Mohammad?

Masood Azhar, chief of Jaish-e-Mohammad, shown in 2000.AAMIR QURESHI/AFP/Getty Images

One of the leading Kashmiri insurgent groups, Jaish-e-Mohammad (“Army of Muhammad”) was founded in 1999 by a Muslim cleric, Masood Azhar. JeM is officially outlawed in Pakistan, but India accuses Pakistan of allowing it to operate freely anyway under other names. Though JeM’s goal is to have Kashmir under Pakistani authority, it has also attacked Pakistan’s military, and in 2003 it was suspected of trying to assassinate then-president Pervez Musharraf.





The political context

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, middle, takes the metro in New Delhi on Feb. 27.HANDOUT/AFP/Getty Images

The Kashmir standoff is a different sort of political test for India and Pakistan’s current leaders. In India, Mr. Modi is about to face a general election in May, and is under pressure from hard-liners to act on the Kashmir issue. At the same time, opposition parties in India have accused him of capitalizing on the conflict: On Feb. 27, 21 parties issued a joint statement condemning him, the first time they have broken ranks on the government on Kashmir policy. In the statement, congress leader Rahul Gandhi criticized the “blatant politicization of the sacrifices made by our armed forces."

In Pakistan, it’s been less than a year since Imran Khan, a popular cricket player turned anti-corruption crusader, became prime minister in a divisive general election in which his PTI party won power for the first time. His policy on Kashmir has been to treat it as a human-rights issue, and has urged the United Nations to act against what he says are atrocities committed by India in Kashmir. He also wants the UN Security Council to honour a 1948 resolution that Kashmiris can decide their political future through a plebiscite.





Where Canada stands

In a Feb. 27 statement, Foreign Affairs Minister Chrystia Freeland joined a chorus of world leaders urging the two sides to de-escalate:

Canada is gravely concerned about rising tensions between India and Pakistan. We urge both sides to exercise maximum restraint and avoid any further military escalation. Dialogue between India and Pakistan is needed to identify a durable diplomatic solution and maintain peace and security in the region. Canada remains steadfast in its support of the global fight against terrorism. We are committed to working with India, Pakistan and our international partners in this effort.





The Globe in Kashmir: More from our archives

2018: In disputed Kashmir, a young generation in search of a future

2017: India’s dam construction in Kashmir has heightened tensions with Pakistan – and its own citizens

2013: Kashmir feels the pinch as dispute chokes trade

2013: Amid deadly skirmishes, Pakistanis enjoy a little Shangri-La – in Kashmir





Compiled by Globe staff

Associated Press and Reuters, with reports from Globe staff
