Bhima Koregaon anniversary: 10 lakh visit Jay Stambh, Bhim Army chief goes live on Facebook

Around 10 lakh people gathered at the Jay Stambh memorial in Maharashtra's Pune district on Tuesday to pay their tributes on the occasion of the 201st anniversary of the Bhima Koregaon battle amid heavy security.

Security was stepped to avoid a repeat of last year's violence.

On January 1 last year, one person was killed and several others were injured in clashes that broke out on the anniversary of the 1818 Anglo-Maratha battle, which was fought between the British army (mainly comprising soldiers from the Dalit Mahar) and soldiers of Peshwa Bajirao II.

Meanwhile, Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad Chandrashekhar took out a bike rally from Pune to Koregaon Bhima despite being denied permission to do so. On a Facebook Live video, the Bhim Army chief claimed he was just going to see the victory pillar and people in lakhs joined him on the way.









On Monday, the Bombay High Court refused to grant interim relief to Bhim Army, which petitioned the court after Pune Police denied it permission to hold a public meeting at Koregoan Bhima.

Every year on the first day of January, Dalits in large numbers pay homage at the 1818 war memorial at Koregaon Bhima village, about 40 km from Pune.

Paying homage at the war memorial, Dalit leader Prakash Ambedkar said the battle also symbolises a fight against caste discrimination and social injustice. "It was Baba Saheb Ambedkar, who first visited this memorial in 1923," Prakash Ambedkar, the grandson of Dalit icon and chief architect of the Indian Constitution BR Ambedkar, told India Today.

Although he praised the security arrangements, Prakash Ambedkar came down heavily on the BJP government for falsely implicating Ambedkarite intellectuals who have been working for the betterment of the marathas and OBC community people.

He also alleged that the BJP government does not want peace to prevail in this area and has banned the organisers from entering Koregaon Bhima for the war memorial event, thereby creating fear psychosis among the masses.

Eminent Dalit leaders like Ramdas Athavale, Jogendra Kawade, Anand Raj Ambedar, Congress leader Deepak Nikalje were also present. The mother of the deceased Dalit student, Rohith Vemula, also visited this war memorial besides three state ministers.

By 8pm, the number of visitors at this place were around 10 lakh, district collector Naval Kishore Ram said.
