Our principled patriotism: India is fighting terrorism for the sake of her civilisational ideals

Sagarika Ghose has been a journalist for over three decades, starting her career with The Times of India, subsequently moving to Outlook magazine and The Indian Express. She has been a primetime news anchor and has also worked as Consulting Editor, The Times Of India. She is also a political commentator on the news channel ET Now. Ghose is the author of the best selling biography of Indira Gandhi, "Indira, India's Most Powerful Prime Minister." She is the author of the recently published theoretical work, “Why I Am A Liberal”. LESS ... MORE

After the terror attack at Pulwama, the Indian Air Force has struck a jihadist terror camp in Pakistan. That India’s heroic air force launched a remarkable strike at Jaish-e-Muhammed training camps, yet took care not to target any Pakistani civilians reveals soldierly courage and professionalism. In 1971, covering the Bangladesh war, the London Times said about India’s soldiers: “The Indian army’s performance as a temporary occupation force has surpassed its performance on the battle field.”

Contrast the actions of the security forces as well as the foreign secretary’s emphasis that Pakistani civilians were not on India’s radar, to the warmongering social media armies who are constantly seeking to make enemies of fellow citizens. From the safety of their keyboards and TV studios, ‘muscular nationalists’ are calling for retribution on ‘traitors’, ‘urban naxals’, ‘libtards’, or anyone asking any questions of the ruling party. Is this hyper nationalism being true to the unsurpassed conduct that India’s armed forces are renowned for?

Genuine patriots know that love of the country cannot be based on hatred of any manufactured or imagined enemy within, but needs to be predicated on a realistic mission to keep India’s unity and harmony alive. Liberal patriotism builds and strengthens the nation, muscular nationalism directed inwards tends to create social infighting, just at the precise time the terrorist is seeking to ignite civil war.

The government’s withdrawal of security cover of Hurriyat members and some valley politicians, as well as arrests of Jamaat members and separatist leaders, should not become a moment of shrill triumphalism by hyper nationalists. On the other side too, rumours should not be fuelled about rationing or troop buildup. As cries of revoking Article 35A and Article 370 – laws that confer ‘special status’ on J&K – are being heard, Kashmiri politicians like Mehbooba Mufti are threatening that Kashmiris might even abandon the tricolour, such is the feeling of persecution among some.

To prevent these cleavages, the narrative must remain inclusive rather than accusatory. Expelling Kashmiri students for social media posts, campaigning to get Congress’s Navjot Singh Sidhu barred from a comedy show because he happened to voice an opinion that was not to the liking of muscular nationalists, are tactics that aim to terrorise in the name of so called deshbhakti.

Should women journalists be made the target of obscenity and gang rape threats on social media in the name of ‘nationalism’? Is it not unacceptable for constitutional functionaries like the Meghalaya governor Tathagata Roy to endorse a boycott of Kashmiris as a way to fight militancy? As Tuesday’s strikes demonstrated, India’s campaign is against those armed violent entities waging war against her, not against civilians of any hue.

True Indian patriots adhering to values of reconciliation have taken it upon themselves to heal and unite. Tough no nonsense politicians like Punjab CM Amarinder Singh are implementing zero tolerance on those wreaking vengeance on Kashmiris. Sikh communities have rushed to the rescue of Kashmiris. In a scathing stricture the Supreme Court has insisted that every state government take steps that Kashmiris are not harmed. Liberal patriotism upholds rule of law. Muscular nationalists by attacking ordinary Kashmiris – indeed, anyone who they disagree with – help to obliterate the dividing line between terrorism and civilisation.

True patriots have always struggled for reconciliation. Both AB Vajpayee and Manmohan Singh invited the Hurriyat for talks, standing forth as supporters of the political process in the valley, knowing that local support for militants only weakens when the government is seen as a source of justice and inclusiveness. When the then J&K CM Mufti Mohammad Sayeed initiated the policy of the ‘healing touch’ he was reinforcing an idea of Kashmir in which no teenager had become a suicide bomber for two decades.

When human rights activists ask questions about ‘encounter killings’ in J&K, they are seeking to make the administration and state apparatus more credible, just and accountable, thus strengthening India’s cause not weakening it.

In 2003 Vajpayee not only spoke of insaniyat, kashmiriyat and jamhooriyat in Srinagar but also took care never to make any kind of divisive or polarising references in speeches in the rest of India. Nor did Vajpayee ever say that if BJP did not win domestic elections, fireworks would be set off in Pakistan, as BJP president Amit Shah declared in the Bihar campaign of 2015, signalling that an anti-BJP vote was also an ‘anti-national’ one.

For Mahatma Gandhi, love for the country did not mean hatred or personal animosity for the opponent, but the pursuit of higher ideals. Nor was Gandhi a passive ‘peacemonger’ in the face of aggression, if war must be waged, it must be on the basis of values. That’s why Gandhi supported the Allied war effort in the two world wars provided they upheld the values of civilian dignity and freedom. After all, India is fighting terrorism for the sake of her civilisational ideals, not targeting any community or religion.

Muscular nationalism runs the risk of legitimising and normalising violence, creating copycat violence, as well as setting off social and communal divisions. Liberal patriotism believes that asking the government to be just and accountable makes it stronger. The muscular nationalist says my country right or wrong. The liberal patriot says, my country must live up to the highest standards of constitutional democracy. One of the best bulwarks against external threat is the force of a citizenry united not by coercive rhetoric but by visible manifestations of the principles of inclusiveness and decency.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
