Woman among six martyred in Indian shelling across LoC

SIALKOT/ISLAMABAD: India’s border forces resorted to heavy fire along the Line of Control (LoC), leaving at least six civilians, including a woman, dead and 11 others wounded in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) on Tuesday evening.

While Pakistan on Wednesday summoned Indian envoy and condemned the unprovoked ceasefire violations by the Indian occupation forces along the LoC on February 26, which resulted in the martyrdom of four innocent civilians and injuries to six others.

Civilians are being ruthlessly targeted by Indian forces without any provocation while Sialkot sector on the LoC between Pakistan and India has turned into a massive battlefield with casualties being reported from both sides.

The four deaths reported by local newspaper came as a result of intense and indiscriminate shelling which began at about 5:30pm simultaneously in Kotli, Bhimber and Poonch districts of the AJK. At least five civilians including three of the same family were killed in Nakiyal Sector after the Indian troops opened unprovoked firing at the residential areas along with the LoC.

Deputy Director of international think tank ICTC F Jeffery earlier revealed the breaking news quoting Pakistani security sources in a tweet on Tuesday. The security expert tweeted that Indian forces including all Indian bases in Jammu Kashmir were currently on high alert in anticipation of a possible Pakistani strike.

Pakistani border forces also retaliated after aggression by India and up till now more than five Indian soldiers have suffered injuries along with heavy damage to their military installations as confirmed by Indian media itself. Pakistan targeted Indian soldiers in Kashmir’s Poonch, Rajouri and Jammu district.

The development comes hours after Indian Air Force fighter jets violated the LoC before being scared away by the Pakistan Air Force fighter jets. Indian Air Force also claimed to have targeted the alleged Jaish’s terrorist camp though Pakistan denies any such attack.

Pakistan on Wednesday summoned Indian Acting High Commissioner Gaurav Ahluwalia and condemned the unprovoked ceasefire violations by the Indian occupation forces along the Line of Control (LoC) on February 26, in Nikial and Khuiratta sectors which resulted in the martyrdom of four innocent civilians and injuries to six others.

The civilians martyred included Mottia Bibi, Ms Zarina, Gulfaraz and Ms Shehnaz. According to a Foreign Office statement, Director General (SA & Saarc) Dr Mohammad asked the Indian envoy that India should respect the 2003 Ceasefire arrangement, investigate the incidents of violations, instruct its forces to respect the ceasefire in letter and spirit, and maintain peace on the LoC and the Working Boundary (WB).

The Director General (SA & Saarc) demanded that the Indian side should permit United Nations Military Observers Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) to play its mandated role as per the UN Security Council resolutions.

According to the statement, the Indian forces along the LoC and the WB were continuously targeting civilian populated areas with heavy weapons. This unprecedented escalation in ceasefire violations by India was continuing from the year 2017 when the Indian forces committed 1970 violations, it added.

“The deliberate targeting of civilian populated areas is indeed deplorable and contrary to human dignity, international human rights and humanitarian laws. The ceasefire violations by India are a threat to regional peace and security and may lead to a strategic miscalculation,” the statement maintained.
