More rallies staged in support of armed forces

PESHAWAR: The residents of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa on Wednesday staged more rallies and vowed to fight alongside the armed forces to defend the country in the face of an Indian aggression.

Traders staged a rally at Qissa Khwani. They chanted slogans to condemn India for violating the Pakistan airspace. They renewed the support to the armed forces.

NOWSHERA: The Anjuman-e-Tajiran Nowshera cantonment paid rich tributes to the Pakistan Air Force for shooting down the warplanes of India. Chanting slogans against India for its aggression against Pakistan, the traders passed through various routes before holding a rally at the Shobra Chowk at the Nowshera cantonment.

Meanwhile, the Tehsil Council in Pabbi unanimously passed a resolution condemning the Indian aggression against the country. The councillors vowed to support the armed forces and defend the country against Indian aggression. Sajidullah presided over the session.

The resolution demanded India to stop subjecting the Kashmiris to inhuman treatment. It said the entire nation stood by the army and no effort would be spared to defend the country.

MINGORA: A rally was held in the Swat district to express solidarity with the armed forces. The participants carried banners and placards which had slogans against the Indian aggression.

DERA ISMAIL KHAN: Students, social workers and traders in Dera Ismail Khan staged a rally to pledge support to the armed forces. Holding Pakistan flags, they chanted slogans in favour of the armed forces and against India. They also torched an effigy of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

GHALLANAI: The traders at Ekkaghund Bazaar staged a rally in support of the armed forces. They pledged support to the security forces and vowed to fight alongside the soldiers against India if it attacked Pakistan.

LANDIKOTAL: Scores of Afghan citizens and traders took out a rally to show solidarity with Pakistan. The participants holding banners and placards chanted slogans of Pakistan Zindabad. They lauded the Pakistan Air Force for giving a befitting response to India by downing its jet fighters.
