DNA Edit: Pakistan Cornered - Islamabad is looking increasingly short of allies

The bottom line in diplomacy is rather stark. Everyone has to fight his own war. As the last 48 hours have revealed, when it comes to bare-knuckle fighting, even the best friends keep away.

At its briefing on Tuesday, hours after the Indian air strike, China, Pakistan’s all-weather friend, refused to take sides openly. It asked India and Pakistan to show restraint and settle disputes amicably, a standard diplomatic euphemism, if one existed.

If Islamabad was hoping for a more substantial assertion of its point of view about Indian violation of its airspace from Beijing, it never came. Quite apart from the fact that China has an upcoming trilateral meeting involving Russia and India, historically it has stayed away from any Indo-Pakistan bilateral dispute, preferring to hand out homilies, rather than take sides.

Both during the 1965 and 1971 wars with Pakistan, Indian diplomacy and military experts prepared for a two-front engagement — with Pakistan in the west and China in the north — but it never came.

Experts in Pakistan were left fulminating, but Beijing showed that it had no intentions of fighting someone else’s war. It was equally non-committal on the telephonic conversation between the Pakistan and Chinese foreign ministers on Tuesday, offering only bland one-liners as solutions to a highly complex problem.

China is keen on Indian participation in the second Belt and Road Forum in April at a time when the important project has been hit by rejections in some countries. India was the only major country to boycott the first meeting of the Forum last year, although 150 countries, including the US, had participated.

New Delhi’s presence can provide respectability to the programme, which has only the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor to show for. But globally, Pakistan finds that its chickens are coming to roost. After years of running terror camps — all well chronicled — countries, who have been at the receiving end by its militant proxies, are wary of listening to Islamabad’s litany of grievances against New Delhi.

According to one account, the Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, in a conversation with US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo threatened to disrupt the Afghanistan peace process, if the US did not ‘rein in’ India.

The US is currently talking to the Taliban to negotiate a withdrawal of their troops out of Afghanistan, using Pakistan’s good offices. The Australian foreign ministry, while urging both sides to exercise restraint, said that Pakistan must do everything possible to proscribe Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM).

India, with the advantage of the first strike, has done its bit of robust diplomacy. Foreign minister Sushma Swaraj picked the hotline to talk to foreign ministers of China, Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Singapore to brief them about targeting JeM by the Indian Air Force (IAF).

Evidence of skilful diplomacy was evident in the statement issued by the New Delhi-based Dean of Diplomatic Corps Frank Castellanos, who acknowledged that the Indian strike was completely justified.
