‘Govind Pansare was killed for being obstacle to Hindu rashtra’

Govind Pansare

Hindu rashtra

Sanatan Sanstha

Narendra Dabholkar

MM Kalburgi

journalist Gauri Lankesh

Supplementary charge-sheet explains the conspiracy hatched in Belgaum.Communist Party of India (CPI) leaderwas killed because he was seen as a hurdle in the formation of, says the supplementary chargesheet filed by Kolhapur Special Investigation Team (SIT) in the 2015 murder case.The SIT claimed that the planning of Pansare’s murder was inspired by a book titled Kshatradharma Sadhana, published byVirendrasinh Tawde is the kingpin of the murder, said the chargesheet filed on February 12, 2019. Tawde obtained bail in the Pansare murder case last year, but he is still in jail inmurder case. Dabholkar, rationalist, social activist and author, was, shot dead in Pune on August 20, 2013.Dr Dabholkar’s killing was the first murder of a rationalist committed by the right-wing extremists.Later, Pansare,andwere murdered.On February 16, 2015, Pansare and his wife, Uma, were attacked in Kolhapur by two unknown assailants. Pansare succumbed in a Mumbai hospital on February 20.According to the chargesheet, Devidas Suryavanshi, 56, who used to work as a motorcycle mechanic, has given a statement that he and Sachin Lakhe stole a black coloured bike from Belgaum. On the same night, Suryavanshi took the motorcycle to Kolhapur ST bus stand and showed it to Tawde and Amit Degvekar, another accused, the chargesheet said. Tawde conducted first meeting with Suryavanshi, Degvekar and others. Tawde asked Suryavanshi to steal the bike for the ‘Dharma’ work to be conducted in Kolhapur, the chargesheet claimed. Devidas has also confessed about the shooting practice he used to have with Sachin Andure, the alleged shooter of Dabholkar, using a tree as a target near Hatnur dam in Jalgaon. The tree has been chopped off now, so the SIT couldn’t get direct evidence of the firing practice. Suryavanshi was also trained in bomb- making.Sharad Kalaskar, another alleged shooter in Dabholkar case, has given a statement that in 2015 Amol Kale was training him to make pistols. Kale, Tawde and Degvekar used to visit Belgaum frequently for some work. This secret work was never discussed in front of him. Kalaskar, who hails from Aurangabad district, was staying in Belgaum in another accused Bharat Kurane’s house. Kalaskar states that he and Andure were under lot of pressure by Tawde for the murder of Dabholkar, the chargesheet said. Tawde and Kale used to tell them that they have done some mistakes while committing the assigned ‘Dharma task –elemination of Dabholkar’.“In February 2015, I heard the news that Pansare was attacked in the way Dabholkar was. I was scared. At 10 in the night, Kurane and Lakhe reached home. Kurane showed a pistol. That time Lakhe said we would have been caught redhanded had the police patil checked our luggage.”This weapon was used in Pansare murder case and it was carried by both of them to Belgaum, the charge-sheet states. The weapon was later taken away by Tawde, Kurane had told Kalaskar, according to the chargesheet. In December 2017, Kalaskar had done ‘study’ of former Justice BG Kolse Patil on the order of Kale.Shockingly, the chargesheet brings on record witnesses who were offered weapons training by Tawde and Kale during 2014-15, but they refused to kill someone for Dharma. The forensic evidences have proved that the link between Dabholkar – Pansare and Kalburgi murder, says the chargesheet.Vinay Pawar and Sarang Akolkar are shooters in Pansare case as per earlier chargesheets.Amol Kale has given a statement that on the second day after Pansare was shot; he, Tawde, Kurane, and Lakhe had faluda near the Temblai temple Kolhapur. This is where Tawde allegedly handed over to Kurane the pistol that was used in Pansare murder case, the chargesheet claimed.
