Pakistani fighter jets 'try to VIOLATE Indian airspace' as war tensions escalate

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

The Pakistani jets were chased away by Indian Air Force warplanes after flying towards the contested border in Kashmir on Thursday.

The two nuclear-armed countries are at risk of descending into conflict after both ordered warplanes to carry out revenge airstrikes in recent days. Pakistan launched airstrikes and shot down two Indian jets on Wednesday 24 hours after Indian warplanes struck inside Pakistan on Tuesday for the first time since a war in 1971.

The tit-for-tat air strikes happened after a suicide car bombing that killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police in Indian-controlled Kashmir on February 14.

India claimed it had bombed “terror camps” in near Kashmir's Line of Control (LoC), where the militant group, the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), were said to be planning another attack.

World leaders including US President Donald Trump have called for calm between the two nations, both of whom claim all of Kashmir.

(Image: DS)

Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan on Wednesday called for talks with India, warning of “miscalculation” resulting in war between the two nations.

"History tells us that wars are full of miscalculation,” Khan said during a brief televised broadcast to the nation.

“My question is that, given the weapons we have, can we afford miscalculation. We should sit down and talk."

(Image: GETTY) (Image: REUTERS)

In contrast, India’s Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, struck a more combative tone, saying he had “complete faith” in his country’s defence forces in facing down threats from the “enemy”.

“The enemy tries to destabilize us, carries out terror attacks, they want to stop our growth,” Modi said on Thursday.

“We all countrymen are standing like a rock to counter their evil designs.”

The conflict comes at a critical time for Modi, who faces a general election in a matter of months.

(Image: GETTY)

Tensions have elevated since Thursday when Pakistan Air Force fighter jets were scrambled to intercept the Indian warplanes said to be attacking the JeM. The strike – first of its kind since the two countries went to war in 1971 – has risen the risk of war dramatically. Pakistan Major General Asif Ghafoor said he country had "no choice" but to respond to India's attack after earlier warning "get ready for our surprise”.

(Image: REUTERS)

Pakistan and India have fought three wars since independence from British colonial rule in 1947 and went to the brink a fourth in 2002 after a Pakistani militant attack on India's parliament.

The latest escalation marks a sudden deterioration in relations between the two countries.

As recently as November, Pakistan's leader Khan spoke of "mending ties" with India. The White House urged "both sides to take immediate steps to de-escalate the situation."
