First civilian casualty on borders as Pakistan violates ceasefire on LoC

Shifting focus to the Line of Control (LoC), Pakistan army activated various sectors on Thursday when they pounded the civilian area and Indian forward positions leaving one woman dead and another injured.



Deputy Commissioner of Poonch, Rahul Yadav told DNA that a woman was killed in Chhajila village while another person was injured in the Balnoi village of the district.



Amina Kousar was working in her house when a powerful shell landed on the premises. She received grievous wounds and was shifted to hospital where she was declared dead by the doctors.



Zakir Hussian, a serving soldier who had come home on leave, was injured when a shell landed in the Balnoi village. He was immediately shifted to district hospital Mendhar.



This is the first civilian fatality since the hostilities broke out between the India and Pakistan after Indian Air Force jets crossed into Pakistan and targeted Jaish-e-Mohammad terror camps in Balakote area of Manshera in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.



The fresh round of the ceasefire violations started early in the morning when Pakistan army resorted to heavy shelling in Krishna Ghati sector of Poonch district in Jammu.



Pakistan army used heavy calibre mortars and small arms to target the civilian population and Indian forward posts. However, the Indian army swung into action immediately and retaliated in equal measure to silence Pakistani guns.



Hours later, Pakistani army changed gear and extended the shelling to other sectors of the LoC in the neighbouring district of Rajouri in Pir Panjal valley of Jammu.



"Pakistan continues with its nefarious designs in continuous unprovoked cease fire violation along the LoC since six in the morning. Now, again at about 3 pm, resorted to unprovoked ceasefire violation by heavy shelling from mortars and firing of small arms along LoC in Sunderbani, Mankote, Khari Karmara and Degwar Sectors in Jammu and Kashmir," said Lieutenant Colonel Devender Anand, defence spokesman at Jammu.



Pakistan Rangers, sources said, are using long range weapons including 120 mm mortars, which has a range of seven kilometers, and 82 mm mortars, having a range of 4.5 kilometres, to inflict maximum damage deep into the civilian areas.



Sources said for the last three days Pakistan army has carried out more than 32 ceasefire violations on the LoC. In the last 10 hours alone, Pakistan has violated ceasefire at least eight times along the LoC in Rajouri and Poonch districts.



Tension has gripped the villagers living near the Line of Control after a fresh wave of ceasefire violations. For the second day on Thursday, schools and educational institutions falling in the 0-5 kilometers of LoC in Rajouri, Poonch and Jammu were closed as a precautionary measure.



Deputy Commissioner Rajouri, Mohammad Aijaz Asad said no body has been shifted or evacuated from any border area of the district.



"People living in the border areas are staying at their respective places. Our officers are staying with the people in these villages. There is no problem as such. Our 102 bunkers are ready on the border areas," he said.

32 Violations

Sources said for the last three days Pakistan army has carried out more than 32 ceasefire violations on the LoC. On Thursday daytime alone, Pakistan has violated ceasefire at least eight times along LoC
