Firing outside school: Edu dept forms probe panel

Ludhiana: On a day when the district education department constituted a three-member committee to probe the firing outside a government school at Gag Kalan village in Sidhwan Bet, police are probing whether two firearms were used in the clash that had left two persons injured, including one with bullet injury.

On Tuesday, a clash had broken out over a teacher allegedly reprimanding a student a few days back. The two groups, one supporting the teacher and other the student, had come to blows. An unidentified accused had fired several gunshots.

While Daljeet Singh of Tudyad in Dharmkot, Moga, was hit by a bullet, Manjeet Singh of Khurshidpoora in Sidhwan Bet had received head injuries after being hit by a rod.

Meanwhile, Sidhwan Bet police had registered cross FIRs into the matter.

In the first FIR, Baljinder Singh of Khurshidpura claimed his cousin Manjit Singh was with him when the accused challenged them in the village. He alleged the accused Kuldeep Singh alias Bittu of Khurshidpura took out a pistol and fired at Manjit.

The complainant said the bullet had hit his thigh after which the accused fled the spot. He claimed that the incident occurred due to old enmity.

Police had booked Kuldeep Singh, Gurinder Singh, Preetam Singh, Jasminder Singh, Buta Singh of Khurshidpura, Daljeet Singh of Dharamkot Moga and Maan Singh of Jalandhar for attempt to murder and other sections.

Meanwhile, Hari Singh of Khurshipura in his complaint told police that his brother Iqbal Singh was standing outside his house along with his nephew Gurinder Singh and friend Daljeet Singh of Dharamkot. He said because of clash, prominent citizens had gathered outside the school.

The complainant said he is a member of the panchayat and he along with his nephew Gurinder Singh and his friend had gone to participate in discussions over the clash. He said the accused Tarseem Singh and his accomplices, who were standing outside the school, challenged them for a duel.

Hari Singh said the accused then took out his pistol and fired at him. He said the bullet hit Daljeet Singh on his head after which he was taken to a private hospital in Ludhiana.

Police have meanwhile booked Tarseem Singh, Gurdev Singh, Manjeet Singh, Sukhdev Singh and 3-4 unidentified accused in a case of attempt to murder.

ASI Kulwinder Singh, investigating officer of the case, said the accused are on the run. He said the two complainants have claimed that two weapons were used in the crime.

The IO said once the accused are arrested, it would be ascertained whether the men who allegedly fired during the incident sided with the teacher or student.

Box: Education dept orders probe

District education officer (secondary) Swaranjit Kaur said that they have constituted three-member committee to probe the matter. The committee is expected to submit a report within a week after which necessary action will be taken in the case. The DEO said as of now neither the teacher nor the student has been suspended.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
