Pakistan to release Indian pilot as a ‘peace gesture’

Indian people hold placards and photographs of Indian Air Force pilot Abhinandan Varthaman, as they celebrate the announcement of his soon release, in Amritsar on February 28, 2019. AFP

Pakistan to release Indian pilot as a ‘peace gesture’

PAKISTAN said on Thursday it will release a captured Indian pilot in a “peace gesture”, taking a step towards rapprochement as clashes between the nuclear-armed rivals ignited fears of a disastrous conflict.

The pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, has become the face of the crisis since he was shot down in a rare aerial engagement between the South Asian neighbours over the disputed region of Kashmir on Wednesday.

With anger boiling over his capture in India, analysts have touted him as a potential trump card for Islamabad.

“As a peace gesture we are releasing the Indian pilot tomorrow,” Prime Minister Imran Khan told a joint session of parliament.

Parliamentarians stamped their feet in approval at his statement, the first sign of a potential thaw after a dangerous sequence of events between the two countries sent tensions soaring.

Tit-for-tat raids across their hair-trigger border have alarmed world powers who have urged restraint.

Pakistan has said it downed two Indian fighters, while India confirmed it had lost one plane and claimed it had shot down a Pakistani jet.

“I am afraid of miscalculations,” Khan said. “We should not even think of war, especially in view of the lethality of the weapons that we have.”

However he warned that his Indian counterpart Narendra Modi should not misconstrue his desire to de-escalate as “weakness”.

“India must know that we will be forced to strongly retaliate against any Indian action in the future,” he said.

Wednesday’s dogfight and the pilot’s capture sparked fears of India and Pakistan – who have fought two wars and countless deadly skirmishes over the Himalayan region – entering a cycle of retaliation and counterattacks that could spiral out of control.

Pakistan has closed its airspace indefinitely, and the army said on Thursday its troops were on high alert along the Line of Control, the de facto border that divides Kashmir.

Authorities have tightened security across the country, with hospitals on alert and leave for police and other security officials cancelled in some cities.

With anger boiling in India over Pakistan’s capture of the pilot, Modi called on his citizens Thursday to “stand as a wall” in the face of an enemy that “seeks to destabilise India”.

Analysts have said the pilot’s fate, and his safe release, could prove central to the neighbours pulling back from the brink.

US President Donald Trump has voiced optimism that the tensions could soon be resolved.

“We have had some reasonably decent news . . . Hopefully that’s going to be coming to an end,” he said of the crisis, speaking to reporters in Hanoi after his summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un.

The confrontation erupted after a suicide attack by a Pakistani group killed 40 Indian troops on February 14.
