Former J&K CM Mehbooba Mufti plays soft separatism card before polls

Come elections, former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Mehbooba Mufti is at her soft-separatism best.

From calling-up Moderate Hurriyat Conference chairman Mirwaiz Umar Farooq to accusing the Centre of intruding into Muslim homes and destroying families through the Triple Talaq Bill, Mehbooba is trying hard to woo a huge separatist constituency before the assembly polls.

Mehbooba sprung a major surprise when she reached out to Mirwaiz on Monday to convey her outrage over the desecration of the Jamia Masjid by masked youth who unfurled Islamic State (IS) flags and briefly occupied the sacred pulpit on Friday. Mirwaiz is the chief cleric of Jamia Masjid who delivers sermons on Fridays and important days of the Islamic calendar.

"Appearance of a few youth with IS flags in Jamia Masjid, Srinagar is desecration of the most important institution of Kashmir's religious, social life. Called Mirwaiz Kashmir Umar Saheb to convey my outrage. Jamia Masjid and its pulpit are most important landmarks of our religious, cultural moorings. Can't allow barbaric forces to defile it in the name of Islam," tweeted Mehbooba.

The phone call to Mirwaiz comes two years after he, along with Hurriyat hawk Syed Ali Shah Geelani and JKLF chairman Mohammad Yasin Malik, formed the Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL) to spearhead the 2016 unrest against the Centre and the then Mehbooba Mufti-led PDP-BJP alliance government

Earlier on Saturday, Mehbooba took to Twitter to congratulate Geelani for the success of his granddaughter in matric exams. On Sunday, she visited a terrorist's family in south Kashmir's Pulwama and cautioned the government against alleged harassment of terrorists' families.

Picking up the threads from where she left on Sunday, Mehbooba on Monday, also hit out at the Centre saying that BJP is entering the homes of Muslims through the Triple Talaq Bill, which will destroy their families.

"Indian Muslims and we from J&K, which is a Muslim majority state, decided to stay with Gandhi's secular democratic India and let us not convert it into Zia-ul-Haq's nation," she said.

Mehbooba alleged that after creating divisions on religious and sectarian lines, BJP is now trying to divide Muslim families through the Triple Talaq Bill.

"Muslims pride themselves for strong family structure and bonding. Same is true of other religions in the East, which is considered as an advantage over the Western culture. This Tripple Talaq Bill is a direct assault on that," she said

The Peoples Democratic Party president said democracy is not run through brute majority and it is about consensus. "Muslims accepted the decision of SC on invalidity of Triple Talaq, unlike the Sabarimala verdict. Best is to empower Muslim women to be able to face the world independently in case of a breakup," she said.

ON TRIPLE TALAQ

Picking up the threads from where she left on Sunday, Mehbooba hit out at the Centre saying that BJP is entering the homes of Muslims through the Triple Talaq Bill, which will destroy their families
