Husband of BJP MLA’s daughter, who sought protection from father citing threat, beaten up outside court

Sakshi Mishra with Ajitesh

Key Highlights Sakshi Mishra's video with husband appeared last week on social media Sakshi claimed threat to her life from father for marrying a Dalit Her husband was beaten up outside court today

Allahabad: The husband of an Uttar Pradesh BJP MLA’s daughter, who had approached the Allahabad High Court last week seeking protection from her father, was on Monday roughed up outside the court premises here.

Some unidentified men roughed up Sakshi Mishra’s husband Ajitesh outside the Allahabad High Court premises where they had gone to attend the court hearing on seeking protection. Both were swiftly taken to the court after the incident.

A video of Sakshi had last week appeared in which she had claimed that she faced threat to her life from her father for marrying Ajitesh, who is a Dalit.

Today, the Allahabad High Court took up the couple’s plea and issued directions to the police to provide security to Sakshi and Ajitesh. After going through the marriage certificate and age-related documents of the couple, the court observed that both are adults and have full right to marry as per their wishes.

The court also ordered police officials to appear before it and explain the lapses which led to the attack on Ajitesh. The couple has also been asked to stay in court no two for security reasons.

Meanwhile, the couple’s lawyer later told the media outside the court that only Ajitesh was beaten up by unidentified men. There were earlier reports both Sakshi and Ajitesh were beaten up.

"Only Ajitesh was beaten up. It's not known who these people were. But it proves that there is indeed a threat to their life for which they were seeking protection," the lawyer said.

After Sakshi’s video went viral on the social media last week, Mishra, MLA from Bithari Chainpur in Bareilly, had stated that his daughter had nothing to fear from him and that she was within her rights to take her own decisions.

In the video, Sakshi could be heard telling her father that he should allow her to live in peace with her husband. She further appealed to the police to provide them protection claiming her father, brother and their associates posed a threat to her life.

In their petition, the couple contended that the girl’s father was furious over the fact that his daughter, a Brahmin, had married a Dalit.

They stressed in the petition that since they are adults and married out of their free will, they should be allowed to live in peace.

"Whatever is going on against me in the media is wrong. My daughter is an adult and has the right to take her own decisions. Neither I nor my men or any member of my family has given any threat to life to anyone," Misra said in a statement last Thursday.

"I and my family are busy in our work. I am doing the people's work in my constituency and presently running a BJP membership campaign. There is no threat to anyone from me," he added.

Sakshi had also issued an appeal to other MPs and MLAs to not support her father, who is also known as Pappu Bhartaul, on the matter.
