BL Santhosh replaces Ram Lal: Why does RSS want greater control over BJP?

Ram Lal, the longest-serving Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) general secretary (organisation) is back with the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). He was repatriated over the weekend after serving as bridge between the BJP and the RSS for 12 years.

Ram Lal has been replaced by BL Santhosh, who is considered a more purist Sangh ideologue than his predecessor. Unlike Ram Lal, Santhosh is not known to hold back his views if a BJP leader or the party leadership deviates from the core RSS ideology of Hindutva.

The development comes at a crucial time when there has been unease in the RSS over the organisation being "ignored" by the BJP leadership in giving credit for the Lok Sabha election result.

It follows a national conclave of RSS prant pracharaks at Vijayawada in Andhra Pradesh ending on Saturday. The RSS conclave decided to increase "our effortsfor the purpose of social transformation." At the three-day conclave, the RSS leaders sounded uncomfortable with the BJP leaders giving total credit for the party's win to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's popularity and Union Home Minister Amit Shah's organisational skills.

At the end of the conclave, RSS joint secretary Manmohan Vaidya minced no words in reminding the BJP about its contribution to the return of the Narendra Modi government. Vaidya said the RSS volunteers conducted door-to-door campaign in 4.5 lakh of the 5.5 lakh villages across the country "creating awareness" during the Lok Sabha election.

Who got BJP votes in Lok Sabha election?

He said sar-sanghchalak Mohan Bhagwat called for 100 per cent voting during the Lok Sabha election. "The swayamsevaks were also involved in the task of spreading public awareness to increase the voting percentage and encourage people to vote on issues of national interest. The swayamsevaks did door-to-door contact and held small indoor meetings," said Vaidya.

He asserted that "out of the 5.5 lakh villages across India, they reached around 4.5 lakh villages. As per the sangh's structure, there are 56,000 mandals [divisions]. Swayamsevaks reached out to 50,000 mandals out of them. In the public awareness programmes, around 11 lakh Swayamsevaks and society at large had participated. Among the participants, there were 1 lakh women too."

This reminder is consistent with RSS general secretary Bhaiyyaji Joshi's statement after the Lok Sabha election results on May 23. When the BJP leaders were singing paeans for PM Modi after the party got 303 Lok Sabha seats, Joshi described the election result as the "triumph of national forces". He did not give credit to Narendra Modi or Amit Shah.

The recall of Ram Lal and elevation of hardliner BL Santhosh also happened on the eve of organisational elections in the BJP. These elections are likely to be held in July-August and speculation is rife that Amit Shah might relinquish the post of party president and working BJP president JP Nadda will be given charge. More space is likely to be given to RSS leaders in the organisation at the cost of "independent" members.

Why BL Santhosh?

An RSS pracharak, Santhosh was inducted into the BJP in 2006 and has been a key figure in deciding the BJP's position in the southern states. He had been Karnataka BJP general secretary for eight years before he was given a national role in 2014 as an associate of Ram Lal in-charge of the southern states.

In 2019 election, Santhosh is said to be reason for a surprise BJP ticket to Tejaswi Surya from late Ananth Kumar's Bangalore South Lok Sabha seat. The BJP had almost finalised the candidature for Ananth Kumar's wife Tejaswini before nominating Surya.

Santhosh had then said the BJP tickets cannot be given on the basis of DNA and genes. He had also previously criticised BS Yeddyurappa over issues of corruption and the style of functioning.

The general secretary (organisation), the second-most powerful post, in the BJP has always gone to an RSS pracharak -- N Govindacharya, Sanjay Joshi and Ram Lal all having the same qualification. But Santosh's appointment indicates greater control of the RSS on the BJP.

Nadda, the working BJP president, has risen through the ranks after beginning his political career in the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad, the student wing of the RSS.

So, why does the RSS need to have greater control over the BJP when it has won bigger mandate in election, and it has enjoyed a smoother relation with PM Modi and Amit Shah at the helm of affairs unlike the past when Atal Bihari Vajpayee and LK Advani ran the BJP. Many insiders believe that it has a lot to do with Modi and Shah gaining overarching influence.

And, Ayodhya is also there

There could be other issues as well. The RSS has been pushing for two major changes -- education policy and labour reforms. The new education draft is ready but labour reforms draft is still in the works. The RSS is said to be unhappy with the pace of progress.

Also, the RSS has raised the chorus for speedier resolution of Ayodhya dispute and early construction of a Ram temple at the disputed site. Mohan Bhagwat had in November last year criticised the Supreme Court saying the Ram temple issue "is not a priority for the apex court". He followed it up with another statement in February this year that construction of Ram temple at Ayodhya would begin in four months.

The Ayodhya dispute has been referred to a Supreme Court-mandated mediation panel, which has set August 15 as deadline. The Supreme Court last week asked the panel to submit status report by July 25.

The RSS is reported to be getting impatient with the Ayodhya matter lingering in the Supreme Court and the BJP - since 2014 - side-stepping the emotive issue in favour of politics of development. The party's manifesto for 2014 and 2019 did not list Ram temple construction as its key poll promises.

Santosh, as an assertive RSS ideologue, is expected to push the BJP leadership to explore other ways for early construction of Ram temple at Ayodhya and speedy implementation of key policy matters to the satisfaction of the organisation.
