Govt offices remain empty as staff strike

Coimabtore: Day one of the indefinite strike launched by a section of government employees turned out to be partial success for the striking staff as well as the state government on Tuesday.

While a number of government staff, primarily teachers, stayed away from work and staged protests, the government managed to ensure that not all employees joined the strike.

According to the state government, only 35% of teachers and 20% of other department staff participated in the strike while the rest reported for duty. But employees unions contradicted the claim and said less than 30% turned up for work in schools in Chennai and neighbouring districts. More than seven lakh teachers and employees from other state government departments boycotted work across the state, they said.

Some government schools were shut while in others, students were made to remain in classes though teaches were not present. In a few places, those from nearby teacher training institutes were deployed to handle classes till the protest ended.

In Coimbatore, a large number of government school teachers stayed off from work. The strike had hit classes in schools in Coimbatore, Pollachi, Kinathukadavu, Thondamuthur, Valparai and Perur, among other areas. Employees of taluk offices, revenue department, agriculture department and health department also took part in the strike.

The Joint Action Council of Tamil Nadu Teachers Organisations and Government Employees Organisation (Jacto-Geo) representatives from the district said more than 5,000 members had participated in the strike. In the morning, the members staged demonstrations at the collectorate and blocked the headquarters in seven other blocks in the district.

School education minister KA Sengottaiyan requested protesting teachers to return to classes, asking them to keep the children’s welfare in mind.

On whether Tamil Nadu Essential Services Maintenance Act (TESMA) will be invoked to put an end to the protest, the minister said, “We have to monitor the situation in the days and future course of action will be decided after consulting with chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami.”

Chief secretary Girija Vaidyanathan on Monday warned of disciplinary action against the protesters, adding that absentees would face a pay cut.

But Jacto-Geo has planned to intensify the strike in the coming days while the government is also desperate to defeat the agitation by cracking down on striking staff.

Jacto-Geo is an umbrella organisation involving 50 teachers’ unions and 125 other workers’ unions. A Mayavan, co-ordinator of the organisation, said protests would intensify across the state if the government did not accept their demands, which include scrapping of the new contributory pension scheme and reviving the old one, regularisation of services of those under special consolidated pay and payment of 21-month arrears of pay commission recommendations. Secondary grade teachers requested a pay hike on par with Central government employees.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
