Protest by residents, Khader’s intervention puts brakes on collection of toll from local vehicles at Surathkal plaza

Mangaluru: The National Highways Authority of India NHAI ) had issued directions to its officials in Dakshina Kannada to commence the collection of toll from local vehicles at the Surathkal plaza on NH-66 from Tuesday. However, opposition to collection of toll from local vehicles took on the proportions of a massive protest by the members of the Action Committee Against Surathkal Toll Gate, which prompted Dakshina Kannada district in-charge minister UT Khader to step in and resolve the issue. With popular sentiment running against the proposed collection of toll, the district administration directed the authorities managing the toll plaza not to levy any charge on local vehicles till they were told otherwise.Vehicles registered in Dakshina Kannada are designated ‘KA 19’, and the NHAI authorities were made to understand that they could collect toll from the automobiles from Tuesday. However, protesting against collection of toll from local motorists, many of whom have to travel on the highway on a daily basis, people gathered in large numbers at the plaza, with members of political parties accompanying them to extend support to the cause. In a bid to prevent the situation from getting out of hand, a posse of cops led by assistant commissioner of police for Mangaluru North sub-division Srinivas Gowda rushed to the plaza.Khader had written to the Karnataka chief secretary TM Vijay Bhaskar, intimating him about the problems the residents would be plunged in if the NHAI proceeded to collect toll in accordance with its original plan. This correspondence between the minister and the state’s chief bureaucrat resulted in the district administration issuing a new directive to the NHAI authorities.“I wrote to the chief secretary after many locals complained to me about the problems they would face if NHAI started to collect toll from them. I asked him to direct the district administration accordingly. Locals must be exempted from paying toll, and the Suratkall plaza with the one at Hejmadi must be merged,” Khader said.The leader of the action committee protesting against toll collection Muneer Katipalla said, “We have discussed the situation with the representatives of the contractor, entrusted the responsibility of managing the plaza in question. They have agreed not to collect toll from local vehicles till the district administration revises its decision. We have decided to withdraw our protest for the time being. But, we have warned the NHAI authorities that we will not hesitate to launch our agitation again if they levy toll on local vehicles.”However, Katipalla said that the overarching objective of the action committee was to halt the collection of toll at Suratkal entirely. “NHAI must shift the toll plaza from Surathkal at the earliest. The plaza was opened at Surathkal as an ad hoc arrangement. The contract for collection of toll at this plaza ends in October, and this must not be renewed. We will continue our agitation until our demands are met,” he added.
