Trouble in paradise | India Today Insight

Goa Chief Minister Pramod Sawant is the only MLA in the state BJP now who has not been in another party, a testament to the fickle political loyalties in the state.

On July 10, when Goa's ministers assembled for a cabinet meeting at the state secretariat in Porvorim, there was uncertainty all around. Chief Minister Pramod Sawant, 46, first postponed the meeting to attend the funeral of former minister Wilfred Mesqueta, then cancelled the meeting altogether without saying why.

The reason became evident later that evening. Ten of the 15 Congress MLAs including leader of the opposition Chandrakant Kavlekar, formed a separate group breaking from the party. Assembly speaker Rajesh Patnekar recognised the group the same night. The next day, all 10 joined the BJP in the presence of working party president J.P. Nadda in Delhi.

With 17 MLAs, the Congress was the single largest party in the state after the March 2017 elections. It now has five MLAs left. In the assembly election, the BJP won just 13 out of 40 seats but still formed the government after roping in nine MLAs-three independents, and three each from the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (MGP) and Goa Forward Party (GFP).

In the four months since the death of the late CM Manohar Parrikar on March 17 and the anointment of Sawant as his successor, the BJP has more than doubled its seat tally to 29 legislators supported by two independents. But the two-thirds majority now came via the backdoor.

First, it broke two MGP MLAs, Manohar Ajgaonkar and Deepak Pauskar. Then it got two Congress defectors, Dilip Sopte and Subhash Shirodkar, re-elected. The inclusion of 10 more Congress defectors swelled its ranks to 27 MLAs. The party has the support of two independent MLAs, Govind Gaude and Prasad Gaonkar. Two defectors, Azagaonkar of the MGP and the Congress's Chandrakant Kavlekar have been made deputy CMs. Three ministers from the GFP and an independent who had been made minister, Rohan Khaunte, were sacked.

The mass defections have nearly wiped the Congress off the state's political map, especially in the belt dominated by Catholics. All three MLAs from Catholic-dominated Salcete--Filipe Nery Rodrigues, Wilfred D'sa and Clafasio Dias--switched over to the BJP. State Congress president Girish Chodankar says his partymen fell prey to blackmailing and allurements. Health minister Vishwajeet Rane, meanwhile, says Catholics joining the BJP will send a positive message to the country's minorities.

But the underhand means to get a majority has shocked the people of Goa. The state's politicians, though, are another matter. GFP chief Vijai Sardesai says the "permutations and combinations of finding new friends" had begun soon after Parrikar's death. Desperate for power, a bunch of Congress defectors first approached Sardesai with an offer to make him CM if he joins them to pull down Sawant.

Sardesai reportedly developed cold feet, believing that a powerful BJP in Delhi would not allow a weak, non-BJP government to work in Goa. MGP president Sudin Dhavalikar predicts that the defectors in Sawant's government will soon start fighting among themselves. One of them, Kavlekar, now deputy CM and new town planning minister, says it won't happen. "We were frustrated in the Congress as the party had failed to form the government in spite of having numbers on its side. Now that we are in the BJP, there is no question of forming any pressure group within the party," he says.

Meanwhile, there is trouble brewing inside the BJP. There is a growing chorus that Sawant has become too powerful after securing the majority. An Ayurvedic doctor by training, he was handpicked by the late Parrikar to be speaker in 2017 as he represented the grassroots BJP worker. Interestingly, Sawant is the only MLA in the state BJP now who has not been in another party, a testament to the fickle political loyalties in the state. He now heads the most stable government in the history of the state.

Goa has had trouble finding stable administrations--between 1995 and 2017, it had 10 governments. Sawant now needs to focus on improving the state's financial health. The top item on the agenda is the ban on mining of iron ore which has cost the state exchequer Rs 4,000 crore already in two years. If he can't get the ban overturned, he has to find alternate ways to increase income. The state is paying Rs 180 crore every month as interest on loans taken from different lending agencies to run the government.

Governance had ground to a halt as Parrikar lay critically ill. The challenges before Sawant are vast. The state's all important tourism industry is in decline after a 20 per cent slump in foreign tourists in the current season. The state has to act fast to bring back the tourists before the start of the next season this October.

Sawant's initiatives to attract investment like the 'Vibrant Goa' summit scheduled for October has stirred a controversy as its promoters are private players and not the government. He is still hopeful of positive results. "You will see the results in October. Wait till then," he says.

His critics, including a former minister, claim that Sawant's lack of experience is showing. He points out how, when the CM recently announced a decision allowing women employees to work the night shift, he merely discussed the number of women employees. There was no spin on how it would positively benefit them. "He needs to grasp several subjects fast like his predecessors, which is not happening now," says the ex-minister. "Administration needs depth, and if he can't cope he will be in trouble."

Sawant has held only two cabinet meetings in the four months he has been CM. This lends credibility to the charge that he avoids discussions on policy matters. Having secured his government with the numbers, he now has no excuse not to govern.

READ | 'Induction of Congress MLAs into BJP is death of Parrikar's legacy'

WATCH | The Fadnavis Formula for Success
