Divided Opposition unites over law and order to attack government

Congress

LUCKNOW: While it will no longer be a united Opposition in the UP Assembly this time after BSP and SP parted ways in the aftermath of the Lok Sabha polls, failing law and order in the state will be a common agenda on which they will attack the Yogi government during the monsoon session which begins on Thursday. Separately, the three main Opposition parties are ready with the issues to corner the government in the House.The party plans to target the government over multiple cases of violence in the state in recent weeks. Last week, BSP chief Mayawati had demanded a strong anti-lynching law in the state and the party is expected to raise the issue in both Houses. Wednesday’s bloodbath in Sonbhadra will also feature prominently in the party’s agenda. A senior BSP member said that hooch deaths will be another issue on which the party will demand answers from the government. “On Wednesday, Behenji tweeted about floods in the state and how they are impacting the lives of the poor. We will ask the government what steps it has taken to provide relief to the affected families,” he said.The party has decided to raise the issue of Sonbhadra murders, deteriorating law and order and FIRs against senior SP leader and Rampur MP Azam Khan. On Wednesday, SP MLAs gathered at the party headquarters in Lucknow where Leader of the Opposition Ram Govind Chaudhary, along with his counterpart in the Council, Ahmad Hasan framed the party’s strategy for the House. “Sonbhadra group clash leading to nine deaths and several injuries is a horrific incident and this will be prominently raised in the two Houses. Government is accountable for the increasing lawlessness in the state and we will not allow it to run away from its responsibility,” Chaudhary told reporters. He said death of farmers and political vendetta against SP leader Azam Khan are other issues which would be raised in the assembly.The party plans to rake up the issue of deteriorating law and order situation, failure in paying cane dues to the farmers, deaths of children because of Japanese encephalitis, employment generation and callous attitude of the police. Congress legislative party leader Ajay Lallu said that the morale of criminals is high in the ruling BJP dispensation. “The situation has come to a point that people are being attacked in the premises of high court,” he said in reference to attack on Ajitesh who married Sakshi Mishra, the daughter of BJP MLA Rajesh Mishra. He said that the BJP is deliberately targeting its political opponents and killing people in fake encounters. The Congress is also likely to raise the issue of recent hooch tragedies which were reported from various parts of the state.
