Ex-BJP MLA arrested for threat against MP CM during protest

Former BJP MLA Surendra Nath Singh was Friday arrested for allegedly using threatening language against Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath during a protest a day earlier.

At a protest in Roshanpura area, those participating started shouting, "hamari mange poor nahi to khoon bahega sadko par" (if our demands are not met, then blood will flow on the streets), Singh had said earlier.

When a section of the protesters shouted "whose blood", the MLA claimed he had inadvertently replied "Kamal Nath's".

The alleged remark had created a furore in the state Assembly earlier in the day, leading to two adjournments as Congress MLAs mounted a protest.

"Former MLA Singh has been arrested in four cases, including one related to threatening the chief minister, which is registered in TT Nagar police station," Superintendent of Police (South Zone) Sampat Upadhyay said.

Another officer said two cases each have been registered against Singh in MP Nagar police station and TT Nagar police station.

TT Nagar police station in charge Sanjiv Chowkse said Singh was arrested for using threatening language against the CM during a protest held in Roshanpura on Thursday.

Another case was registered against the former MLA in TT Nagar for locking up a municipal corporation office in Mata Mandir area during a protest some time back, Chowkse said.

Singh was presented in the special court set up in Bhopal for politicians, where Judge Suresh Singh granted him bail on a surety of Rs 30,000 each in all four cases, his lawyer Ravi Goyal said.

Singh was leading a protest on Thursday against the removal of vendors from different parts of the city as well as inflated power bills being given to the slum dwellers.

A purported video of the protest is being shared on social media.

Speaking on the issue, CM Kamal Nath said the remark had been condemned by the state Assembly, adding that "this had exposed the culture of the BJP".

Meanwhile, after being granted bail, the former MLA said, "The court has told me not take the law into my hands. I respect the judiciary and hope I will get justice," Singh said.

He said he planned to meet leaders of various parties asking them to ensure "justice for poor people".

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
