‘CM will fight Assembly poll only from Nagpur’

Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad

municipal election

BJP-Shiv Sena

Senior BJP minister scotches rumour, says Fadnavis won’t contest from 2nd seat in Mumbai.A senior BJP minister has quashed speculation that Chief Minister Devendra Fadnaviswould contest the upcoming Assembly elections in the state from two seats – one from his home seat in Nagpur, and the other from a seat in Mumbai – saying Fadnavis will fight from the Nagpur seat alone.“The CM will only fight from his current seat in Nagpur. Some leaders in the party had suggested that the CM would contest from Nagpur as well as from a seat in Mumbai. Constituencies like Malabar Hill and Mulund were doing the rounds. But this has been ruled out totally. There is no substance to such talk. The CM will only fight from Nagpur,” a senior Cabinet minister from the BJP told Mirror.Fadnavis, who represents the Nagpur South West constituency, began his political career in the mid-’90s. As a college student, he was an active member of the, the BJP’s youth wing, and won his firstfrom the Ram Nagar ward. Five years later Fadnavis, at the age of 28, became the youngest mayor of the Nagpur Municipal Corporation and the second youngest mayor in the country.An MLA since 1999, Fadnavis is serving his fourth term in the Assembly.“There was a suggestion that the CM must contest from two seats so that we can use his popularity and clean image in Mumbai too. He is popular across urban areas. His candidature from Mumbai would have given a boost to the BJP in the city, especially since we are fighting the state Assembly elections in alliance with the Shiv Sena. However, this plan has been ruled out now,” a BJP functionary from the city said.Many believed that if Fadnavis contests from Mumbai, it would help him shed his image as a ‘Nagpur leader’. “However, with his performance as CM since 2014, he has emerged as the undisputed leader of the state. He has successfully overshadowed even the Sena in connecting with urban voters all over the state,” the functionary said.Flagging off the BJP’s campaign for the Assembly elections, Fadnavis on Friday asked his party’s rank and file to ensure the rulingalliance wins all 36 seats in the metropolis in the upcoming assembly polls.Fadnavis said that unlike the previous Congress-NCP government, his dispensation had brought about qualitative change in the lives of all sections of Mumbaikars. He exuded confidence that the city will not stop even during the monsoon once some infrastructural works are completed over the next three-four years.“We have to write the second chapter of the change in October. We want renewal from the people to bring about this change. In a democracy, it is the people who have to say that we did a good job,” Fadnavis said.To drive home his point, Fadnavis said the entire Opposition had been up in arms against Prime Minister Narendra Modi in the Lok Sabha polls held earlier this year, but the people went ahead and gave the PM aresounding mandate.“Therefore, one whose work speaks need not speak much. The people stand with him, no matter how much is spoken against him,” Fadnavis said.“I am confident... that both the teams (the BJP and Shiv Sena) are together now. We have to win this match 36-0. We will have to work at the booth level to win each and every seat in Mumbai,” the CM added.Fadnavis was speaking at a BJP event where the party’s newly appointed city unit chief, legislator Mangal Prabhat Lodha, took formal charge.The BJP and Sena had contested the 2014 assembly polls separately, winning 16 and 15 seats in the city respectively.The Cabinet minister explained that any move by Fadnavis to contest the polls from Mumbai would not go down well with people in Nagpur.“He is the most popular leader from Vidarbha. If he contests form Mumbai, it would send the wrong message to the people of Nagpur, too.As chief minister, Fadnavis has worked for the entire state, and just contesting elections from Mumbai or Nagpur will not make a difference,” the minister said.Though allies, the Sena and the BJP are already competing to attract more voters to their fold.While Yuva Sena chief Aditya Thackeray launched his statewide tour from Jalgaon on Thursday, Fadnavis had launched the Deendayal Upadhyay Antyodaya scheme in Mumbai on Monday.Both initiatives aim at reaching out to a maximum number of voters in the state.
