Karnataka political crisis: Many in BJP fret over rebels’ berth demands

BENGALURU: The mood in the state BJP is quite upbeat, considering that it has, for the moment, the required numbers in the assembly to trigger a change through the trust vote. Some early discussions about government formation under BS Yeddyurappa’s leadership have already begun.

But questions about possible roles the 15 Congress-JD(S) rebels, if they are finally absorbed in the saffron camp, might seek in the new government have crept up the worry list of several BJP leaders. These leaders told STOI the rebels might put forward difficult demands for ministerial berths once the BJP gets closer to a position where it can stake claim to form the new government.

“The rebels may have been promised the princess’s hand in marriage, but tomorrow, if they set their eyes on the queen’s hand, what will you do? It will become difficult to survive,” said a senior BJP MLA and former minister.

Chief minister HD Kumaraswamy has already issued a veiled warning on such a scenario to an overeager BJP camp. “Don’t I know this game? Let’s see how long your government will last (with the support of the rebels),” he said in the assembly on Friday.

The BJP has many experienced legislators in its ranks, and caste equations will also play a key role in allocation of ministerial spots. According to party insiders, of the 15 rebels, only one or two can be accommodated in the cabinet, if a BJP government comes to power in the state. “Not everyone in the group of rebels is keen on ministership. Some want extra funds for their constituencies as they have resigned from their assembly membership and if accepted, they will seek to recontest,’’ the sources said.

BJP spokesperson N Ravi Kumar, who is also a member of the legislative council, said the party was not worried about rebels and it would form the government on its own. “We are ready; there’s no doubt about it,” he said.

One option being explored is to offer some rebels top posts in boards and corporations.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
