VHP leader Sadhvi Prachi courts controversy, calls for boycott of Muslims who make kanwars

File image of pilgrims undertaking Kanwar Yatra | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Sadhvi Prachi makes two controversial statements against Muslims She says Muslims are snatching employment opportunities from Hindus by making kanwars She further says those born in madrasas go on to become terrorists

Baghpat (Uttar Pradesh): In a controversial statement, Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) leader Sadhvi Prachi has called for a boycott of kanwars made by Muslims. Prachi said a majority of the kanwars are made by Muslims which are then used by disciples of Lord Shiva. She said such Muslims and the kanwars made by them should be shunned.

Prachi said the move would help give employment opportunities to Hindus.

"99 per cent of Muslims make kanwar for Lord Shiva devotees in Haridwar. They should be boycotted. They should be asked to leave from there. Hindus of my country should get employment opportunities," the VHP leader said, speaking at a gathering here on Wednesday.

'Kanwar Yatra' is an annual pilgrimage undertaken by bhakts of Lord Shiva. The pilgrims are referred to as kanwariyas who go to places like Haridwar, Gaumukh and Gangotri in Uttarakhand and Sultanganj in Bihar to fetch water from River Ganga, considered to be holy by Hindus. The devotees then bring the water back to their native places where they worship the Lord using the same holy water.

The VHP leader did not stop at that and made further controversial remarks against Muslims. Prachi said those who study in madrasas end up becoming terrorists like Mumbai attack mastermind and Lashkar-e-Toiba chief Hafiz Muhammed Saeed.

She further said that people like BJP MP Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur and Mahatma Gandhi's assassin Nathuram Godse will never take birth in madrasas.

"They say people like Nathuram Godse and Sadhvi Pragya Thakur are not born in madrasas. All the intellectuals in the country remained quiet on this. Nobody said anything, but I want to tell them that I will speak the truth even if I am hanged. I support you on this, people like them [Godse and Thakur] can never be born in your madrasa," she was quoted as saying.

"Those born in madrasas grow up to become like Hafiz Saeed," the VHP leader said, courting controversy.
