Thrust on Make in India weapons: Army chief

Kargil Vijay Diwas: Thrust on ‘Make in India’ weapons says Army Chief Rawat

DRASS: Ahead of 20th anniversary of 1999 Kargil war commemoration, Army chief Bipin Rawat on Thursday said that the thrust on Make in India weapon has begun in full swing, with the joint venture on AK 203 in Amethi and “any world Army would be willing take such weapons” from India.“The guns are being manufactured in India.We have got modern 155 mm guns, helicopters already and now we are looking at manufacturing ammunition in the country. Now, the AK 203, in joint venture with Russia is going to be manufactured in Amethi. Impetus is on Make in India. We will be very happy if anybody is willing to share technology and colloborate with us, they would be the gainers,” said Rawat.“We have a huge market here. Once any weapon that is tested by the Indian Army , it becomes world famous. Everybody knows that our trail mechanisms are very good. Any weapon now that gets introduced in Indian Army, any world Army would be willing to take that,” he added.He made these remarks during a media interaction at Lamochan hills in Drass, six kilometres from the Kargil War Memorial The COAS also said that Army has better surveillance devices than in 1999 and “our men were sitting on heights” to keep Pakistan on alert.On Wednesday, the Army displayed hand held thermal imager with laser ranger finder that has capability of day and night sight up to range of 8 km and ability to operate from - 30 degrees to + 55 degrees.The device, manufactured by Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) at Panchkula has colour camera, in-built GPS (with Indian grids) and can weather snow and rains.“It was a big misadventure undertaken by Pakistan Army in 1999. They did not appreciate the will and the intent of the Indian political establishment and the Indian armed forces that they will never allow them to succeed, no matter what heights they capture. The Army will always give it back to them, the way they recaptured those heights in 1999. I rather him (Pakistan) not dare any such attempt in future. Today we have got better surveillance devices. But, other than, we are sitting on heights in Kargil where we think he can come,” Rawat said.The Army Chief also rubbished Pakistan PM Imran Khan’s claims that Pulwama bomber was a Kashmir insider and that his country has no role in it.“We are aware of the truth. We dont have to get carried by his statements. Intelligence agencies have given ample proof of what had happened in Pulwama,” he said.The army chief reiterated Union defence minister Rajnath Singh ’s statement that infiltration in the Valley has shrunken.“Two reasons for that. One is because our troops are sitting alert. We have also inducted additional forces to strengthen the counter infilitration grid and terrorists across understand that if they come near LoC, they will come to collect dead bodies,” he said.“We are capable of taking missions when we are sure of success. We do take risks and we commanders are expected to take risks,” he added.
