Govt reneges, pay cut for contract teachers

shalender@tribune.com

Karam Prakash

Tribune News Service

Patiala, January 23

Contractual Punjab teachers who had rejected the state government’s regularisation policy and continued with their protests are in for a shock as the Capt Amarinder Singh regime has backtracked from its earlier announcement and ordered a 60 per cent cut in their salary.

Not paid for eight months, the SSA/RMSA teachers would now get salary equivalent to their counterparts who had accepted the terms of the regularisation policy, which was announced in October last.

As per the policy, teachers who enrolled under the scheme--6,060 of 8,900 SSA/RMSA teachers had said yes--were to face a 60 per cent pay cut and get Rs 15,000 (primary) and Rs 20,000 (upper primary) salary for 30 months. Their probation period was to be counted from April 1, 2018. Once the probation was over, the teachers were to draw Rs 37,000 (primary) and Rs 42,000 (upper primary), but as regular staff.

Those who didn’t enroll under the scheme were to continue on contract at the existing pay of Rs 37,000 (primary) and Rs 42,000 (upper primary). The government, however, has now decided that even the teachers who didn’t accept the regularisation scheme would be paid on a par with those who accepted it.

The state Education Department has, through a communiqué, already directed the District Education Officers to clear pending salaries of the protesting staff with a 60 per cent cut.

Hardeep Toderpur, co-convener of Sanjha Adhyapak Morcha, said, “The government has again backtracked from its own offer of full pay to the contractual teachers. They are targeting us only because we turned down their offer.”

Prashant Goyal, State Project Director, said, “The salary cut is due to deduction in funds by the Union HRD Ministry. However, we have requested for additional funds to pay the contractual teachers their full salaries.”

Meanwhile, the morcha said “come what may”, they would hold a massive protest in front of the residence of Education Minister OP Soni in Amritsar on January 27.
