S-400 Missiles: A Game Changer for India & Asia?

Amitava Mukherjee

(Amitava Mukherjee is a senior journalist and commentator. He can be contacted at amitavamukherjee253@gmail.com)

Even Nikita Khruschev may have turned in his grave in appreciation for Vladimir Putin, his distant successor in the Kremlin. For what Khrushchev could not achieve by placing nuclear-tipped missiles on the soils of Cuba in 1962, Putin has easily accomplished nearly the same by releasing into the armament market a deadly missile named S-400 Triumf which has changed a large portion of international geo-strategic scenario in favour of Russia. This has put the United States in a tough situation in South Asia where both India and China have opted to procure the S-400 brushing aside US objections and threats for sanctions. One of the reasons behind the shabby treatment meted out to Imran Khan during his latest US tour may be the information that inside the Pakistani administration increasing demands for procuring the S-400 missiles are being raised now. Later, Donald Trump balanced it by approving USD 125 million military sales for end use monitoring and technical/logistical support for the F-16 fleet of Pakistan.

But what is the S-400? It is an integrated air defence system that can simultaneously track, identify and then destroy numerous incoming objects including aircrafts, missiles, electronic warfare mechanisms etc. The most important feature of the system is that its radars can pick up an object as far as 1,000 kilometers away. The command post then distributes the responsibility of taking care of each object to separate manned anti-aircraft missile system which is known for ensuring a high degree of success rates for destruction of those items which are likely to be destroyed at a distance of 400 kilometers. The system operates at a radius of few hundred kilometers, can move at a remarkable speed of Mach 15 and is effective at a height ranging from 5 meters to 30 kilometers. S-400 has raised consternation among military strategists of the US and western Europe as most of the weapons used by these countries like the cruise and ballistic missiles including the Tomahawk and fighter aircrafts like the F-16 and F-22 are now threatened.

There is a distinct apprehension in China and Pakistan that India’s acquisition of the S-400 system will drastically alter the strategic scenario of South Asia. In 2018, New Delhi signed an agreement for acquiring this missile system. Although China had already bought this system from Russia yet Beijing’s apprehension is not misplaced as possession of S-400 will bring India very close to China in matters of air defence. Donald Trump has been blowing hot and cold with India in matters of the latter’s purchase of this missile system, and also threatening with the imposition of Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA) provisions. He has already imposed sanctions on China. It will not be unreasonable to conclude that various trade embargos that the US has imposed on China and India have originated to some extent out of an apprehension on the part of Washington after decisions by these two countries to install the S-400 on their soils.

Washington has reasons to feel uncomfortable because it has been losing initiatives to Moscow so far as the strategic balance in Middle East and the Eastern Mediterranean are concerned. S-400 has already landed in Turkey, a reliable NATO ally for so long. But the most spectacular shift has occurred in Syria where Bashr-al-Assad, the President of the country and a Russian ally, has not only strengthened his position but has recaptured the lost areas of East Aleppo, East Ghouta and Deraa. Asad has the S-300 missile system, the previous version of S-400, and it successfully deterred the powerful Israeli air force from carrying on attacks on Syrian soil. S-400 missiles are also on Syrian soil but those are under Russian control.

It can be averred with certainty that Russia and its S-400 have forced Turkey away from the US influence in the Eastern Mediterranean region. It is ironic that downing of a Russian jet by Turkey in 2015 over the Syrian sky led to the arrival of this missile system in Syria. In its wake hopes for a regime change in Syria gradually receded and Turkey was forcefully pushed out of the Syrian theatre of war. This forced Ankara to make up with Russia.

The US is now in a fix and till now it is groping in the dark as to what could be done in regard to Turkey’s and India’s decisions to buy the S-400. In June last Patrick Shanahan, the then acting defence secretary of the US, openly threatened Ankara for its decision to buy the S-400 and Washington has ultimately backtracked from its plan to sell the F-35 fighter aircrafts to Turkey. However, Ankara has refused to budge. So Trump is now clueless in regard to Turkey.

Similar things happened over India also. Mike Pompeo, the US Secretary of State, had tried to wean New Delhi away from the S-400 purchase during his last visit to India. But he was firmly told by S. Jaishankar, the Foreign Minister, that India would take her own security decisions. Behind Pompeo’s desperate urgings lay a lurking fear that Middle Eastern security scenario may go further out of control if reports of Iraq’s decision to buy the S-400 system turns out to be true. Strategic analyses point out that it will be very difficult for Iraq, with a 5.05 billion dollar annual military budget, to buy the highly expensive S-400 system unless someone else finances it.

Who can be that financier? A group of international security analysts wonder whether it could be Iran. Meanwhile, Tehran has already transferred large numbers of other genres of missiles to various Iraqi Shia militias and the government at Baghdad has raised no objection to it. So it is almost certain that Iran will have a good control over the S-400 system if Iraq purchases it and the most likely place where those missiles may be stationed is the Anbar province giving the S-400 missiles a range to hit Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Israel.

So the security scenario in the Middle East and South Asia is on a thin balance. Where does India stand in this jigsaw puzzle? Undoubtedly S-400 missiles will give New Delhi the capability to strike deep inside Pakistan. Although sections of the Pakistani army and bureaucracy are clamouring to get this weapon yet for Pakistan, now deep inside financial crunch, it is nearly impossible to purchase it because the system’s cost is prohibitive. The base cost for an S-400 system is USD 500 million with only a limited number of missiles and limited support system. More missiles and more logistical support involve more costs. It is highly unlikely that Pakistan can afford it at this moment. India will, therefore, enjoy a clear advantage in the strategic map.

There is a possibility that introduction of the S-400 will give Russia an advantage in Afghanistan also where various peace initiatives are going on. The US is in an uncomfortable situation. It is displeased with India but cannot alienate New Delhi either lest a Middle East like scenario is repeated in South Asia.
