Narendra Modi govt yet to appoint Lok Sabha deputy speaker, Congress slams delay

NEW DELHI: The 17th Lok Sabha is breaking away from tradition in several aspects. These have even helped the Lower House to register higher productivity in legislative business. However, it has also broken from tradition by not fulfilling the constitutional obligation of choosing a deputy speaker Articles 93 to 97 of the Constitution deal with the post of speaker and deputy of the Lok Sabha. Article 93 makes it obligatory upon the Lok Sabha to appoint a speaker and deputy speaker to conduct house proceedings.It states: “The House of the People shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the House shall choose another member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.”The first session, which is also the budget session, of the 17th Lok Sabha commenced on June 17. The first two days were spent on pro tem speaker Virendra Kumar administering oath of office to the newly-elected members of the Lower House.On June 19, Om Birla was unanimously elected as the Lok Sabha speaker.The budget session of Parliament was originally scheduled to end on July 26. Looking at the high productivity and to accomplish some important legislative business, the session was extended by eight working days to August 7.However, in a sharp break from tradition, the deputy speaker has not been appointed as yet. Otherwise, the post used to be filled soon after the appointment of the speaker in the previous Lok Sabhas.As against his predecessors, Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla has been spending maximum time on the chair. During his brief absence, the house is presided over by any of the 10 MPs whose names are included in the 'Panel of Chairpersons'. They are Rama Devi, Kirit P Solanki, Rajendra Agarwal, Meenakshi Lekhi, Kodikunnil Suresh, A Raja, PV Midhun Reddy, Bhartruhari Mahtab, NK Premachandran and Kakoli Ghoshdastidar.Sources in the Modi government said that a deputy speaker would be appointed by the end of this session on August 7.“The government is of the view that the Lok Sabha is functioning smoothly even without a deputy speaker . The presiding officers are efficiently conducting the house. A deputy speaker would be appointed by the end of this session itself,” an official said.However, the largest opposition party - the Congress - has hit out at the BJP-led NDA government.Talking to timesofindia.com, Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari, who is also a Lok Sabha member, said, “The constitutional requirement of appointing a deputy speaker needs to be fulfilled. The government wants to run a truncated Parliament and that is why standing committees have also not been constituted till now.”Meanwhile, the BJP’s ally Shiv Sena has its own demand regarding the coveted post. Its Rajya Sabha member Sanjay Raut is on record to state that the party has demanded the post. “We have conveyed our demand to the BJP," he said.A top Shiv Sena office-bearer staked claim to the deputy speaker’s post. “The Shiv Sena is the second largest party in NDA. We also have the longest alliance with the BJP. Therefore, the post should come to us. That is the natural thing to happen,” the leader said.“However, that is not the most priority area for the Shiv Sena. It is a constitutional provision and the government will fulfill it,” the party office-bearer added.Not just the Shiv Sena but also others would keenly watch till August 7 the Modi government’s move of appointing a deputy speaker.
