Several hurt as ABVP protest against ‘cut money ‘ turns violent

Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad

West Bengal

Rapid Action Force

Durgapur

Nadia district

Cops lob tear gas as protest in Asansol turns violent.Several activists of BJP’s youth wing and(ABVP) were injured in clashes with the police during an agitation in Asansol city of’s Burdwan district on Friday to protest against ‘cut money’ allegedly taken from beneficiaries of government schemes. The incident happened when the protesters had gathered outside the Asansol Municipal Corporation to submit a fivepoint memorandum of demands.As the protest turned violent, the police lobbed tear gas shells and resorted to lathi-charge on the activists. The activists had planned to gherao the corporation.The clashes broke out as police stopped the activists by putting up barricades, 50 metres away from the corporation’s office. The activists broke the barricade and pelted stones and bricks at police.Police lobbed at least 15 rounds of tear-gas shells to disperse the mob. The(RAF) and police also resorted to lathi-charge to bring the situation under control. Furious activists refused to budge and several rounds of clashes occurred. A huge police force was then brought in from AsansolPolice Commissionerate and deployed to bring the situation under control. Tension still prevails in the area. Police has cordoned off the entire area.Abomb was hurled by the agitating activists at police. However, no police men were injured due to bombing.Several youth activists were rushed to the hospital as they received injuries. However, police did not confirm the number of people injured.Asansol Municipality authority had organised a blood donation camp inside the Municipality office. Police stopped the BJP activists as there were a number of Trinamool Congress workers on the premises.Asansol Municipality Corporation Chairman Jitendra Tiwari brought out a counter rally to protest the incident.Meanwhile, ABVP activists went to submit a memorandum to the college authority in’s Ranaghat and the activists clashed with police over another agitation. The activists pelted stones at police and situation went out of control.
