District Congress Stages protest against BJP Govt for Arresting Priyanka Gandhi

District Congress Stages protest against BJP Govt for Arresting Priyanka Gandhi

Mangaluru: The district Congress staged a protest on July 20 in front of the DCC office against the BJP and Uttar Pradesh government after Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi was stopped from visiting the victims of a clash which claimed 10 lives in Sonbhadra on July 19.

The protesters shouted slogans against the BJP government and the CM of Uttar Pradesh Yogi Adityanath.

Addressing the protesters former minister Ramanath Rai said, “In Uttar Pradesh, 10 people were shot dead by the Sarpanch. Priyanka Gandhi visited the hospital in Bhopal and later proceeded to Sonbhadra to meet the family of the victims. On her way to Sonbhadra, Priyanka Gandhi was stopped and taken to the guest house where electricity and water were disconnected. The weaker sections of the society, the Dalits and the backward classes are suffering in UP. Stopping Priyanka Gandhi from meeting the victims shows that the BJP government is not in favour of the Dalits, backward class and the weaker sections.”

Ramanath Rai further said, “Congress leaders sacrificed a lot and went to jail for the freedom of the country but they are being called as traitors and those who have gone to jail in criminal cases are ruling the country and they are called patriots. Those who have sacrificed their lives for the country are insulted while those involved in criminal cases are considered heroes. many are killed in the name of religion. In Bihar, three men were lynched over a suspicious cattle theft incident. We condemn the double standards of the BJP government and urge the ruling government to stop the bloodshed in UP and Bihar.”

Addressing the protesters former Minister Abhaychandra Jain said, “The BJP is ruling in the centre as well as in UP. After the BJP came to power, crimes have increased. On July 19, Priyanka Gandhi the granddaughter of freedom fighter and former PM Jawaharlal Nehru was on her way to Sonbhadra to meet the victims of a clash which claimed 10 lives. On the way to Sonbhadra, Priyanka Gandhi was stopped without any reason and kept in a guest house where she held a Dharna. The BJP government is not in favour of the poor or weaker sections of the society but is working in favour of the landlords. Priyanka Gandhi was not allowed to meet the victims who are from the weaker section.”

Abhaychandra further said, “In Karnataka, the BJP government tried to buy 20 of our MLAs by offering them a huge amount of money. They are hell-bent on destabilizing the coalition government. We condemn the cheap tactics of the BJP government to buy the MLAs from Congress and JD(S). Home Minister Amit Shah is using cheap tactics to buy the MLAs by offering them a huge amount of money. People of this country should understand the double standards of the BJP government.”

DCC President Harish Kumar also spoke on the occasion.
