Gowtham Kumar Jain is the new Mayor

Bharatiya Janata Party

Mayor

Deputy Mayor

Gowtham Kumar Jain

Kannada

Bengaluru

(BJP) on Tuesday baggedandposts after a gap of four years. BJP candidatefrom Jogupalya ward has been elected as the Mayor while Bommanahalli ward corporator C R Ram Mohan Raju as the Deputy Mayor.While both the BJP corporators have secured 129 votes each to their respective posts, R Satyanarayana from the Congress got 110 votes and Gangamma of the JD(S) secured 108 votes for the elections to the Mayor and Deputy Mayor posts.BJP corporator from Kacharakanahalli ward Padmanabha Reddy has withdrawn from the contest. While the disqualified Congress and JD(S) MLAs – Byrathi Basavaraju (KR Puram), Munirathna (Raja Rajeswari Nagar), T Somasekhar (Yesvantpura), and K Gopalaiah (Mahalakshmi Layout) did not participate in the election. R Roshan Baig, who quits Congress, has also remained absent. Congress Rajya Sabha MP Jairam Ramesh, Member of Lok Sabha D K Suresh and BJP Rajya Sabha MP Nirmala Seetharaman did not attend the meeting.Later addressing media, Gowtham Kumar Jain has said that he would give importance to fix this garbage problem in the city. “My focus will be on implementing the ban on single-use plastic effectively. I will not do anything that affectslanguage and culture,’’ said the new mayor.He said CM B S Yeddyurappa has ordered inquiry into various ongoing developmental works. “The chief minister has asked the officials concerned to submit the report. I will wait for the chief minister to take a call on this. I will work in coordination with the deputy mayor and the BBMP Commissioner,’’ he said.When brought to his notice about Kannada Chaluvali leader Vatal Nagaraj’s protest against selecting a non-Kannadiga for the mayor’s post, he said: “I hail from Siriguppa in Ballari district. I request Vatal Nagaraj not consider me as a non-Kannadiga. I will not do, not allow anything that affects Kannada language and culture in,’’ he said.Police whisked away Kannada Chaluvali leader Vatal Nagarj whey he staged a protest at the BBMP Head Office premises opposing the election of Gowtham Kumar for the Mayor’s post.“A Kannadiga corporator should have been elected as the Mayor instead of selecting a corporator from Marwadi community. It is the time for Kannadigas to awake and fight for Kannada language and culture,’’ said Vatal Nagaraj.
