Telangana HC postpones hearing of petition on TSRTC strike

Telangana HC postpones hearing of petition on TSRTC strike

Meanwhile, buses remained off the roads for a 6th day as employees continued to stage protests across the state.

news Protest

The Telangana High Court on Thursday postponed the hearing of a petition on the ongoing strike by employees of the Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC), which has disrupted normal life in the state.

The plea, which was filed by advocate P V Krishnaiah, sought orders from the court for directing striking TSRTC employees to resume their duties immediately. It also sought that the court issue an order to the Telangana government to constitute an independent committee and look into the demands of the RTC unions.

Speaking to reporters outside the High Court on Thursday, Krishnaiah said that the TSRTC unions told the court that they had reasonable demands, and had the right to strike and protest against the state government. The state government meanwhile, opposed the advocate's plea, stating that they had made alternate arrangements to ensure that commuters were not inconvenienced.

After hearing both sides, the court posted the case for further hearing on October 15.

Meanwhile, buses remained off the roads for a 6th day as employees continued to stage protests across the state at major bus depots and other public spaces.

In Kalwakurthy in Nagarkurnool district, TSRTC workers staged a protest “half-naked”, without their shirts, and took out a procession through the main road of the town.

Telangana's opposition parties have come together to throw their weight behind the ongoing indefinite strike by the employees of the TSRTC, and are planning to call for a state-wide shutdown.

The Congress, the Telugu Desam Party and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) have extended their support to the strike by TSRTC employees, besides the Communist Party of India (CPI) and Telangana Jana Samithi (TJS).

The main demand of the union members is to merge the TSRTC with the government, besides other requests like purchasing new buses, filling vacancies and hiking salaries, which has been due for over a year.

Ruling out any talks with the unions, Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao has asked officials to go for recruitment of new employees. He even said that the state government would go for trifurcation of TSRTC. While 50% of the bus fleet will be owned and managed by TSRTC, another 30% will be hired buses, and remaining 20% will be private buses.

Read:

‘Are we criminals?’: Women conductors pour out anger at KCR amidst TSRTC strike

Is privatisation of 20% of Telangana’s RTC buses the best way forward?
