Plan to deploy CISF on Visva-Bharati campus: Stir after convocation, say students, teachers

This is the first time that the paramilitary forces will be posted at the central university.

Written by Atri Mitra

A section of teachers and students of Visva-Bharati University in Shantiniketan, who have been opposing the deployment of central forces on the campus, has planned to launch an agitation against the move after the varsity’s convocation, scheduled to be held on Monday.

The teachers and students, mostly Left-leaning, are also planning to launch an online signature campaign, even as they are not against the deployment of Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) to protect the museum or any other historical or heritage monument in Visva-Bharati.

With President Ram Nath Kovind scheduled to attend the Visva-Bharati University’s convocation next Monday, the administration has already started taking necessary steps to block any type of agitation. The President is Visva-Bharati’s Visitor and the Prime Minister its Chancellor.

Interestingly, a faction of the ruling Trinamool Congress, which protested against Vice-Chancellor (V-C) Bidyut Chakraborty and opposed the deployment of CISF, are now saying they are not against it. The leader of this faction and the university’s karmi sabha (union of non-teaching staff) leader Gagan Sarkar said they are not going to lunch any movement “because the V-C is very vindictive in nature”. “No student or staff is willing to risk their seat or job.”

First year postgraduate student Mainul Hussain, who is the Birbhum district joint secretary of Student Federation of India (SFI), the students’ wing of the CPM, said they are preparing to fight it unitedly. “At the time of fee hike, we fought unitedly. This time too, different Left-leaning students’ organisations have started a dialogue. We will sit very soon to fix the road map for this movement.”

He added they are also planning to launch a signature campaign within the campus as well as online against this issue.

“At the time of fee hike, the V-C said that the university’s economical condition is very poor. Then how will the university bear the cost of central forces. The HRD Ministry has already said that the cost will have to be borne by the university,” Mainul said.

President of Visva-Bharati University Faculty Association Sudipta Bhattacharya said they too will take a decision on the movement collectively. “But, personally I think that if the central forces are used to protect the university’s assets, then it’s okay. But, we will not allow the central forces to maintain the university’s law and order situation,” she said.

“This V-C always used to say there is no alternative to dialogue. I don’t know why this time the V-C is silent on the issue,” Bhattacharya added.

However, both the Left students’ and teachers’ organisations are cautious to maintain a safe distance from the TMC factions, which are opposing the central force deployment.

A professor said the ruling party’s leaders are involving hooligans in the movement. “From the previous V-C’s time, law and order has been deteriorating.”

This is the first time that the paramilitary forces will be posted at the central university. Presently, security guards from a private agency man the campus.

Recently, citing incidents of confrontation between the university administrations and students and employees, the V-C wrote to the Union HRD minister, requesting security from CISF.
