Bhima-Koregaon: Demand for release of activists intensifies

writer Jayant Pawar

Urmila Pawar

journalist Nikhil Wagle

Rona Wilson

Surendra Gadling

Mahesh Raut

Varavara Rao

Arun Ferreira

Vernon Gonsalves

Writers, lawyers and journalists show solidarity with nine activists who have been in lock-up and denied bail for more than a year.A group of Mumbai intellectuals came together on Monday to intensify their demand for the release of nine activists arrested in connection with the Bhima-Koregaon violence in 2018. The nine activists have been in lock-up for over a year. Senior lawyer Sanjay Singhvi,, and union leader Vishwas Utgi expressed their solidarity with the activists under the banner ’Mumbai Rises to Save Democracy’ and vowed to ensure justice for them.The nine activists –, Sudhir Dhawale,, Soma Sen,and Sudha Bhardwaj – have been under arrest since between June and August last year and have had numerous bail applications rejected. Singhvi said no specific reason has been given as to why they have been refused bail. “As per the law, a person can be kept in lock-up only for 90 days. But 90 days passed in this case and the police got an extension (to file the charge sheet). This is not legally sustainable. Also, people are not given bail under UAPA, but when the activists were kept under house arrest none of them escaped. Then what is the reason to deny them bail?” he said. Recalling a judgment by justice Chandrachud, Singhvi said that having a connection with a terrorist organisation is not sufficient grounds to deny bail, and that one has to prove participation in anti-national activities. “But state power is stifling dissenting voices. We should fight against it forcefully,” he said.Wagle demanded that Hindutva leaders Sambhaji Bhide and Milind Ekbote be investigated in connection with the violence. “The entire case is fabricated and there is no evidence against the arrested activists. It was a police vendetta. We were initially told by the Pune police that it was a conspiracy to assassinate the prime minister, but the issue was never discussed during the hearings. Now, the new government should ensure justice for the activists. People like Sambhaji Bhide and Milind Ekbote should be arrested and investigated,” he said.Recalling the intellectual legacy of Prabodhankar Thackeray, grandfather of chief minister Uddhav Thackeray, Jayant Pawar appealed the new CM to give space to voices of dissent. “You are aware of the voices of dissent in a democracy. You have also recently stated that dissenters or opposition members are not enemies. I have hope that you will respect other voices in the state. Giving justice to the Bhima Koregaon activists will be a step towards ending the politics of revenge,” he said.Terming it a conspiracy against Dalit community, Urmila Pawar demanded that the cases against the activists be withdrawn. “There is no evidence against the arrested activists. The Dalit community was targeted in the violence. We have hope that the new government will not be biased,” she said.The state government had earlier announced that it would withdraw 350 cases in connection with the violence at Bhima-Koregaon in 2018. According to a home department committee report, there are 649 cases against protesters involved in the Bhima-Koregaon agitation. Of these, 63 cases involve serious offences and cannot be withdrawn. In another 200 cases a summary report has been filed, while 350 cases have been recommended for withdrawal. These are in connection with the Maharashtra bandh on January 3, 2018, two days after the initial violence.
