Accidental Prime Minister but not Accidental Film

Accidental Prime Minister but not Accidental Film

Freedom of thought and expression is guaranteed as a fundamental right under Article 10 of the Indian constitution and all people including Bollywood actors are required to work in consonance with the constitutional provisions. But then they have no inborn right or the right under constitutional provisions to malign the personality of any individual or political or social organization more so of the highest office of the land - the Prime Minister's chair and its occupant.

All must ensure creativity of the actors and other artists. But this right of freedom of thought and expression should not be misused as is happening in the film Accidental Prime Minster about the personality of former economist turned politician and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. In the film, Manmohan Singh played by actor Anupam Kher, is depicted as the accidental prime minister in a denigrating manner. Singh played his two innings very well, honestly without any blemish on his personality. He had managed the economy and the country well and had governed honestly and then he should not be depicted in bad light as is done in the BJP sponsored film, whose three-minute trailer was released on Thursday. The film is all set to be released across the country on January, 11, 2019.

The film accidental prime minister has evoked a major political storm and controversy as Congress and other opposition parties as expected have criticized the film and its timing and called the film a propaganda blitz by BJP and Sangh Parivar. However, BJP has appreciated the film calling it as the real demonstration of the fact that the country was held to ransom by Gandhi family for ten long years. Jharkhand state Congress President said that the state Congress will not oppose the screening of the controversial film in the state. State Congress president Ajoy Kumar said though the film is made with an agenda but Congress will desist from indulging in unlawful and undemocratic means to demonstrate against the film. The film is directed by Vijay Ratnakar Guttee, and is a biographical political drama presented by Rudra production (U.K) Bohra bros in association with Dr. Janyantilal Gada (pen India ltd). It is written by Mayank Tiwari. The controversial movie stars Anupum Kher and Akshay Kumar star as main protagonists. It is true that the film is BJP sponsored and thus the film is not an accidental and spontaneous one but is dictated by BJP with an agenda to defame and malign Congress before 2019 general elections and cash in on this film which portrays Ex-Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and the then Congress president Sonia Gandhi in bad light, while making the then PM an object of ridicule as a mere 'puppet'.

Congress has criticized the film and called that hooliganism is the character of fascist BJP. Any person who has reasonable understanding of the film can differentiate between genuine film product and an agenda driven stuff. People are free to see the film and make their judgment. There is no need to stop the screening of the film, said Jharkhand state chief of Congress party. The Kher starrer movie made on the former PM Manmohan Singh and Congress party has evoked criticism from the Congress but its leaders have reacted with caution. Congress leaders said that film making is creativity. People have liberty of expression and hence we see no reason to interfere and jeopardize the screening of the film. At the same time Congress is of the view that BJP does not let any opportunity to go waste in spreading falsehood about Congress.

The Accidental Prime Minister film is based on the controversial book of the same name (Accidental Prime Minister: Making and unmaking of Manmohan Singh) written by Sanjay Baru political analyst who served as the media advisor of the Manmohan Singh from 2004 to 2008. The political drama has Anupum Kher in the lead role. While the memoir on which film is based on alleges that Manmohan Singh was not entirely in control of his powers as most of it was wielded by the then Congress President Sonia Gandhi, the film is an exaggerated project of the BJP to malign Congress and the former PM of the UPA rule. Congress rightly says that the movie is the doomed product of RSS juggernaut before 2019 general elections. Baru feels that world for Sardar turned upside down after in the second tenure of Manmohan Singh after 2009. The Prime Minister was bumped with lot of difficulties and a puppet like term was attached with this name by the media. In the second term the author of the Accidental Prime Minister book Sanjay Baru has written that Singh had threatened to resign; he sealed the Indo-US nuclear deal and got his way but felt helpless against the charges of corruption in his second tenure.

Manmohan Singh was an honest and clean Prime Minister without any corruption charges against his personality and the countrymen know it well, notwithstanding this film which is made with the sole objective of tarnishing the image of Ex-Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and the Congress party just before the onset of the general elections of 2019. The writer of the controversial book on which the film is based was released on the eve of the general elections of 2014 named - Accidental Prime Minister: Making and unmaking of Manmohan Singh further says and alleges that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh was omitted from important decisions and his faithfulness to Gandhi family remained unrewarded. Congress says the propaganda through this film will be counterproductive for BJP.

The BJP throwing its weight behind a three-minute trailer described the film as a "riveting tale of how a family held the country to ransom for ten long years. Was Dr. Singh just a regent who was holding on to the Prime Minister's chair till the time, the heir was ready"? In response to a tweet like this, several other twitter users asked if the film was sponsored by BJP. Maharashtra youth Congress president Satyajeet Tamble responded to the BJP's tweet and said that the real producers of the film have come forward to promote it. Randeep Surajewale of Congress said, "fake propaganda by BJP will not deter Congress from questioning Narinder Modi government on rural distress, unemployment, demonetisation, GST, corruption and failed Modinomics. When the official handle of the largest ruling party of India promotes a film, what do you call it?"

The Accidental Prime Minister treads a tricky path ahead of 2019 elections. The film has been timed ahead of general elections to entice voters and insite them against the Congress. It seems to be the repeat of same exercise before the general elections of 2014. Back then as the countrymen went into the longest ever general election, a book was released that sent the PMO into tizzy and gave the opposition BJP another tool to attack the ruling party congress and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. While sympathetic to Singh the book - The accidental Prime Minister - spoke about interference from Congress chief Sonia Gandhi in the affairs of PMO and attempts to give credit to Rahul Gandhi for key decisions. The PMO then released a statement the day Accidental Prime Minister was released, dismissing the veracity of the memoir, "It is an attempt to misuse a privileged position and access to high office to gain credibility and exploit it for commercial gain. It smacks of a fiction and the coloured view of a former advisor".

Some say Manmohan Singh was a good Finance Minister but a bad PM. Whatever it is, the fact is that Indian economy performed extremely well during the first tenure of Manmohan Singh. The country achieved a growth rate close to 10 percent for much of his term. Even during global financial crisis, the Indian economy did better than many other countries. He inked Indo-US nuclear deal amid criticism from its ally CPIM. The movie revolves round Manmohan Singh - the economist and politician who served as the PM of India from 2004 to 2014 under UPA. Many in Congress have raised objections over the film while BJP has praised it. Even some cultural organization of Punjab have applied to the central board of film certification for intervention and prayed for its modification. They allege that the film belittles Manmohan Singh and the Sikh community as well. The film has been banned by Congress government in Madhya Pradesh.

PM Manmohan Singh was an accidental PM and was the need of the hour then but the film is not an accidental one. It is a deliberate and conscious effort of the BJP to malign its opponents with an eye on 2019 general elections.
