Nationwide strike affects banking services in parts of country; SBI likely to remain operational

Follow us on Image Source : PTI Banking services affected due to strike called by Central Trade Unions

Banking operations were affected in some parts of the country on Tuesday after a section of employees refused to deliver their duties in support of the two-day strike called by 10 Central Trade Unions, in protest against the alleged anti-labour policies of the government. The strike was supported by the All India Bank Employees' Association (AIBEA) and Bank Employees' Federation of India (BEFI), which has impacted banking operation where these two unions are strong.

Customers of a number of public sector banks were already informed about the likely impact on the services if strike materialises.

A statement by the Indian Bank read, "If the strike materialises, a section of the bank's employees may take part in the proposed strike on the said dates, in which case, the normal functioning of the branches/offices of the bank may get affected.”

The State Bank of India (SBI) however, is likely to remain operational, as other seven unions in the banking sector are not part of the strike.

According to an official, SBI is likely to remain operational on the two days, along with a few other nationalised banks.

"All the SBI branches will remain operational. Out of nine union constituents, only two have called the strike and rest are not supporting it this time," United Forum of Bank Unions West Bengal Convener Siddhartha Khan said.

Khan, who is also an office bearer of the National Confederation of Bank Employees said that apart from SBI, Indian Overseas Bank and Bank of India would stay fully functional and some other banks may face partial disruption.

The Reserve Bank of India employees, however, have supported the strike only on January 8.

"Two major RBI employees union have jointly decided to observe the strike in solidarity on January 8. On January 9 there will be a joint lunch-time gate demonstration in all offices against central government’s anti-people, anti-worker, anti-national, pro-corporate policies," All India Reserve Bank Employees Association general secretary Samir Ghosh said.

Latest India News
