Day 2 : Protesters block trains, public in distress

Thiruvananthapuram: On the second day of the 48 hour-long general strike called by trade unions, the protesters blocked trains in Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi and Kasaragod.

Like the previous day, Raptisagar Express, Sabari Express, Jan Shatabdi Express and Venad Express were blocked in Thiruvananthapuram railway station. Police arrested the protesters and removed them from the tracks. In Kozhikode, Chennai Mail was blocked by the protesters. Jan Shatabdi Express is running late by one and half hours and Sabari Express is also late by one hour. All trains are running late following the blockade on rail tracks.

The Indian Railway informed that train service will be cancelled if the protesters continue to lay siege on the tracks.

In Kasaragod, protesters blocked Malabar Express. Kottayam-Nilambur passenger train was blocked by protesters at Kalamassery in Kochi. It is reported that train traffic across the state were disrupted due to the protest.

In Kozhikode, one private bus undertook service to medical college. Shops are expected to open by 10 in the morning. Police have strengthened security in the town. It is reported that trade union leaders directed autorickshaw drivers to go off the roads.

KSRTC is operating Sabarimala special service. All other services were interrupted.

Flight service interrupted

For the first time, employees in Thiruvananthapuram international airport also took part in the strike. Many flights delayed to take off from here due to shortage of staff. Majority of the staff in ground handling department observed the 48-hour strike.

Employees blocked from joining duty

Only private vehicles are seen on roads. However, protesters blocked employees from joining duty at Kochi IOC plant and Chelari.

In Palakkad, protesters blocked the employees from joining duty at KINFRA park in Kanjikode.

In Kasaragod, protesters made an attempt to shut down the office of Muthoot Fin Corp and it ended up in a conflict. Police registered a case against five CPM activists in connection with the incident.

As the strike interrupted public transport service, people failed to reach out to their destinations.

In Kochi, only metro service is operating service.

Meanwhile, merchants have strong disappointment over the strike. It is learned that many shops will be opened today. The general strike largely affected rural areas when compared to urban areas.

The two-day nationwide strike called by central trade unions in protest against what they have described as the alleged anti-worker policies and unilateral labour reforms evoked a mixed response on Tuesday with claims of near-total success in some states and of partial impact in some others.

The 10 unions which have given the strike call include the Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC), All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC), Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) Hind Mazdoor Sabha, All India United Trade Union Centre- AIUTUC) Trade Union Coordination Centre (TUCC) and Self Employed Women's Association (SEWA).

The RSS-affiliated Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) did not take part in the strike. (with added inputs from IANS)
