Rising unemployment can lead to social unrest, says MD of Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy

Activists from the National Students Union of India (NSUI) protesting near Collectorate Circle in New Delhi against unemployment and other issues (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Data released by the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE) has revealed that the unemployment rate in India peaked a new high in the first three weeks of this month at 8.1 per cent. This data not only reiterates the issue of unemployment among Indians but also casts a shadow on the age-old notion that general elections in India generate temporary employment, a phenomenon which has failed to occur this time around.

Speaking exclusively to Mirror Now, Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of CMIE, Mahesh Vyas says that the increase in the unemployment rate is troubling. In order to present his argument, Vyas sights how unemployment rate dipped to 6.7 in the month of March from 7.2 in February, only to attain a new peak at 8.1 in the month of April. "There has been a marginal increase in the employment rate from 39.5 per cent in March to 40 per cent in April," he adds.

K.E. Raghunathan of Manufacturing Association speaks to @fayedsouza, says that payments are pending with the government. #Unemployment #Jobs pic.twitter.com/VVnsVxcTsi — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 25, 2019

However, even Vyas agrees that the demand for casual labour has somewhat increased due to the election season which only indicates that labour participation rate will be worse off post-election. "Young graduates between the ages of 15 and 25 are finding it hard to get jobs," adds Vyas. He further asserts that the unemployment problem can spill over to the social system and cause social unrest.

The World Bank only uses government data. So how are we in a situation, that for the first time, we're quoting international agencies rather than quoting ourselves: Prof. @SMehrotra1 to @fayedsouza on #Unemployment pic.twitter.com/IxJsvXdp1A — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 25, 2019

Professor of Economics at the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), Jayati Ghosh told Mirror Now, "This is a really deep and widespread issue which should have become a matter of emergency for any government." Professor Ghosh's concerns are shared by former Commerce Secretary Ajay Dua who raises serious concerns at the government's state of denial towards an alarming unemployment rate. "The government claims that the NSSO survey was fundamentally flawed and hence cannot be relied upon," says Dua.

The government claims that the NSSO survey was fundamentally flawed and hence can't be relied upon.



Former Commerce Secretary, Ajay Dua shares his views on that@fayedsouza #Unemployment #Jobs pic.twitter.com/VXyWsaa8qV — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 25, 2019

Responding to the concerns, spokesperson of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Vivek Reddy claims, "I do not think the situation is as dark as the CMIE is trying to project and the employment is as stable in India."
