Protest over Puneri Pagdi: Students protest in Pune University's convocation ceremony on Puneri Pagdi issue

Students protest at the convocation ceremony in Pune University on the Puneri Pagdi issue | Photo Credit: BCCL

Pune: Protests raged over the use of traditional Indian, saffron-coloured gowns with the Puneri Pagdi (pugree or pagadi) as the headgear during the 114th convocation held in the Savitribai Phule Pune University on Friday 11 January. Some representatives of the student organisations opposed the inclusion of the Puneri Pagdi at the graduation ceremony.

The loud protests caused tension for some time and abated only after the security forces held back protestors, thus allowing the following program to be completed.

Administrative authorities at the Savitribai Phule Pune University this year decided to change the British era headgear that is included as a part of the graduation ceremony function. Instead of British -style black-coloured gowns and circular hats, they used Indian kurta, pajama and uparne (a traditional cloth slung over the shoulder) as the prescribed dress for the convocation.

There was however argument over what to wear on the head. Some students' organisations had opposed the proposal of wearing Puneri Pagdi (a style of turban scholars and people of position wore in Pune during the 1800s and the early 1900s) on the head. However, some dignitaries present at the ceremony were wearing the Puneri Pagdi. With some students protesting the idea, the situation on the campus was tense for some time.

While the ceremony was going on, students' representatives Kuldeep Ambekar, Dayanand Shinde and Sharmila Yevele went towards the podium and shouted slogans against the Puneri Pagdi. Nationalist Student Congress (NCP Student Wing) Akash Jhambre-Patil and activists protested by getting a mule sporting the Puneri Pagdi on its head. The security personnel on the campus handed them over to the Chatushrungi police.

In this ceremony, a total of 1,03,124 students will get a degree certificate while 439 students will get a Ph.D. certificate each.
