Eight feared killed in Trinamool-BJP clash in Bengal



Kolkata, June 9 (IANS): At least eight persons were allegedly killed and several others injured and missing following a clash between West Bengal’s ruling Trinamool Congress and the BJP workers in North 24 Parganas, sources in both parties claimed on Sunday.

While the state BJP sources claimed that five of their activists have been shot dead by the Trinamool backed men and 18 others have gone missing, a senior Trinamool Congress leader alleged three of their party workers have been killed in a bloodied clash that took place in Hatgachi area under Sandeshkhali Assembly constituency on Saturday.

Graphic images of those slain in the Sandeshkhali clash were posted on social media. “Mamata Banerjee is directly responsible for unleashing violence against BJP workers. We will be reaching Union Home Minister Amit Shah to apprise him of the Sandeshkhali killings,” BJP leader Mukul Roy tweeted late on Saturday.

Police has so far confirmed deaths of three political workers comprising two from BJP and one from Trinamool Congress in the incident.

According to locals, the clash between the two groups started over the forceful removal of BJP’s flags on Saturday afternoon. It soon took a violent turn and bullets were flying.

Mukul Roy called on Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Saturday night and apprised him of the situation. “A team of BJP MPs will visit the area on Sunday and submit a report to Shah,” he said.

State BJP General Secretary Sayantan Basu had on Saturday claimed three party workers — Pradip Mondal, Tapan Mondal and Sukanta Mondal — were killed and five other functionaries injured in the clash.

BJP state General Secretary (organisation) Subrata Chattopadhyay said a fourth BJP worker Debabrata Mondal also died of bullet injury.

Later, another injured BJP worker Shankar Mondal’s body was found, who died early on Sunday, BJP sources said.

The Trinamool meanwhile said its worker Qayum Mollah was stabbed to death, two others were thrown into the water.

“During a booth-level meeting of our workers in Hatgachhi, some miscreants backed by the BJP, attacked them. Mollah, a 26-year-old Trinamool worker, was dragged out of the party office and stabbed to death,” state Minister and Trinamool’s district President Jyotipriya Mallick claimed.

BJP stopped from taking workers’ bodies to Kolkata

An altercation broke out between the police and a group of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leaders in West Bengal’s North 24 Parganas district on Sunday when they were stopped from taking bodies of slain party workers to Kolkata.

On Saturday, three people were killed in a clash between the Trinamool and BJP workers in the Hatgachi area of Sandeshkhali in North 24 Parganas district, over removal of BJP’s flags. The police confirmed three deaths, two from the BJP and one from the Trinamool Congress, in the clashes, though the two parties claim as many as eight deaths.

A BJP delegation visiting the area decided to take bodies of the two party workers to Kolkata for last rites. But the convoy was stopped thrice by the police, claiming it may cause law and order issues in Kolkata.

The BJP convoy, including two hearse vehicles, had bypassed the two police barricades near Sandeshkhali’s Malancha Crossing before being stopped at Minakhan.

The BJP leaders, including state party chief Dilip Ghosh and national secretary Rahul Sinha, argued with the police demanding the vehicles be allowed to go as the party workers shouted slogans, like Jai Sree Ram and BJP Zindabad.

“The family members of the deceased have decided to perform last rites in Kolkata. How can the police stop them? It is their duty to stop murderers and criminals and not the dead,” said Sinha.

“I have told them there will be no rallies in Kolkata. They (bodies) will just be kept at the BJP headquarters to let people pay their last respects. Still the police is stopping us,” he said.

The BJP claimed four of its workers were shot dead and several others were missing. The Trinamool Congress alleged its three workers were killed.

The BJP workers also blocked roads and held demonstrations in Bankura, Hoogly, Howrah, Midnapore, Malda, Barackpore, Naihati and North and South Kolkata. A number of BJP supporters were arrested while holding a protest near the party’s state headquarters in central Kolkata.

BJP to observe ‘Black Day’ across Bengal today

In a bid to protest against the killing of their party men in West Bengal’s North 24 Parganas district a day ago, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) will observe ‘Black Day’ across the state on Monday, a senior state BJP leader said on Sunday.

The party has also called for a 12-hour general strike in the Basirhat sub-division on Monday and a ‘condemnation march’ to the Kolkata Police headquarters in Lalbazar on June 12.

“We condemn the role of the police and the state administration who acted like silent spectators when our workers were killed by Trinamool goons. We will hold ‘Black Day’ across Bengal tomorrow. Also, there will be a 12-hour general strike across the Basirhat subdivision,” BJP national Secretary Rahul Sinha said.

“To protest against the complete lapse of law and order in Bengal, we will hold a mega condemnation rally in Kolkata on June 12,” he added.

The rally will start from Wellington Square and go to Lalbazar, the leader said.
