Tabrez Ansari's mob lynching in Jharkhand is a black eye on India's commitment to international human rights

Muslims staging a silent demonstration in Ranchi on Tuesday to protest against mob lynching of Tabrez Ansari | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The victim has a head injury which went undetected: Post-mortem team Two police officers have been suspended in the wake of the incident "This is a stray incident," claimed Jharkhand food Minister Saryu Rai

Ten days have passed since a 24-year-old man was tied to a pole and mercilessly beaten to death by a murderous mob on the suspicion of theft in the Saraikela Kharsawan district of Jharkhand. Employed in a fabrication workshop in Pune, Tabrez Ansari was visiting his native village of Kadamdiha in Adityapur block with his wife of one-and-a-half months at the time of the horrific incident which has entered the records of Indian Parliament in the words of none other than the current Prime Minister.

In a complaint to the Seraikela police station, Ansari's 21-year-old wife Shaista Parveen claimed that he called her on the night of June 18 and prayed for help against a mob of locals who were threatening to kill him. The complainant also said that she last spoke to her husband at around 10 pm on the same night when he told her that he would later return home. A distraught Parveen immediately informed Tabrez' uncles who managed to find him lodged in a wounded state at the jail inside Seraikela police station.

A report over the incident commissioned by Chhabi Ranjan, the Saraikela Kharsawan deputy commissioner (DC) with Seraikela civil sub-divisional officer (SDO) at the helm says, "Tabrez, hailing from Kadamdiha village under Kharsawan PS, was caught by villagers of Dhatkidih around 2.30 am on June 18 when he was attempting burglary along with his two associates Numair Ali and Sheikh Irfan (both from Kadamdiha). Both managed to escape but Tabrez was caught and beaten up."

(Protests against the incident being held in Ranchi)

While the language of the report found no room to mention the nature of the alleged attempted burglary, Tabrez was accused of attempting, it also failed to take into account several videos of the incident which suggest that the Pune-based welder was tied to a pole and coerced to confess to an attempted burglary and instructed to chant "Jai Shri Ram", a religious chant the incumbent Union Minority Affairs Minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi describes as words which "can be chanted by embracing people and not after throttling them". Ironically, the religious chant uttered while worshipping a mythological champion of honesty, fairness, justice and equality for all is now being used as a battle cry for arbitrary mob justice.

The nature of this crime bears a stark resemblance to others reported from across the country in recent years where victims of mob-lynchings have been charged with petty crimes despite the nature of the victims' wounds often resulting in death. In a majority of such cases, fatalities of communal violence are reduced to a number, almost exceedingly under-reported in rural pockets such as Dhatkidih village with a reported 135 houses within its borders as per Census 2011.

A Special Investigative Team (SIT) led by inspector TN Singh has arrested 11 suspects, all daily wagers and residents of Dhatkidih. They have been identified as Pappu Mandal alias Prakash (28), Kamal Mehto (48) and his son Sumant (24), Premchand Mahli (21) and his cousin Sonaram (31), Satyanarayan Nayak (55) and nephew Madan (30) among others. Police have also arrested roadside food vendor Bhim Mandal (45), landowner Chamu Nayak (40), Sonamu Pradhan (23) and Mahesh Mahli (28).

An analysis of the authenticity of videos of the chilling crime will establish whether or not these suspects deemed it trivial to report an alleged burglar to the police and instead decided to playact judge, jury and executioner by the powers they believed were vested to them in the name of majoritarianism. Merely on the basis of suspicion of committing a crime.

What is hard to believe is that these men who lynched a man to death on the suspicion of burglary could very well find themselves out on bail in a couple of months from now as has been the case in past instances. If similar incidents are anything to go by, one can refer to photographs of lynching accused attending political rallies or being garlanded by elected representatives. Whereas on the other hand, their victim in his last days was mercilessly thrashed for four hours by an unruly mob and kept behind bars for almost four days after allegedly being given 'dhatura', a form of poisonous weed. The treatment meted out to Tabrez is a crystal-clear illustration of the understanding of prisoner's right to life held by police officials not just in Jharkhand but across the length and breadth of the country.

Even as India awaits the results of Tabrez Ansari's post-mortem examination which will specify the cause of his death, an institutional failure on the part of the police force and doctors who dealt with the newlywed 24-year-old since the night of June 18 until his last breath will leave a blot on India's commitment to International Human Rights Conventions for years to come. If proven, the role of communalism in this murder will also highlight a societal plague which has crept into the nooks and corners of what was once known as the world's most vibrant democracy.

(Protesters demonstrating against Tabrez Ansari's lynching being detained by police outside Charminar in Hyderabad)

After reclaiming its seat of power at the centre with an even more massive mandate than 2014, the ruling dispensation is now zealously promulgating a celebration which the President of India described as "a fitting tribute to a great man whom we in India consider the Father of our Nation and whose 150th birth anniversary is being celebrated in 2019."

Serving a prison sentence in Pune's Yerwada Jail, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi in his weekly journal Harijan's September 15, 1940 edition wrote, "communalism of the virulent type is a recent growth. The lawlessness is a monster with many faces. It hurts all in the end, including those who are primarily responsible for it."

However, instances such as the abominable killings of Tabrez Ansari, Pehlu Khan, Junaid Khan, Umar Khan, Alimuddin Ansari, Mohammed Akhlaq and several others portray India's failure as a nation to abide by the principles of the man who they consider the father of the nation, even 71 years since his demise. It is perhaps unfortunate that 2019 will now be remembered as the year of Tabrez Ansari's lynching rather than Mahatma Gandhi's 150th birth anniversary.
