Opposition parties in Bihar rock Assembly over AES deaths

The monsoon session of the Bihar Vidhan Sabha started off with a ruckus with the Opposition RJD targeting the Nitish Kumar-led JD(U)-BJP government for the deaths caused by AES in the state. Nearly 170 children had lost their lives due to the disease in Muzaffarpur district. The Congress and the CPI(ML) too raised their voice in protest against the government.

Workers from both the parties protested against the government before the session began. They also demanded resignation of Health minister Mangal Pandey. CPI(ML)'s Mahboob Alam said, "The health minister should resign on moral grounds. If he doesn't resign, CM Nitish Kumar should make him leave the cabinet." On the other hand, Congress urged the government to provide employment and a compensation of Rs 10 lakh to the families of the deceased.

While CM Nitish Kumar and Deputy CM Sushil Modi were present in the Assembly, Opposition leader Tejashwi Yadav was conspicuous by his absence. Interestingly, it has been a month since Yadav has not returned to state capital Patna. However, on asking Rabri Devi about her son's whereabouts, she yelled and said, "Go, search at your home."

OPPN DEMANDS Congress urged the government to provide employment and a compensation of Rs 10 lakh to the families of the deceased



Doctors claimed the parents of most of the deceased children had no access to the public distribution system

Meanwhile, the Speaker read out the names of the candidates elected to the Lok Sabha. Five MLAs have been elected to the Lok Sabha from Bihar, one from Congress and four from JD(U). The proceedings have been stalled till July 1. But more drama continues as Monday's session will begin with the issue of AES and its consequences.

Meanwhile, a group of doctors, which conducted an independent inquiry into the recent deaths of children in Bihar's Muzaffarpur district, has blamed "administrative failure" and the "state's apathy towards people" for the tragedy.

It has also claimed that the parents of most of the deceased children had no access to the public distribution system as they did not have ration cards.

Most of the children were malnourished and none had been treated for it. Also, none of them had growth-monitoring cards, a preliminary report prepared by the fact-finding team of doctors under the banner of "Progressive Medicos and Scientists' Forum" (PMSF) stated.

(With inputs from agencies)
