Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences to build police chowki on its campus

HUBBALLI: In the wake of the recent attack on two male nurses by outsiders over trivial issues at Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences , the hospital authorities have decided to strengthen security in the premises. Staff at KIMS have been demanding a full-fledged police outpost (police chowki) at the hospital since several years. After repeating incidents of assault on nurses and other staff, KIMS has approved the construction of a police chowki on its KIMS premises.KIMS director Dr Ramalingappa Antaratani told TOI, “We have installed adequate CCTV cameras in our premises and increased the number of security personnel from 100 to 125. The guards have been posted at all vulnerable points and departments to ensure safety of doctors, nurses and those visiting the hospital.”“But, the presence of CCTVs and security guards has not created any fear among troublemakers. They assault our staff over petty issues and also threaten security guards with dire consequences. We are worried about such disturbing incidents,” he added.“Currently, we have one or two policemen functioning from inside the casualty department. Due to the absence of policemen in the hospital premises, many people are bothering our staff. Earlier, the Lokayukta had recommended that a police chowki be set up in medical colleges across the state and we are now working we seriously working on this issue,” he said.“We have already drafted a plan to build a full-fledged police outpost in the hospital premises on a 25 by 25-foot site near the casualty department at an approximate cost of Rs 4 to 4.5 lakh. We have already finalized the contractor who will start work in the next couple of days. According to our plan, the proposed chowki will accommodate five-six policemen who can keep an eye on all visitors,” said Dr Antaratani.“The very presence of a police chowki will deter many people from taking the law into their hands and behave rudely with our staff. It will also instill confidence and courage among staff to work without any fear,” he added.Once the chowki is built, the government will provide the required number of policemen, he said.
