Pedestrian friendly CP on weekend: Traders protest against NDMC over change in plan

Traders staged a protest in Delhi's Connaught Place on Saturday against the New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) over the pedestrianisation of the inner circle, alleging that the civic body is adopting a different plan than what was agreed upon which can affect their businesses.

Traders were seen protesting with placards saying "No Car No Karobar" and throwing traffic cones off the road.

Delhi: New Delhi Traders Association (NDTA) stage protest in Connaught Place area against New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) decision to execute its pedestrianisation plan in the area. NDMC has decided to restrict vehicular movement to Connaught Place on 30 Jun & 1 July. pic.twitter.com/j24sZkUE0H ANI (@ANI) June 29, 2019

Vehicular movement to Connaught Place will be restricted this Sunday and Monday as the NDMC plans to execute its pedestrianisation plan in the shopping hub.

"Connaught Place is not an experiment laboratory, it is a professional business centre. It must be respected. We too have several tax liabilities. If NDMC really wants to improve the status here, street hawkers should be removed," a member of New Delhi Traders Association (NDTA) said.

Member of New Delhi Traders Association (NDTA): Connaught Place is not an experiment laboratory, it is a professional business centre. It must be respected. We too have several tax liabilities. If NDMC really wants to improve the status here, street hawkers should be removed. pic.twitter.com/dXv88Nz0AA June 29, 2019

Traders had raised objection to the plan following which the NDMC had tweaked its earlier plan, which was to make the inner circle completely car-free, to focus on pedestrianising the blocks but giving access to all parking lots in the inner and outer circles to car users.

"They are now adopting a different plan than what was agreed upon in the previous meeting. As per the plan discussed with NDMC officials, it was decided that vehicles will be given entry only through Janpath to inner circle, and from there they can access all parking lots.

"The exit will only be through Baba Kharak Singh Marg. Other entry and exit routes will be blocked for cars. But now they are not adopting this plan," Vinay Behel, the treasurer of New Delhi Traders Association (NDTA) said.

He said the association will stage a protest if the civic body doesn't amend the plan as decided or make decisions without keeping the NDTA in confidence.

Connaught Place market was one of the locations initially chosen for pedestrianising in the national capital, along with Chandni Chowk. In January 2017, when Venkaiah Naidu was the urban development minister, he had conceptualised the idea, which was taken forward by the NDMC.

However, the plan never took off owing to strong opposition from the traders' association. The NDMC had earlier this month announced that it will do a trial run of the plan for two consecutive weekends.

(With inputs from Kumar Kunal and PTI)
