RJD MLAs protest encephalitis deaths outside Bihar Assembly

The death toll due to the acute encephalitis syndrome has mounted to 134 in Bihar.

As national outrage around the mounting encephalitis deaths in Bihar seems to have died down, Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) MLAs protested outside the Bihar Assembly on Monday.

The RJD MLAs protested against the deaths of more than 100 children due to the encephalitis outbreak. The protest took place on the first day of the Bihar Assembly's monsoon session.

RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav had been slammed for failing to raise his voice over the deaths of children. On Monday, Leader of Opposition Tejashwi Yadav said he will raise the issue of deaths due to Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) in the state Assembly.

"I will ask questions on crime and health issues in state Assembly," Yadav told reporters in Patna.

When asked about his opponents' criticism over his "disappearance" post the Lok Sabha elections, Tejashwi Yadav, while rubbishing the comments, said he has already clarified his stance.

"I have already cleared my position with a tweet. They have nothing else to talk about," he said.

After his month-long absence from the public eye, Tejashwi had on June 28 said he was undergoing treatment for a ligament and ACL injury.

"Friends! For the last few weeks, I was busy undergoing treatment for my long-delayed ligament & ACL injury. However, I'm amused to see political opponents, as well as a section of media, cooking up spicy stories," Yadav had tweeted.

"Constantly following up the untimely loss of hundreds of poor kids due to AES. In this tragic moment asked party workers, leaders to visit affected families without getting into Photo-OP and MPs to raise it in Parliament and that is why PM responded. My Dear Bihar! I am very much here," he had said in another tweet.

The death toll due to the acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) mounted to 134 in Bihar on Saturday.

As per the official data, Shri Krishna Medical College and Hospital (SKMCH) in Muzaffarpur, which is handling the largest number of patients in the district, reported 113 deaths while there were 21 deaths at Kejriwal Hospital of the city.

(input from Rohit Kumar Singh in Patna)
