Jaipur minor girl rape case: Locals vandalise vehicles, demand accused's arrest

The matter came to light when the child reached home after the accused raped her. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Jaipur: After a man was arrested for raping his seven-year-old girl in Shastri Nagar area of Jaipur, Rajasthan, locals staged a protest demanding justice for the victim on Monday afternoon. In the protest, locals vandalised several cars and vehicles parked in the hospital's vicinity, where the minor is undergoing treatment. Reportedly, the incident has taken a communal angle and heavy forces have been deployed in the area.

The local police and special forces are guarding the area to avoid any escalation in the matter. The cops are appealing to people to keep peace in such a sensitive situation. The matter came to light when the child reached home after the accused raped her. The accused posed as the victim's father's friend and kidnapped the minor. In an isolated place, the accused raped her after which she ran and came back to her place. The family immediately rushed her to the local hospital from where she was referred to JK Lon Hospital for further treatment.

Meanwhile, the police registered a case under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. While condemning the incident, the locals began protesting outside the hospital and demanded arrest of the accused. Senior police officers from Shastri Nagar police station immediately reached the spot to control the situation.

Police Commissioner Anand Shrivastav told Dainik Bhaskar, that the minor is safe and is being treated by experienced doctors of the hospital. He also warned people about several rumours which are being spread and mentioned that strict legal action will be taken against culprits. However, the police are trying to nab the accused who had fled from the spot after committing the heinous crime.

Also Read: Scared of police? This police station in Rajasthan offers snacks, tea to complainants

In another case reported from Rajasthan, a girl was allegedly abducted and raped in Mewar city of Rajasthan in June this year. The victim was abducted while she was asleep near her mother. The accused dumped the girl on the spot and is still on the run.

The girl was rushed to the nearest hospital by the police and is said to be in stable condition. The minor alleges that there was more than one person present at the spot. Taking cognizance of the case, the BJP MP Diya Kumari met senior police officials and asked the police to speed up the investigation process and take the matter seriously.

However, the police have identified the accused and further probe in the case is underway.
