Poor water supply, unusable bathrooms make life hard for SC/ST hostel inmates

COIMBATORE: Lack of proper water supply and unusable bathrooms and toilets are some of the problems faced by the inmates of the men’s Industrial Training Institute (ITI) hostel for SC/ST students at Samathuvapuram in Vellakinar near the city.The students said there was no regular water supply in the hostel’s pipelines and they had to rely on water brought in tankers, which was also insufficient for all the inmates.The ITI, which is situated on Mettupalayam Road, has a hostel on its campus. The hostel for SC/ST students is situated separately at Vellakinar and is maintained by the department of adi dravidar and tribal welfare.The students said they had informed the issue to the hostel authorities earlier and also staged a protest in front of the hostel a year before, but there was no respite.On Tuesday, inmates of the hostel submitted a petition to the district collector, K Rajamani, seeking relief.A first year student said the pipes in the hostel restrooms have no running water supply. “The hostel authorities buy water in trucks and fill a 1,000-litre tank. But even tthat is not supplied daily. There are 60 inmates in the hostel. We have to use the water for bathing, washing clothes and cleaning. How will it suffice?” the student asked.The students also said the bathrooms and restrooms were in an unusable condition and they were forced to bathe in open space inside the hostel. “The hostel premise is also not cleaned properly,” said another student.They said there were three batches in the ITI – 7.30am, 9am and 12pm – and food for all the batches was cooked at the same time. “So, when the last batch students come to eat, the food goes cold and stale,” they said.When contacted, an official from the district adi dravidar and tribal welfare department said the collector had asked them to act on the issue. “We have pulled up the warden of the hostel. We have also sent officials to the hostel to inspect and take action. We will surely rectify all the issues within two days,” the official said.
