Rahul Gandhi formally resigns as Congress chief, tweets resignation letter; 'I am responsible for poll loss'

Rahul Gandhi shared his resignation letter on Twitter

Key Highlights Rahul Gandhi resigned as Congress chief, shares resignation letter Gandhi said that CWC should select the new party chief at the earliest. Several party leaders had urged Gandhi to withdraw his resignation

New Delhi: After days of uncertainty and suspense, Rahul Gandhi on Wednesday finally submitted his resignation and shared his resignation letter in a tweet.

Gandhi took responsibility for Congress' defeat in Lok Sabha and said that he would continue to fight the ideology of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

In his four-page resignation letter, Gandhi said it had been an "honour" to serve the Congress Party. "I owe the country and my organisation a debt of tremendous gratitude and love," Gandhi wrote in his tweet along with the copy of his resignation.

Gandhi clarified that he had quit the top post of the party as he held himself accountable for the party's humiliating defeat in the general elections at the hands of the BJP.

"As President of the Congress party, I am responsible for the loss of the 2019 election. Accountability is critical for the future growth of our party," the Congress leader wrote in the letter.

It is an honour for me to serve the Congress Party, whose values and ideals have served as the lifeblood of our beautiful nation.



I owe the country and my organisation a debt of tremendous gratitude and love.



Jai Hind pic.twitter.com/WWGYt5YG4V — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) July 3, 2019

Stating that he had "no hatred or anger" towards the BJP, he said, "But every living cell in my body instinctively resists their idea of India."

In his letter, he added that the senior party leaders were tasked with the responsibility of choosing new party chief.

Notably, soon after Gandhi tweeted out his resignation, changes in his Twitter bio were made to reflect his position in the party. The bio on his official Twitter handle has been changed fro, 'President of Indian National Congress' to 'Member of Indian National Congress.'

Earlier in the day, Gandhi had reiterated his decision to step down from the post of Congress president after the Lok Sabha polls debacle.

Gandhi stated that he was no longer the party chief and said that the Congress Working Committee should elect a new party president “without further delay. “

“Party should decide on the new president quickly without further delay, I'm nowhere in this process. I have already submitted my resignation and I am no longer the party president. CWC should convene a meeting at the earliest and decide,” Gandhi was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

Gandhi’s insistence to quit the top post of the party comes even as several leaders, including Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot and veteran leader Ahmed Patel, have urged Gandhi to continue working as the party president.

On Monday, Rahul Gandhi had met all the party chief ministers - Gehlot, Punjab CM Amarinder Singh, Madhya Pradesh CM Kamal Nath, Puducherry CM V Narayansamy and Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel.

During the meeting, the CMs had requested Rahul to reconsider his decision of resigning as Congress chief. Briefing reporters after the meeting, Gehlot had said that all the Congress CMs had asked Gandhi to continue as the party chief and to oversee a complete overhaul of the party.

Gehlot had said, "We conveyed to him the feelings of our party workers and leaders. We hope that he will pay heed to our views and do the right thing."

A day after Gandhi's meeting with Congress chief ministers, at least a hundred party workers staged a 'dharna' in the national capital protesting against the Congress chief's decision to step down. The workers told a news agency that the party shared the collective responsibility of the drubbing it received in the Lok Sabha elections and that Gandhi was not the only one to be blamed for it.

The Congress managed to win only 52 seats out of the 543 seats of the Lok Sabha in the 2019 general elections, while the Bharatiya Janata Party registered a landslide victory in 303 seats.
