Delhi: Safdarjung Hospital doctors' strike claims 18-year-old man's life

The resident doctors' strike at Safdarjung Hospital demanding better security at the hospital was called off Monday everning. Meanwhile, 18-year-old man from Bihar, who met with an accident in Gurugram on Saturday, died at the hospital Monday morning waiting for treatment after doctors went on an indefinite strike, shutting emergency services. The doctors went on strike after one of the resident doctors was thrashed by a Delhi Police head constable's son, who had come for treatment on Sunday morning.

Kishan Murari died after waiting for treatment for over 24 hours. As his condition went from bad to worse, the family alleged that several requests were made to transfer him elsewhere but the requests were rejected."My brother was brought to the Safdarjung Emergency in the wee hours on Sunday after getting referred from a hospital in Gurugram. From Sunday morning till he breathed his last on Monday morning, no doctor attended to him and our requests of referring him elsewhere also fell on deaf ears," said Monu Kumar, Murari's cousin. With over 1,600 resident doctors on an indefinite strike at a hospital that has on an average 10,000 footfalls in its Out-Patient Department, several others were seen waiting at the hospital's emergency where they were neither getting treatment nor getting referred to another hospital. A day-old-girl, fighting for life, was sent back due to unavailability of doctors.While the two constables, Virender, father of the accused who punched the doctor-on-duty in the nose, and Vinod, duty constable, have been suspended pending inquiry, the doctors are not satisfied with the security at the hospital. To look into the matter, meetings were held between the Director General of Health Services, who visited the hospital on Monday, and the Medical Superintendent. "We heard about the death and feel sorry for the family, but if we doctors need help too as there have been many incidents where doctors have been thrashed by the family members of patients," said a senior resident doctor. Doctors at the hospital even took out a peace march from the resident doctors' hostel to the Medical Superintendent's office on Monday morning.There were only 3,723 Out-Patient cases at the hospital on Monday, of which only 1,825 were new cases.

WAIT TOO LONG
