APHC chief spokesman booked under PSA

Srinagar, July 03, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, the authorities booked the illegally detained Chief Spokesman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Ghulam Ahmad Gulzar under draconian law, Public Safety Act. Indian police had arrested Ghulam Ahmad Gulzar on 15th of June 2019 from his residence and lodged him at Shergarhi Police Station in Srinagar. The occupation authorities, today, shifted him to Udhampur jail of Jammu region after invoking PSA against him.

APHC Chairman, Syed Ali Gilani addressing a meeting of Executive Council of Hurriyat Conference in Srinagar, today, strongly condemned the slapping of PSA on Ghulam Ahmad Gulzar. The APHC in a statement issued at the end of the meeting said tall claims of governance and rule of law stand shamefully exposed when a person is rearrested on same grounds within a fortnight. According to the statement, Hakeem Abdul Rashid has been nominated as new APHC spokesman.

Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir Chairman, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai in a statement issued in Srinagar deplored that illegally detained Kashmiris were being ill-treated in Indian jails. He visited the residence of incarcerated Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, Muhammad Yasin Malik at Maisuma in Srinagar, today. He met Yasin Malik’s mother and sister and inquired about the well-being of the JKLF Chairman. The Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Chairman also visited the residences of Sartaj Ahmed Dar and Parveez Ahmed Reshi, who are languishing in Indian jails.

The Jammu and Kashmir Freedom Movement Chairman, Muhammad Sharif Sartaj in a statement issued in Jammu said that even Indian parliament was not free from people of terrorist mind-set. He said that Hindu terrorists affiliated with right-wing organizations were being given signals from the floor of the parliament to commit genocide of the Muslims through raising Jay Shri Ram slogans.

Jammu and Kashmir Mass Movement Chairperson, Farida Bahenji in a statement said that the youth sacrificing their lives for the Kashmir cause were the precious assets of the Kashmiri people. Jammu and Kashmir Employees Movement Chairman, Muhammad Shafi Lone said that India was hell bent upon suppressing the Kashmiris’ freedom movement through military might.

Communal Indian police arrested four Muslim traders after labelling them as cattle smugglers in Rajouri and Poonch areas of Jammu region. The police also took around four dozen cattle into its possession. Meanwhile, people held a protest demonstration in Shopian against the anti-people policies of the occupation authorities. On the other hand, three persons including a teenage girl were found dead in mysterious conditions in two different areas of Islamabad district, today.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
