After Rahul Gandhi quits, Congress leaders mount pressure on Ajoy Kumar

RANCHI: Rahul Gandhi ’s four-page note, which he posted on social media on Wednesday to make it clear that he has stepped down from the post of Congress president, is being seen as a silver lining by dissenting party’s leaders in Jharkhand.Their Lok Sabha hopes dashed by the BJP-led NDA, Congress leaders here had been seeking the ouster of state’s party chief Ajoy Kumar and RPN Singh, the party’s national in-charge for Jharkhand. Now, with Gandhi having made his stand public, leaders here are pinning hopes on the new president to take a tough call on the state leadership. Soon after the party’s debacle in Jharkhand, Kumar tendered his resignation to Singh. But with Gandhi’s future being uncertain, Kumar’s resignation has been kept pending.Veterans had accused Kumar and Singh of miscalculating the seat-sharing arrangement, giving away its pocket boroughs to JMM and JVM-P, ignoring the Left parties and picking weak candidates in three of seven seats it contested. After the poll debacle, the two were accused of shying away from conducting review meetings and misleading the national leadership of actual reasons behind the loss. Party workers even demonstrated outside the party’s state headquarters in June.Pradeep Balmuchu, former state president and a former parliamentarian, said: “Rahulji is correct. Office bearers shied away from their responsibility. There was no concrete post-poll analysis. Just the district presidents were called for a brief meeting in Ranchi and a cosmetic report was handed over to the national leadership.”Balmuchu is one among many Congress veterans who are frequenting New Delhi to apprise the leaders there of the party’s condition in Jharkhand. Former state Congress vice-president Anadi Brahma, ex-spokesperson Rakesh Sinha, and former Ranchi district Congress president Surender Singh met Ghulam Nabi Azad, Mallikarjun Kharge and Ahmed Patel seeking Kumar and Singh’s ouster earlier this week.Another veteran, who did not wish to be named, stressed that efforts are being made to convince the national leadership to quickly reshuffle the state’s top brass. “If it is not done, the party’s chances in the upcoming assembly election will be ruined as well,” he added.When contacted, Kumar said he will keep doing his work. “There will be speculations and comments. But I had committed to Rahulji that we will fight the assembly election and come out as winners. I will stand by my commitment,” he told TOI from Jamshedpur on Thursday.
