Anubhav Sinha Files Case Against District Magistrate After ‘Article 15’ Gets Banned In Roorkee

Since the time Anubhav Sinha’s directorial Article 15 has released, it has been courting controversies one after the other. While the movie is earning all the praises from critics and fans, in some parts of the nation, the movie is facing violent protests.

The movie has been banned in Roorkee, Uttrakhand, due to law and order proceedings, it is said. Unhappy with this, director Anubhav Singh had tweeted a couple of days ago that he would seek legal advice and will challenge it in the court.

Seeking legal advice. Will challenge it in the court. https://t.co/fPiYlUUEN1 — Anubhav Sinha (@anubhavsinha) July 2, 2019

Thankyou Rakesh. Will give this to my lawyers. https://t.co/hAASRyowgJ — Anubhav Sinha (@anubhavsinha) July 2, 2019

Doing the same, he has now filed a case against District Magistrate. Furthermore, he also plans to file a case against the group who initiated the ban and stirred the row around Article 15.

Yeh le beta pic.twitter.com/IMHQVy0riP — PatRIOT DeshPreyMe (@randomaccesone) June 28, 2019

The movie has been facing violent protests in Roorkee. On Tuesday, the district administration decided to stop the screening of Ayushmann Khurrana starrer Article 15 after protests by right-wing organisations who had objections to certain scenes in the movie, reports IANS.

BCCL

"Since protests were held only in Roorkee, we decided to stop the screening of the movie in the town only," a police official said. Reportedly, protesters were shouting slogans against the director Anubhav Sinha and also tearing off the posters.

BCCL/The picture shows protests against Article 15 in Nagpur.

The movie was also banned in Kanpur earlier following protests by Brahmin outfits.

The Anubhav Sinha directorial is based on Article 15 of the Indian Constitution. The film also draws inspiration from the Badaun gang-rape incident in Uttar Pradesh and deals with caste discrimination. The investigative thriller features Ayushmannn Khurrana as a police officer, with Sayani Gupta, Kumud Mishra, Isha Talwar and Manoj Pahwa in key roles.
