Following communal violence, internet remains closed in Agra

A large police contingent from the neighbouring district was deployed around Jama Masjid where Friday prayers are held.

Days after communal violence that broke out in Agra following a protest march by Muslims in the city, internet remained down on Friday to prevent spreading of fake news after Friday prayers.

A large police contingent from the neighbouring district was deployed around Jama Masjid where the Friday prayers are held.

Police presence ensured a calm situation despite the protest march call by Muslim organizations and the Bhim Army.

Activists belonging to both Muslim organizations and the Bhim Army have either been picked up by police or are in hiding due to the strict checking throughout Agra and the DGP OP Singh is himself monitoring the sitution.



Friday prayers were also held peacefully in the Taj Mahal, which was open for two hours just for the prayers. A large number of CISF jawans were on a strict vigil during the prayers.

However, the communal violence which followed the demonstration held by Muslim organizations in Agra on July 1 is far from over.

A similar protest march was held in Mathura district's Raya which ended in a mass panic spreading through the town.

While police managed to keep the situation under control, the viral messages on social media have scared the local residents who are demanding action against those who are spreading these messages.

The locals claim that the Mathura district is already sensitive given the communal tension between Hindus and Muslims due to Ram Janma Bhumi and Idgah disputes.

Similarly, in Aligarh and Firozabad districts too, hushed whispers about a proposed 'movement' by the Muslim organizations are being heard in small circles.

Several social activists of these districts warned India Today that if this 'circle of whisperers' is not broken, it could result in the outbreak of widespread violence on communal lines in Uttar Pradesh as both Aligarh and Firozabad are home to large number of Muslims.

Hindustani Biradari vice-chairman Vishal Sharma suggested that the DGP OP Singh should instruct the district police chiefs to hold anti-riot drills and run public outreach programs to make the people aware of what exactly is transpiring in the state.

Vishal Sharma also said that the situation appears to be an orchestrated plot to push Uttar Pradesh towards communal riots and unless the police maintains strict vigil, the plot will be successful.

At present too, some anti-social elements are trying to create an atmosphere of panic and communal hatred in Uttar Pradesh and the Tabrez Ansari incident of Jharkhand is being used to generate mass hysteria among the Muslim community.
