The annual mayhem nobody does a thing about

monsoon

Mumbaikar

Shiv Sena

rocket

SpiceJet

natural resources

Mithi River

Strange. When calamity strikes, most people think instantly and selfishly about themselves. As I did. I was booked on a flight to Goa. And then the skies ripped open — dramatically and suddenly. My trip was timed to meet a critically ailing friend. I guess our final meeting was not destined to take place — I may have to live with that regret forever. While I was staring glumly out of the window as torrential rain tore up and drowned Mumbai, killing more than 30 people, rendering countless more homeless, washing away homes, and creating utter havoc in the lives of hapless citizens, I was relieved that the one sentiment nobody invoked this year was ‘The Spirit of Mumbai’. A lot has changed since the time our metropolis faced the full wrath of thefury on July 26, 2005, and yet managed to stay afloat, with fellow Mumbaikars reaching out and helping those who were marooned, hungry, cold, thirsty, desperate, scared, lost. This time, the mood was entirely different. Yes, several good Samaritans went out of their way to rescue strangers, animals in distress, children separated from their parents. But, for the most part, citizens focused on covering their own backs, ignoring those who could have done with a helping hand — the elderly and sick.Is Mumbai turning heartless? Where has the kindness gone? Outsiders who used to remark on the spontaneous generosity of the city, now ask incredulously whether it ever existed? Yes, it did! But the sad truth is that even the most large-heartedis plain exhausted. And sickened by the official apathy, neglect and callousness of those in charge of keeping Mumbai safe and clean. For more than 25 years, one political party — the— has exercised total and unchecked control over the BMC — one of the wealthiest municipal corporations in India. (Budget for 2019-20 is a staggering Rs 30,692 crores.) And also the most corrupt. Prepping the city for the monsoon does not requirescience. We have the money to hire experts from abroad, if we lack the skills ourselves. And yet, year after year, Mumbaikars have to endure heartbreaking hardships only because BMC officials have not bothered to do a damn thing.In Malad alone, more than 26 people lost their lives after a wall collapse. Mismanagement at every level brought India’s premier city to a standstill. Instead of stepping up, taking charge and plunging into emergency mode, the arrogant top dogs pointed fingers at the sky and blamed the rain gods. What a pathetic alibi! Sure, 400 mm in four hours is one hell of a lot of rain. But does that exonerate those whose job it is to make sure the city does not collapse? It is shameful that instead of ensuring systems were in place to help citizens, our netas chose to blame nature.Such is the impunity on display that others also take their cues from these so-called city fathers, to shrug off all responsibility, as it happened with SpiceJet. When one of its flights overshot the runaway upon landing in Mumbai recently, the airline denied any passengers were injured. But there are credible accounts documented by affected passengers that describe what happened on the flight. Anywhere else in the world,would have faced lawsuits. But here in India, we don’t assert ourselves and demand justice.Same goes for our passive toleration of political parties that have been brazenly looting Mumbai for decades, stripping it of, going ahead with ambitious projects that can lead to further disasters in future. If these people are incapable of cleaning up, if they think nothing of stripping mangroves and creating a zoo (if you please!) inside Aarey Colony — all the while lining their own pockets, and taking our silence for weakness — then we only have ourselves to blame. Why don’t we as citizens insist on transparency and accountability from the cash-rich BMC? The money BMC is sitting pretty on is meant for us — for the city. We have a new BMC chief. He seems sincere about his job and responsibilities. Let’s hope he too doesn’t buckle and start playing ball with political parties. But, what about the mayor? The chief minister? The Thackerays? Isn’t Mumbai their beloved city, too? Where were they when Mumbai was drowning? Come on, Mumbaikars — show your asli spirit. Ask questions. Demand answers. We deserve better.
