Karnataka crisis LIVE updates: Rebel MLAs remain united, say no question of returning to Bengaluru

After 13 MLAs of the coalition government in Karnataka submit their resignations at the Karnataka Assembly Speaker’s office on Saturday, the JD (S) has called a crucial meeting at 6 pm. While the situation is chaotic, Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy who was on a private visit to the US is expected to arrive today. KPCC president Dinesh Gundurao is also expected to arrive in the state today.

On Saturday, at least 13 MLAs of ruling alliance submitted their resignations to the Karnataka Assembly Speaker’s office. Reports said the legislators also met the Governor Vajubhai Rudabhai Vala at the Raj Bhavan before being flown to Mumbai on a private jet for safe-keeping in the continuance of resort politics.

After the resignation of 13 more MLAs, the strength will be down to 102. Last week, two Congress MLAs Anand Singh and Ramesh Jarkiholi resigned from Karnataka government. The current strength of the coalition government is 117 while BJP’s current strength in the Legislative Assembly is 105 and requires the coalition to come down to 102 to cross the halfway mark. The current strength of the Assembly has been reduced to 222.

Police detain Mumbai Congres workers for protesting outside hotel where defected Karnataka MLAs are kept

Here are the LIVE updates:

Senior Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge said that the rebel MLAs were under pressure, adding that the BJP in the state has become active in Karnataka following its victory in the Lok Sabha elctions 2019. Kharge said that BJP is trying to topple the colaition governmnet in the state.

Rebel MLAs have cleared the air about their return to Bengaluru, saying they will not withdraw their decision or return to Bengaluru. Speaking to media outside Sofitel hotel in Mumbai, rebel MLA ST Somashekar said that 13 legislators have submitted resignation to the Speaker and informed Karnataka Governor about the same.

Following the rebellion in the party, Karnataka Congress has issued a circular, asking all MLAs to attend Congress Legislature Party (CLP) meeting on July 9. Reports said that Karnataka Congress in charge KC Venugopal and state Congress chief Dinesh Gundu Rao will be present in the CLP.

Maharashtra Police have detained Mumbai Congress workers for protesting outside Sofitel hotel where defected Karnataka MLAs are kept. The protesters were asking disgruntled legislators to take back their resignation.

Maharashtra Youth Congress workers including its vice-president

Suraj Singh Thakur have been detained by police during their protest outside Sofitel hotel asking #Karnataka Congress MLAs to take back their resignation. pic.twitter.com/qLuXQVSqBF — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Congress leader HK Patil blamed the BJP for creating the problem in Karnataka. He said that the leaders of the coalition are in touch with the disgruntled MLAs and they will return to the party.

HK Patil, Congress: Our leaders are talking to our legislators who are unhappy. Everything will be okay. BJP is only creating this problem. But Govt will be stable. Govt is safe & it will remain safe. All our legislators will come back. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/mZ4B2ZmFyW — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

HD Kumaraswamy has cancelled his Air India flight, he has taken a charter plane to reach Bengaluru as soon as possible, reports said.

Congress leader DK Shivakumar said that the scenario in the state will be taken back to normalcy. He said that both the parties will be holding a meeting to settle the issue. Shivakumar said that he is sure the defected MLAs will come back to the party-fold.

Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy, whose government is facing an existential crisis, is flying to Bengaluru via a special flight from the national capital. He was in the US for a private visit and returned to Delhi today.

Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy is flying to Bengaluru by a special flight from Delhi. pic.twitter.com/Wf9524IsBK — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Mumbai Congress says won’t tolerate horse-trading. They have decided to stage a protest outside Mumbai’s Sofitel BKC hotel against alleged poaching of Congress MLAs. currently, the Congress-JDS MLAs are staying on the 14th floor of the hotel.

A senior Congress leader, on conditions of anonymity, has termed Siddaramaiah a thief inside the party. The Congress leader is in charge of keeping the flock of party legislators together in Karnataka, reports said.

Maharashtra BJP Vice President and MLC, Prasad Lad has said that he knows about the Karnataka crisis only through media adding that he is busy with the party membership drive.

Maharashtra BJP Vice President and MLC, Prasad Lad on being asked about political situation in Karnataka: I know about it only through media. I am busy with the party membership drive. pic.twitter.com/0xNFqMdmMq — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy has returned from the US. Janata Dal (Secular) has also called for a legislative party meet today at 6 pm.

#Karnataka: Janata Dal (Secular) calls for legislative party meet later today; Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy to return to India later today. (file pic) pic.twitter.com/I3pxBhsKxa — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Senior Karnataka legislator R Roshan Baig, who was suspended by the Congress on Tuesday (June 18) for anti-party activities, is likely to resign soon, reports said. Roshan Baig said the Congress suspended him and he is not going back. On June 19, the Shivajinagar MLA had said that he was still a disciplined soldier of the Indian

National Congress and not “Siddu Congress.” Baig also said that his comments against the Congress leaders were the truth and also the opinion of party workers.

National Congress and not “Siddu Congress.” Baig also said that his comments against the Congress leaders were the truth and also the opinion of party workers. Congress leader DK Shivakumar said the JD(S) called a meeting of their party leaders and his party will also call their party leaders to sort out this issue. Shivakumar said he was confident that things will cool down immediately. Expressing his confidence in the MLAs that they will come back, in the interest of the nation, both the Congress and JD(S) leaders need to run Karnataka govt smoothly and he was confident that the MLAs will come back.

DK Shivakumar leaves HD Devegowda’s residence after holding a brief meeting with the JD(S) chief.

JD(S) leaders including HD Revanna, D Kupendra Reddy, HK Kumaraswamy, and DC Thammanna have also joined the meeting between Congress leader & Karnataka Minister DK Shivakumar and JD(S) leader & former PM HD Deve Gowda in Bengaluru.

BJP MLC Prasad Lad was seen outside Sofitel Mumbai BKC hotel in Mumbai , where 10 Karnataka Congress-JD(S) MLAs are staying.

#Maharashtra: BJP MLC Prasad Lad outside Sofitel Mumbai BKC hotel in #Mumbai, where 10 Karnataka Congress-JD(S) MLAs are staying. pic.twitter.com/EJYFwft0cj — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Karnataka: JD(S) leaders HD Revanna, D Kupendra Reddy, HK Kumaraswamy, and DC Thammanna have also joined the meeting between Congress leader & Karnataka Minister DK Shivakumar and JD(S) leader & former PM, HD Deve Gowda in Bengaluru. pic.twitter.com/ENcGKCFzTJ — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Congress workers on Sunday held a protest outside party office in Bengaluru for asking Congress MLAs to take back their resignation.

Bengaluru: Congress workers hold protest outside party office asking Congress MLAs to take back their resignation. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/M0pr8SZKHE — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Congress leader Siddaramaiah has said that BJP is behind all these defections. It is Operation Kamala. Everything is fine. He has said that Govt will survive, there is no threat to the govt.

Congress leader Siddaramaiah on political situation in #Karnataka : This clearly shows that BJP is behind all these defections. It is Operation Kamala…Everything is fine. Don't worry. Govt will survive, there is no threat to the govt. pic.twitter.com/3ZjPPj7IS8 — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Union Minister Pralhad Joshi has said Congress party as a whole is trying to throw out Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy. It’s Congress party’s game plan to out HD Deve Gowda and his family. Siddaramaiah is responsible, also some senior Congress leaders are involved in it.

Union Minister&BJP leader Pralhad Joshi on political situation in K'taka: Congress party as a whole is trying throw out HD Kumaraswamy. It's Congress party's game plan to out HD Deve Gowda&family. Siddaramaiah is responsible, also some senior Congress leaders are involved in it. pic.twitter.com/JnqB1lhUoR — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Congress leader DK Shivakumar has arrived at the residence of JD(S) leader HD Deve Gowda to discuss further over the issue of alliance.

#Karnataka: Congress leader DK Shivakumar to meet JD(S) leader HD Deve Gowda at his residence today. (file pics) pic.twitter.com/Cj935BKPpB — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Congress leader Siddaramaiah has revealed that he is in touch with 5-6 MLAs. and has said that It is not a question of a person being loyal to him. Everybody is expected to be loyal to the party.

Congress leader Siddaramaiah in Bengaluru: I am in touch with 5-6 MLAs. I can't reveal all details. Everybody is loyal to the party. It is not a question of a person being loyal to me. Everybody is expected to be loyal to the party. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/diJm2eEq7G — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

BJP leader BS Yeddyurappa has said that he is going to Tumkur and will come back at 4 pm today. He has said that he doesn’t want to answer to what HD Kumaraswamy and Siddaramaiah say.

BS Yeddyurappa, BJP in Bengaluru, #Karnataka : I am going to Tumkur and I will come back at 4 pm. You know about the political developments. Let's wait and see. I don't want to answer to what HD Kumaraswamy and Siddaramaiah say. I am nowhere related to this. pic.twitter.com/vYNbvKRcJQ — ANI (@ANI) July 7, 2019

Live Updates

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
