The recalcitrant government and spreading civil disobedience

The blog is named after Seeing the Invisible, the title of a book on economics for children that Sanjeev wrote in 2018. Economics involves the study of incentives, motivations and information flows which are invisible. Likewise, self-seeking ministers and bureaucrats often work invisibly (and insidiously) against the public interest - more so in socialist countries like India where governments take on many unnecessary functions. On the other hand, self-interested businesses – through their competition for our custom – end up fostering the public interest. This blog straddles a range of autobiographical, governance and policy topics, including the experience working in the IAS, letting go of the Indian bureaucracy and learning new things in different countries, and attempting to build a liberal party for India. LESS ... MORE

Nearly one month has passed since the first civil disobedience action by Shetkari Sangathana on 10 June 2019. Till 4 July 2019, thirty-five instances of civil disobedience have occurred but the Modi government continues to dither. The Modi government must realise that this can’t go on. The farmers will not accept no for an answer.

It is important to remind the BJP government about Vajpayee’s Jai Vigyan call. Unlike Vajpayee, though, Modi is a deeply confused anti-science man (He imagines Ganesha to be a case of cosmetic surgery).

Sadly, Modi’s ministers in key portfolios seem to be equally incompetent. Two of them had the opportunity to clarify the way forward in Parliament recently but they side-stepped the issue.

On 2 July 2019, agriculture minister Tomar told Lok Sabha that “few incidences of suspected open cultivation of Bt. brinjal and HT cotton were reported in Maharashtra, Haryana, Punjab, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare have issued advisories to States to take appropriate necessary action to curb and control the spread of Bt. Brinjal and HT cotton. State Governments have given the directions to all District Administration to take necessary legal steps to curb the production and selling of illegal GM crops.”

On the same date, science and technology minister Harsh Vardhan told Rajya Sabha that “Department of Biotechnology had constituted Field Inspection and Scientific Evaluation Committee to study the cultivation of illegal, unapproved HT cotton in cotton-growing states. The committee’s recommendations have already been communicated to the relevant Ministries/Departments of Central and State Governments and agencies to prevent recurrence of the spread of unapproved HT cotton”.

Both Ministers dodged the essential question that is being asked by the farmers: Why is GM technology at a complete stand-still in India since 2002? Twenty years of silence, even as the world has gone ahead and approved 517 instances of GM crops. They both focused on the producers and sellers of “illegal GM crops”. It seems that farmers, who are actively being deprived of biotechnology, don’t even rate a mention by the Agriculture or Science ministers.

As I mentioned earlier, the farmers know that international regulators have long endorsed HT Bt and Bt brinjal. Of the cotton currently grown in Australia, over 94% contains Bt technology and over 99% of this contains herbicide-tolerant traits. What is so special about India that our farmers must be penalised while farmers of developed countries can happily grow the latest and best varieties of crops?

The only saving grace is that Times of India, in its editorial on 26 June 2019 has come out very strongly in favour of GM crops. It wrote: “Indian agriculture is in urgent need of technological infusion. Transgenic crops are the obvious answer. The best way forward is for the government to follow the lead given by its regulator. End procrastination and approve transgenic brinjal, mustard and the next iteration of cotton”. Many other scientists and journalists have also come out in strong support of GM technology.

At the same time, anti-GM lobbyists have stepped up their disinformation and fake news campaign.

On 14 June 2019, a media house reported that “farm activists have blamed the failure of BT crops” for farmer suicides. This complete falsehood has been conclusively and repeatedly disproven. It is, in fact, the other way around – that Bt cotton has enormously benefited farmers and India as a nation. Why is such garbage even printed by the press?

On 2 July 2019, another report put out said: “Norman Borlaug inadvertently accepted that GM crops will lead to premature deaths”. That is an extraordinary falsehood. Dr Norman Borlaug strongly supported GM technology. He said that GM crops are as natural and safe as today’s bread wheat and are the only way to increase food production as the world runs out of unused arable land.

The same article claimed that “GM crops are being opposed worldwide due to their ill effects on human health”. That is an even more extreme falsehood. As I have already shown, all regulators across the world including all major science organisations strongly support GM technology. In fact, 517 GM crop approvals exist at the moment across the world.

Then, on 3 July 2019, another report said that Vijay N Waghmare, acting director of the Central Institute of Cotton Research, said that “herbicide-tolerance can easily spread through pollination, and eventually give rise to a variety of ‘super-weeds’ that are resistant to existing herbicides. This could create a situation akin to antibiotic resistance — misuse of over-the-counter antibiotics has caused several strains of disease-causing bacteria to become immune to existing medications.”

Does this “scientist” imply that antibiotics must now be banned? There are huge benefits of science that the current generation (which is desperately poor in comparison to future generations) must always reap, and science allowed to develop further improvements in the future. The idea that the Indian farmer and consumer today must be actively harmed because of meaningless speculation from alleged scientists baffles me.

One can go on and on. It is not even possible to imagine the distortions and lies that these enemies of science cook up.

Our party calls upon the Modi government to immediately lift the moratorium on Bt brinjal and to set in motion regulatory processes to approve HT Bt cotton. The regulatory approval by developed countries can be used as a basis of the immediate approval.

The farmers are not going to rest until their goal is achieved. Today, on 5 July 2019 the farmers of Haryana are launching their own civil disobedience by planting HT Bt cotton in Hissar, with advance notice to all the media and to all branches of the government. This expanding movement presents a major challenge to the legitimacy of the Modi government.

I understand that the farmers are also mentally preparing themselves for much strong action if the government does not listen to reason. The Modi government forgets that Shetkari Sangathana was founded by Sharad Joshi who, when absolutely necessary, took to the street. Maharashtra was brought to a standstill with a massive rasta roko agitation in 1980. There are many other festering grievances of the farmers as well, who have been long demanding the abolition of hundreds of anti-farmer laws. One hopes such an eventuality, which requires farmers to take to the street, will not need to arise, but if it does, our party will stand right behind them in their fight for economic freedom and technology.

In end, this is shaping up into a New Mahabharata, a battle for a new vision for India, a fight against superstition and medievalism, a fight for the right to think and to be.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
