JNU groups join hands to protest students' suspensions

Student groups in Jawaharlal Nehru University have come together to demand that the university administration immediately revoke the academic suspension of 20 student leaders and activists. On Friday, when the president of JNU Students Union (JNUSU), N. Sai Balaji, and former JNUSU president Geeta Kumari, who are pursuing PhD courses, logged into the university website to pay their fee for the current semester, they both got pop-up messages that said, “You are not eligible to register for this semester. Please contact evaluation branch for more information. Academically suspended by chief proctor office.” The suspended students have not yet been told the reason for their suspension.

The left-wing group All India Students Association on Sunday, July 7, 2019, said in statement on social media: 'The 'Academic Suspension' of JNUSU president and others is nothing but complete disregard for rule of law and principles of natural justice. JNU V-C (M Jagadesh Kumar) on pretext of pending enquiries which JNUSU office bearers and student activists are facing has academically suspended them without any reason and basis of law. Not only this is illegal but this is against any convention or principle of law which holds any person innocent until proven guilty.'

AISA alleged that the suspensions were due to the students relentlessly exposing and resisting the anti-student policies of the Narendra Modi government, such as 'the online entrance examination scam, massive 80 per cent budget cut of JNU library, massive fund cuts for research and education, fighting against scuttling of reservation and decimation of social justice and numerous such anti student policies.”

In recent months, JNUSU has accused the administration of unilaterally increasing the entrance exam fee by over 300 per cent, delinking MPhil and PhD courses without proper procedure, denying deprivation points to students in reserved categories, and blocking opportunities to conduct research.

Geeta Kumari said that she saw the suspensions as a move by the university administration to curb voices of dissent on campus, and that she was feeling harassed.

Balaji told this website, “When we approached the proctor's office, we were not told the grounds on which this step was taken. This is illegal. We will move the court if the administration continues with this injustice.'

Besides AISA, the student organizations that are challenging the JNU vice-chancellor over the suspensions belong to the Democracy Students Front and the All India Students Federation.

JNUSU called for an 'all-organisation meeting' meeting at 9 pm on Sunday to 'discuss the future course of action in countering the latest administrative assault.'

The JNU V-C could not be reached for comment. When this website contacted JNU Registrar Pramod Kumar by phone, he refused to comment on the matter.
