Rebel Karnataka MLAs holed up in Mumbai hotel

Congress stages protest, says BJP trying to topple democratically elected govt.

Within a span of six months, the drama from Karnataka politics has yet again spilled over State borders, with rebel Congress-JD(S) MLAs holed up at Sofitel hotel in Mumbai under the watch of State Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leaders since Saturday.

While BJP leaders denied that the MLAs have been kept there against their wishes, State Congress leader Ashok Chavan accused the BJP of trying to topple the democratically elected Karnataka government by misusing the State machinery.

The Congress held demonstrations against the BJP and the MLAs outside the Sofitel in Bandra Kurla Complex on Sunday afternoon.

The Maharashtra BJP has denied having any knowledge of the matter. However, a BJP leader assigned with the task of monitoring the MLAs, claimed, “We have 14 Congress and JD(S) MLAs with us in Mumbai. They were brought to Sofitel on Saturday night and will be here for at least two-three days.”

The MLAs submitted their resignations to the Karnataka Assembly speaker on Saturday and were immediately flown to Mumbai. The move has created political turmoil in the neighbouring State with a possibility of the Congress-JD(S) government falling apart.

In January, five Congress MLAs and one Independent from Karnataka were kept in a five-star hotel in Powai.

On Sunday, following the Congress’s agitation, security outside the hotel was tightened fearing that party workers might barge inside.

BJP MLC Prasad Lad and another leader from Mumbai, Mohit Kamboj, were seen at Sofitel, but when contacted said they visited the hotel for personal reasons.

Mahendra Singhi, a Karnataka Congress MLA, was seen with Mr. Lad outside the hotel, where he met another disgruntled MLA, Ramesh Jarkiholi. He told reporters, “There is no threat to our government as the issues will be resolved on the Chief Minister’s return. It is our duty to talk to those who are upset.”

Earlier, Mr. Chavan alleged that the BJP leadership had a dictatorial mindset. “Their singular agenda is to ensure the downfall of opposition party-led governments by hook or crook, including misusing the government machinery. The BJP wrested power in similar ways in Goa, Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur. The focus is now on West Bengal and Karnataka,” he said.

“BJP leaders are bringing Congress legislators by private flights to Mumbai and keeping them at five-star hotels. The richest political party is luring legislators from other parties with money and this needs to be condemned,” Mr. Chavan said.
