NEET issue echoes in both Houses, DMK walks out

The DMK on Monday walked out of Parliament in protest against what they called an injustice to the medical studies aspirants of Tamil Nadu.

The Tamil Nadu government, as well as several regional parties in the State, have been opposing the common entrance examination for medical admission, the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (NEET) since it was introduced in 2013.

However, Monday’s uproar was over Central government informing a Division Bench of Madras High Court that two Bills passed by the Tamil Nadu Assembly to conduct medical admission in the State solely based on Plus 2 marks was rejected by the President.

“You put the Bills in cold storage for 27 months,” accused DMK leader T.R. Baalu in Lok Sabha. He even brought an adjournment motion to discuss the issue, which was rejected by the Speaker. He was, however, allowed to make his submission.

“Several young girls who aspired to become doctors committed suicide (because of NEET). The reason is the exams are conducted based on CBSE syllabus and the students from State Board are disadvantaged,” Mr. Baalu said.

The Tamil Nadu Assembly unanimously passed two Bills on February 1, 2017, for the State to be exempted from the test. “After keeping the Bills in cold storage for 27 months, the Centre informs the court it has been rejected,” Mr. Baalu said demanding a response from the government. Since none of the Ministers responded, the DMK staged a walk out.

Earlier, in Rajya Sabha, the issue was raised by DMK leader Tiruchi Siva. Making a Zero Hour submission, Mr. Siva accused the Union government of acting against the spirit of federalism. The DMK members in the Upper House too walked out.

When NEET was made mandatory for medical admission to both undergraduate and post-graduate level after the amendment of the Indian Medical Council Act of 1956 and the Dentists Act of 1948, it faced stiff resistance for Tamil Nadu. Subsequently, the State Assembly passed Tamil Nadu Admission to MBBS and BDS Courses Bill of 2017 and the Tamil Nadu Admission to Postgraduate Courses in Medicine and Dentistry Bill of 2017 in order to grant medical admission on the basis of their Plus Two marks.

Since the State Bills were repugnant to the Central legislation, they were forwarded to the President for consent.
