Virgin Bride row: Professor Sarkar calls his post 'Sunday Fun' as protests erupt at Jadavpur University

Students today staged protests at the Jadavpur University in West Bengal (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Kolkata: A professor of International Relations (IR) at the Jadavpur University in West Bengal, Kanak Sarkar seems to have landed on shifting sands. Already under fire for his derogatory remarks about 'virgin brides', the professor told media outlets that he "was having Sunday Fun".

Earlier this week, Sarkar was called out by students' rights groups for publishing a post on his Facebook account where he drew parallels between 'virgin brides' and 'unopened packs of biscuits'. In his post titled, "Virgin Bride-Why Not?", the professor also said that virgin brides are like 'sealed bottle of cold drinks'.

Kolkata: Students of Jadavpur University stage protest in campus demanding expulsion of Prof. Kanak Sarkar over his remarks made in a Facebook post, say,"We want his expulsion as he is influencing young minds &we don't want misogynistic environment here. He's a repeat offender." pic.twitter.com/a0Lh4Bv5TD — ANI (@ANI) January 15, 2019

In fact, the Vice Chancellor of Jadavpur University, Suranjan Das also criticised the professor by saying "it is unbecoming of a professor to make such remarks". Students of the varsity also submitted a deputation to the head of the department, Om Prakash Mishra, urging him to stop professor Sarkar from teaching "western political thoughts". General secretary of JUTA, Partha Pratim Ray also issued a statement in this regard on Sunday deeming professor Sarkar's post on Facebook as "highly deplorable, misogynistic and sexist".

Responding to the outrage invoked by his statements, Sarkar said that those criticising him are curbing his freedom of speech. He further said that other professors of the Jadavpur University have been known to be vocal about figures such as the Prime Minister and other political stakeholders. A number of students also staged demonstrations at the Jadavpur University in West Bengal today to protest against professor Sarkar's statements.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Hundreds of trees axed in Odisha's Balangir to make helipads ahead of PM Modi's visit
