Trinamool raise voice against proposed PSU divestment

NEW DELHI: Trinamool Congress was the only Opposition party that protested against the Centre’s proposal to divest major state-owned companies, as mentioned in the budget statement.

Workers unions affiliated to TMC, CPM and Congress have started agitations in many places in West Bengal against the Centre's proposed plans to privatise public sector undertakings (PSUs).

Protesting against 42 public sector undertakings (PSUs) Trinamool Congress MPs sat on a dharna at the Mahatma Gandhi statue in Parliament premises before the House opened on Monday morning and later TMC members in Rajya Sabha sought to disrupt proceedings by entering the well and raising slogans to protest against the proposed disinvestment.

After being disallowed to raise their issue, the TMC members staged a walkout from the Upper House and returned only in the second half.

Some TMC members, including Derek O'Brien and Sukhendu Sekhar Roy, were on their feet and repeatedly asked the Chair to permit them to raise the issue of disinvestment of state-run firms during the Zero Hour.

Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu did not allow them to raise the issue, saying members should not resort to such measures to raise issues and that he would not succumb to pressures.

Naidu, however told TMC members he would allow them to raise the matter only if there is time left.

The TMC members continued to raise slogans but the Chair said nothing of that sort would go on record.

Some members of the ruling BJP too were seen responding to the sloganeering of TMC members.

Just before the House adjourned for lunch, Naidu cautioned members not to enter the Well to press for their demands.

The last session of the Rajya Sabha, held before the general elections, had witnessed several adjournments due to protests by opposition parties.

However, the current Budget session has not witnessed any major protest by opposition parties.

Members raise important issues of public interest during the Zero Hour after the Chair permits them to do so.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
