Karnataka govt crisis deepens as 2 more MLAs quit, 30 ministers resign: All you need to know

The Karnataka coalition government continues to sink deeper into the ongoing crisis that has shaken up the southern state yet again. On Monday, 30 ministers of the JD(S)-Congress government, including 21 of Congress and nine of JD(S) quit the government, in order to pave way for a Cabinet reshuffle to save the government from complete collapse.

However, two other Independent MLAs also withdrew support from the coalition government, further bringing down the numbers of the government in the 224-member Karnataka assembly.

Meanwhile, top BJP leadership, including Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh, has denied any role in orchestrating the Karnataka political turmoil while both the ruling parties have accused them of horse-trading.

The 13 MLAs who had resigned on Saturday, triggering the fresh crisis in Karnataka, have now moved to Goa after a brief stay at a Mumbai hotel. An Independent MLA who resigned on Monday also accompanied them to Goa.

Here are the top developments:

1. All 30 ministers of the Karnataka government quit on Monday to give a free hand to Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy to reshuffle his Cabinet to include rebel MLAs. One of the two, H Nagesh flew to Mumbai to join the group of rebel MLAs.

2. Two Independent legislators also withdrew their support on Monday adding to the 13 others who had already resigned on Saturday.

3. Speaking on the Karnataka turmoil during a Lok Sabha session on Monday, Rajnath Singh said that BJP does not have any hand in the crisis that has hit the JD(S)-Congress government. He said, "Whatever is happening currently in Karnataka, we have no relation with that."

4. Karnataka Deputy Chief Minister G Parameshwara accused Governor Vajubhai Vala of encouraging horse trading following a flurry of resignations by Congress and JD(S) legislators threatening the existence of the coalition government in the state.

5. The JD(S)-Congress coalition's total strength after the 2 latest withdrawals is 116 besides the Speaker. With the support of the two independents, the BJP has 107 MLAs in the 224-member House, where the half-way mark is 113. If the resignations of the 13 MLAs are accepted, the coalition's tally will be reduced to 103. The Speaker also has a vote.

6. Karnataka Congress' legal department has petitioned Speaker, requesting him not to accept resignations of 13 Congress-JD(S) legislators, alleging that rules have not been followed during its submission.

7. Speaking to India Today TV, former CM and Karnataka BJP president BS Yeddyurappa said that he is expecting more MLAs to quit, till then BJP will wait and watch. Yeddyurappa also denied any role in the crisis and said that the MLAs were fed up of the coalition government.

8. Congress held several protests in Bengaluru and outside the Mumbai hotel where the MLAs were holed up. Congress workers brought a horse to the protests to symbolise the alleged horse-trading that has hit Karnataka.

9. BJP, led by Yeddyurappa, will also be holding protests on Tuesday against the ruling coalition.

10. Meanwhile, BJP has demanded the resignation of CM Kumaraswamy. The governance in Karnataka has completely collapsed and Kumaraswamy should resign immediately and pave way for formation of a new government, BJP MP Shobha Karandlaje said on Monday.




