Parents oppose MIT School syllabus change

Objecting to institute’s shift from SSC to CBSE format, they want their wards to continue under state board



Parents of students studying in MIT School, Pune, have once again questioned the school over switching to Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) board on Monday after the school suddenly changed the timings of state board students for Monday and Tuesday.



Parents whose children are already studying in SSC board are opposing introducing CBSE board in the school. Claiming that the school is keeping them in the dark and not informing them about the switch to CBSE board, they have demanded assurance that school will not change their children’s board to a national board and continue with state board. Parents want the school keep everything transparent, asking the process of formation of this year’s Executive Parents Teachers Association (EPTA) to be started, which is already delayed.



The school has announced the changed timings for state-board children, which is usually 12 noon to 5 pm to 8am to 2 pm for Monday and Tuesday.



Sanjay Joshi, a parent of a student who studies in Class VI, said, “On Saturday we got the notice that the school timings for SSC is changed and is made as per CBSE board. We have been against the move for the past two years. Once the board is changed to CBSE, then we fear it will not be possible to run both the boards on one premises.”



Gajendra Patil, another parent of a student who studies in Class IV, said, “SSC students have been neglected, with no timetable or uniform order given to the vendor yet. The institute should assure us that our children can study here till Class X under SSC board.”



While Marathi-medium students were told about holiday on Saturday itself, junior college students were asked to go back on Monday and announced holiday on the spot. When Mirror visited the campus, the security informed that due to CBSE inspection, holiday was announced for Marathi medium and junior college.



Parents protested outside the school from 8 am on Monday.



Joshi said, “We have requested school to give us in writing that SSC students’ board will not be changed. But the school is refusing to do so.”



Parents had also complained to state education department over NoC given to MIT School to start CBSE sessions and had informed that 80 per cent parents are against CBSE board, after which education commissioner Vishal Solanki had also deputed an inquiry committee.



Swati Chate, executive director of MAEER’s MIT, said, “We have made it clear that we are switching over to CBSE and we are promoting the same. Parents are very well aware of the same. As far as extended timing go, a school can do that for any school activity.”


