Harassed by AIADMK man, teacher tries suicide

Chennai: A teacher of a government higher secondary school allegedly attempted suicide by jumping off the second floor of the school building in Anakaputhur near Pallavaram, after a ruling party functionary cheated him of `5 lakh and threatened to kill him when he asked for the money.

The victim was identified as Kirubhananthan (40), resident of Little Mount in Saidapet and a zoology teacher at the government higher secondary school in Anankaputhur.

The school management told the police that the incident happened even before the day’s classes began. Police said that Kirubhanathan was friendly with Muralidharan (42), an AIADMK functionary, and the head of the Parents Teachers Association of the school. According to police, a year back, Kirubhananthan applied for a housing loan in a private bank in Pammal, Pallavaram. His loan request was denied, police said, adding that Muralidharan with his political influence helped the victim to get the housing loan.But, once the loan was sanctioned, Muralidharan borrowed Rs 5,30,000 from Kirubhananthan for an emergency and promised to give the money back within a few days, but did not return it for almost 10 months, sources said. Police said that the victim had been paying interest for the whole loan amount.

Meanwhile, Kirubhananthan on Friday demanded return of his money, when Murali alleged that he had not borrowed any money from him and also threatened to kill him if he continued to claim the money. Frustrated over this, Kirubhananthan decided to take the extreme step. Police said on Monday morning, the victim came to the school and disclosed his tiff with the PTA head to the fellow teachers.

Even before classes began, Kirubhananthan rushed to the second floor of the school building and attempted to jump off the terrace. However, students present on that floor rushed to the teacher’s rescue and foiled his suicide attempt.

But he fell unconscious and was rushed to the Chromepet government hospital, where he is under treatment. Shankar Nagar police registered a case and began enquiries.

Meanwhile, students of the school boycotted classes on Monday afternoon and staged a protest on the school premises seeking action against the AIADMK functionary. After an hour, police and the teachers held talks with the students and pacified them.

The students returned to their classes after cops promised firm action against the alleged accused.
