Liquor bottling plant at Devprayag kicks up political storm

DEHRADUN: A liquor bottling plant in Devprayag has kicked off a political storm in the hill state with several locals and religious leaders demanding an immediate shutdown of the unit.According to records available with the excise department, a Delhi-based firm got the licence to set up a bottling plant in Dudwa-Bhandli village of Tehri district in 2016. The trial run of the unit started recently after which the photographs of bottles went viral on social media. This sparked a war of words on social media with several religious leaders and politicians stepping in to register their protest. Speaking to TOI over phone from New Delhi, Ganga Mahasabha general secretary Swami Jitendra Saraswati said, “We will not tolerate a liquor factory at the confluence of Alaknanda and Bhagirathi rivers. The state government will have to pass necessary directions to shut down the factory. I will take up the matter with the state government.”He also blamed local politicians for not opposing the project right from the beginning. “I am told that the bottling plant is ready and all industrial waste will go directly to the Ganga,” he added.Locals said that the project first hit the headlines when villagers staged a protest against the unit in 2016. Sameer Raturi, a local who led the protest then, said, “Everything was stopped that year because of our protest. Now, we have learned that the trial run of the unit has started in Devprayag.”Devprayag MLA Vinod Kandari said, “The Congress government gave permission for the liquor bottling plant factory in 2016. I am looking into the matter to find out how the company managed to get the necessary clearance.”Former CM Harish Rawat who had a day earlier tweeted about the issue, said, “Our government had given permission for a fruit beer and wine manufacturing unit not whiskey as is doing the rounds on social media. Also, if my government had made a mistake, why is the present government not making any changes?”He added that he would join the villagers in their protest against the liquor factory. “Devprayag is a holy city and people won’t allow a whiskey factory there. The state government should respect their feelings."
