Karnataka political crisis | Updates: BJP to stage dharna on July 10, demanding CM Kumaraswamy’s resignation

While the coalition government has emptied out the old Cabinet in an attempt to woo back the rebel MLAs, the Congress and the Janata Dal (Secular) are also planning to fight it out legally.

All eyes are set on Legislative Assembly Speaker K.R. Ramesh Kumar as he returns to office on Tuesday and takes a call on the resignations submitted by the 13 MLAs last week. His decision will play a key role in how the fiasco over the government pans out.

Here are the latest updates:

8:00 pm

BJP to stage dharna on July 10, demanding CM’s resignation

BJP in Karnataka has decided to stage a dharna in Bengaluru on July 10, demanding the resignation of Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy, who it claimed, has lost majority after 14 MLAs of the ruling Congress-JD(S) quit.

The coalition has been rocked by the resignations of 14 MLAs — 11 of Congress and three of JD(S).

“I have held discussions with our legislators and we have decided to hold a protest in front of the Gandhi statue at 11 AM, demanding the resignation of Chief Minister Kumaraswamy who has lost majority,” party State unit Chief B.S. Yeddyurappa told reporters in Bengaluru.

The former Chief Minister has been holding a series of meetings with party leaders at his residence since morning on the ongoing political developments and BJP’s plan of action.

According to sources, Mr. Yeddyurappa is expected to meet Governor Vajubhai Vala at the Raj Bhavan on July 10. — PTI

7:00 pm

Azad, Hariprasad rush to Bengaluru as K’taka crisis deepens

As the Congress-JD(S) coalition government in Karnataka plunges into more trouble, the Congress rushed senior leaders Ghulam Nabi Azad and B.K. Hariprasad to Bengaluru to solve the differences.

Sources said UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi asked the leaders to mitigate the crisis in the southern State and save the government.

Mr. Azad was the one, who along with Ashok Gehlot, stitched together the coalition government in Karnataka last year. — PTI

6:00 pm

Less scope of not accepting resignations: BJP MLA Basavaraj Bommai

Shiggaon BJP MLA Basavaraj Bommai said there was scarcely any scope of not accepting the resignations of the MLAs.

“When the MLAs have resigned, how can you disqualify them? Hence, there is no question of rejecting the resignation letter. The copy of the letter submitted to the Governor is in accordance with the Constitution. It is only a futile attempt of Congress and JD(S) to bypass the constitution to stay in power,” Mr. Bommai told reporters.

The BJP MLA, however, expressed his faith in the Speaker and said that he would take a decision in accordance with law.

The 13 dissident MLAs —10 of the Congress and 3 of the JD(S) — submitted their resignations to the Speaker’s office on July 6. — PTI

5:00 pm

Every step I make will become history, can’t make any mistakes: Speaker

Every step he takes will become history and he cannot afford to make any mistakes, Karnataka Assembly Speaker K.R. Ramesh Kumar, who holds the key to the future of the Congress-JD(S) coalition government, said earlier in the day.

All eyes are now on Kumar who has to take a call on the resignations tendered by 13 MLAs of the Congress and the JD(S) from the Assembly.

Asked whether the resignations submitted to his office were acceptable, Mr. Kumar hinted the MLAs might have to personally hand them in and told reporters, “Then I am not required at all. If everything can happen through postal correspondence, I am not required at all.”

Asserting that he will go through the rule book, the speaker said he will consult seniors about the developments, whether the resignations can be accepted or was a different course of action needed.

“I have to make a conscious decision. Every step I take will become history, so I can’t be committing a mistake. Future generations should not look at me like an accused,” Mr. Kumar added.

Questioned on whether the Congress legal cell had written to him that the resignations should not be accepted, Mr. Kumar said he has not seen the letter yet.

“I left office on Saturday. I came only today. Whichever cell has written, I have to go through it now,” he told journalists at the Vidhana Soudha.

“Whether I will decide it today or in the next two hours, doing it two years later These are all irrelevant questions to me. I have to respond to the sentiments of the people.”

Mr. Kumar added that he must understand the helplessness of the people of the State, the feeling of general public, look at the provisions of constitution, the rule book and the spirit and interpretation of the law.

“Then I must act as a man with clear conscience and I am going to do that.”

The speaker said he held an office which was responsible and important.

“I come from a very ordinary background but I am occupying a very important place. I cannot be doing injustice. I cannot bring dishonour and disgrace to the office I hold,” Kumar said. — PTI

3:00 p.m.

Only 13 resignations in order: Speaker

Speaker Ramesh Kumar says only five of the 13 resignations are in order. He has asked three legislators to appear before him on July 12 and two legislators on July 13.

He will resume the earlier complaint of Congress seeking disqualification of four of its legislators from July 11. Incidentally, he has already accepted the resignation of Umesh Jadhav who now represents Gulbarga in Lok Sabha

Mr Ramesh Kumar has asked eight other legislators to re submit their resignations in proper format.

2:45 p.m.

BJP, Congress hold protests accusing each other

Members of the Congress and the BJP hold protests accusing each other for the political crisis in the State in Dharwad.

The Congress district committee in a memorandum has submitted to the President of India through the Deputy Commissioner's officer alleged that the BJP was trying to create political instability in the State by making the legislators to resign.

Protest by Congress workers in Dharwad on Tuesday. | Photo Credit: Special arrangement

The coalition Government in the State has been doing well for last one year. However, the State BJP leaders, abetted by the central leadership have created political crisis in the state, they have alleged and have urged the President to interfere and take necessary action to safeguard democracy in the State.

On the other hand, the BJP members also have been holding a protest seeking resignation of the Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy on moral grounds. They said that legislators have put in their papers fed up with the style of functioning of the JD(S)-Congress coalition Government for last one year.

In a memorandum to the Governor Vajubhai Vala they say that the government has lost majority and urged him to dismiss the State Government if Mr. Kumaraswamy does not resign.

2:20 p.m.

Sources in the Congress say that Speaker has issued notice to those who have resigned to appear before him on July 11. "We expect him to take a decision on that day or we will wait till the session on July 12."

1.55 p.m.

Kumaraswamy has lost moral right to continue in power'

BJP cadres staging a protest demanding Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy’s resignation in Shivamogga on Tuesday. | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

Demanding Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy to tender resignation to his post immediately, Bharatiya Janata Party cadres staged a protest in the Shivamogga on Tuesday.

Addressing the protest meet, S. Dattatri, secretary of BJP Raitha Morcha State unit said that, as the Janata Dal(Secular)-Congress coalition government in the State has lost majority following resignations from 13 MLAs and two ministers, Mr. Kumaraswamy has lost the moral right to continue in the power. He said that, the efforts to save the government by luring the rebel MLAs back by offering them Ministerial posts will not succeed.

The protesters formed a human chain for sometime near Shivappa Nayaka Circle owing to which the vehicular movement was disrupted. Latha Ganesh, Mayor of Shivamogga City Corporation took part in the protest. — Veerendra Pinaki from Shivamogga

1:40 p.m.

It's not violation of Anti-Defection Law, says BJP

The BJP has maintained that the ongoing episode of resignations by some ruling MLAs does not come under the purview of Anti-Defection Law.

BJP leader and former Law minister S. Suresh Kumar has taken to social media to clarify that these MLAs have submitted resignations to Assembly membership and not to their parties.

In this context, it is not violation of Anti-Defection Law, he has argued and accused Congress leader Siddaramaiah of misleading people in this regard.

1:35 p.m.

Khanapur BJP opposes entry of Anjali Nimbalkar

Khanapur unit of BJP has opposed the proposed entry of Anjali Nimbalkar joining the BJP after resigning from the Congress.

Vithal Patil, Khanapur taluk unit president held a meeting with party workers on Tuesday and discussed the issue. He announced that the taluk unit had suspended BJP's membership drive as a means of protest.

Read more

1:30 p.m.

More Congress leaders join former Chief Minister Siddaramaiah in Speaker's chamber. Minister Krishna Byre Gowda, a former law and Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, KPCC President Dinesh Gundu Rao, former Ministers Tanveer Sait and H.K. Patil, among others are discussing the issue of legislators resignation.

Congress is seeking disqualification of all the legislators, who have resigned, excluding Ramalinga Reddy.

Meanwhile, there have been protests in many parts of Karnataka by both Congress and BJP. While the former has been protesting against alleged horse trading by the saffron party to destabilise the government, the latter has been demanding resignation of CM H.D. Kumaraswamy.

1:20 p.m.

Responding to the developments to a television channel, S.T. Somashekhar, one of the MLAS who have resigned and is currently residing in a private hotel, said that there was no question of withdrawing resignation. He said that people of Karnataka were "fed up" with the coalition govt. "We have waited for 13 months for things to improve," he said.

1:00 p.m.

Roshan Baig resigns from Assembly

Roshan Baig (C) arrives at the Speaker's office to submit his resignation. | Photo Credit: V SREENIVASA MURTHY

Senior Congress leader R. Roshan Baig submits his resignation letter to Assembly Speaker K.R. Ramesh Kumar on Tuesday.

Speaking to media persons, he confirms that he had personally met the Speaker and resigned from the Assembly. He said that he was headed for Haj and was not going to Mumbai or Goa. He refuses to answer any question on his next political moves. Speculation has been rife that he would join the BJP.

With this, the total resignations goes to 14 — 11 from Congress and 3 from JDS.

12:30 p.m.

Congress to seek action against MLAs who have resigned

Former Chief Minister Siddaramaiah announced after Congress Legislature Party meeting that the party would submit petition to Speaker to disqualify the MLAs who have resigned under provisions of the the Anti-Defection Law.

Speaking to press after the meeting, he reiterated that the saffron party was “indulging in horse trading.” He said that those who have resigned should return to the party fold and not succumb to inducements or threats.

The party however has clarified that action would not be sought against Ramalinga Reddy since he has not indulged in anti-party activity.

(With inputs from Agencies)
