UNHCR legitimizing terrorism: MEA

UNHCR legitimizing terrorism: MEA

`India firm about zero tolerance towards terrorism’

NEW DELHI, Jul 8: India has reacted strongly to and lodged a diplomatic protest over a new report by the UN Office of the High Commission for Human Rights on Jammu and Kashmir. The Indian government has called the report “false, with a motivated narrative.”

The report, a follow up to one the UN rights office filed last year, once again very controversially called on India to “respect the right of self-determination of the people of Kashmir as protected under international law.”

The Ministry of External Affairs accused the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights of “legitimising terrorism” and said the assertions in the report are “in violation of India's sovereignty and territorial integrity and ignore the core issue of cross-border terrorism.” “It is a... contrived effort to create an artificial parity between the world's largest and the most vibrant democracy and a country that openly practices state-sponsored terrorism,” the ministry said in a statement.

The UN Commissioner's report said there are “serious human rights violations and patterns of impunity” in Jammu and Kashmir and significant human rights concerns witnessed in Pakistan-Administered Kashmir as well.

This includes what the UN body describes as the “excessive use of force by security forces in Jammu and Kashmir, torture, arbitrary detentions of dissidents and internet shut downs.” India said, “The entire state of Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India. Pakistan is in illegal and forcible occupation of a part of the Indian state, including the so called 'Azad Jammu and Kashmir' and 'Gilgit-Baltistan', through aggression. We have repeatedly called on Pakistan to vacate these occupied territories.”

“…..Motivated attempts to weaken our national resolve will never succeed,” MEA spokesman Raveesh Kumar said in response to media queries on an update of the Report by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir.

Last year in June, a furious India had described as “fallacious, tendentious and motivated” the UN report that tore into both India and Pakistan for human rights violations in Jammu and Kashmir and Pakistan-Administered Kashmir.

“The Government of India follows the policy of ‘zero tolerance’ towards terrorism and will take all measures to protect its territorial integrity and sovereignty against cross-border terrorism,” the Ministry of External Affairs spokesman said.

Hitting out at the report, Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said, “The update of the report of the OHCHR is merely a continuation of the earlier false and motivated narrative on the situation in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.”

Last year, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) released its first-ever report on Kashmir and in an update of that report it claimed on Monday that “neither India nor Pakistan have taken any concrete steps to address the numerous concerns raised.”

“A situation created by years of cross-border terrorist attacks emanating from Pakistan has been “analysed’ without any reference to its causality. The update seems to be a contrived effort to create an artificial parity between the world’s largest and the most vibrant democracy and a country that openly practices state-sponsored terrorism,” Kumar said.

“We have registered our strong protest regarding the update with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,” he said,
