Shabana Azmi hits back at trolls on her criticism of government

Veteran actress Shabana Azmi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Shabana Azmi has hit back at trolls on her criticism of the present government My father had returned his Padmashri in protest against a Congress government minister: Shabana Azmi

Mumbai: Veteran actress Shabana Azmi has hit back at trolls on her criticism of the present government during an event in Indore where she was honoured with 'Kunti Mathur Award' instituted by the Anandmohan Mathur Charitable Trust in recognition of her work for women.

Shabana had said that anyone who criticises the present is branded as an "anti-national" while stressing the need for criticism to realise one's mistakes. However, she was trolled heavily on social media for her remarks.

Today, Shabana hit back at trolls saying that her father had returned his Padma Shri in protest against a Congress government minister who said that those asking for Urdu to get second language status should be paraded on a donkey with their faces blackened.

Shabana likened the situation when she faced backlash over her bald avatar Deepa Mehta’s Water. Fatwas were reportedly issued against her over the film."So much uproar over my 1 remark? Didn't realise I was so important in the eyes of the right-wing Muslim fundos also passed fatwa against me for shaving my head for @IamDeepaMehta film ‘Water’ to which @Javedakhtarjadu response on record was 'SHUT UP'. All fundos are mirror images of each other," Shabana said on Twitter.

During the event in Indore, Shabana had said, "It is always necessary that we point out our flaws for the betterment of our country. If we do not, how can our conditions improve? But the atmosphere is such that if we criticise the government we are branded as anti-nationals. We should not be afraid, nobody needs their certificate."

Union Minister Giriraj Singh termed veteran actor Shabana Azmi the "new leader" of "tukde tukde" and "award wapasi" gang. Sharing the video where the actor can be seen criticising the government, the Union Minister said, " Shabana Azmi is a new leader of the tukde-tukde gang and the award-wapasi gang."
