Karnataka news: Congress-JD(S) coalition govt suffers another blow as MLA Roshan Baig resigns

File picture: R Roshan Baig | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Roshan Baig submitted his resignation to Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar at Vidhana Soudha "I am not going to Mumbai or Delhi," said Roshan Baig Roshan Baig was suspended by Congress for “anti-party activities” in June

Bengaluru: The stability of the Congress-Janata Dal (Secular) coalition government in Karnataka on Wednesday suffered another dent as Shivajinagar MLA R Roshan Baig tendered his resignation from the state Assembly. Baig had announced his decision to quit Congress and join BJP yesterday.

Baig submitted his resignation to Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar at Vidhana Soudha. With his resignation, the number of MLAs who have resigned has gone up to 14 - 11 from Congress and three from the JD(S).

After coming out of Vidhana Soudha, the suspended Congress MLA said he would not fly to Mumbai or Delhi, like the other disgruntled MLAs.

"I am not going to Mumbai or Delhi. Being the chairman of the State Hajj committee, I am going to the airport to oversee arrangements for the Hajj pilgrims," Baig said.

If the Speaker accepts the resignations of all 14 MLAs, the Congress-JD(S) coalition government's strength in the 225-member Karnataka Assembly (including one nominated) would be reduced to 102 minus the Speaker. Currently, the BJP's strength stands at 107, thanks to the support of two Independent MLAs.

Baig had on Monday said: "I am hurt by the way the Congress party treated me. I'll resign from my MLA post and join BJP."

Notably, Baig’s resignation comes days after he was suspended by the Congress for “anti-party activities”.

While protesting near the Mahatma Gandhi statue against the BJP's alleged efforts to destabilise the state coalition government, Congress Legislature Party leader in Karnataka Siddaramaiah said: "His (Baig) resignation is also against the party. I appeal to all those who have resigned to come back and not fall prey to BJP's designs.”

(Pic courtesy: PTI)

Baig, the 67-year-old eight-time MLA, was a minister in the last two Congress governments. He had lashed out at former Karnataka CM Siddaramaiah, party general secretary KC Venugopal and state Congress president Dinesh Gundu Rao, holding them accountable for the party's dismal performance in the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections in Karnataka.

The Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) had issued a notice to Baig, asking him to explain his open criticism of the state party leadership. Out of 28 Lok Sabha seats in Karnataka, Congress and JD(S) could manage to win only one seat each. The BJP had won 25 seats in the southern state. One seat was grabbed by an Independent.

Baig recently hogged the limelight for his alleged links with Mohammad Mansoor Khan, the IMA group founder and prime accused in a Ponzi scheme case. Khan, who is absconding, had claimed that Baig took Rs 400 crore from him and not returned it. The charge was rejected by Baig.
