Power board job-seekers climb atop tower, 65-year-old joins them

PATIALA: Four months after assurance by the government authorities to provide jobs on compassionate grounds, as many as six protestors, including an elderly woman, climbed atop a water tank on Monday in a protest over their demand to get job for which they have been waiting for over 15 years now.The protestors climbed atop a water tank near in the power colony in Patiala , while many others sat near the PSPCL office. They are demanding jobs in the PSPCL on compassionate grounds.The police were deployed near the water tank where the protestors sat in agitation. The protestors claimed that they had been demanding jobs on compassionate grounds after they lost their parents or kin who were in job with the Punjab State Electricity Board (PSEB), which was later dissolved and transformed into two separate boards, including PSPCL and PSTCL, in 2010.65-year-old Maya also climbed atop a water tank. She hails from Rauni village in Nabha block of the district, while her son sat along with other protestors. The woman has been demanding job for her son Jaswant Singh after her husband passed away.The protestors revealed that they have been demanding jobs for the period between 2000 and 2010 when the PSEB was not dissolved. They claimed that the government stopped giving jobs on compassionate grounds in 2000, but later in 2010, after the PSEB was dissolved, the government came up with new notification and started recruiting employees on compassionate grounds.Ranjit Singh, vice-president of the PSEB death case union, said: “We are protesting against the government since 2000 to press them for our demands, but all in vain. There are around 6,000 persons across the state demanding jobs on compassionate ground from the PSPCL and PSTCL. The government had given jobs to the kin of employees who died after 2010, but not to those whose kin died between 2000 and 2010. This is an injustice to us.”He said: “We had protested before the general elections in March and the government assured us of providing jobs. Till now nothing has been done so far. We are fighting starvation and want only jobs so that we earn our bread and butter. The government should look into the matter and provide us jobs as we deserve jobs on compassionate ground.”The district authorities met around 150 members of the union on protest and pacified them with an assurance of taking up their matter with the state government and solve it.The protesters, including 65-year-old woman Maya Devi, also handed over petrol bottles to the police which they had taken along with them while climbing atop the water tank to mark the protest.
