Congress MPs stage walkout in Rajya Sabha to protest unrest in Karnataka

New Delhi | Uproar by opposition Congress over developments in Karnataka stalled pre-noon proceedings in the Rajya Sabha on Tuesday, with practically no business conducted in the House.

As the protest by Congress members continued, the House was again adjourned till 2 PM.

Within minutes of assembly of the House, Congress members stormed into the well shouting slogans against the ruling BJP at the Centre, which it has blamed for instigating a rebellion within the Congress-JD-S government in Karnataka.

Also Read: Karnataka coalition still in deep crisis, 2 more MLAs resign

Congress members were shouting slogans to imply that democracy was being killed in reference to developments in Karnataka.

TMC members too trooped into the well against privatisation of public sector units, forcing Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu to adjourn proceedings till 1200 hours.

When the House re-assembled at noon to take up the Question Hour, there were almost similar scenes with slogan shouting Congress and TMC members trooping in the Well.

Deputy Chairman Harivansh, who was chairing the proceedings, made repeated efforts to persuade protesting members to return to their seats so that the Question Hour could be conducted.

However, his appeals went unheeded and the House was adjourned till 2 pm.

Before adjourning the House till 2 pm, he told protesting Congress members that the Chairman had allowed them to raise the Karnataka issue during the Zero Hour, but it was not availed.

The year-old Congress-Janata Dal (S) coalition government in Karnataka is on the brink of collapse after a spate of resignations by MLAs.

The Karnataka Assembly has 225 members, including one nominated MLA. The halfway mark in the 225-member Assembly is 113.

Earlier during the Zero Hour, Naidu said he has received a notice under rule 267 from Congress member B K Hariprasad, seeking suspension of the listed business to take up the Karnataka issue.

“I am not allowing it,” he said, prompting Congress members to rush to the well shouting slogans.

Naidu also said he has received a notice under rule 267 from Dola Singh of TMC but it cannot be allowed as the same had been raised through a Zero Hour mention on June 21, the first day of the session.

TMC members trooped into the well but the issue they were raising could not be heard.

On June 21, one of the issues raised during the Zero Hour was delay by the Centre in according ST status to 11 communities recommended by the West Bengal government.

“As per rules, you cannot discuss the same issues twice in the same session,” Naidu said, adding the House had functioned without disruption for 13 days but now it seems members were determined to disrupt.

“If you have decided to disrupt, I adjourn proceedings till 1200 hrs,” he said.

Earlier, BJP leader Lokhandwala Jugalsinh Mathurji, who was elected to the Upper House from Gujarat in the by-polls last week, took oath as a member of the Rajya Sabha.

Also Watch: Can the Congress-JDS alliance survive the latest Operation Lotus?
