Jharkhand HC Expresses Deep Concern Over Mob Lynching In State, Directs Govt. To File Report

Expressing concern over mob violence in the state in the past few days, Jharkhand High Court has directed the state government to submit reports related to alleged murder of Md Tabrez Ansari in Saraikela Kharsawan district and the alleged attack on two youths at Main Road in Ranchi. A division bench comprising Justice HC Mishra and Justice Deepak Roshan issued the order while hearing a...

Expressing concern over mob violence in the state in the past few days, Jharkhand High Court has directed the state government to submit reports related to alleged murder of Md Tabrez Ansari in Saraikela Kharsawan district and the alleged attack on two youths at Main Road in Ranchi.

A division bench comprising Justice HC Mishra and Justice Deepak Roshan issued the order while hearing a PIL (3147/2019 Pankaj Kumar Yadav v/s Union of India) filed in connection with the death of Ansari and the subsequent IA filed regarding the stabbing of youth by mob last Friday.

Rajiv Kumar, the lawyer who appeared on behalf of petitioner said that court has directed Ranchi SSP to submit a report related to mob violence in Ranchi adding the bench has also asked the government to submit a report regarding Saraikela Kharsawan incident.

He added, "The court has observed that the incidents were serious in nature".

Notably, Ansari, who was allegedly beaten by a mob on June 17, died while undergoing treatment a few days later. The minority community on July 5 held a meeting in Ranchi to condemn Tabrez's incident but a few of the participants had pelted stones on a bus, on return.

On the same day members of minority community have allegedly gathered at the main road in Ranchi to protest the beating of three youths near the airport. A section of the mob, however, allegedly stabbed a youth and thrashed up another one while they were returning home after closing their shops in the evening.

Subsequently, the petitioner filed an IA seeking the direction of the court for the video recording of the meeting organised in Doranda. It further stated that organizers of the incident along with others may be investigated. The next hearing in the case has been fixed on July 17.
