Crabs outside minister's house after he blames them for Tiware dam breach | Watch

A group of NCP workers landed up at Maharashtra Water Resources Minister Tanaji Sawant's door and threw crabs in front of his house to protest against his comment on the Tiware dam breach that has killed at least 19 people.

After the devastating accident on July 3, Tanaji Sawant had said in a controversial statement, "There is a huge problem of crabs around the dam and that resulted in the leakage. Whatever problems were brought to the notice by the villagers to our irrigation department was addressed immediately. But whatever happened was unfortunate."

On Tuesday, in a bid to protest against this statement, National Congress Party (NCP) workers threw a crate full of crabs outside Sawant's house.

#WATCH: NCP workers stage protest and threw crabs outside the residence of Maharashtra Water Conservation Minister Tanaji Sawant in Pune against his statement on Ratnagiri's Tiware dam breach. The Minister had said that crabs were responsible for the breach in the dam. pic.twitter.com/7wbsT8yGIs ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

The crabs crawled all over the porch of Sawant's house and some even made their way inside through an open door.

23 people went missing on July 3 when the Tiware dam in Maharashtra following incessant rains leading to flood-like situation. 19 bodies have been recovered so far while 4 are still missing.

The dam breach caused a flood-like situation in seven downstream villages, with 12 houses being swept away.

A Special Investigation Team (SIT) has been set up by the Maharashtra government to probe the Tiware dam breach incident.

Meanwhile on Friday, NCP workers handed over a few crabs to the police after asking them to arrest the crabs for the dam breach.

NCP workers led by party general secretary Jitendra Awhad walked into the Naupada police station with crabs in hand and urged the cops to arrest them.

This was also in protest against Sawant's attempt to blame the accident on crabs.
