Maratha quota struggle: How the silent rallies stole a march over naysayers despite violence during Pune stir

A file photo of Marathas protesting against Kopardi gangrape and demanding reservation in Sangli, Maharashtra | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The Marathas are a Marathi-speaking community that largely live in Marathwada and Western Maharashtra region. Around 30 per cent of the population of the state is of the Maratha community. For Maratha quota and justice to Kopardi rape victim, 58 silent marches were organised in one year where lakhs of protesters participated. Out of the total 18 chief ministers of Maharashtra, at least 10 belong to the Maratha community. In fact, Maharashtra's first CM was a Maratha.

After nearly three years, which included 58 silent marches, violent protests and at least 10 suicide cases last year, the Maratha community's struggle has culminated. On June 27, the Bombay High Court upheld the state government's decision to give reservation to Marathas in education and jobs. However, the court brought down the quota from 16 per cent to 12 per cent in education and 13 per cent in jobs.

But who are the Marathas? Why are they given reservation? Did they really need reservations? This article attempts to answer all the important questions related to Marathas and their long battle.

Who are Marathas?

The Marathas are a Marathi-speaking community that reside in Marathwada and Western Maharashtra region. They make up 30 per cent of the population of the state. Out of the total 18 chief ministers of Maharashtra, at least 10 belong to the Maratha community. In fact, Maharashtra's first CM was a Maratha.

Historically, the community associated itself with the warrior class or the Kshatriyas, but claims are also being made that the group belongs to Shudra caste.

It is one of the rare groups whose classes oscillate from a wealthy landlord to a poor and landless farmer. The Maratha leaders argue that the farming class makes up most of the community and is under severe distress. A study conducted by Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics showed that 26 per cent of farmer suicide cases between April 2014 and March 2016 from Marathwada and Vidarbha region were committed by Marathas, reports ThePrint.

The history of Maratha reservation

The demand for quota for Marathas was initiated in the 1980s but the Mandal Commission declared the caste as ''forward''. In 2000, the National Commission for Backward classes also rejected the demand for the Maratha community to be classified as ''backward''. In 2008 too, the Bapat Commission with a majority of 4-2 concluded that Marathas cannot be considered as OBCs.

The Congress-NCP government formed a non-statutory committee under Narayan Rane, then Congress leader, which rejected the Bapat Commission report saying the report lacked quantifiable data. The committee concluded that Marathas were socially, educationally and economically backward and recommended 16 per cent reservation for them. The Maharashtra government brought an ordinance for the same in 2014 which was later rejected by the high court.

The resurgence of Maratha movement

A 15-year-old Maratha girl was brutally gang-raped and murdered on July 13, 2016, in Kopardi village of Ahmednagar district in Maharashtra. This incident caused great anger in the community which led to a series of silent protests under the name of Maratha Kranti Muk Morcha. The major demands were giving justice to the gangrape victim and reservation for Marathas.

Across Maharashtra, 58 silent marches were organised in one year where lakhs of protesters participated. All the political parties showed solidarity and supported the movement.

Meanwhile, Justice Maroti Gaikwad (retd), who headed the State Backward Class Commission, was gathering the data to assess the economic and social backwardness of the community.

In July 2018, another group of Maratha protesters launched a dharna against the BJP government for not fulfilling the promise of the reservation to the community. It followed state-wide bandhs where massive violence was marked in Aurangabad, Pune, Navi Mumbai, reports The Hindu. Over 200 people were arrested in Pune and Aurangabad for incidents of violence and vandalism.

These round of protests led to at least 10 suicide cases from the Maratha community.

Finally, the victory

Finally, on 15 November 2018, the Gaikwad Commission submitted its report which recognised that the Maratha community was socially and educationally backward (SEBC). It recommended the reservation for the group under the OBC category.

The Maharashtra government passed the Bill which gave 16 per cent reservation to Marathas under SEBC. The Bombay HC approved the reservation but brought the quota down to 13 per cent in jobs and 12 per cent in education. It also accepted that the quota under SEBC is correct otherwise the OBC community will largely be dominated by the Marathas.

Was the quota justified?

Marathas form 30 per cent of Maharashtra's population, which by no means is a small number and giving reservation to a politically and socially dominant community raises questions. It will also encourage other powerful communities such as Jats in Haryana, Patidars in Gujarat and Kapus in Andhra Pradesh, to raise their demands to pressurise their respective governments for reservation.

Also, the court agreed that giving Marathas reservation under OBCs is not an appropriate step as it will shrink the space of other backward groups in the list and the major chunk of reservation benefits will go to Marathas. It, therefore, allowed the inclusion of Marathas under SEBC. The question is can't the cap of OBC quota be increased to accommodate the Marathas?
