Kolkata Pervert Professor Row: Jadavpur students demand expulsion of Kanak Sarkar

Jadavpur University professor Kanak Sarkar in his post had emphasised that virginity is as precious as honesty and morality.

The controversy surrounding Kolkata professor Kanak Sarkar's sexist comments refuses to die down.

Sarkar, who is a professor the Department of International Relations in Kolkata's premier Jadavpur University went viral with his mind-blowing (for all the wrong reason) logic about women and their virginity and subsequent marriage prospects.

The professor has been dragged on social media for his crass views and the resulting outrage has brought forth from accounts of his students who said his misogyny was not limited to his Facebook account.

Now, students at Kolkata's Jadavpur University have demanded the immediate removal of Sarkar. Taking to the streets, the students raised slogans against Sarkar and demanded his immediate removal.

Kolkata: Students of Jadavpur University stage protest in campus demanding expulsion of Prof. Kanak Sarkar over his remarks made in a Facebook post, say,"We want his expulsion as he is influencing young minds &we don't want misogynistic environment here. He's a repeat offender." pic.twitter.com/a0Lh4Bv5TD ANI (@ANI) January 15, 2019



Speaking to news agency ANI, the students said, "We want his expulsion as he is influencing young minds and we don't want misogynistic environment here. He's a repeat offender."

Students at Kolkata's Jadavpur University are protesting against a faculty member over his sexist remarks against women on social media. #ReporterDiary by @iindrojit

More Videos: https://t.co/FAHzdk9TO8 pic.twitter.com/ynJGVI5kWQ January 15, 2019

The protesting students have submitted a memorandum to the vice-chancellor and the Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) of the university seeking stern action against Sarkar.

The Head of Sarkar's Department of International Relation, professor OP Mishra has called for a teacher-student meet tomorrow to deliberate the matter following which a report will be submitted to Vice-Chancellor Suranjan Das.

The National Commission of Women has also taken note of Sarkar's comments and has written to the West Bengal Police, demanding an inquiry into the incident.

(with inputs from Indrajit Kundu in Kolkata)
