BJP holds march seeking HDK’s resignation

Mysuru: The BJP workers held a protest march in front of zilla panchayat office on Tuesday demanding that chief minister HD Kumaraswamy resign from his post as the Congress-JD(S) coalition government has lost its majority. They said that Kumaraswamy has no moral right to continue as chief minister.The protesters said that 14 MLAs have already resigned and they have extended their support to BJP. “They have lost majority. While BJP has 107 MLAs, the Congress and JD(S) combine has been reduced to 103 seats. As he has no majority, Kumaraswamy should resign immediately,” they said.The protesters also argued that for the past one year, there has been no development in the state and Kumaraswamy has failed to respond to the problems of the people. “While the entire state is facing a drought, Kumaraswamy went to US to relax. The CM is interested only in improving his family’s prospects and not of the state. He should resign from his post immediately,” they said.MCC council members M Satish and Shivakumar, BJP city general secretary HV Rajiv, KR segment president BV Manjunath and others were present.Meanwhile, Congress workers held a protest against the BJP for trying to dislodge the coalition government.The Congress workers gathered at Gandhi Circle and shouted slogans against Prime Minister Narendra Modi, BJP president Amit Shah and former chief minister BS Yeddyurappa. They alleged that BJP leaders are trying to topple the government through horse-trading.Speaking on the occasion, former minister CH Vijayashankar said the BJP has tried to topple the government at least six times in the past 13 months but has failed in its attempts. “BJP is luring Congress and JD(S) MLAs with money. PM Modi and BJP president Amit Shah are involved in destabilising the government,” he alleged.Later, former MLA MK Somashekar alleged that the BJP is luring Congress and JD(S) MLAs by offering Rs 25 crore. “The BJP is spending more than Rs 300 crore to purchase MLAs,” he said.Congress district president BJ Vijaykumar, city president R Murthy and mayor Pushpalatha Jagannath were present.
