Indian Pharmaceutical Association wants better security for drug control officers

Close on the heels of recent attacks on drugs control officers, the Indian Pharmaceutical Association (IPA) has appealed to all states to implement plan to provide security to these officers as their job includes prevention of the sale of adulterated, spurious, substandard and misbranded drugs, biological products and medical devices. The security is essential as the drugs control officers at a time are exposed to dangerous circumstances including life-threatening situation.

IPA vice president Manjiri Gharat told DNA,'' The nature of drugs control officers is very sensitive. They ensure the safe and effective medicines reaching out to the public. Therefore, it is extremely important that they work in a secure environment and without any fear or apprehension.''

IPA's call comes against the backdrop of killing of drugs inspector and zonal licensing authority in Punjab and attack on drug controller in Bihar. Already, the All India Drugs Control Officers' Confederation had protested attacks with an appeal to the government for firm action. On its part, the union ministry of public health and family welfare has asked states to put in place a proper security cover for drug control officers when they are in the office or on-field duties.

Maharashtra's former Food and Drugs Commissioner Mahesh Zagade said the enforcement has been very weak and if any drugs inspector or officer tries to enforce the law he or she has to face the backlash from the anti-social elements. ''The drugs inspectors and regulatory authorities are supposed to enforce the drug laws through pharmacists and independently to safeguard lives of the patients. Thus, the government at the Centre and state should enforce regulatory aspects in such a manner that the anti-social elements do not dare to take law in their hands,'' he noted.

IPA has called upon the states to take suitable measures to prevent such incidents from occurring saying that in its absence it would be very difficult for drugs control officers to discharge their duties.

Weak Enforcement
