POCSO court convicts teacher for raping 13-year-old student

Sexual Offences

Nerul school

vulgar stories

DNA

Statements from students and parents helped cops build a watertight case.A Thane special Protection of Children from(POCSO) court on Tuesday sentenced a teacher to 10 years of imprisonment and ordered him to pay a fine of Rs 50,000 fine for raping a 13-year-old student. The police said that statements of students, parents and teachers given before a magistrate helped them get conviction in the case.In September 2016, the girl, accompanied by family members, approached a doctor to terminate her pregnancy. The doctor alerted the police who traced the victim and later lodged a complaint against the 34-year-old teacher of aIn December 2016 after several protests from parents outside the school, the teacher was arrested. He had fled to New Delhi and was brought back to the city by a police team comprising senior inspector Ashok Rajput and constables Majid Pathan and Prabhakar Mahajan.During investigations, several parents had complained to the police that the teacher had narratedto their children and showed them indecent photos on social networking sites.They also said that despite repeatedly bringing the teacher’s activities to the school authorities’ notice, no action was taken. The convict used to teach students of classes V, VI and VII.The victim had said that she was raped twice between April and August in 2016 and by September that year was four weeks pregnant.“We had submitted a 300-page charge-sheet which had statements of witness and circumstantial evidence,” said Rajput who investigated the case.Calling the trial court’s order unjust, the convict’s wife said: It has been alleged that my husband impregnated the girl, but hisdidn’t match with the aborted foetus. Then who is the real father, who is the real culprit? This is injustice. We do not accept this judgment.”She also said, “My husband argued his own case and sought death sentence for himself, but the court refused. He cannot live with this shame. He has given up food and water. For three years I have been looking for the real culprit. Our child has also suffered because of this case and had to change schools twice.”She said she would appeal against the trial court’s order in the high court.
