BJP says HDK must resign, Cong holds counter protest

Dharwad / Belagavi / Haveri: BJP leaders and workers protested in front of the deputy commissioner’s office here on Tuesday demanding the resignation of chief minister Kumaraswamy Hundreds of BJP workers marched to the deputy commissioner’s office and shouted slogans against the coalition government and the chief minister. They said the government has been reduced to a minority and as such Kumaraswamy should tender his resignation on moral grounds.Hubballi-Dharwad district unit president Nagesh Kalburgi said, “Several Congress and JD(S) MLAs had submitted their resignation as a protest against the government and this shows that the government has failed to deliver the goods. The Congress is trying desperately to ensure the coalition government survives and is threatening MLAs with legal action.”BJP Slum Morcha president Iresh Anchatageri said the formation of coalition government itself was immoral because the people had not given either the Congress or JD(S) a mandate to form the government. “Taking advantage of the BJP not reaching the magic number, the two parties joined hands and formed the coalition government causing much heartburn among their party workers and even MLAs,” he said.“That the post-poll coalition has failed on several fronts is obvious as development works have come to a halt and the government machinery has become stagnant,” he added.Party Mallikarjun Sawkar, Sanjay Kapatkar, Mohan Ramadurg, Srinivas Kotian and others also spoke. The BJP workers submitted a memorandum addressed to the governor Vajubhai Vala seeking action against the government that has “lost majority” to the DC.BJP intimidated MLAs to resign, claims CongressCongress workers accused BJP of arm-twisting their MLAs to topple the coalition government in Karnataka and violating the provisions of the Constitution.Members of Dharwad District Congress Committee and Hubballi-Dharwad district Congress Committee assembled at the deputy commissioner’s office compound and staged a protest. They accused BJP of using agencies like Enforcement Directorate (ED) and Income Tax department to intimidate some MLAs and luring some others with money and forcing them to resign. Some protesters tried to gate crash into the DC’s office but police prevented them.In separate protests in Belagavi, BJP and Congress workers traded charges against each other.Demanding the resignation of CM H D Kumaraswamy, BJP’s Belagavi City and rural units took out a rally from Channamma Circle to the DC’s office. Party leader M B Zirli led the protest.The Congress’ Belagavi district (rural) and city units protested at the same venue, alleging horse trading by BJP. District president Vinay Navalgatti alleged that BJP was attempting to topple the coalition government through anti-constitutional and immoral ways. He urged speaker Ramesh Kumar not to accept the resignation of MLAs without a fair inquiry.BJP workers protested against state government under the leadership of former MLA U B Bankar and district general secretary Siddaraj Kalkoti in HaveriThey took out a rally from the BJP office to Hosamani Siddappa Circle and shouted slogans against chief minister H D Kumaraswamy and coalition government coordination committee chairman Siddaramaiah.Earlier in the day, members of the Congress district unit protest against BJP at the same venue. They displayed placards against BJP and blocked the NH-48 at Hosmani Siddappa Circle for a while. They alleged that BJP was trying to weaken the state government by forcing MLAs to resign.
