Karnataka crisis: Speaker says two more MLAs gave letters, says he hasn't accepted any of them yet

Karnataka crisis: Speaker says two more MLAs gave letters, says he hasn't accepted any of them yet

In a fresh jolt to the wobbly Congress-JDS coalition government in Karnataka, two Congress legislators, Housing minister M T B Nagaraj and K Sudhakar, tendered their resignations Wednesday to the Speaker, taking the number of disgruntled MLAs who have quit to 16.

The development comes even as D K Shivakumar, Karnataka's Water Resources Minister, the Congress' troubleshooter, was detained and sent packing back to Bengaluru from Mumbai, where he was prevented by police from meeting the rebel MLAs.

The ruling Congress-JDS coalition faces the threat of losing majority in the Assembly if the resignations are accepted as its current tally is 116 in the 224-member House.

Nagaraj and Sudhakar submitted their resignations to Speaker Ramesh Kumar at his chamber in Vidhana Soudha, the State secretariat.

Confirming the resignations, Ramesh Kumar told reporters, "Yes, Sudhakar and M T B Nagaraj have resigned.

Soon after submitting his resignation Nagaraj went and met Governor Vajubhai Vala, informing him about his decision.

Here are the major updates:

* Karnataka Congress Chief troubleshooter goes to Mumbai to convince the dissident MLAs to change their mind

* He is not allowed to enter Renaissance Hotel in Powai. Shivakumar says he will do dharna outside the hotel and will not leave without meeting the dissidents

* Dissident MLAs say they don't want to meet him

* Dissident MLAs move SC protesting against Speaker's decision to delay their resignation process. Hearing tomorrow.

* Shivakumar's booking in Mumbai hotel cancelled and section 144 has been imposed in Powai Police station area from July 9 to July 12.

* DK Shivakumar has been detained. They were later released.

* Speaker says he has recieved two more resignations but he hasn't accepted them yet.

* Fracas at Karnataka Vidhan Saudha between Cong and BJP MLAs.

* Yeddyurappa asked for the Karnataka CM to resign

* DK Shivakumar said he was being 'forcibly sent back' to Bengaluru.

A meeting of Congress leaders Ghulam Nabi Azad, KC Venugopal, Mallikarjun Kharge, G. Parameshwara, Siddaramaiah, Dinesh Gundu Rao, Eshwara Khandre and others is underway following the resignation of 2 more MLAs Dr K Sudhakar and MTB Nagaraj.

Meanwhile, back in Bengaluru, the speaker said to more MLAs – Dr K Sudhakar (Congress MLA from Chikballapur) and Ganesh Hukkeri (Cong MLA from Chikkodi) – also submitted their resignations.

The speaker said: “I have not accepted any resignation, I can't do it overnight like that. I have given them time on 17th. I'll go through the procedure and take a decision. As in the case of other MLAs, law will take its own course. The law cannot deviate from person to person, it is uniform for one and all.”

Arguments took place between Congress and BJP leaders after Cong MLA Sudhakar resigned. He was taken into Minister KJ George’s room. BJP leaders tried to barge into KJ George’s office.

Later there was a tussle between media and police who barred media from entering KJ George’s room.

The following MLA have withdrawn support from the Cong-JD(S) government

1) AH Viswhanath

2) Ramesh Jarkiholi

3) ST Somashekar

4) Pratap Gouda Patil

5) Gopaliah

6) BC Patil

7) Mahesh Kumtahallli

8) Narayana Gowda

9) Byrati Basavaraj

10) Shivram Hebbar

11) Ramalinga Reddy

12) Anand Singh

13) Sudhakar

14) MTB Nagaraj

16) Roshan Baig (Suspended MLA from Congress )

In high drama outside Renaissance hotel in Powai, Mumbai, senior Congress leader from Karnataka DK Shivakumar was stopped from meeting dissident MLAs who are holed up in the city for the last three days. DK Shivakumar was quoted as saying, "I've booked a room here. My friends are staying here.There has been a small problem, we've to hold negotiations.We can't go for a divorce immediately. There is no question of threatening, we love&respect each other".

His booking was cancelled by the hotel. However the Karnataka leader refused to go from the vicinity saying either he will meet the dissidents or the dissidents will come to meet him. He said, "They'll call me. Their heart will break. I'm in touch already, hearts of both of us are beating".

On the other hand, dissident MLAs moved Supreme Court protesting against Speaker's decision to give a three-day lifeline to the state government and also claiming that 10 of the 13 resignations are invalid. They have moved apex court accusing the Speaker of abandoning his constitutional duty and deliberately delaying acceptance of their resignations.A bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi took note of the submission of senior advocate Mukul Rohatgi, appearing for the rebel MLAs, and assured him that it will see whether their petition can be listed for an urgent hearing tomorrow.

Earlier, Shivakumar's message of love wasn't enough to convince Mumbai Police who were present in large number anticipating his arrival. Earlier the MLAs had written to Mumbai Police chief requesting security claiming they fear for their lives as senior Congress and JD(S) leaders may try to enter the hotel.

Shivakumar told the media that he doesn't have any weapon, all he has is love. Senior Congress leader said that he should be allowed inside and he wants to have coffee with his 'friends'. He expressed dismay at not being allowed inside saying this is India, how can anyone be stopped? He also said that senior IPS officers can accompany him inside if they want.

The JD(S) and Congress government in Karnataka is in the brink of collapse as already 15 MLAs have resigned citing lack of confidence in HD Kumaraswamy. Speaker though have said that 10 out of 13 resignations are not valid.

With agency inputs
