An Entire Village In Kerala Could Soon Be Wiped Off The Map Due To Black Sand Mining

Just a few months ago the fishermen from Alapad village in Kollam district of Kerala were in the forefront of the rescue efforts during the massive floods that submerged almost the entire state.

Their selfless efforts turned out to be the difference between life and death for thousands of flood victims who were trapped inside flooding houses.

BCCL/ FILE

Not only they saved thousands of lives, the fishermen who volunteered to help even turned down the cash rewards offered by the government. The fishermen were hailed Kerala's own navy by the state chief minister.

But now some of the heroes are staring at an uncertain future - their home is vanishing in front of their own eyes - eaten up by the Arabian sea inch-by-inch.

BCCL

Alappad, a coastal village in Kollam is facing the brunt of mining. Mining activities in region dates back to 1968 when two government-owned companies, Indian Rare Earth, and Kerala Minerals and Metals Limited began mining beach sand in the region.

According to locals, the years of unregulated mining Alappad which had an area of 89.5 square kilometre has been reduced to just 8 square kilometres by 2019.

They say that it wasn't always like this. The 2004 tsunami, which claimed 29 lives in Alappad was the trigger. While the tsunami left behind a massive deposit of uranium-rich black sand it also began eating into village, which is home to maily fisherfolk.

It has become so bad, they say that if you stand on one end of the land you can see the other end. It is on this narrow stretch of land some 5000 families are living.

The extent of the erosion was also highlighted in a study by the Institute for Ocean Management in 2008, which stated that Alappad along with neraryby Arattupuzha, Thrikkunnapuzha, and Purakkad panchayats have reported the highest coastal erosion in the state.

With the constant threat of their homes being washed away by the approaching sea looming over their head, the residents of Alappad have be on a relay hunger strike for more than two weeks.

BCCL

The localised protests only gathered moment recently after two hashtags #SaveAlappad and #StopMining became viral on social media in Kerala.

The two hashtags helped build momentum and support for the people of Alappad. They are demanding an immediate ban on all mining activity in the region.

“The companies claim that they have mining permission till 2020. But, at this scale, by then, there will be no Alappad left," a local resident said.

They say that the Ponmana village in the area is the best example of what happens as the result of unregulated mining.

BCCL

According to Kartik Sasi, a local resident who is in the forefront of the protest, Ponmana, a village which once had a population of 1500 has now reduced to just three families. The remaining had to flee after sea waters submerged their homes.

Vellanathuruthu, another mining site, too, is facing existential threat after sea waters entered the backwaters there.

A few kilometres away in Chavara, residents have to walk several kilometres to source their drinking water as the mining companies have used open wells in the region to dump their industrial waste.

Even at the face of the mounting protest, IRE is defiant, claiming the company was following all mining norms.

"Since ours being a public sector company with strategic importance, there are several monitoring agencies and both the state and the central governments are aware about processes followed by us," an unnamed IRE official told PTI.

The government too has taken the side of the mining company. Kerala Fisheries minister J Mercykutty Amma said, being a public sector enterprise, the IRE should engage in responsible mining without affecting the erosion of shoreline in the area.

"Being a public sector undertaking, the IRE must do the mining in a responsible manner. They should engage in mining by protecting the shore. This is what the people want and the government stands by the people."

Kerala Minister for industries EP Jayarajan said that there are no plans to stop the mining in Alappad and the coastal erosion was caused by the tsunami and not mining.
