India raises Dawood syndicate, accuses Pakistan of providing haven to D-Gang at UNSC

Recently, there were reports that US representatives in a UK court had acknowledged Dawood Ibrahim’s presence in Pakistan

India on Tuesday raised the issue of Dawood Ibrahim syndicate during an open debate at the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) on Threats to International Peace and Security: Linkages between International Terrorism and Organised Crime’.

India’s Permanent Representative to the UN Ambassador Syed Akbaruddin elucidated upon the connection between terrorism, organised crime and how one metamorphoses into the other.

"Terrorism and Organised Crime are both manifestly malicious organisms drawing sustenance from the same deadly swamp. At times, they co- exist; at other times, they cooperate; and in instances, they converge," he said.

India has faced the terror of such organised crime syndicates when Dawood Ibrahim, a smuggler, was involved in the 1992 Mumbai blasts case. He fled the country and has been known to be living in Pakistan since 2008.

Raising the issue of the D-Gang and the safe have provided to Dawood Ibrahim by Pakistan, the Indian envoy said, "In our own region, we have seen the mutation of Dawood Ibrahim’s criminal syndicate into a terrorist network known as the D-Company. The D-Company’s illegitimate economic activities may be little known outside our region, but for us, such activities as gold smuggling, counterfeit currency, as well as arms and drug trafficking from a safe haven that declines to acknowledge even his existence, are a real and present danger."

Recently, there were reports that US representatives in a UK court had acknowledged Dawood Ibrahim’s presence in Pakistan. The response of Pakistan’s foreign office was that of denial.

"Let me tell you this that Dawood Ibrahim is not, and I repeat, not in Pakistan," said Pakistan’s Foreign Office spokesperson Dr. Mohd. Faisal.

Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) spokesperson Raveesh Kumar during his weekly media briefing on July 4 had responded to a question on media reports citing a US Representative telling a court in UK that Dawood Ibrahim, an Indian Muslim, was a fugitive living in Pakistan.

"The location of Dawood Ibrahim is not a secret. Time and again for the last several years we have been presenting to Pakistan a list of people who are in their country. We have asked repeatedly that they should be handed over. He is a UN proscribed terrorist. His imprint on the Mumbai blasts is very clear for all of us to see and frankly many people from the media fraternity have managed to speak to him. It is very clear that the linkages are in Pakistan," he told reporters.

India has been trying to highlight the same at the world body that is currently discussing linkages between International Terrorism and Organised Crime.

Demonstrating the success collective action has had against the Islamic State, he said, "A similar degree of interest in addressing the threats posed by proscribed individuals, such as Dawood Ibrahim and his D-Company, as well as proscribed entities, including the Jaish-e-Mohammad and Lashkar-e-Toiba, listed as affiliates of Al-Qaeda, under the 1267 sanctions regime, will serve all of us well."

Appreciating the efforts in curtailing and preventing states to sponsor, abet terrorist networks through FATF, Ambassador Akbaruddin said, "We believe that the FATF is playing a significant role in setting global standards for preventing and combating money laundering and terrorist financing. The UN needs to increase cooperation with such bodies.

ALSO READ: Dawood Ibrahim's illegitimate activities from safe haven pose real danger: India to UNSC

ALSO WATCH: US exposes Pakistan's lie on Dawood Ibrahim
