Finally, Govt Seems Serious About Bringing Law On Doctors' Security. Better Late Than Never!

Everyone realises the importance of doctors in the society, yet, there are some people who don't really care and end up attacking doctors. It is unfortunate that we get to hear about doctors being beaten at hospitals while performing their duty. There have been several demands that the government make certain laws that could deter the attackers.

Recently, there has been a spate of attacks from various parts of the country, where doctors and other medical staff were assaulted by relatives of patients accusing them of negligence.

The most high profile case was in Kolkata last month when two junior doctors were attacked by a mob after an 80-year-old under treatment patient at Nilratan Sarkar Medical College and Hospital passed away.

BCCL

The attack on the two doctors caused massive outrage among the medical fraternity in the state who refused to work and demanded a safer work environment.

The protest later spread to other parts of the country and on the 1st of July doctors across the country joined in the protests and boycotted work for the day in solidarity with the Kolkata doctors.

BCCL

Even after the protest and doctors demanding security at work, there have been more instances of assaults as recently as earlier this week when relatives of a patient who died at Delhi's LNJP Hospital assaulted a doctor accusing him of negligence.

Following yet another attack doctors at LNJP hospital went on a strike Monday demanding security.

Their main demand is augmenting of security deployment, including having marshalls in the emergency department.

Now the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has constituted a committee to assess various aspects of bringing out a Central law against attack on-duty doctors and medical establishments.

BCCL

The committee includes medical superintendents of AIIMS, RML Hospital, representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Medical Council of India, Federation of Resident Doctors’ Association (FORDA), Indian Medical Association (IMA), etc.

Welcoming the move, the IMA said "IMA has won the first battle in our struggle against violence.''

"Union Government has constituted an inter-ministerial committee to go into the Central legislation against the assault on Doctors and Hospitals. Congratulations to the entire medical fraternity," said the IMA in the letter.

Earlier, the IMA had demanded a new law to protect doctors and amendment in the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC).

BCCL

The IMA had last month submitted a draft Protection of Medical Service Persons and Medical Service Institutions (Prevention of Violence and Damage or Loss of Property) Act, 2017, to Union Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan which calls for a 10-year jail term and Rs 5 lakh fine for violence against doctors.

According to a study published in the Indian Journal of Psychiatry, doctors in India and other Asian countries face violence more often at the workplace than their western counterparts. As many as 75% of all doctors in India have faced some form of violence. This is much higher than nearly 50-60% violence reported in countries like the US and the UK.
