City hotel owners protest fire policy

The hotel owners protest outside the residence of Cabinet minister Satyendar Jain in New Delhi on Wednesday.

A week after the Delhi government issued notices to 25-30 hotels in the city, more than 300 hotel owners and workers staged a protest outside the residence of Cabinet minister Satyendar Jain on Wednesday demanding relaxation from the New Fire Policy.

After the fire tragedy at Arpit Hotel in Karol Bagh in February, the state government had carried out an inspection and found that the hotel violated several norms.

Soon after that, the state government formulated a policy in which it was made mandatory that no hotels and guesthouses in the city should be more than three floors and emergency exit gate at every floor. General secretary of Delhi Hotel Association Arun Gupta said: "It looks like that the Cabinet minister Satyendar Jain has misunderstood the issues of hotel owners. Somebody needs to tell him that its not always the fault of hotel owners in case of any mishap. We also have families and we are ready to follow every security guidelines. But don't forcefully impose this Tughlaqi order of the new policy."

Recently, the Delhi Police have issued notice to close down more than 30 establishments in Karol Bagh and Paharganj area.

Karol Bagh Guesthouse Association president Jagpreet Arora said: "This new policy has paralysed us. In Karol Bagh, we have more than 700 hotels and guesthouses running for the last 20-30 years. But the new fire policy for hotels says to demolish all the construction above third floor. Karol Bagh is in special area zone of MPD 2021."

Vikram Chaddha, the owner of a small hotel in Karol Bagh, said: "We run budget hotels but the government wants to ensure norms of Five-Star hotels. How is that possible? These norms are not feasible to us."

After the Arpit Hotel tragedy, the government asked civic body to survey all hotels and gueshouses in the city and ensure that they follow the norms. If not, the civic body was asked to demolish or seal the buildings. However, the hotel owners demanded that the new policy should be implemented on the new hotels.

Sources said that there are more than 600-700 hotels above the height of 15 metre and has more than three floors. The protesting hotel owners met minister Jain and environment minister Imran Hussain, after which the protesters said that they were asked by the ministers to come on Monday when they will discuss their issues and try to bring out a solution.

According to hotel association, if the government forcefully closes down the hotels, more than 10,000 workers will lose their job.

Also Read | After Surat tragedy, Delhi to shut down coaching centres operating above fourth floor

Also Watch | New Delhi: Hotel in Karol Bagh gutted in massive fire
