Karnataka crisis: Congress and BJP leaders stage protest

/news/india/karnataka-crisis-congress-and-bjp-leaders-stage-protest/eventshow/70171083.cms

01

Political crisis in Karnataka is not going to end soon as the Supreme Court asked 10 rebel MLAs of the Congress-JD(S) coalition in Karnataka to meet the assembly Speaker at 6 pm to convey to him their decision to resign - Photogallery

Political crisis in Karnataka is not going to end soon as the Supreme Court asked 10 rebel MLAs of the Congress-JD(S) coalition in Karnataka to meet the assembly Speaker at 6 pm to convey to him their decision to resign. These MLAs were staying at a hotel in Mumbai after announcing their support to BJP. However, the Congress and JD(S) accused BJP of a abducting their MLAs and forcing them to join the saffron party. Senior Congress leader Siddaramaiah and Ghulam Nabi Azad alongwith other party members staged protest against BJP. They blamed that BJP is indulged in conspiracy and horse-trading to topple the Kumaraswamy government. On the other hand, BJP's veteran leader and former Chief Minister of Karnataka BS Yeddyurappa and several other party leaders also held protest in front of the Gandhi statue at the state Vidhan Soudha. They demanded the resignation of Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy, who they claim has lost majority in the House after the resignation of 14 MLAs of the ruling Congress-JD(S) alliance. They raised slogans like "Down, down to the government that has lost majority... down, down to CM who wants to stick on to the chair." Earlier, the rebelled MLAs had approached the Supreme Court against the Karnataka Assembly Speaker, who as they said is not accepting their resignations.

A bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi asked the Karnataka Assembly Speaker to decide on the resignation of the MLAs during the course of the day. The bench, also comprising Justices Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose, said the decision taken by the Speaker has to be intimated on Friday when the court takes up the matter again. The apex court also directed the Karnataka DGP to provide protection to the 10 MLAs from Bengaluru airport to the assembly after their arrival from Mumbai. (BCCL)
