Karnataka crisis LIVE updates: Karnataka speaker KR Ramesh said just 3 working days have passed and the rebel MLAs acted as if an earthquake had struck

Karnataka Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh told the media that the rebel MLAs didn't inform him of their decision to meet him on July 6. The dissident MLAs had said he had fled his office on July 6 to avoid meeting them. He said the MLAs had said they were threatened by people after meeting the MLAs as mandated by the Supreme Court for a 45-minute meeting in the Vidhana Soudha on Thursday.

The political crisis in Karnataka has failed to calm down as the 10 rebel MLAs of Congress-JD(S) coalition government has moved their plea to Supreme Court against Legislative Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar for not accepting their resignations. A bench headed by Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi heard the plea and asked the Speaker KR Ramesh to decide on the resignations after meeting the MLAs in person at the Assembly.

Following this, the MLAs reached Bengaluru and met the Speaker in an almost-hour-long meeting. Ramesh then spoke to the media and put forward his side of the story. He said he will take his time to decide on the resignations since he loved the people of the state. The MLAs have since then returned to Mumbai, where they were cooped up in a hotel.

On Tuesday, Speaker KR Ramesh held the resignation of rebel MLAs was not in order and he will not receive resignation letters in groups. The Congress-JD(S)-led government accused BJP of using money and muscle power to lure the MLAs in the state. However, the BJP leadership has denied its role of interfering in the state.

Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy has called a crucial state Cabinet meet which is scheduled to be held at 11 am today at the Vidhan Soudha in Bengaluru. As per the Chief Minister’s Office, the ministers have submitted their resignations to their party presidents, not the CM Kumaraswamy. Meanwhile, the police have imposed section 144 in the Vidhana Soudha. The order, which will be in place from Thursday to Sunday, surrounding Vidhana Soudha prohibits the assembly of more than 4 people.

Here are LIVE updates:

After meeting the rebel MLAs, Speaker KR Ramesh told the media in a press conference that 8 of the 13 resignations were not in order as per Rule 202 of the Karnataka Assembly Rules and Procedures. He said he is bound to examine if the remaining 5 were voluntary and genuine. He said he doesn’t want to hazard a guess if the nature of resignations were genuine.

The rebel MLAs who had reached Bengaluru for meeting the Speaker as mandated by the Supreme Court are returning to the Maharashtra capital as the game of one upmanship is stuck in a stalemate.

Speaker KR Ramesh said he has been accused of delaying his decision on the resignations by the rebel MLAs and their backers, who then moved the Supreme Court. He said the MLAs who met him did not communicate their decisions to him and instead went to Governor Vajubhai Vala. He said he is bound to follow the Constitution and is obliged to serve in the best interests of the people of the state. He said he is delaying the decision on the resignations because he loved the people of the state and not, therefore, act in haste.

Regarding the claims of the MLAs that Ramesh Kumar left his office to avoid meeting them on July 6, the Speaker said he was in his chambers in the Vidhana Soudha till 1.30 pm. But the MLAs late, that too without an appointment and without letting him know they were coming to meet him. He said he felt hurt at being charged with delaying the process of accepting resignations.

The Speaker said his job is not to save governments or remove people. He said due process must be followed and that he was not shirking his duties. Ramesh said he cannot decide things in a hurry and he will verify all resignations. He said he will check if the resignations are voluntary. The Congress and the JDS have been saying that the BJP is behind the machinations to unseat the HD Kumaraswamy government.

CM HD Kumaraswamy, Congress leader DK Shivakumar and others inspect security arrangement at Vidhana Soudha in Bengaluru. The rebel MLAs have been directed by the Supreme Court to meet Karnataka assembly speaker at 6 pm today & resubmit their resignations. Rebel MLAs have started arriving at Vidhana Soudha to meet Speaker KR Ramesh. Their meeting with the speaker will be recorded.

#WATCH: Rebel Congress MLA Byrathi Basavaraj runs into the Speaker's office in Vidhana Soudha, Bengaluru. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/L6zrzPqCub — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

Congress Chief whip in assembly Ganesh Hukkeri has issued whip to party MLAs to attend tomorrow’s session to pass the finance bill and other matters, failing which absent MLAs will be disqualified under the anti-defection law.

Congress claims speaker decision is final and hence, he can interrogate resignations. The speaker will be placing his decision in the Supreme Court tomorrow after it asked him to respond on the ongoing Karnataka crisis which has resulted in the disorientation of the Congress-JD(S) coalition in the state.

Congress’ Jay Gundu Rao says BJP doesn’t have numbers to form the government and added that the Congress-JD(S) coalition is safe with the required number.

Congress leader and advocate Abhishek Manu Singhvi, who had mentioned the matter before the Supreme Court, told the Court that such a direction, asking the Speaker to decide on the resignation of ten rebels, can’t be issued by the SC.

Karnataka Assembly Speaker Ramesh Kumar has moved Supreme Court to seek more time for filing his reply. The SC bench headed by CJI Ranjan Gogoi had asked the speaker to meet the rebel MLAs at 6 pm.

Karnataka Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar moves Supreme Court seeking more time to deal with the resignation issue of rebel MLAs. Supreme Court refused to give a hearing in the matter today. (file pic) pic.twitter.com/iZjrtjCT8p — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge has said that the Court has ordered, naturally, that will be followed. As per law they have to act. Speaker will also go as per rule. The apex court on Thursday has ordered police to provide security to the rebel MLAs also.

Mallikarjun Kharge,Congress on SC asking 10 rebel Karnataka MLAs to meet the Karnataka Assembly Speaker at 6pm today & submit their resignations if they so wish: The Court has ordered, naturally that will be followed. As per law they have to act. Speaker will also go as per rule. pic.twitter.com/BnWouJyvbE — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

Rebel Congress MLA ST Somashekar has said support is there with this govt, to respect their leader Rahul Gandhi. But commitment made by the coalition govt couldn’t satisfy them. they didn’t taken this decision all of a sudden, they had even informed earlier, but they did not care. ST Somashekar: Since last 3 days they became active to solve our issues. Why did they not care about us before? You imposed an IAS officer on Bengaluru Development Authority to scrutinise me as I am the BDA president. When you (govt) take such decisions, we don't need this govt. https://t.co/Id9v6VrmG6 — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

Congress MP P Chidambaram said in Karnataka and Goa, what’s happening may appear to be political upmanship but it has a very damaging effect on the economy. Foreign investors, rating agencies into organizations don’t follow Indian media. What they hear & read on political instability will have an impact on the economy.

Chidambaram: What we've seen in Karnataka,Goa may appear to be political upmanship but it has very damaging effect on economy.Foreign investors,rating agencies,intn organisations don't follow Indian media.What they hear&read on political instability will have an impact on economy https://t.co/CJFTnRBvCW — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

Congress leader DK Shivakumar said they have confidence that the MLAs will be with them. He hopes they will come back and withdraw their resignation. Karnataka Minister and Congress leader DK Shivakumar in #Bengaluru: We have confidence that the MLAs will be with us. I hope they will come back and withdraw their resignation. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/qmfqPsPRee — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

The Supreme Court said Karnataka Speaker has to take a decision in remaining part the day. The Court also ordered the DGP of Karnataka to provide protection to all the rebel MLAs and adjourned the hearing for tomorrow.

The Supreme Court says Karnataka Speaker has to take a decision in remaining part the day. The Court also ordered the DGP of Karnataka to provide protection to all the rebel MLAs and adjourned the hearing for tomorrow (July 12). https://t.co/ih2fE1AKR3 — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

Supreme Court to hear the petition of rebel MLAs tomorrow. The rebel MLAs have filed afresh plea against the Karnataka Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar for not accepting their resignations. The MLAs have sought the help of apex court over the matter.

Congress leader DK Shivakumar said that since the hotel people in Mumbai yesterday rejected his reservation after making him stand for hours together, They have asked legal people to look into it. He said he has to take a legal remedy to protect my rights.

#Karnataka Min&Congress leader DK Shivakumar at Kumara Krupa Guest House in Bengaluru: Since the hotel ppl in Mumbai y'day rejected my reservation after making me stand for hrs together,I've asked my legal ppl to look into it. I'll have to take a legal remedy to protect my rights pic.twitter.com/dDXxpWQKbH — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

Congress leaders including Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi and Anand Sharma protest in front of the Gandhi statue in Parliament. Rahul Gandhi has said that they are protesting against Karnataka and Goa issue. In Karnataka and Goa, Congress MLAs have resigned and are joining rival party BJP.

Delhi: Congress leaders including Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi and Anand Sharma protest in front of Gandhi statue in Parliament. Rahul Gandhi tells ANI, "We are protesting against Karnataka and Goa issue" pic.twitter.com/wmZCj7Pihn — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
