India’s NIA attaches Aasiya Andrabi’s residence

Srinagar, July 10, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, India’s infamous National Investigation Agency has attached the residence of illegally detained Dukhtaran-e-Millat Chairperson, Aasiya Andrabi, in Srinagar. In the attachment order, pasted at the entrance of Aasiya Andrabi’s residence located in Soura area of Srinagar, the NIA directed all the concerned quarters not to transfer, sale or otherwise deal with the said property in any manner.

Hurriyat leaders and organizations including Shabbir Ahmad Dar and Bilal Ahmad Siddiqui in their separate statements while denouncing the Indian act, said that after failing to suppress the Kashmiris’ ongoing freedom movement through use of brute force, New Deli is using its probe agencies like NIA and Enforcement Directorate to intimidate the Kashmiri people into submission. They said the attachment of the properties of Hurriyat leaders is the worst example of political victimization.

The Hurriyat forum led by Mirwaiz Umar Farooq in a statement issued in Srinagar said that the second report released by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights on rights violations in Kashmir testified the Hurriyat stand. The forum asked for settlement of the UN-acknowledged Kashmir dispute through engagement of Pakistan, India and the people of Kashmir to put an end to bloodshed in the territory. Hurriyat leader Muhammad Sharif Sartaj, Jammu and Kashmir People’s League and Voice of Victims also hailed the UN report.

Association of Parents of Disappeared Persons held a sit-in protest at Pratap Park in Srinagar against the enforced disappearances of their near and dear ones by Indian forces. The relatives were holding posters, seeking the whereabouts of the disappeared persons.

Family members and relatives of illegally detained Hurriyat leader, Sarjan Barkati, today, staged a protest demonstration at Press Enclave in Srinagar to push for his release. Sarjan Barkati, well known for his peculiar style of sloganeering against Indian occupation, was arrested in October 2016.

APHC-AJK chapter at a meeting in Islamabad, today, said that Indian forces were committing genocide of Kashmiri people in the occupied territory. The participants of the meeting urged the world to initiate proceedings against Indian occupational forces under war crimes.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
