Missing toddler sparks war of words between family, BMC

MUMBAI: Twenty-four hours after a toddler slipped into an open drain at Goregaon (E) and was feared drowned, locals and the BMC were engaged in a war of words. Residents claim drains in the area have not been covered for four years, the BMC says that’s not true.Eighteen-month-old Divyansh Singh had ventured out on Wednesday evening alone. When his mother realised it, she looked around and found his footwear near the drain.“We have photos as recent as June 29 showing that drain covered with cement lids. One of the lids seems to have been taken off by someone... It’s an unfortunate incident and our priority is to look for the child,” said additional commissioner (west) Ashwini Joshi.Eighteen-month-old Divyansh Singh lived near Veetbhatti Ambedkar Chowk with his parents, two older siblings and grandmother. His father, Suraj, is a scrap vendor. On Wednesday night, the child's grandmother fed him dinner and went to her room. His mother was in the kitchen and he followed his father outside the house, without anyone knowing. Family members said Suraj worked in the vicinity and Divyansh had been on the route quite a few times accompanied by elders.Soon after, around 9.40pm, Divyansh's siblings alerted his mother that he had stepped out. She rushed out to look for him and spent the next 10 minutes in anxiety, checking the street and knocking on the doors of all her neighbours. She then spotted his footwear near an open drain, past an electric transformer box. “My heart leapt into my mouth as I imagined the worst," the child's mother, Sandhya, said. "All day he had been insisting on going outside and playing in the rain. I had warned him against it as I feared he would catch a cold. He is a bubbly child, full of life," she said, breaking down.Sandhya informed her husband and neighbours and together they decided to approach a mosque in the vicinity as it had put up cameras. "We knew that viewing the footage would provide us with some clues about Divyansh's whereabouts. It showed Divyansh standing near the drain and accidentally slipping in. It had been raining that day and the drain was filled to the brim with water. By 10pm, the entire locality was alerted and many rushed forward to help look for the child,” said Avdesh Singh, a neighbour.Four men from the neighbourhood entered the drain and tried to look for the child. "The fire brigade and the BMC were informed at 10.15pm. While fire engines arrived in half an hour, some officers from the ward office came hours later. There was tension everywhere in the area," said Pankaj Singh, a resident."A search was carried out by the fire brigade, along with the drains department of the BMC. Due to currents, there is a possibility the child was dragged into the main drainage line. A search was conducted in a 10km drainage area and a wall was broken with the help of a JCB on Wednesday," said a fire officer. Irate residents took to the streets and blocked the Goregaon-Mulund Link Road in protest on Thursday afternoon. The police were called in and the crowd was cleared in 15 minutes. Traffic movement was hit for some time. On Thursday evening, the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) joined the search.“For years, we have complained to the BMC about open drains and how they are a risk to everyone in the locality. But there has been no action and our child may have drowned," said Priyanka, Divyansh's aunt. BMC officers from P-South ward said no complaint was received from residents. “It's a common practice among slum residents everywhere to remove cement lids installed on drains to throw garbage inside,” said an officer.
