NIA court sentences five of terror module for plotting to kill Badals

PATIALA: The National Investigation Agency (NIA) that took over the investigations into the Uttar Pradesh-based terror module plotting to kill the Badals has secured the conviction of five persons. The convicts include Jarman Singh who was arrested by the Patiala police in a joint operation with the Rajasthan Police on October 18, 2018, from Beechwal village on the outskirts of Bikaner. Four of them have been sentence to seven years in jail and one for five years behind bars.Following his arrest, Jarman had been handed over to the NIA, which had registered a case against five persons in connection with the Shamli arms loot case, that had led to the busting of terror module supported by Khalistani sympathisers settled abroad.The accused identified as Gurjant Singh, Amrit Singh, Karamveer Singh and mastermind Jarman were charged under sections 13 (1), 16,18 and 20 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, sections 120B (criminal conspiracy), 307 (attempt to murder ), 392 (punishment for robbery) and 397 (dacoity) read with section (common intent) 34 of the IPC and Section 27 of the Arms Act.The fifth accused Karam Singh was charged under sections 13 (1), 16, 18 and 20 of UAPA 1967 and sections 120B, 216A (penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits) and 411 (dishonestly receiving stolen property) of IPC. They all pleaded guilty.The case was originally registered at Jhinjhana police station of Shamli in UP. Karam and Gurjant Singh, both residents of UP, along with Amrit, a resident of Haryana, had looted of two weapons — an INSAS and a .303 rifle —from a constable and a home guard in Jhinjhana area at 10 pm on October 2 last year. They were arrested on October 15, which had led to the arrest of Jarman and Amrit and the busting the terror module plotting to kill the former chief minister of Punjab Parkash Singh Badal and his son and Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) president Sukhbir Singh Badal In a statement, NIA said Jarman was highly radicalized and motivated for the creation of Khalistan and wanted to eliminate the Badals. He had even managed to reach one of the political rallies organized by the Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) at Patiala in October, last year, but could not carry out the attack. Based on the intelligence inputs provided by the central agencies, the Patiala police had finally managed to nab him near Bikaner with the help of the Rajasthan police.The NIA said “fanatic to the core” Jarman had tried to arrange illegal weapons through various channels, that is, by soliciting the same from different people but after having failed in his effort, he planned and executed this incident in association with his associates.The NIA Lucknow special judge sentenced Gurjant, Amrit, Jarman and Karamveer to rigorous imprisonment of seven years for attempt to murder and robbery. They were also sentenced for five years for criminal conspiracy. They were also convicted for five years each under sections of UAPA. All sentences will run concurrently. Karam was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment of five years.
