[EXPLAINED] India-Sri Lanka fisheries dispute: All you need to know

Sri Lankan Navy arrests six Indian fishermen | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Sri Lanka often detains Indian fishermen for fishing in their territory Maritime boundary agreement concluded in 1970s Tamil Nadu crticises Indian government's decision of ceding island of Kachchatheevu to Sri Lanka

Sri Lankan Navy personnel on Friday arrested six Indian fishermen hailing from the state of Tamil Nadu for allegedly catching fish in the Sri Lankan water, India's newly created Department of Fisheries said.

The fishermen from Nambuthalai in Ramanathapuram district had begun sailing in a country boat on Thursday and later, were detained near Nedhuntheevu for fishing in the Lankan waters, Deputy Director of Fisheries E Kathavarayan said.

The Lankan Navy on June 27 allegedly chased away over 3,000 Tamil Nadu fishermen while they were straying into the island nation’s waters.

As Sri Lanka often detains Indian fisherman over charges of crossing into their territory, here's what you should know about the dispute.

What is this dispute all about?

In the 1960s, the government of India decided to promote seafood exports, offering huge subsidies to fishermen. As a result of this move, the fishermen of Tamil Nadu capitalised on the world's rising seafood demand. At that time, there were no clearly demarcated maritime borders between India and Sri Lanka.

Finally, in the 1970s, India and Sri Lanka concluded the maritime boundary agreements of 1974 and 1976, delimiting international boundaries in the Palk Bay, the Gulf of Mannar, and the Bay of Bengal, respectively. The agreement was facilitated between the then Prime Ministers of the two nations - India's Indira Gandhi and Sri Lanka's Sirimavo Bandaranaike. However, politicians from the state of Tamil Nadu protested the ceding of the island of Kachchatheevu in the Palk Bay by India to Sri Lanka, without treating the southern state as a stakeholder. The debate over the sovereignty of the island of Kachchatheevu has been going on since then.

Almost eight years after the conclusion of maritime boundary agreements, a civil war between the rebel group of Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) and the government broke out in Sri Lanka in 1983. With the advent of the civil war, the Sri Lankan government, taking a security precaution, prevented its fishermen of northern region from fishing in the sea. As a result of the this, the catch of the Sri Lankan fishermen declined during the war, which ended in 2009. But, Indian fishermen, during that time, allegedly kept fishing even in Sri Lanka's territory.

When the Sri Lankan fishermen again started their fishing activity in 2009 they found large Indian boats fishing on their territory. The Sri Lankan fishermen, dependent on fishing for their livelihood, then conveyed their plight to their government.

Apart from the above points of conflict, Sri Lanka also raises the environmental protection bogie against India. Sri Lanka often complains that trawlers used by the Indian fishermen also damage the fragile ecosystem of the sea. They allege that heavy nets used by the Indian fishermen badly affect the region's marine life.

The friction has not died down since 2009 and the Sri Lankan navy personnel have detained thousands of Indian fishermen since then. Sometimes, the fishermen are released upon the intervention by the Indian government but both the sides have failed to find a long-lasting solution to this problem. The Indian government has also not addressed the concerns raised by its Tamil Nadu region over the issue of Kachchatheevu island.

What is the issue of sovereignty of island of Kachchatheevu?

When India ceded Kachchatheevu island in the Palk Bay to Sri Lanka, politicians from the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu called the move a big mistake, saying that they were not consulted before deciding on the maritime boundary agreement. The Palk Bay is a narrow strip of water separating the state of Tamil Nadu in India from the Northern Province of Sri Lanka. Unfortunately, at the time of ceding, the Indian government did not consider the island a part of India and termed it a disputed territory.

The ceding of the island exacerbated the tension between the fishermen practicing traditional fishing and those using huge modern mechanised trawlers. In order to prevent the conflict, Tamil Nadu government enacted the Tamil Nadu Marine Fisheries Regulation Act in 1983, which required that trawlers or mechanised boats should not catch fish within three nautical miles from the coast. It also stipulated that the three-nautical-mile area would exclusively be reserved for artisanal fishermen (those who practice the trade in a traditional or non-mechanized way). However, the artisanal fishermen claim that the government has not done anything to enforce the three nautical mile stipulation.

While both the nation's governments continue to look the other way, it is the fishermen on the southern coast of India who find that they are literally and figuratively fishing in troubled waters.
