Capt behaving like BJP spokesperson, says Khaira about CM''s reaction to SFJ ban

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Tribune News Service

Jalandhar, July 11

Punjabi Ekta Party leader Sukhpal Khaira accused Chief Minister Amarinder Singh of “behaving like a spokesperson of the BJP”—referring to the former’s praising of the central government’s ban on Sikhs for Justice.

Khaira, who was addressing a press briefing on Friday, said while central government’s reasons for the ban was unclear, the chief minister’s statements on SFJ sounded as if he were speaking on behalf of the Bharatiya Janata Party.

“The government of India has banned SFJ. Only the government can tell us what facts it has. However, Capt. Amarinder Singh is behaving like a BJP spokesperson. He is no more a Congress leader. They way he has welcomed the ban on SFJ and declared it a terror outfit; the way he spoke on behalf of the BJP on Canadian PM Justin Trudeau. The way he tried to torpedo the Kartarpur corridor issue. Capt Amarinder Singh is reduced to a BJP spokesperson. Things which BJP can’t say are being said by Capt Amarinder Singh.”

Khaira announced at the press conference that his party was going to hold a protest outside the chief minister’s office on July 22. The protest, he said, would be over several issues, including status quo over Power Purchase Agreements that were negotiated under the previous government under the Shiromani Akali Dal as well as the state’s decision to allow water to allow into Pakistan despite depleting groundwater tables in the state.

“The chief minister had said the Congress will review Akali regime PPAs. It was a key point in party’s election manifesto. But even after years, Congress has not reviewed PPAs, even as poor get exorbitant bills of Rs 30,000 to 40,000.”

“The Congress and Akali Dal have again and again stated they will not share waters with Pakistan. Yet 15,000 to 20,000 cusec of the states’ river waters flow into Pakistan even as state canals run dry. This water could have been used to rejuvenate state’s groundwater. I demand, like Karnataka’s stance on Cauvery waters, the state should also clear its stance to the Supreme Court that it isn’t in a position to share its waters.”

Punjab’s depleting groundwater tables is a cause of great concern—recent data that the central government shared in Parliament said Punjab falls within “overexploited” category for groundwater resources.

A recent government groundwater assessment survey reveals that groundwater decline in Punjab and Haryana stood at 69 per cent and 66 per cent, respectively, between 2008 and 2018.

Khaira however deflected a question on Referendum 2020—a proposed separatist vote on an independent Sikh nation. Khaira said the issue was repeatedly brought up, even though the real problem that Punjab faces is water scarcity.

"The real 2020 issue for the country is the Niti Ayog’s report that 21 Indian cities shall be devoid of water by 2020. These include Patiala, Amritsar, Jalandhar, Ludhiana and Mohali. Groundwater is depleting and Punjab will be barren state in 25 years. I ask the government to rather take steps to prevent that.”
