Mangaluru: Private vehicles association calls off indefinite strike

MANGALURU: The Dakshina Kannada District School Vehicles Drivers’ Association on Friday called off their indefinite strike, which they had commenced on Thursday. The decision comes after the intervention of MLA D Vedavyas Kamath and the Mangaluru city police , who have assured the association to look into the issue.Drivers of more than 1,400 vehicles from the district, including nearly 600 from Mangaluru, went on an indefinite strike citing atrocities by the city police against them. The strike received a good response. However, the strike which commenced on Thursday, inconvenienced hundreds of parents, who had to rush to school to drop and bring back their wards. There were heavy traffic pileups outside some school campuses and roads.Announcing the decision of calling off the strike, association honorary president Sunil Kumar Bajal said that from the past few weeks, drivers engaged in ferrying children were harassed often by the city police on various grounds, like for vehicles carrying more than the stipulated number of passengers and other rules. Some of them were fined more than four times for the same violation, and also made to cough up heavy fines.He added that the issue was brought to the notice of MLA D Vedavyas Kamath, and he assured to have a word with the Mangaluru city police to show leniency towards drivers, and not take any stringent action against them. “Due to the MLA’s assurance and also considering the plight of parents, we have decided to call off our strike,” he added.Association members pointed out that they do violate the rules, but that it has improved over the years. “We have been able to improve the system over a period. Compared to the past, the school vans have made tremendous changes in service as well safety aspects,” noted Sunil. Later in the day, the association members also met Sandeep Patil, city police commissioner. Sandeep Patil said that members have aired their grievances before him, and he assured them that he would look into it.
