Viral rumour on ‘Bharat Mata’ slogan sparks protest in school

RAIPUR: A provocative social-media rumour — that the principal of a Christian school had banned students from saying ‘ Bharat Mata ki Jai’ — sparked tumult in Kanker district of Chhattisgarh on Friday.VHP members and some parents barged into the school and started protesting against the principal, whose repeated pleas that he hadn’t issued any such order went in vain. Police intervened, but the protesters refused to budge until students and teachers assembled and shouted ‘Bharat Mata Ki Jai’.The viral message said, “Principal… has issued a diktat, banning students from saying ‘Bharat Mata ki Jai’. When it was verified, it was found to be true. The order was issued to teachers and students about 15 days ago. Though his intention isn’t clear, it is condemned...”It triggered a wave of anger. A large group of parents and VHP activists went to the school and staged a noisy demonstration, demanding that the order be withdrawn. Police and district officials arrived and asked the protesters to calm down, but to no avail Tehsildar Anandram Netam, who rushed to the school on hearing of the protest, told mediapersons that he too had received the WhatsApp message. “We have formed a team to visit the school today and check the authenticity of the message,” he said.The protesters were brought face to face with the principal, who said he had not issued any such order.“Though we found no such written or unwritten order issued by the principal, the parents and our team checked with him about the claims made on social media. The principal denied giving this order but extended an apology for any ‘unintentional mistake committed by him that has hurt people’s emotions’," Netam said.When TOI contacted the principal, he said: “We have been running this educational institution for several years and we respect everyone’s emotions, without any kind of prejudice. Everyone is equal for us. Some people might be spreading rumours on social media to ruin our reputation. I am innocent. I haven't issued any such order.”Some parents, however, continued to insist that the ban was imposed a few days ago. So, an assembly was conducted in their presence, where children and teachers together raised the slogan of ‘Bharat Mata ki Jai’. This satisfied the parents, who called off the protest.
