Search for toddler who fell into drain abandoned

drain

National Disaster Response Force

Devansh Singh

BMC

accidental death

drainage line

BMC workers look for body in a nullah behind Inorbit Mall in Malad, 5 km from the accident site (Photo by Nilesh Wairkar)

Family wants action against civic officials; activist calls for protest against authorities.The search operation to find the body of an 18-monthold boy who fell into awas called off on Friday night, more than 48 hours after the incident. Fire brigade andsearched for the body ofin vain before calling off the operation. Devansh fell into a drain near his house in Dindoshipada, Goregaon (East), around 9.30 pm on Wednesday night.The incident caused a lot of anguish among the child’s family, who demanded action to ensure “there isn’t another Devansh” in Mumbai.Even as the search was going on, Dindoshipada witnessed a lot of drama, as police detained social activist Shravan Tiwari, who announced a protest if the boy was not found. “The police are just trying to hide the inefficiencies ofofficials by stopping us from speaking out,” he said after leaving detention.The police, meanwhile, maintained that they were worried about the law and order situation in the area. “For the last couple of days, emotions have been running high among the people. Anything can incite them and make the situation worse. We were just preventing that from happening,” said a police official.Devansh’s family also visited the police station with the intention of registering an FIR, blaming civic officials. However, the police did not record one. “We have already registered a missing person’s report. It can only be converted into anreport once the body is recovered,” said another police official.Meanwhile, neighbours of the Singh family have a few worries of their own. “We also have kids who roam around the same place. We fear for their well-being and lives,” said Sameer Khan, who lives in the area.“The drains are open either because of some repair work being undertaken by the BMC or electricity suppliers. For the past four years, despite our repeated complaints, neither civic officers nor the electricity company has paid any heed to the maintenance of the drainage lines,” said another resident, Ghulam Hussain.Another man said the area was water-logged a few days ago. “When the whole city was water-logged, there was knee-deep water in our compound. We were constantly worries about there being a feeder box located very close to the,” said Mohammed Nafees Khan, who has a shop outside the compound.
