4 arrested, 19 snatching cases solved

Ludhiana: A gang that had carried 19 cases of snatching and loot in Ludhiana ran out of steam as Sadar police arrested four of its members, including three who were out on bail in snatching and Arms Act cases.

The police also seized a .315 bore country-made revolver, three stolen motorcycles, 12 snatched mobile phones and one sharp-edged weapon from the accused, identified as Gurpreet Singh (23), Sukhraj Singh (31), Daljot Singh (23) and Gurpreet Singh (30). Another member of the gang, Bheem, is still at large, police said. All the accused belonged to Boparai village in Sudhar.

According to police, the gang had executed crimes in the city and outskirts.

Gurpreet, Sukhraj and Daljot were facing trials in cases of snatchings and under the Arms Act. Four months ago, they had come out on bail and resumed their crimes with other gang members.

Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police-2 Jaskiranjit Singh Teja said the accused, active since 2014, were arrested from Dream Villa colony following a tip-off. In the past three months, the gang had executed 19 snatchings.

“They were more active in Sarabha Nagar, Shimlapuri, Mullanpur and Sudhar area. The accused used bikes and kept pistols or sharp-edged weapons to rob people. The accused have confessed that they had purchased a country-made revolver from Uttar Pradesh four months back,” the official said.

The ADCP said all accused are school dropouts and had taken to crime to earn easy money.

Box- 2 held with 16 snatched mobile phones

The Crime Branch-1 has arrested two men — Sahil (23) and Sunny Verma (24) of Bank Colony, Noorwala road — with 16 stolen mobile phones and one motorcycle on Thursday. According to officials, the accused had executed 20 snatchings in three months. They had mostly targeted factory workers in the Bahadurke area, Kakowal Road and Noorwala Road. ASI Boota Singh said Sahil was facing trials in two cases of snatching. He was lodged in a jail and had come out on bail three months back.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
