After strong objection from India, Pak removes pro-Khalistan leader Gopal Singh Chawla from Kartarpur panel

Gopal Singh Chawla with Pakistan PM Imran Khan | Photo Credit: Facebook

Key Highlights Gopal Singh Chawla had prevented Indian diplomats from meeting Sikh pilgrims Involved in placing ‘Sikh Referendum 2020’ banners outside gurdwaras Was seen with Navjot Singh Siddhu at Kartarpur groundbreaking ceremony

New Delhi: Ahead of Kartarpur Corridor meeting with Pakistan, Islamabad relented under New Delhi’s pressure and removed Khalistani radical Gopal Singh Chawla from Pakistan Sikh Gurudwara Prabhandhak Committee (PSGPC). A new committee has been formed without the radical Khalistani extremist who was seen with Congress leader Navjot Singh Siddhu when the latter visited Pakistan for Kartarpur Corridor’s groundbreaking ceremony.

New Delhi had earlier lodged a strong protest to Pakistan over the presence of a leading Khalistani separatist in a committee appointed by Islamabad on the project.

Chawla, a close aide of 26/11 mastermind Hafiz Saeed, and his name had popped up in investigations into the grenade attack on the Nirankari Bhawan in Amritsar which led to the death of three people.

He had also prevented Indian diplomats from visiting Gurdwara Nankana Sahib and Gurdwara Sacha Sauda in Pakistan’s Lahore on November 21-22.

Later, India summoned Pakistan's Deputy High Commissioner Syed Haider Shah lodging a strong protest over 'harassment' of its High Commission officials.

He was also involved in placing ‘Sikh Referendum 2020’ banners outside gurdwaras in Pakistan including Gurdwara Janam Asthan at Nankana Sahib when Sikh pilgrims from India were on a visit to the neighbouring country to celebrate Baisakhi.

Later, US-based Sikhs for Justice (SFJ) took note of this and urged the Pakistan Sikh Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (PSGPC) to stop displaying banners and posters designed by the SFJ.

Gurpatwant Singh Pannun, the legal adviser to the Pakistan-backed SFJ, said that Referendum 2020 is the brainchild of SFJ therefore no has right to use it.

The Indian government had recently banned the SFJ and declaring it unlawful under the provisions of Section 3(1) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.

The terror outfit is allegedly financed by Pakistan’s spy agency, Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI).

Meanwhile, officials from India and Pakistan will meet at the Attari-Wagah border on Sunday to discuss issues related to the Kartarpur Corridor, including connectivity at the Zero Point and the number of pilgrims to be allowed.

New Delhi is also likely to raise its concerns over the security aspect.

As per the government sources, a “hi-tech and robust security system” will be in place once the corridor becomes operational as “security is paramount and non-negotiable.”

The complex will have CCTV surveillance and other advanced security systems. Pakistan, on November 2018, agreed to set up Kartarpur corridor which will link Gurdwara Darbar Sahib to Dera Baba Nanak in Punjab's Gurdaspur district.
