Mumbai rains: Locals stage protest against BMC for inaction, failure to trace missing 18-month-old infant

Local residents of Goregaon East on Saturday along with family members of the 18-month-old Divyansh Singh, who drowned in an open drain on Wednesday, staged a protest against the (Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation) for the civic body's failure in tracing the missing infant.



The protest March began from the residence of Divyansh, which was led by his father and family friend Shravan Tiwari.



At the protest, residents shouted slogans against the civic body and complained about BMC's incompetence in order to find the missing infant.



Divyansh had slipped into an open drain outside his residence on Wednesday evening as Mumbai continued to witness heavy rains.



Since then rescue efforts by the NDRF and BMC had been launched to find the baby boy.



The rescue and search operation was carried out through the open drain leading to null in the radius of around 3 to 4 square kilometres, eventually leading to the creek, but did not yield any positive results.



Finally, after the NDRF called off the search, BMC had also called off the search operation on Friday evening.



Divyansh's family, who were still praying for a miracle, expressed displeasure when they came to know that the civic body had called off the search operation.



After repeated phone calls and messages, BMC officials on Saturday started digging drain upwards in which the kid had drowned.



Several ducts and concrete slabs were removed but it didn't help with any clue of the missing kid.



By Saturday morning, a BMC team with an earthmover reached the spot and started removing the ducts and concrete slabs over the drain in upwards direction to look for the kid.



A BMC official on the spot said that they were trying to see under the covered areas of drain suspecting that the kid might have gotten entangled in the cables passing from the drain. This attempt, too, was fruitless.



Around 3:30 pm, locals led by Divyansh's father Suraj and his friend Shravan Tiwari spearheaded a protest march to the BMC's ward office in Goregaon west of the P South Ward.



"We demand that the mayor of BMC should resign because it is their failure which has led to this incident. Since the past three days we waited that they will help and find the kid but they called off the operation," said Shravan Tiwari, a family friend of Divyansh.



"The ward officer never even bothered to meet us or visit the spot where the incident happened. We met her but the meeting has failed to provide anything concrete and the BMC officials have nothing to say. They should be punished and reprimanded for the shoddy job they do," said Divyansh's father Suraj.



"We will continue our protest and agitate against the civic body's lethargic attitude. I want justice for my child," he added.



Meanwhile, the police was yet to ascertain on what sections and against whom the FIR be registered as the infant's body is yet to be found.



Also, the CCTV the footage was being examined to see who was the person who had removed the concrete slab from the spot where the kid drowned.
