Kerala: Members of pro-alcohol group stage protest, demand dignity for drinkers

Another demand of the protesters was that every panchayat should have a liquor store (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The protest took place in front of the Secretariat in Thiruvananthapuram The two protesters were from the All Kerala Alcoholics Supporters Association

Kerala: Two men stood in front of the Secretariat in Kerala's Thiruvananthapuram on Saturday, July 13 to voice the rights of people who consume alcohol. The two protesters were members of the All Kerala Alcoholics Supporters Association who addressed issues like police harassment towards people who consume alcohol.

Holding placards in their hands, the two men stood demanded a reduction in the price of Indian-made Foreign Liquor (IMFL). They also said that people walking on the streets under the influence of alcohol should not be harassed by the police.

One of the protesters said, "Government says toddy is the national drink. They say it promotes tourism and they sell it, too. But after drinking, the police are not allowing us to walk on the streets. They check us and physically torture us. If we say that we are just walking away properly, they put a criminal case on us saying we are preventing them from doing their duty."

The two men demanded that alcohol be included under Goods and Services Tax (GST) to reduce its price. The protesters said," The price of alcohol will be increased irrespective of any natural disaster or calamities. Around Rs 400 crore was collected through this industry after price hike following the recent flood."

Another demand of the protesters was that every panchayat should have a liquor store. One of the protesters said, "Let the police catch those who drive after drinking alcohol and create problems at home but spare those who walk away without creating trouble for anyone. "

Man sells ayurvedic drink containing alcohol in Gujarat

A man named Chirag Lohana was arrested by the police from Rajkot in June for selling alcohol containing ayurvedic drink. Lohana used to source the drink from Ahmedabad Dholka highway and used to target people living in Khambaliya.

According to an investigation, the accused had sold around 2,800 bottles of the drink. AB Jadeja, sub-inspector of Khambaliya police station said, "Each bottle that cost him Rs 35 was sold by him between Rs 70 and Rs 100. He had become a popular figure among the Bacchus lovers who would throng to his place to buy the drink." The police also confiscated Rs 1,150 bottles of the 'ayurvedic drink' which was priced at Rs 1.15 lakh.
