Fact Check: Anti-lynching protest in Surat goes viral as vandalism in Mumbai

Did miscreants vandalise a bus in Bandra area of Mumbai in the past few days? Well, social media would certainly have us believe so. A video of some hooligans smashing a blue-coloured bus has been going viral with the claim that it is the doing of some auto-rickshaw drivers in the Bandra Kurla Complex (BKC) area of Mumbai.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) found that the video is not from Mumbai but from Surat.

Facebook user Nirmal Thakur uploaded a post in which a large mob of Muslim men can be seen vandalising buses. A few people from the community are seen trying to stop the miscreants along with some policemen too. Along with the post, Thakur wrote, "Oppose of bus route started to Bandra to BKC by Muslim Rikshawala’s running share riksha." This post has been shared by a few Facebook users and the archived version of this post can be seen here.

Similarly, few Twitter users too shared the same video saying that this video is from Bandra East, BKC area. This video has been viral on Whatsapp too with the same claim.

AFWA looked at the video closely and found that the name "sitilink" is written on the side of one of the blue buses that are getting vandalised. Typing sitilink on internet leads to various links related to the Surat Municipal Corporation. Sitilink is a transportation project of the municipal corporation of Surat under the Smart City project.

AFWA then searched the internet to see if there had been any protests by members of the Muslim community in Surat and found that on July 5, there was a protest at Swami Vivekanand Circle, Nanpura area of the city. This protest was against the recent mob lynching in Jharkhand. The protest got out of hand when a large number of people took to the street and it was during this protest that the buses were vandalised. News about this can be read here. The same buses damaged by the mob in the viral video can be seen in a news clipping about the incident.

The advertising posters "Shah" which can be seen in the video can be seen in the Google Instant Street View as well.

There have been media reports of hooliganism about auto-rickshaw drivers of BKC but no such incident of vandalism of buses was reported in Mumbai by the local police.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Buses vandalised at BKC in Mumbai Conclusion The video is of Surat when miscreants vandalised buses on July 5 JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
