Wider political ramifications of protocol violation

Public representatives often find their names missing in invitations and on plaques

Difficult to explain to party cadre

Men in public from grass roots-level elected representatives to Members of Parliament have nursed a grouse about protocol violations whenever their names did not figure on plaques to do with inaugurations or they were not extended invitations for public functions.

The lone BJP member in the State Legislative Council N. Ramchander Rao made no bones about his embarrassment when he lodged a strong complaint recently with Chief Secretary S.K. Joshi against the district authorities for not following the protocol. In his case, Mr. Rao’s territorial constituency extended over three districts — erstwhile Hyderabad, Ranga Reddy and Mahabubnagar — as he was elected to the council from the graduates constituency representing these districts. He lamented over being left out in functions in the districts saying the authorities either avoided him or omitted his name on invitation cards and plaques.

This was creating an unpleasant atmosphere as party workers were protesting against such omissions, Mr. Ramachander Rao rued seeking strict directions to the district authorities to follow rules and procedures of protocol.

Not his alma mater

The Foundation Day celebrations of National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development here the other day was an occasion for Regional Director of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in Hyderabad Subrata Das, to recall how he missed the bus. Participating in the celebrations on the campus of Centre for Economic and Social Studies, he recalled that he wanted to pursue his Ph.D in Economics at the centre in 1986 but ended up taking the doctoral degree from Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi.

Recollecting his first visit to the CESS campus, Mr. Das stated that he came from Odisha and attended the interview for admission into Ph.D but for some reasons he did not join here. He then proceeded to complete his doctorate in New Delhi and became an officer in the RBI. He was feeling elated to spend some time on the campus he wanted to be 33 years ago, the officer said.

Govt. does not budge

The pressure tactics of tahsildars’ association to secure their demands apparently did not work on the government.

The association gave a call for work to rule for three days followed by a strike from July 15 if their demand to repatriate its members to districts of their previous posting was not conceded. The tahsildars were transferred to various districts to discharge duties for Assembly elections but not reverted after that.

To serve the notice of their agitation, a delegation of the association tried to meet Chief Secretary S.K. Joshi but he did not give an appointment. The notice was handed over to Mr. Joshi’s Officer on Special Duty. As the government was unmoved by the threat, the association leaders met the Special Chief Secretary of Revenue and called off the agitation expressing satisfaction on his assurance.

(M. Rajeev, B. Chandrashekhar and N. Rahul)
