CoEFM develops cost effective tech for bio-diesel production

Ludhiana: Under the aegis of the CSIR-CMERI, scientists at Centre of Excellence Farm Machinery (CoEFM) here have developed the technology of ‘semi-continuous bio-diesel plant’. This technology represents a simplified process to produce biodiesel from any feedstock having free fatty acid content up to 10%. It is a low maintenance production technology, easily implementable anywhere at low capital cost and operated with lowest possible manual intervention.

The plant is capable of utilizing different types of waste edible oils and non-edible oils of jatropha, karanj, tung, mahua and jojoba as well as animal fat to produce quality bio-diesel. The CSIR-CMERI is commercializing its technology to help MSME units in the production of bio-diesel processing machinery. New entrepreneurs and startups are taking part in developing successful business models and presently it has been transferred to more than five industries.

On Sunday, this developed technology has been transferred to Basudev Biodiesel LLP, Bhuvneshwar, Odisha, in the presence of CSIR-CMERI director Harish Hirani.

On this occasion, CMERI director Harish Hirani said CMERI was conducting research and developing technologies to utilize waste oils, biomass and municipal solid waste for energy production. He urged the industries to work together to take this technology further forward to achieve government’s target of higher energy dependence on renewable energy sources. Currently, the institute is developing a fully automatic upscaled version of bio-diesel plant, with many more features like utilizing high FFA oils and recovery of reactants and purification of byproducts.

Elaborating the technology, the inventor, Krishnendu Kundu, principal scientist, said the bio-diesel produced through this plant was a better energy alternative, considering overall sustainability as it lowers the toxic emissions like carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides and particulate matter, etc. He added that the technology was beneficial for the bio-diesel producers too as it will give them a profit of Rs 5-8 per litre with a payback period of less than one year.

After signing the license agreement, Pramod Samantara from Basudev Biodiesel LLP, Bhuvneshwar, Odisha, expressed his gratitude to the CSIR for the support in this business endeavour and he also emphasized that there was a huge market potential of bio-diesel technology.

The technology was then demonstrated to the industry, showcasing the easiness in its operation and maintenance. Various functions of the plant are controlled through a single control panel. Previously, a 35HP tractor had also been run on B100 successfully for more than 1,000 hrs. It was assured that the bio-diesel produced from this technology is comparative to normal diesel and match the quality standard of the BIS and ASTM.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
