‘Let me sell liquor or I’ll commit suicide’, Gujarat man’s request stuns authorities

Sheikh said that he wanted to sell liquor to people who had been granting the alcohol consumption permit by the Mehsana Civil Hospital (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Yusuf Khan Sheikh was arrested from Mehsana, Rajkot The arrest was made on Saturday, July 14 Sheikh threatened to immolate himself and his family

Palanpur: A man named Yusuf Khan Sheikh was arrested in Rajkot's Mehsana on Saturday, July 14 for threatening to set himself and his family members on fire. The accused claimed that he would end his life if the government did not permit him to sell alcohol or start a gambling den.

Allegedly, Sheikh had even written to the Chief Minister of Gujarat, Vijay Rupani and Director General Police (DGP) Shivanand Jha on April 25, seeking permission to start the said businesses. He resorted to threatening the police after the government did not respond to his letter. The police granted bail to Sheikh after he assured that he would not take any extreme step.

Sheikh said that he had wanted to sustain his family and since he had lost his leg in an accident, he could not take up any work that involved physical labour. Sheikh said that he wanted to sell liquor to people who had been granting the alcohol consumption permit by the Mehsana Civil Hospital. According to Sheikh, he was unable to pay for the school fees of his children as he did not have any source of income.

Kerala: Members of pro-alcohol group stage protest, demand dignity for drinkers

Two members of the All Kerala Alcoholics Supporters Association stood in front of the Secretariat in Thiruvananthapuram on July 13 in support of people who consume alcohol. The two men held placards and demanded that the price of Indian-made Foreign Liquor (IMFL) be reduced.

The two men said that the police should not harass the people who walk on the streets in an inebriated condition. One of the protesters said, "Government says toddy is the national drink. They say it promotes tourism and they sell it, too. But after drinking, the police are not allowing us to walk on the streets. They check us and physically torture us. If we say that we are just walking away properly, they put a criminal case on us saying we are preventing them from doing their duty."

Advocating the rights of people who consume alcohol, the protesters said, "Let the police catch those who drive after drinking alcohol and create problems at home but spare those who walk away without creating trouble for anyone." The two men said that alcohol should be included under Goods and Services Tax (GST) so that its price is reduced. One of them said, "The price of alcohol will be increased irrespective of any natural disaster or calamities. Around Rs 400 crore was collected through this industry after price hike following the recent flood."
