Indo-Canadian Forum rescinds invite to Ontario’s Sikh associate minister

JALANDHAR: Taking exception to his support for a resolution passed by Ontario assembly to recognize the November 1984 massacre of Sikhs in India as genocide, the Indo-Canadian Harmony Forum rescinded its invitation to associate minister Prabmeet Singh Sarkaria for its Annual Awards and Gala Night held on July 12.“We have recently noticed your views regarding unfortunate anti-Sikh riots in 1984 in Delhi, India, are not in harmony with the position of ICHF and the Indo-Canadian community at large. In the light of above we, ICHF board of directors, are constrained to withdraw the invitation extended to you earlier to attend ICHF Annual Awards and Gala Night on July 12, 2019,” said a letter from ICHF Board of Directors on July 11.Sarkaria is associate minister for small business and red tape reduction in the Ontario provincial government.When contacted through Facebook for comments, ICHF said, “They are Canadian representatives in legislative assembly. They are wasting our tax money on the matter which do not help Canadians’ life at large. Divisive political practices are tarnishing Indo-Canadians fabric of harmony in Canada”. In response to further questions, ICHF said, “Just don’t bring your battle and baggage to Canada. Especially when you are an elected representative of Canadians.”Asked about use of word genocide, ICHF argued, “It harms the community here. They use this term (genocide) and the unfortunate 1984 riots in a different political connotation. They talk as if the whole nation was involved. That was of course a bad spot in Indian history. But this is none of their business. It’s India’s matter and between Sikhs and Government of India. Why are these people poking their nose.”On April 7, 2017, Sarkaria had tweeted, “So proud of PC Party for making history and recognizing 1984 as Genocide. Disappointed that libs (Liberals) voted against this motion #sikh #1984.”India objected officially, BJP uses the termAfter the Ontario assembly had passed the genocide resolution, India had objected to it. External affairs ministry spokesperson Gopal Baglay had said, “We reject this misguided motion which is based on a limited understanding of India, its constitution, society, ethos, rule of law and the judicial process.” He had also said that the views of the Indian government “have been conveyed to the government and political leadership in Canada”.However after Congress leader Sajjan Kumar was convicted in a massacre case and then during electioneering BJP’s top leaders have called it a genocide. Welcoming Sajjan’s conviction then finance minister Arun Jaitley had called it “worst kind of genocide”. From BJP’s official twitter handle it was called genocide and termed it “biggest genocide of India”. Even Prime Minister Narendra Modi had called it horrendous genocide at an election rally in Hoshiarpur
