Days after nation-wide doctors' strike, patient's kin attack medicos in Mumbai's Nair Hospital

Doctors emphasized that there should be security audits, pass system and emergency alarm system should be installed in all government-run hospitals. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The 50-year-old deceased was critically ill and died during treatment Relatives of the patient stormed into the ward and then attacked the doctors Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) condemned the attack on doctors

Mumbai: Days after the nation-wide protest by resident doctors against attack on medicos, three doctors of the civic-run Nair Hospital in central Mumbai were attacked by the relatives of a patient. The incident took place on Sunday evening.

The patient was identified as 50-year-old Rajkishore Dixit who was critically ill and died during treatment. After his death, the deceased's kin began thrashing the doctor. According to a report, an official said as the resident doctors declared the patient dead, 13 to 15 of his relatives stormed into the ward number 23 where he was admitted, and started abusing the doctors. They then attacked the doctors and the security guard as well.

Reportedly, the relatives have also damaged the hospital property. Meanwhile, the seniors of the hospital were alerted about the incident and they approached the local police for lodging a complaint against the patient's kin. Meanwhile, the Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) condemned the attack on doctors stating that the medical fraternity, are under tremendous mental stress due to the increasing assault and violence against them.

In an official statement, they urged that the deaf government should hear their plea and make a strict Central Protection Act for doctors across the nation. They have also demanded that the state government makes necessary changes in the existing Doctors Protection Act and make solid norms against the mob attacks. They emphasised that there should be security audits, pass system and emergency alarm system should be installed in all government-run hospitals.

However, the Agripada police station registered a complaint against the accused based on the hospital's complaint. The accused were booked under Section 353, 332, 504 , 34 of the Indian Penal Code and relevant sections of the Maharashtra Medical Practitioners' Act.

Further police probe in the case is still underway.

In another case reported from Mumbai

A 29-year-old woman allegedly attacked the hospital staff in Kandivali area of Mumbai, Maharashtra after which the doctors of the hospital went on a strike on June 20, 2019. The doctors at the facility alleged that the woman had also attacked the security personnel employed with the hospital. She allegedly came to the facility in an inebriated state and began harassing the hospital staff.

Reportedly, she first banged the hospital's doors after which she thrashed the hospital nurses and housekeeping staff. After the incident, the doctors called the police and locked the hospital's gates. Condemning the attack on the hospital staff, the next day doctors of the hospital went on a strike.

Doctors across the country are demanding strict action against such attacks, constant police protection and availability of paramilitary forces in all government-run hospitals.




