City-based scientists develop new biodiesel plant tech

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

Tribune News Service

Ludhiana, July 14

Scientists at the Centre of Excellence for Farm Machinery (CoEFM) here have developed the technology of 'Semi-continuous Biodiesel Plant'. This technology represents a simplified process to produce biodiesel from any feedstock having free fatty acid content up to 10%. It is a low-maintenance production technology, can be easily implemented anywhere at low capital cost and operated with lowest possible manual intervention. The plant is capable of utilising different types of waste edible oil and non-edible oils of jatropha, karanj, tung, mahua and jojoba as well as animal fat to produce quality biodiesel.

The CSIR-CMERI is commercialising its technology to help MSME units in the production of biodiesel-processing machinery.

New entrepreneurs and startups are taking part in developing successful business models and these have been transferred to more than five industries.

According to the CMERI Director, Prof Harish Hirani, CMERI is conducting research and developing technologies to utilise waste oils, biomass, and municipal solid waste for energy production. He urged industrialists to work together to bring this technology to achieve the government's target of higher energy dependence on renewable energy sources. At present, the institute is developing a fully automatic up-scaled version of biodiesel plant, with many more features like utilising high FFA (Free Fatty Acid) oils and recovery of reactants and purification of byproducts.

Elaborating on the technology, its inventor and Principal Scientist, Dr Krishnendu Kundu, said biodiesel produced through this plant was a better energy alternative considering overall sustainability as it lowered the toxic emissions like carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides and particulate matter etc. The technology is beneficial for the biodiesel producers too as it will give them a profit of Rs 5-8 per litre with a payback period of less than one year.

Quality diesel

The technology was demonstrated to the industry, showcasing the easiness in operation and its maintenance. Various functions of the plant are controlled through a single control panel. It was assured that the biodiesel produced from this technology is comparative to normal diesel.

Odisha firm gets new tech

This developed technology was transferred to M/s Basudev Biodiesel LLP, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, in the presence of the CSIR-CMERI Director, Prof Harish Hirani, on Sunday. After signing the license agreement, Pramod Samantara, M/s Basudev Biodiesel LLP, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, expressed his gratitude to the CSIR for the support in this business endeavour and he also emphasised that there was huge market potential of biodiesel technology.
