Noida family receives ransom call for daughter. She went missing 3 years ago

On May 12, 2016, the Rawat family had filed a complaint with the police claiming that their daughter Kashish had disappeared while playing outside their Noida house.

On July 8, Sanjay Rawat, a resident of Sector 22 in Noida received a call from an unknown number.

The caller demanded that Rawat pay him a ransom in return for his daughter Kashish.

Perturbed by the call, Rawat immediately reached out to the police as any parent would. But Rawat's worry was different.

Because Kashish had disappeared three years ago.

Four-year-old Kashish Rawat went missing from in front of her Noida house in 2016. Now a stranger is calling her parents and demanding a ransom.

Kashish's family has claimed that someone has been repeatedly calling them, asking for a ransom in exchange for their daughter, who disappeared three years ago.

The caller has asked the family to pay him Rs 10 lakh if they want to see Kashish alive.

Kashish's father has approached the Noida police and filed a complaint in the case.

Caller spams family

According to Sanjay Rawat, his family has received multiple ransom calls between July 8 and 10. The caller has been harassing the family with more than 10 calls a day.

Sanjay Rawat says each call comes from a different number. "The caller says that my daughter Kashish is with him in Punjab. He says if I want to see her alive, I should give Rs 10 lakh," he told the media.

He added that when the family demanded a photo of Kashish, the caller refused to comply.

Police file case

After receiving the calls, Rawat filed a complaint with the Sector 24 police. The police have registered an FIR and have begun probing the case.

The police are also trying to trace the different phone numbers from which the ransom calls have been coming. According to SSP Vaibhav Krishna, the caller claims to be from Punjab but the phone numbers have been traced to Telangana and West Bengal.

The police believe that someone is trying to dupe the family by using their missing daughter as an excuse.

What happened in 2016?

Kashish had gone missing in 2016. On May 12, 2016, Sanjay Rawat had filed a complaint with the police claiming that his daughter Kashish had disappeared while playing outside their Sector 22 house.

At that time, the police had conducted search operations in Noida, Ghaziabad, Delhi, Bulandshahr, Hapur and Meerut but were unable to trace the missing child. The family has even held demonstrations against the police's functioning at the time.

Now, the out-of-the-blue ransom call has also left the police stumped but SSP Vaibhav Krishna claims that the mystery will be solved soon.
