Daily Bulletin: 2 MLAs withdraw support to HDK govt in Karnataka; Theresa May exit likely as UK Parliament rejects Brexit; day's top stories-India News , Firstpost

Today's top stories: Two MLAs withdraw support from Karnataka government; JU students demand expulsion of professor Kanak Sarkar; Theresa May suffers crushing defeat over Brexit deal; and more.

Theresa May suffers crushing defeat over Brexit deal

British prime minister Theresa May's Brexit divorce deal was defeated by a crushing margin in parliament on Tuesday, further complicating the country's historic exit from the EU and triggering a no-confidence motion against her government.

May's bid to get the Withdrawal Agreement, struck between London and Brussels, through a House of Commons was defeated by a margin of 202 to 432 - a majority of 230, the biggest defeat ever suffered by a British premier in modern history.

Within minutes after the defeat, opposition Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn announced that his party would move a motion of no-confidence against May's government, to be held on Wednesday.

Two MLAs withdraw support from Karnataka govt

In a jolt to the HD Kumaraswamy led Congress-JD(S) government in Karnataka, two Independent MLAs on Tuesday withdrew support to the seven-month old ministry amid turmoil triggered by charges of horse trading flung at each other by the ruling coalition and BJP. In a significant turn to the political war that erupted on Monday with both sides venting their fears of poaching, H Nagesh (Independent) and R Shankar (KPJP) wrote to Governor Vajubhai Vala, conveying their decision to withdraw their support with immediate effect.

Both lawmakers, staying at a hotel in Mumbai, sent identical letters to the governor and requested him to take "necessary action", a move that reduced the ruling coalition's strength to 118, but still kept it in the safe zone in the 224-member Assembly.

Putting up a brave face, Congress and JDS top leadership said that the government was safe, with a seemingly unfazed Kumaraswamy, saying his ministry was stable and "I am very totally relaxed."

Jadavpur University students demand expulsion of professor Kanak Sarkar

Students of Kolkata's Jadavpur University (JU) on Tuesday staged a protest in the university campus, demanding the expulsion of Professor Kanak Sarkar over his remarks made in a Facebook post.

The professor had compared a woman's virginity to a sealed bottle or packet in a Facebook post. Earlier in the day, the National Commission for Women (NCW) took suo motu cognisance of the objectionable statements.

The NCW team, led by Rekha Sharma, will meet the Vice-Chancellor of Jadavpur University to discuss the matter during their scheduled visit to West Bengal this week.

The commission has also written to DGP, West Bengal, directing him to investigate the matter and take appropriate action as per the relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code.

'Most shameful behaviour': Narendra Modi slams LDF and UDF over Sabarimala

Prime Minister Narendra Modi slammed the CPI(M)-led LDF government in Kerala and Congress-led UDF opposition over the Sabarimala women entry issue and said both fronts were two sides of the same coin. Tearing into the Pinarayi Vijayan-led LDF government, Modi said its conduct in the Sabarimala issue will go down as one of the "most shameful behaviours" by any party and government. Kerala has today "become hostage to the corruption and communalism" of the LDF and UDF, he said while addressing a huge gathering of BJP workers.

Modi said for the last few months, the entire nation has been talking about Sabarimala. The conduct of the Kerala LDF government on the Sabarimala issue would go down in the history as one of the "most shameful behaviours by any party and government," he said. "We know that the communists do not respect the Indian history, culture and spirituality but nobody imagined they would have such hatred," he said. Slamming the "multiple stand" taken by the Congress and the party-led opposition front UDF in the state, he urged them to clear their stand on the issue.

Petrol price witnesses marginal drop

After witnessing a hike for the past few days, the petrol prices witnessed a marginal drop of 8 paise on Wednesday in the national capital, while diesel rates continued its upward trend following a hike of 12 paise. Petrol and diesel are being retailed on Wednesday at Rs 70.33 and Rs 64.59 respectively in Delhi.

Meanwhile, in Mumbai, a litre of petrol will cost Rs 75.97 after a decline of Rs 8 paise. on the other hand, diesel witnessed a drop of Rs 13 paise in Mumbai and is being sold at Rs 67.62 per litre.

Two crore people take holy dip on Day 1 of Kumbh Mela

About 2 crore people took a dip to mark the beginning of the Kumbh Mela on Tuesday. The sacred baths began at break of dawn as the sun rose faintly over the horizon and went on through the day till the last rays set over the Sangam, the chants of "Har Har Gange" reaching a crescendo.

By end of day, about 1.4 crore people had taken the ritual bath in the holy waters of the Sangam here, administration officials estimated.

Makar Sankranti, which marks the beginning of the festival, is one of the sacred bathing days of the 50-day Kumbh Mela. More than 12 crore people are expected to visit the Kumbh between 15 January and Maha Shivratri on 4 March.

Supreme Court bans transport of extracted coal in Meghalaya

The Supreme Court on Tuesday banned the transportation of extracted coal lying at various sites in Meghalaya which has had no success in rescuing 15 miners trapped inside an illegal rat-hole coal mine for almost a month.

The order was passed by a bench comprising justices AK Sikri and SA Nazeer which refused the plea of miners to allow them to transport the extracted coal at various places.

WhatsApp may be forced to let government authorities snoop into user messages

Telecom regulator, TRAI has asked Facebook-owned popular messaging service WhatsApp for feedback on a new set of rules that could potentially force the entity to reveal users’ messages to the government. TRAI is expected to submit it's recommendations for new rules to the Department of Telecommunications for further scrutiny but may choose to go ahead and enforce the rules starting February. With more users in India than in any other country, WhatsApp may be forced to do away with or weaken its end-to-end encryption, allowing law enforcement authorities and other regulatory bodies to trace messages and remove questionable content within 24 hours.

Tillotama Shome wins Best Actress at Brussels International Film Festival

Tillotama Shome has won the Best Actress award for her performance in Rohena Gera's Sir at the Brussels International Film Festival. "Thank you The Brussels International Film Festival for honouring me with the best actress award for 'Sir'. Thank you jury members," Tillotama, who plays the character of Ratna in the film, posted on social media.
