[EXPLAINED] Where India, China stand on the Dalai Lama issue

Dalai Lama | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Chinese communist government under Mao Zedong carried out invasion of Tibet in 1950 Evading the People's Liberation Army of China, the Dalai Lama fled to India in 1959 China in 2017 objected to Dalai Lama's visit to Arunachal Pradesh's Tawang district

Independent India and China have always shared a strange relationship since 1947. Although both the countries share a strong trade relationship, New Delhi and Beijing have had differences over territory in the Aksai Chin area, and Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh, which China claims as a part of southern Tibet. After the Chinese forces forcefully occupied Tibet in 1950, the Tibetan Buddhist leader - the Dalai Lama - fled to India in 1959 along with tens of thousands of his disciples, in order to avoid Chinese oppression. He has since been given refuge here.

Besides border disputes with India, the Dalai Lama's mere existence and the Tibetan people's government in exile has been another major irritant for China. Beijing, which claims Tibet as its own territory, considers the Dalai Lama as a separatist. However, the Dalai Lama had given up his call for and support to the demand for Tibetan independence way back in 1974.

China has always objected to Dalai Lama's visit to Tawang which lies in Arunachal Pradesh in an area close to China border. Apart from this, China also takes a strong exception to Tibet's spiritual leader's birthday celebration in India. At least 11 Chinese civilians on July 12 unfurled a big banner near Line of Actual Control (LAC) in J&K’s Ladakh region, apparently protesting against the Dalai Lama's birthday celebrations.

Why did Dalai Lama have to take refuge in India?

On 7 October 1950, the People's Liberation Army under the Chinese communist government led by Mao Zedong had invaded the Tibetan region of Chamdo. The Tibet's government in 1951 signed a 17-point agreement that professed to preserve Buddhism and Tibetan autonomy and reaffirmed China's sovereignty over Tibet. Dalai Lama, who was a teenager at that time, was the head of the government.

However, China's high-handed approach in the Tibetan region led to the beginning of the Tibetan resistance movement in 1956. It is also said that America's CIA supported guerilla fighters.

Similarly, in 1959, China's socialist land reforms and military crackdown on rebels gave birth to the Tibetan uprising. China, in order to suppress the national resistance, launched an operation, killing thousands of Tibetans. Tibetans, in an attempt to prevent the capture of the Dalai Lama, surrounded his residence, and the spiritual leader under the cover of darkness fled Tibet.

Dalai Lama, who reached India through Nepal, was granted refuge by the then government of Jawaharlal Nehru. India also provided shelter to the Tibetans fleeing Chinese oppression in Tibet.

Where do things stand now?

China in 2017 raised objections to Dalai Lama's visit in Tawang. China termed Dalai Lama's visit as “provocation” by India. New Delhi responded by saying that Dalai Lama is a revered figure in the country and he is also respected by the Indians so, no additional colour should be given to the spiritual leader's activities and visits.

However, India made a significant departure from its stated position on Dalai Lama in 2018, when it did not allow Central Tibetan Administration to hold the interfaith prayer and “Thank you, India” functions in Delhi. India's foreign ministry, in a note to the cabinet secretary, advised the senior leaders and government officials to refrain from participating in the events organised by the Tibetan organisations. The note came just before Prime Minister Narendra Modi was scheduled to visit China for the Shanghai Cooperation Organization summit.

India has, over the period, refrained from making any strong statement on the issue of Tibet and bringing up the matter in talks with China. However, India's changed stance has sent confusing signals to the Tibetans, who have always looked upon India as a big supporter of their cause.
