Mumbai: Unions protest over shutdown of printing presses, allege Railways of promoting privatisation

The railway unions alleged that the railway administration are looking out to sell off prime properties in Mumbai in the name of development. The railway unions on Monday agitated against the shutdown of printing press at Byculla. The Indian Railways however has decided to shut down all five printing press across the county. The unions claim that the Indian Railway ministry are on a privatisation spree and wants to commercially utilise right from these printing presses, rail production units, staff quarters and even manufacturing of rakes.



The Indian Railways are presently operating printing presses at Byculla on Central Railway, Howrah in Eastern Railway, Shakurbasti (Delhi) in Northern Railway, Royapuram (Chennai) and Secunderabad in South Central Railway.



On Monday morning the railway employees led by National Railway Mazdoor Union protested near Byculla railway station. "It is not just about shutting down these printing presses but privatization at large. In the long run common people will be affected by the same. If the railway administration continues to go ahead with their plan then we will intensify our protest," said Venu Nair, General Secretary, National Railway Mazdoor Union.



According to a recent circular issued in June, the Railway Board approved the closure of these railway printing presses by March 2020. Till then it shall print PRS and UTS ticket rolls for suburban and long distance trains. "We want the commercial department to digitise all the money valued documents. Ideally this means more focus on ATVMs and Mobile ticketing which stands at 24% and 3-4% respectively," said a Railway official.



A letter sent to the railway administration stated, 'The dubious decision to close down this printing press now is unreasonable and beyond to the sense of wisdom.' Meanwhile those working at these printing presses will be transferred for safety category jobs.
