ABVP protests against DU syllabi for depicting RSS, its ideology in 'bad light'

Delhi University campus | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights ABVP staged a protest outside the Vice Regal Lodge over anti-RSS syllabi ABVP alleged there was an attempt to take syllabi towards Leftist ideology The DU syllabi was sent for scrutiny and revision after the protest

New Delhi: “Anti-RSS” topics have been included in Delhi University’s syllabi, Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP), a BJP-affiliated student body, and a member of varsity’s academic council have alleged.

Members of ABVP, which is the student wing of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), also staged a protest outside the Vice Regal Lodge at the university campus against "objectionable material on the RSS" in the DU syllabi.

Professor Rasal Singh, a member of the academic council also raised objection over the English syllabus, claiming that it depicted the RSS and its ideology in “bad light”. He objected to the “anti-RSS” content at a meeting which was called to discuss the syllabus of under-graduate courses at the Delhi University campus.

'Maniben alias Bibijaan' by Shilpa Paralkar on the 2002 Gujarat riots, and papers like 'Literature in Caste' and 'Interrogating Queerness' portray a wrong picture of the RSS and Indian culture, he claimed, news agency PTI reported.

Singh further said that there was an attempt to take the syllabus towards the Leftist ideology, which, he said, was anti-RSS and against nationalism.

He also said, in history, there was an attempt to include the history of Naxalism and the Left, while in political science, under the social movement course, there was a proposal to include the study of Maoism.

"There is an attempt to take the syllabus towards the Leftist ideology. All these materials are anti-RSS and against nationalism. The head of the English department should resign," he added.

According to agency sources, the syllabi of four departments - English, history, political science, and sociology – was passed by the academic council, however, it was later sent for scrutiny and revision after the protest by Singh and the ABVP.

The ABVP members allegedly tried to get inside the vice-chancellor's office while protesting at the Vice Regal Lodge where the meeting was taking place.

A professor alleged that they also shouted slogans and demanded that the heads of Departments of History and English along with an academic council member Saikat Ghosh be handed over to them.

"While all other syllabi were approved without discussion, the English and History syllabi were stalled by members affiliated to the BJP/RSS teachers' group," he claimed.

"When Saikat Ghosh spoke in the academic council meeting in defence of the English syllabus, immediately after that the ABVP tried to enter the Council Hall," the professor alleged.

The charges, however, was rejected by the ABVP, which said that they were protesting peacefully, outside the meeting venue.
