Civil society urges PM to help fulfill Dr KC’s demands, save his life

KATHMANDU, Jan 16: Several noted civil society members have urged the government and lawmakers to save Dr Govanda KC’s life and address his demands in line with the agreement signed with the government.

Issuing a joint appeal on Tuesday, 20 members of civil society raised serious concerns over Dr KC’s health, life and urged the government to implement the agreement reached with him.

They have questioned the honesty and credibility of the government in implementing the agreement reached with the government, lawmakers and political parties.

On July 26 last year, the government led by Prime Minister KP Oli had signed a nine-point agreement with Dr KC on the 27th day of his 15th fast-unto-death. The agreement included bringing Medical Education Act, taking action against 43 officials implicated by the report of former justice Gauri Bahadur Karki and opening government medical colleges in all seven provinces.

“The latest agreement was signed at the initiative of Prime Minister Oli himself,” said the statement. So we remind the government that Prime Minister Oli is also concerned about addressing the demands raised by Dr KC,” reads the statement.

“We appeal to the government, lawmakers and concerned political parties to approve the Medical Education Bill, which is now in parliament, in line with the latest agreement with Dr KC and save his life,” the statement reads. “We believe that Prime Minister Oli is also the leader of the NCP parliamentary party and he will play a special role to forge consensus for implementing the agreement,” it adds.

The 20 civil society members, who appealed to the government and lawmakers to address Dr KC’s demands and save his life are, former chief justice Sushila Karki, former speaker Daman Nath Dhungana, senior journalist Bhairav Risal, former TU VC prof Kedar Bhakta Mathema, writers Prof Dhruba Chandra Gautam and Prof Abhi Subedi, journalist Rajendra Dahal, Prof Jaya Raj Acharya, Prof Dilli Devi Shakya and Prof Madan Upadhyaya. Likewise, other scholars and civil activists are Prof Ramesh Kanta Adhikari, Prof Shekhar Gurung, Prof Birendra Mishra, Prof Nobel Kishor Rai, Ram Dayal Rakesh, Prof Dr Saroj Dhital, physician Dr Madhu Ghimire, Dwarika Dhungel, Gita Kesari and former secretary Khem Raj Regmi.

After the government and lawmakers flouted the agreement signed with Dr KC, Dr KC launched his 16th hunger strike in Ilam on January 9. Dr KC’s condition is deteriorating by the day.
