Bend it like Baghel | India Today Insight

Compared to some of his Congress colleagues, Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel is in a unique position. While Madhya Pradesh CM Kamal Nath and Rajasthan CM Ashok Gehlot are under constant pressure from their state's BJP units, Baghel has the luxury of not having to keep an eternal vigil on his political rivals. This reflects political realities-despite the Congress's national slump, it won 68 of Chhattisgarh's 90 Assembly seats in December last year. However, with the BJP's pan-India win in the Lok Sabha elections-winning nine of Chhattisgarh's 11 Lok Sabha seats-the state Congress government has been looking to consolidate its Assembly win.

In February this year, just weeks after taking office, the chief minister announced a new initiative, the Suraaji Gaon Yojana (the well-governed village mission). Based on four principles-narwa, garwa, ghurwa and badi, Chhattisgarhi words that loosely translate to rivulets, livestock, manure and home-cultivation-the yojana is aimed at improving the state's agricultural infrastructure and resource management. Chhattisgarh is predominantly rural, with more than two-thirds of the population dependent on agricultural earnings, and the state government no doubt hopes the yojana will bring both economic and political windfalls.

Post the Lok Sabha elections, work has begun in earnest. A steering committee has been constituted to oversee the initiative, since it involves multiple government departments. Headed by the state's Chief Secretary, Sunil Kumar Kujur, other committee members include the principal secretaries of the rural development, water resources, animal husbandry, agriculture and forestry departments. "We have begun working on the program, and have taken up livestock management in the first phase," says chief secretary Kujur.

In an interview with India Today last month, chief minister Baghel had this to say: "We want to make our villages self-sufficient. The 'narwa, garwa, ghurwa, badi' programme is a step in that direction. For example, agriculture in Chhattisgarh is facing a crisis owing to [the large population of] stray cattle. To solve this, we have identified panchayats where, under the first phase of the programme, gauthans (cow shelters) will be made." Stray cattle not only cause damage to crops, but have also been blamed for accidents on the state's rural roads. Under the programme, a total of 1,446 gauthans-about 10 in each of the state's blocks-are to be established.

Per the government's design, each gauthan is to be a minimum of five acres in size, equipped with water drainage and basic livestock infrastructure, with an adjoining grazing area. Village committees will be constituted to manage these gauthans, under the village sarpanch and prominent local cattle owners. These facilities will also produce manure-based fertilizer through composting-the ghurwa in chief minister Baghel's plan-which will be sold locally, with the proceeds used to fund the gauthans. "It is estimated there are at least three hundred ghurwas, or compost pits, in each village, adding up to a production of about 1,500 tons of compost," says Pradeep Sharma, an agriculture advisor to the chief minister.

However, even as CM Baghel proceeds with his ambitious project, a major stumbling block remains-the uneasiness between the state's permanent and political executives. This is based partly on the fact that the Congress has returned to power in Chhattisgarh after 15 years, and its perception that the state's administrative machinery still bears the imprint of earlier BJP governments. This uneasiness has manifested in several rounds of personnel transfers at the mantralaya and directorate level since December's Assembly election. IAS officers say that even Chhattisgarh's chief secretary and director general of police-the heads of the state's civil administration-have little influence in matter of transfers, and that postings are a political matter, not one of merit. Some say this has manifested in on-ground officers refusing to take ownership of projects, or implementing them half-heartedly. "Most officers feel that those who were perceived to be close to the previous government will be penalized if they take any decision, leading to a paralysis," says an IAS officer posted at the mantralaya, speaking on condition of anonymity.

The chief minister has defended the thorough administrative shakeup on the grounds that it is precisely his prerogative to do so. "Officers have been given a time frame to complete a task. Those who don't do so are removed-otherwise, it would adversely affect the pace of the entire project," he says. However, since the state's administrative machinery is central to the success of his Suraaji Gaon Yojana, this distrust between the permanent and the political could prove costly.

Strong, authoritative leadership, while perhaps necessary for ambitious, state-wide projects, can prove costly in other ways too. Political circles talk of cabinet ministers not being allowed to function freely, and of ministers having no say in the transfers of their departmental secretaries. There may even be some discomfort within the party-some say that rural development minister R.S. Singhdeo and state home minister Tamradhwaj Sahu are on chief minister Baghel's radar. As other contenders for the top job when the Congress stormed to power in Chhattisgarh, they are power centres of their own. However, for the government to run smoothly, chief minister Baghel will need the cooperation of all his ministers-especially the ones with power of their own.

And there are notable challenges to be met. Recently, the chief minister had to deal with a fierce protest against mining work by the Adani Group at Bailadila, in Dantewada district, by locals asserting that the hill being mined was sacred ground in their culture. The chief minister put a temporary lid on the situation by announcing a halt to mining work in the area and convening a gram sabha meeting for locals and local officials to somehow resolve the project with their concerns, but the issue remains to erupt once more.

Maoism also remains an issue in Chhattisgarh. Chief Minister Baghel has spoken of a consultative approach, saying, "I have held meetings with civil society groups, journalists and security personnel who have served in the affected areas. I will proceed after taking everything into account." After an initial lull in violence between Maoists and security personnel after the assembly elections, strife has returned to plague the state. In the past few months, many have been killed, including a BJP MLA from Dantewada, Bhima Mandavi. The chief minister has so far insisted that this problem was allowed to grow during the BJP's time in power. However, with the BJP having chosen Amit Shah as Union home minister-with an aggressive policy against Maoists-chief minister Baghel will have to find another answer to this issue.

Within his own party, Bhupesh Baghel appears on the ascendant. He was recently successful in getting Mohan Markam, a two-term party MLA from Kondagaon, in Bastar, appointed as his successor to the Congress' state committee. This was significant especially because this appointment was the only one cleared by then-Congress chief Rahul Gandhi in the post-Lok Sabha election chaos. The Congress has also green lighted Baghel's proposed cabinet expansion-the appointment of Amarjeet Bhagat, a senior tribal leader from North Chhattisgarh.

However, on the ground, the jubilation of the Congress' win of the state assembly has proved short lived. Though the BJP appears largely inactive in the state as of now, its resounding win in the Lok Sabha election has kept the government on its toes. And during the BJP's temporary hiatus, the role of Opposition has been filled by Bhupesh Baghel's bete noire, Ajit Jogi's Janata Congress Chhattisgarh (JCC). The JCC has been leading agitations in the state against liquor shops, and was also at the forefront of the protests over the Bailadila mines. Bhupesh Baghel's government has responded by issuing notices to Ajit Jogi's son Amit Jogi in the Antagarh tape cases, but Jogi remains defiant.

The coming months will be a test of Bhupesh Baghel's administrative and political abilities. Not only will he have to deliver on his ambitious Suraaji Gaon Yojana-he must also do so while winning the confidence of other major stakeholders, including the bureaucracy and local farmer's groups. The latter appear to have deserted the Congress en masse at the Lok Sabha polls, despite the Baghel government's writing-off of farmer loans and well-above-minimum support price purchase of paddy at Rs 2,500 per quintal.

And on that count, two upcoming bye-elections to the Chhattisgarh Assembly-one at Dantewada and the other at Chitrakoot, in Bastar-will be the first direct test of the chief minister's leadership.
