India-Pak Netizens Clash After Indian Leaders Hail ICJ Ruling on Kulbhushan Jadhav

Delivering its judgment on Wednesday (17th of July) in The Hague, the ICJ asked Islamabad to give New Delhi consular access to Jadhav who has been held by Pakistan since March 2016. "Pakistan deprived India of the right to communicate with and have access to Kulbhushan Jadhav, to visit him in detention and to arrange for his legal representation and thereby breached obligations incumbent upon it under Vienna Convention on Consular Relations", the ICJ had observed in its ruling.

Taking to social media, Modi and other ministers of his cabinet, including Home Minister Amit Shah, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, and Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman hailed the ICJ’s judgment.

We welcome today’s verdict in the @CIJ_ICJ. Truth and justice have prevailed. Congratulations to the ICJ for a verdict based on extensive study of facts. I am sure Kulbhushan Jadhav will get justice.



Our Government will always work for the safety and welfare of every Indian. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) July 17, 2019

A great day at the @CIJ_ICJ! The verdict is a victory of truth and protects human dignity.



It is yet another manifestation of Modi Government’s diplomatic efforts and commitment to protect all Indians.



I congratulate Harish Salve ji for his stupendous efforts through the case. — Amit Shah (@AmitShah) July 17, 2019

Relief for #KulbhushanYadav and his family. Thanks @PMOIndia @narendramodi for pursuing this case, and gratitude to Harish Salve for giving his best @CIJ_ICJ in service of the nation, and Smt. @SushmaSwaraj for all her efforts. — Nirmala Sitharaman (@nsitharaman) July 17, 2019

The ICJ’s verdict on Kulbhushan Jadhav is big victory for India. The ICJ directing Pakistan to grant consular access to Jadhav and asking them to review the conviction and the sentence is a welcome decision.



It is also a big win for PM Sh.@narendramodi’s diplomatic initiative. — Rajnath Singh (@rajnathsingh) July 17, 2019

Indian opposition leader Rahul Gandhi also welcomed the ICJ verdict, calling it a “moment of joy & renewed hope”.
