Life in a democratic mobocracy: India's obligation to enact national law against mob lynching

Protest against Mob lynching at Jantar Mantar, New Delhi (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The Manipur Protection from Mob Violence Ordinance was enacted in 2018 India has witnessed a sharp rise in instances of mob lynching in the last five years Supreme Court issued 11-point prescription to Centre, states to end mob lynching in 2018

New Delhi: Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot has stated his decision to enact a law tackling instances of mob lynching and honour killing in the state of Rajasthan. The veteran Congressman declared the same while replying to a question in the Legislative Assembly. Referring to a recent instance when a newly-married couple was murdered over their decision to opt for an inter-caste marriage, Gehlot said that his government also intends to introduce legislation to deter cases of honour killing.

Rajasthan is not the first state in India to mull over laws concerning incidents of mob lynching. The Madhya Pradesh cabinet has also asserted its will to introduce a provision in the state Assembly, making stringent laws against those convicted in cases of mob lynching. A proposal to amend the Madhya Pradesh Cow Progeny Slaughter Prevention Regulation will be introduced in the state Assembly to achieve the objective in the coming days.

Taking suo moto cognisance of the rising instances of mob lynching in various parts of the heartland state, Uttar Pradesh Law Commission has also submitted a report to Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath asking him to immediately implement a law awarding stricter punishment in cases of mob violence. The Commission also came up with a draft Bill titled 'Uttar Pradesh Combating of Mob Lynching Act' to be enacted for this purpose. In its draft Bill, the Commission recommended punishment ranging from seven years in jail to life imprisonment for the offenders.

In fact, the only Indian state to have already brought legislation to tackle the menace of mobocracy is Manipur. In a notification dated November 19, 2018, the government in Imphal introduced The Manipur Protection from Mob Violence Ordinance, 2018 promulgated by the then Governor Najma Heptulla. The state described it as "an ordinance for the public to create a separate offence for lynching and providing adequate punishment for mob violence so as a special law in the field would instil a sense of fear against the people who involved themselves in such kind of actions and for the rehabilitation of victims of lynching and their families and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto".

Unfortunately, India has witnessed a sharp rise in instances of "mob justice" in the past decade. Since 2012, as many over 100 of such incidents have been reported from across the length and breadth of the country. These occasions of mindless violence have led to the deaths of anywhere between 47 and 95 people, as per different trackers. While the number of casualties claimed by this murderous rampage differs from source to source, the immediate need to enforce a nationwide law to act as a deterrent against mob lynching is as clear as day. In July of last year, the then Chief Justice of India Dipak Misra had also directed Parliament to draft new legislation to deal with incidents of mob lynching.

What should the national law against mob lynching cover?

Since Manipur is the only state to have already brought a law in this regard into effect, here are a few salient features of The Manipur Protection from Mob Violence Ordinance, 2018, which can act as a reference point for legislators.
