Karnataka crisis: Vote is happening

Governor

Vajubhai Vala

HD Kumarswamy

Assembly Speaker

Opposition leader BS Yeddyurappa draws out strategies with other leaders

Chief Minister

Speaker Ramesh Kumar

Karnataka crisis: Our MLAs are being kidnapped, alleges Congress 00:12

DHARNA TIME: After adjourning the Assembly for the day, the treasury benches look empty, while the opposition members stayed on to stage an overnight dharna at the Vidhana Soudha till the time a decision comes out of this conundrum

BJP MLAs to sit on overnight 'dharna' at Bengaluru's Vidhana Soudha 00:18

Supreme Court order

Karnataka Governor #VajubhaiVala wrote the letter to @CMofKarnataka @hd_kumaraswamy, asking him to prove majority o… https://t.co/XiRDw1o6Hz — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1563463419000

Karnataka Ministers @MBPatil and @DKShivakumar in conversation with BJP MLAs include state @BJP4Karnataka chief… https://t.co/s2KtORxFbh — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1563459982000

.

Congress MLA Shrimant Patil with @BJP4Karnataka MLA Laxman Savadi at Chennai Airport, last night. Congress MLAs s… https://t.co/QpyarZWEuf — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1563458819000

BJP MLAs inside the state Assembly after the House was adjourned for the day. They are on an overnight 'dharna' dem… https://t.co/MS6tsZSvVo — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1563458638000

With folded hands I am requesting the Speaker of the house, my party MLAs have been kidnapped. I want you to bring… https://t.co/9c9xQDm24L — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1563453120000

#KarnatakaPoliticalCrisis: Scenes from Karnataka Assembly as @BJP4Karnataka MLAs in overnight 'dharna' against adj… https://t.co/12ZEl38geR — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1563473818000

#KarnatakaPoliticalCrisis: @BJP4Karnataka president @BSYBJP sleeps at the Vidhana Soudha. BJP legislators are on… https://t.co/XqdOttjefM — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1563474552000

asks HDK to prove majority by 1.30 pm on Friday* Governor’s note to Speaker comes under fire* Protest over Kagwad MLA Shrimant Patil who ‘escaped’ to Mumbai after ‘chest pain’* Siddu says he is ‘leader of opposition’Governorhas asked Chief Ministerto prove his majority on the floor of the Assembly before 1.30 pm on Friday.The Governor’s communication to Kumaraswamy came hours after therejected his message to complete the trust vote before the day’s proceedings end on Thursday.Sources say that Kumaraswamy too, like the Speaker has decided to tackle the issue and put the ball back into the Raj Bhavan’s court after consulting legal experts.In the three-page letter to thewith a copy marked for, the governor said, “In my capacity as head of the State, I had not intervened in the matter having regard to the fact that the House was called and Trust vote has been moved. However, it has been reported to me that the proceedings of the house on 18-07-2019 for vote of confidence has been stalled and consequently adjourned without reaching any finality. This cannot go on in a Democratic set up governed by the Constitution of India. (Sic)’’Referring to resignation of Congress JD(S) MLAs, the governor said: “It is well settled that the CM and his Ministry are expected to always enjoy and maintain the confidence of the House.’’Vala stated that he had sent a message to the Speaker earlier in the day. “Though a message as contemplated under Article 175 (2) is sent to the Speaker, I am informed that the House is adjourned today. Under these circumstances, I require you to prove your majority on the floor of the House on or before 1.30 pm.”Earlier in the day, a message by Governor Vajubhai Vala, soon after BJP leaders met him, to Ramesh Kumar to complete the trust vote by the end of the day’s session led to a heated debate between the treasury and the Opposition members compelling deputy Speaker Krishna Reddy to adjourn the Assembly for the day.As soon as the Assembly resumed its business on Thursday, Kumaraswamy started his speech reasoning why he asked for a trust vote. As he was referring to the 10th Scedule of the Constitution (Anti Defection Law), leader of the Congress Legislature Party (CLP) raised a point of order seeking clarity on Supreme Court’s interim order which said that 15 Congress and JDS MLAs who have resigned to their seats cannot be compelled to attend the ongoing session of the House.Siddaramaiah who was speaking on the infringement of his right to issue whip by the. He was stopped by the Speaker, who asked him what was the point of order he intends to raise. The former chief minister was quick to say that he is the Opposition leader, sending waves of laughter in the Assembly.A few BJP members cracked a joke saying that his true feelings have come out. Recovering from his goof-up, Siddaramaiah immediately said that he is the CLP leader.When BJP members continue to laugh, a smiling Siddaramaiah said that at least you people are happy now. Later, as he was referring to 15 MLAs who have resigned, Siddaramaiah said, BJP and JD(S) MLAs instead of Congress and JD(S) MLAs sending House into laughter.Advocate General Uday Holla met Ramesh Kumar to provide him legal advice on the questions raised by Siddaramaiah earlier in the day.It is not clear what the advocate general has briefed the Speaker based on which he is likely to give his ruling on the point of order raised by the CLP leader.In the Assembly the case of the missing MLA Shrimanth Patil caused quite a furore.Displaying Patil’s photos undergoing a test in St George Hospital in Mumbai and boarding passes of an aircraft, members alleged that BJP was behind it. This created a scene in the Assembly with members from ruling and opposition Benches trading blows. Speaker Kumar told Home Minister MB Patil to get a report on the health of Congress MLA Shrimanth Patil who after reaching Mumbai was admitted to a hospital after complaining of chest pain.Congress accused that BJP kidnapped its MLA to Chennai and from there to Mumbai. To cover this, the party admitted him to a hospital to mislead the Assembly, KPCC president Dinesh Gundurao said, seeking Speaker Ramesh Kumar to help bring back the MLA.The Speaker read out a letter from Shrimanth Patil on a plain paper that he cannot attend the session due to chest pain. He also read out a letter, again on a plain paper, from the doctors attending to the MLA and said that these cannot be trusted and one had to give letter in proper format.“I will return to Bengaluru once I recover,” Patil said, speaking after being transferred from a private hospital where he was admitted first, to a public hospital in south Mumbai. “I went to Chennai for some personal work and felt chest pain, so I visited a hospital and on medical advice, I came to Mumbai and got myself admitted here,” he said. Meanwhile, Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge claimed that it was the BJP which brought Patil to Mumbai in its attempt to topple the Congress-JD(S) government in Karnataka. Police were not allowing anyone to meet Patil, Kharge said.
