Indian asylum seekers on hunger strike transferred to El Paso ICE Detention Facility

Asylum seekers on a hunger strike have been moved from the Otero County Processing Center to the El Paso ICE Processing Center, sparking concern among immigration rights advocates.

Four men from India who had begun hunger strikes in the Otero facility were moved Wednesday night to El Paso, according to Advocate Visitors with Immigrants in Detention. The group is concerned that immigration officials will force feed the asylum seekers.

Margaret Brown, a member of the group, said the men are on a hunger strike in pursuit of gaining freedom after being in detention for long periods of time. Some have been in detention for over a year, she added.

The names of the men have not been shared.

“They have not gotten a fair shake when it comes to their legal cases,” Brown said.

Brown said her concern is spurred by an event earlier this year where two other men from India were force-fed during a 74-day hunger strike in the El Paso facility.

She also mentioned close to, if not more than 100 hunger strikes have started inside the Otero Processing Center. Brown and Nathan Craig of the group authored a report with over 200 complaints of abuse migrants reported between 2015 and 2018.

The El Paso Times reached out to Otero County Processing Center for comment. A spokeswoman said the Times’ questions were forwarded to ICE but no answer was provided Thursday afternoon.

Linda Corchado, the director of legal services for Las Americas Immigrant Advocacy Center, said she is representing one of the men.

Corchado said her client alleges that ICE officers engage in discriminatory practices against Indians as disproportionately, more Indians suffer prolonged detention opposed to asylum seekers of other nationalities.

“Hunger strikes are a form of protest and expression for asylum seekers,” she said. “For detainees deprived of liberty and freedom, they should not, at the hands of our own government, face additional torture by force-feeding. International law is on our side.”
