No Karnataka Trust Vote Till Monday, Speaker Adjourns Assembly: 10 Points

The coalition, which is in danger of losing power after multiple resignations, says the Governor cannot ask for a test of strength when the government has asked the Supreme Court for a clarification on an order that allowed rebel lawmakers to skip the house in defiance of a party whip.

In his second letter, the governor said detailed debates and discussions were held only to delay the floor test. "When the allegations of horse-trading are widely made and I am receiving many such complaints, it is constitutionally imperative that the floor test be completed without any delay and today itself," he wrote.

BJP's BS Yeddyurappa, after the assembly was adjourned, said Monday will be the last day of the Kumaraswamy government. "We are dealing with this peacefully. They don't have the majority and they are not letting the one with the majority to also rule. We are 106 and so they are postponing. They are trying to horse trade, but it's not happening," Mr Yeddyurappa told reporters.

Mr Kumaraswamy, in a long speech in the Assembly, accused the opposition BJP of offering "Rs. 40-50 crore" to lawmakers to switch sides. In his second statement in two days, he warned the BJP of Judgement Day. "...the only consolation is that there is coming a day when all will give an account of their lives to God," he said.

As Mr Yeddyurappa insisted on an immediate trust vote, Mr Kumaraswamy said: "After 14 months (in power), we have come to the final stage. Let's have a discussion. You can still form government. Nothing urgent. You can do it on Monday or Tuesday also. I am not going to misuse power."

The coalition also alleged that the governor was under pressure to recommend president's rule. Top central government sources rubbished the allegation, saying there was "no question" of central rule in Karnataka. "How long can they avoid a trust vote? One week to two weeks? We are watching the situation," said the sources.

In protest against the Speaker's decision to end proceedings without a trust vote on Thursday, BJP lawmakers had spent the night in the assembly, eating dinner and sleeping on the floor of the house.

The Supreme Court has left it to the speaker to decide on the resignations of the rebel lawmakers. At the same time, the court said on Wednesday that the rebels cannot be forced to attend the assembly, prompting the coalition to seek a clarification on whether or not they can be disqualified for defying a whip.

Sixteen legislators - 13 from the Congress and three from JDS - have resigned in the last two weeks, and two independent legislators have withdrawn their support to the coalition government. One Congress rebel, Ramalinga Reddy, appears to have returned.
