India provides ‘evidence’ of pro-Khalistan groups in Pak

shalender@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, July 18

Flagging its concerns in view of the proposed Kartarpur Corridor, India has handed over a dossier to Pakistan explaining how Sikh pilgrims visiting the country are regularly subjected to the pro-Khalistan agenda and anti-India propaganda.

The dossier was given during the recent bilateral meeting on the corridor between the two countries at the Wagah border. In the dossier, India said it was “unfortunate” that even a Pakistan federal minister, in an address, told the pilgrims that the Sikhs and Kashmiris are treated like “slaves” by the Indian government.

An MHA official, quoting the dossier, said, Sikh ‘jathas’ visit key gurdwaras in Pakistan four times in a year under the bilateral Protocol of 1974, which allows pilgrimage to shrines on a reciprocal basis. “But Sikh pilgrims going to Pakistan are regularly subjected to anti-India propaganda, which is in no way in sync with the spirit of the visits and is in subversion of the objectives of the bilateral arrangement.”

Highlighting the propaganda, which is being perpetuated during the religious events organised by Pakistan’s Evacuee Trust Property Board, the MHA said the organisers on each occasion attempt to “promote the agenda of Khalistan instead of focusing on the religious discourse”.

The official said, “We have provided them summary of events with evidences. These included one event in 2016, where Sardar Slohammad Yousuf, Federal Minister for Religious Affairs and Harmony of Pakistan in his address at Gurdwara Nankana Sahib, eulogised Burhan Wani and alleged the Sikhs and Kashmiris are treated like ‘slaves’ by the Indian government.”

The official said the dossier gives details of several pro-Khalistan groups, including Sikhs For Justice (SFJ), operating freely in Pakistan. The group was recently banned by India . It also contains pictures of Gopal Singh Chawla meeting LeT founder and Mumbai attacks mastermind Hafiz Saeed and burning of the Indian flag. Chawla is the former general secretary of the Pakistan Sikh Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee.

The official said, “We have explained as to how some of the Pakistani Sikh leaders are posting messages (on social sites) like ‘Khalsa Khalistan Da, Kashmir Pakistan Da’, videos like ‘Kashmir Banega Pakistan’ and other anti-India messages.”

He said India also flagged its concerns about encroachment of Kartarpur Gurdwara’s land by elements inimical to India. “We have suspicion that Pakistan is also involved in encouraging such elements in encroaching land.” (with Agency inputs)

What the report highlights

Events that were orchestrated by Sikh radicals
