What’s driving protests by sugarcane farmers in Maharashtra: 5 points

The protesters went on rampage primarily in the sugarcane heartland of Sangli, Satara, Kolhapur, Solapur districts | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: An agitation driven by the disgruntlement of sugar cane growers in Maharashtra is on the boil again. The recent agitation of the state farmers kicked off on 1 January 2019, when Raju Shetti the leader of Swabhimani Shetkari Sanghatana (SSS) warned the state BJP government that the farmers of state would launch the statewide agitation if the state government did not impound the properties of sugar mills by January 28, 2019. The farmers under SSS were alleging that the sugar mills owners have defaulted payments owed to them.

In the following days, the protesters went on rampage primarily in the sugarcane heartland of Sangli, Satara, Kolhapur, Solapur districts and thus brought the whole activities related to harvesting and transportation of the most prized crop of the state, to almost a standstill.

Though the sugarcane production hardly covers the 4 per cent of the cultivable land crop, it has got the privileged treatment over the years in the state as most of the sugar-producing units in the state are owned by high-profile politicians of the state and Union level.

However, this is not the first time that the sugarcane growers are on road, as previously too farmers raged as their repeated demands to increase the procurement price for the crop were not met by the government. In 2015, farmers were demanding Rs 4,500 per tonne of sugarcane from sugar units which led to the deaths of two farmers.

Here are the five crucial reasons which may have played its role in sparking off protests by the farmers:

1. The recent protests have been sparked by sugar mills’ decision to pay farmers a rate of Rs 2,300 for every tonne of cane crushed, even as the Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) is Rs 2,850 per tonne. The farmers were enraged over a delay and marginal payment of their dues by the sugar factories.

2. As per the information provided by the state sugar commissioner, sugar-producing units of the state have to pay dues worth Rs 4,500 crores to farmers.

3. Besides, according to the Maharashtra government the state governments consistent failure to disburse Rs 7,450.9 crore as the ‘Fair and remunerative price’( FRP), have been a major issue of grievance amongst the farmers.

4. The farmers' organisations were finding it difficult to come to terms with the decision of sugar mills to pay the FRP in installments as against the demands of the sugarcane growers in one installment.

5. Farmers of the state are always in a protesting mode with respect to the procurement of sugarcane at abysmally low prices. In addition to that, the peasants are also not very happy with the FRP mechanism. Brought as a substitute to the Statutory Minimum Price (SMP) on the recommendations of Swaminathan Committee, the FRP has not been popular amongst the farmers as its estimates regarding cultivation costs are very low. The estimates regarding the cultivation cost are the criteria utilised for determining FRP.



The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
