NRC in Assam: Yesterday’s inefficiency, today’s conundrum

The National Register of Citizens in Assam is set to complete its final draft by July 31st, 2019 and it holds in its clutches, the fate of more than 4 lakh people who remain excluded from the list till now. The object of this list i.e. deportation of the ‘illegal migrants’ has received mixed opinions from the nation’s masses. This is primarily because the cut-off date for identification as an ‘illegal migrant’ is set in 1971, almost 38 years ago. This makes the argument of both sides understandable and the past government’s inefficiency to implement the NRC on time, the sole reason for the conundrum we face today. To understand how the past government’s inaction has created issues for the current era, we need to go back to the Assam Accord.

A brief history

The NRC exercise was first completed in 1951, for the detection of migrants soon after the partition. Therefore, the problem of illegal migration in Assam had already set its course. After the liberalisation of Bangladesh, immigration in Assam reached a peak with the influx of refugees, instilling fear in the minds of inhabitants with the demographics of the region changing with time. All Assam Students’ Union (AASU) and All Assam Gana Sangram Parishad (AAGSP) staged a violent protest, demanding the deportation of the infiltrators and hence, after six years a resultant accord, between the Rajiv Gandhi government and the unions, was reached: The Assam Accord.

As per the provisions of Assam Accord, a cut-off date of 25th March, 1971 was set, all entrants who had come after which would be identified and would be deported. The same was legislated in Section 6A of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985.

These provisions agreed upon were never executed by the government until 2013, when after a writ petition filed by Public Assam Works, the Supreme Court ordered the government to honour the provisions of the Citizenship Act, and hence now, the NRC is being updated.

Only if it was done then….

When the Rajiv Gandhi government had signed the Assam Accord, the identification of illegal immigrants seemed inevitable, but vote bank politics played its course as in order to secure the votes of the Muslim community, which the majority of immigrants belonged to, neither the government at that time nor any successive government in-power implemented the NRC exercise. Today, 38 years after the immigration, it is a callous task to disenfranchise and deport the individuals who have dwelled into the Indian community and have sustained a livelihood over the decades. In fact, it is preposterous to even term them ‘migrants’ after almost 40 years of being in India. It would’ve made sense for the identification and deportation to have been done when the accord was signed, but this procrastination done in the greed of politics has led to heavy price to be paid now. Moreover, most of these ‘illegal migrants’ were in fact refugees. The distinction between the refugee migrants and the migrants who came in lieu of economic prosperity could have been done when the accord was signed. Today, so many years later, this distinction has become impossible and hence, valid refugees now face the risk of deportation.

The NRC also reduces the proof of citizenship to a set of documents and the Brahmaputra Valley being highly prone to floods has resulted in the loss of these documents over these years, for many people. Moreover, the onus of proving citizenship is on the individuals and with more than 30% of them being illiterate, there is a substantial power in the hands of officials dealing with their documents to misuse their position. With the elapse of time, these ‘illegal migrants’ have had offspring in the Indian state, and hence this late implementation of NRC has also opened doors to the dilemma of dealing with the citizenship of their children. Even if they are provided citizenship, would they be forced to live away from their parents? And if they are not, it’s highly unjustified (probably unlawful) to deny them citizenship when they were born and brought up in India.

The ramifications

It would be preposterous to argue that illegal migration has not been a problem for the indigenous citizens of Assam, but it is indeed a problem, that should’ve had its solution implemented years ago. Today, none of the stakeholders are wrong at their position but this time bomb started by the inefficiency of past governments is ready blow, rendering a deal with Bangladesh highly essential, at this point of time. Today, although our relations are not strained, Bangladesh refuses to accept the immigrants after deportation. In this case, the disenfranchised citizens will be rendered ‘stateless’ without any rights under the Constitution, hanging on the ledge of inhumanity. The year 1985, when the Assam Accord was signed was a time of heightened cordial relations between India and Bangladesh. It had almost only been a decade since India had helped liberalise Bangladesh. Had actions been taken then, things would have been different, but with politics playing the spoilt-sport, all we can hope for now, is that we are able to successfully establish treaty with Bangladesh and prevent a Rohingya-like crisis.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
