Don’t dilute RTI Act; instead strengthen it, don’t appoint retired bureaucrats as information commissioners

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

The central government has revived its push to dilute the Right To Information Act. Currently, the Central Information Commissioners can serve a tenure upto five years until the age of 65 and their salaries and allowances are on par with Election Commissioners. The RTI Act amendment bill proposes to amend the tenure of service and their “salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service” according to those “prescribed by the central government”.

In other words, security of tenure, parity with Election Commissioners, all go out of the window. Now an Election Commissioner could be sacked at will or offered salaries and other service conditions that make it so unattractive that qualified candidates and eminent citizens will not apply for the job. The arguments put forward by Union minister Jitender Singh while pushing for the amendment bill’s introduction were unconvincing.

Among others he claimed the Modi government believed in “maximum governance, minimum government” and that the RTI Act created administrative problems quipping that it equated information commissioners to Supreme Court judges but allowed appeals against commission orders to high courts. Singh also claimed that contrary to opposition claims about government weakening RTI it had strengthened the body, introducing 24 hour RTI facility through portals in contrast to UPA era 10am-5pm RTI filings.

However, the information commissioners also play an important role under the RTI Act. It is to them that the common public file appeals when their RTI requests are denied. Staffing the Central and State Information Commissions with beauraucrats, especially pliant ones, has already reduced the vitality of the Act. Retired bureaucrats as a result of their long professional innings are more adept at withholding information than revealing it. Many information commissions also have many vacancies.

Blunting the RTI Act is in the interest of the bureaucracy. It will boost corruption and red tape. The Modi government must not tamper with the service conditions of the Commissioners. Rather it should try and appoint grounded public spirited citizens to the information commissions instead of bureaucrats.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
