[In Detail] A look at non-Gandhi Congress presidents since Independence

Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Since Independence there have been 13 non-Gandhi presidents of the Congress party. Except for a brief periods in the last seven decades, Nehru-Gandhi family has held two posts at the same time - prime ministership and Congress president

New Delhi: The Indian National Congress since Independence has always had a Gandhi acting as the topmost and the sole power centre in the party. During the time of independence it was the first prime minister Jawarharlal Nehru, then came his daughter and the only female prime minister of India - Indira Gandhi. After Indira's assassination, the balance of power shifted in favour of his son Rajiv Gandhi and then, following his assassination - Sonia Gandhi became the sole power centre in the party and served as the longest-serving president of the party till date. She continued to remain the power centre even with her son Rahul Gandhi took the mantle of presidentship.

However, Rahul resigned as Congress president on July 3, 2019, asserting that a non-Gandhi should be the next chief. This demand - for a party that's not in habit of taking decisions without a Gandhi at the helm - triggered one of the biggest crisis the party has ever faced since Independence. After the two consecutive drubbings in general elections, the party is at its lowest - politically and electorally. To understand the power dynamics of the grand old party, here are the party presidents - including the 13 non-Gandhi presidents -since Independence.



1947: Jivatram Bhagwandas Kripalani (JB Kripalani)

Considered a devout follower of Mahatma Gandhi, Kripalani was the president of Congress when India gained Independence in 1947 and Nehru became the first prime minister. However, it's said that he realised soon after becoming party chief that the power of the Congress president is no longer the same as before. Later on, he became a harsh critic of Nehru and also opposed Indira's policies.

1948, 1949: Pattabhi Sitaramayya

After the power tussle with Kripalani, Sitaraimayya was elected as party president. He is considered a man who kept his affairs low-key and is known to have refrained from taking parts in elections. After his tenure, Sitaramayya served as the Governor of Madhya Pradesh from 1952 to 1957.

1950: Purushottam Das Tandon

Tandon's election as the president is considered by many as the example of the power struggle between Nehru and Patel - after the Independence. Tandon was a known figure who demanded official language status for Hindi and was considered a conservative by Nehru. During the 1950 presidency election, Nehru vehemently opposed his election but only to see him get elected due to Patel's backing.

1951-1954: Jawaharlal Nehru

Tandon becoming the president created two power centres in the party and thus began the struggle. In 1951, Nehru resigned from the Congress Working Committee (CWC) in protest against Tandon's decisions. Eventually, due to the demise of Patel and rising factionalism, Tandon resigned and Jawaharlal Nehru became the president and sole power centre. He remained president till 1954.

1955- 1959 UN Dhebar

After three years of Jawarharlal Nehru being both the party president and the prime minister, UN Dhebar was elected and he presided over the sessions in Avadi, Amritsar, Indore, Gauhati and Nagpur. Dhebar's election ensured the growth of the Gandhi family cult in the family. Dhebar has been quoted by a Calcutta University professor as saying that whether Nehru remains as president or not, the whole country looks to him for guidance.

1959: Indira Gandhi

Following Dhebar's peaceful presidency, Nehru's daughter Indira Gandhi became the party president. Over the years, she was guided by Nehru himself and learnt the nuances of party politics from him. However, at the end of her tenure, she refused to re-run for the post.

1960-1963: Neelam Sanjiva Reddy

Reddy was the youngest President to assume office and stayed on the post for three consecutive years, he also went on to become the 6th President of India.

1964-1967: K Kamaraj

Kumaraswami Kamaraj presided over the party during one of its most troubled times. After years of smooth run, there was a clamour for other shake-ups - especially owning to defeat against China. Kamraj proposed that all senior Congress leaders holding ministerial office resign and take up party work. It was known as 'Kamraj Plan.' During his tenure, Nehru also passed away and he was tasked to choose his successor. Kamraj consulted all MPs and CMs and helped Lal Bahadur Shastri to become the next PM.

However, in 1966 Shastri passed away in Tashkent. He was again tasked to manage the transition and this time Indira Gandhi became the Prime Minister despite strong contention from Morarji Desai.

1968, 1969: S Nijalingappa

Nijalingappa succeeded Kamraj and due to the rising power of Indira in the party, and her bid to create a single power centre, he expelled Indira from Congress. In other words - Nijalingappa split the party.

1970, 1971: Jagjivan Ram

After the split, Congress faction led by Indira elected Jagjivan Ram as its president. He remained president till 1972 but the power balance shifted and remained with Indira Gandhi.

1972-1974: Shankar Dayal Sharma

Jagjivan Ram was succeeded by Sharma who was again a close confidante of Indira. He later served in the union cabinet as the minister for Communication during the emergency period 1975–77. He also went on to become the ninth President of India.

1975-1977: Dev Kant Barooah

During the darkest period of Indian democracy, Barooah led the grand old party. He is famous for his slogan - “Indira is India and India is Indira” - affirming the grip of the Gandhi family over the party post.

1978 - 1984: Indira Gandhi

After the party's drubbing in the general elections in the aftermath of Emergency, Indira took the reins of the party herself. She led the party to victory in the 1980 Lok Sabha Elections, becoming the prime minister again, and remained party president till her assassination in 1984.

1985- 1991: Rajiv Gandhi

Rajiv Gandhi succeeded his mother Indira and became both - the prime minister and the party president. His tenure was mired with several controversies and led to the defeat of Congress in 1989. VP Singh became the prime minister but his government fell after Ram Rath Yatra was stopped in Bihar in 1990. Rajiv Gandhi remained party president till he was assassinated in 1991.

1992- 1996: PV Narsimha Rao

Rao's tenure marked the only era when no Gandhi was prominent in the party. Rao had become the Prime Minister following the fall of VP Singh's government and held both the posts during turbulent times. His detractors slowly pushed Sonia Gandhi into politics.

1996-1998: Sitaram Kesri

Rao made way for Kesri to succeed but his era was more disruptive with two central governments falling in a span of six months in 1997.

1998-2017: Sonia Gandhi

Amid all the disruptions in politics, 1998 was the last nail in the coffin. Atal Bihari Vajpayee led BJP to victory and Kesri was blamed for Congress' dismal performance. He was removed forcefully from his post and Sonia became the Congress president in 1998. Under her tenure, she led the party to two consecutive victories during general elections in 2004 and 2009 and became the longest-serving chief of the party.

2017-2019: Rahul Gandhi

Rahul succeeded her mother in 2017 and led the party to victory in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. However, following the drubbing in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, he decided to pass over the baton to a non-Gandhi president.
