Ahead of Mamata Banerjee’s mega rally, West Bengal BJP chief Dilip Ghosh calls it ‘didi's circus’; FIR filed

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee

Key Highlights Condemning Dilip Ghosh for his statement the TMC called it “direct provocation to violence” and filed an FIR against him for threatening party leaders Dilip Ghosh challenged the TMC leadership to lodge ten more FIRs against him saying he would face them all Every year on this day, TMC holds a rally in remembrance of 13 Congress workers who died in 1993 police firing during Mamata Banerjee’s rally in Kolkata

Kolkata: Calling Trinamool Congress’s mega Martyrs' Day rally in Kolkata, where Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee is likely to kick off the poll campaign for state elections, West Bengal BJP chief Dilip Ghosh said that the TMC's programme would be "didi's circus".

Terming the rally as a "condolence" meeting, Ghosh questioned whether it will be a winning festival or a condolence meeting.

Every year on July 21, TMC holds a rally in remembrance of people who died in 1993 police firing, in Kolkata. This year's rally is significant as it would be the first mega show by TMC after its poll debacle in Lok Sabha elections.

"All went there to see Didi's drama and circus. Will anyone from here go tomorrow to see a circus? No gates, no flags, what is going on I can't understand. Will that be a winning festival or a condolence meeting?" said Dilip Ghosh.

He further said that the TMC's condolence meeting is on as they lost in these polls following which they are unable to celebrate the winning festival. He also said that the public should catch hold of TMC leaders going to Kolkata by road and ask them to return the public money which they had taken in the last 7-8 years.

Condemning Ghosh for his statement the TMC called it “direct provocation to violence” and filed an FIR against him for threatening party leaders.

Reacting to the FIR lodged against him the West Bengal BJP chief claimed that people are not going to come to TMC rally saying it would prove to be a flop show.

He also challenged the TMC leadership to lodge ten more FIRs against him saying he would face them all.

Meanwhile, TMC supremo Mamata Banerjee claimed that the Centre was planning to stop train service today so that people cannot gather in large numbers for the mega rally.

Calling the saffron party “mischievous”, Mamata fired back saying that during BJP rally extra trains are deployed but now that the TMC is holding a rally they have a problem.

In 2019 Lok Sabha elections, while the TMC won 22 seats the BJP won 18.

TMC has also brought in poll strategist Prashant Kishor on board to prepare the party for 2021 elections hoping to stop the BJP’s juggernaut powered by Modi-Shah combine.

It is expected that the Chief Minister will launch a campaign against the EVMs calling for bringing the paper ballot back.
