Saving Our World: 10 Times People In India Spoke Up To Save The Environment

Pollution is one of the biggest problems that humans are facing right now. What is worse is that we are ignorant about how much it is actually affecting us! It's scary that what we are seeing is just the tip of the iceberg, future generations will have it much worse.

Now, however, the alarm bells have sounded and people are slowly waking up to the devastating reality that our world is in serious danger. Governments are putting in place initiatives and policies to keep the environment clean. Here are some rules that have been put in place to protect and conserve the environment.

Representational Image

Ooty, known as one of the most beautiful hill stations in Tamil Nadu, is one of the most sought-after tourist destinations in Southern India, and it has got one step closer to becoming plastic-free. The Nilgiri District Administration, which Ooty falls under, has banned the sale of single-use plastic items including water bottles, soft drinks and food items packed in plastic wrappers, along the highways leading to the district’s major towns. The ban will come into effect from August 15.

The Nilgiri District Administration announced the ban following a Madras High Court order last month which directed the Collector to prohibit entry of all kinds of plastic packages into the district.

AGRALEAKS

Agra, the land of Taj Mahal, is not only a popular tourist hub, but is also infamous for soaring levels of air pollution, making it one of the top polluted cities of the world. The particulate matter is caused primarily by the practice of burning scrap tyres to extract iron and industrial waste.

Despite several warnings by the Supreme Court to keep a check on incessant garbage burning practice, there are hardly any concrete steps taken to tackle pollution. Finally, cracking down on individuals and organisations burning solid waste, the Agra Municipal Corporation (AMC) has collected Rs 18,000 as penalty in just a couple of days.

Tree ambulance launched in Chennai, aims at planting uprooted trees& offer services like seed ball distribution,plant distribution,aiding tree plantation, shifting&survey of trees & removal of dead trees.Founder Abdul Ghani says, aim to implement it cross the country by year 2020 pic.twitter.com/18QIn2klaV — ANI (@ANI) June 4, 2019

In a one-of-its-kind move, Chennai environmentalist Dr Abdul Ghani, known as the ‘Green Man of India’, launched a tree ambulance service to provide first-aid service to trees. Tree Ambulance aims to deliver a positive environmental impact by exclusively caring for trees. The idea of tree ambulance is to save trees by caring for sick ones and help bring uprooted ones back to their feet.

Now that the pollution levels around the world are at an all-time high, and the green spaces are quickly losing out to industrialisation and commercial spaces. It is imperative that grown trees are fostered and protected.

Union Minister Prakash Javadekar told Lok Sabha, "Several measures have been taken/being taken by the government to check/control air pollution in Delhi. Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations (CAAQMS) data indicated general improvement in air quality of Delhi in 2018, said the Environment minister while announcing a 'four-solution' programme beginning 2020 to "reduce air pollution by 90 per cent".

The government has invested to avail Bharat Standard 6 (BS6) petrol to reduce pollution generated by vehicles. The cars manufactured from 2020 will be BS6 compliant.

AFP - Representational Image

The National High-Speed Rail Corporation Limited (NHSRCL), which is the nodal agency for the Mumbai-Ahmedabad High-Speed Rail Corridor has come up with a new design for the station in Thane to save thousands of mangroves.

The NHSRCL said the design was reworked to reduce the number of affected mangroves from the estimated 53,000 to 32,044. Earlier, the agency had come under heavy criticism from environmentalists after it emerged that the corridor will affect tens of thousands of mangroves spread over 13.36 hectares.

Maharashtra Transport Minister Diwakar Raote had earlier this week informed the assembly that as many as 54,000 mangroves will be affected because of the project.

6. Delhi planning to store Yamuna water

Reuters

After the government realised that Delhi was going to face water shortage sooner than anyone could imagine, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal announced that a recharge pilot project on the Yamuna floodplain will start this monsoon season. According to a study by National Institute of Hydrology, IIT-Delhi and the Central Ground Water Board, Delhi government proposed to create a 1,000-acre underground reservoir on the Yamuna floodplain in northwest Delhi's Palla to store an estimated 37,000 million gallons of rainwater - enough to meet the city's peak summer water supply shortfall.

BCCL

Nature lovers, wildlife enthusiasts and environmentalists stepped up their protests against the proposed elevated corridor that cuts through Bandipur Tiger Reserve in Karnataka. Hundreds of people from all walks of life under the banner of #SaveBandipur came together at Maddur Range Check Post, under Bandipur Tiger Reserve to oppose the project.

The movement gained momentum last year with demonstrations in various parts of the state. More such protests happened as the campaigns #noelevatedhighway and #nighttrafficbeda on social media continue to attract more and more people.

SIKKIM ORGANIC FARMING STATE/ MEDIUM

India’s north-eastern state of Sikkim has won the award for the being the '100 per cent organic state' that promotes agro-ecological and sustainable food systems.

Sikkim beat 51 nominees from around 25 countries to win the 'Oscar for best policies', from the Food and Agriculture Organisation, the Press Trust Of India reported. Sikkim is not only the country's first 100 per cent organic state but also the cleanest state.

It is the first in the world to get the Future Policy Award 2018 for bolstering efforts to attain Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The Himalayan state of India was conferred with this honour during the World Food Week at headquarters of the Food and Agriculture Organization in Rome, Italy.

BCCL

Sending out a strongly worded warning, the Supreme Court reminded the Haryana Government not to take any action that will affect the ecological balance of the Aravalli hills and forest.

"We are concerned with Aravalli. If you are doing anything with Aravalli or Kant Enclave you will be in trouble. If you are doing anything with forest, you will be in trouble. We are telling you," the SC bench of Justices Arun Mishra and Deepak Gupta said.

The court's stern warning was in the context of the Haryana Assembly passing the amendments in the Punjab Land Preservation Act (PLPA) which would have opened it for construction work in the ecologically sensitive zone.

AFP- Representational Image

Facing public anger against the proposed felling of thousands of trees in the capital, the Centre on Thursday said no more trees would be cut for redevelopment of the seven government colonies that have been the target of chipko-like protests from green activists.

The two construction agencies of the government — National Buildings Construction Corporation (NBCC) and Central Public Works department (CPWD) — will rework the layout design to avoid cutting down trees, it said.

“It was decided at a meeting that no big tree will be cut. Small trees will be transplanted and more than a million trees planted by different agencies during this monsoon,” Housing and Urban Affairs Secretary Durga Shankar Mishra said, adding that the decision had been taken in view of public concerns. The trees planted will not be saplings but of 8-12 feet height, the government said.
