TMC Martyr's Day: BJP won 2019 LS polls by using EVMs, CRPF and Election Commission, claims Mamata Banerjee

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: Questioning the Bharatiya Janata Party's (BJP’s) win in the Lok Sabha elections, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee claimed that the saffron party won by cheating, using EVMs, CRPF and central police and the Election Commission. She further said that the workers of the BJP are trying to capture Trinamool Congress' (TMC’s) offices and beating up workers.

The credit for the smooth functioning of Parliament goes to opposition parties and not to those in power, she added. The TMC supremo said that she will request the Election Commission to conduct Panchayat and Municipal elections through ballot paper.

Slamming the BJP over the issue of black money, she talked about launching a state-wide protest on July 26 demanding return of black money "siphoned off" by the saffron party.

|K|

The key highlight of this rally is "save democracy" with Mamata demanding the return of ballot papers to replace electronic voting machines (EVMs) to conduct elections.

Every year on July 21, the TMC holds a rally to remember 13 Youth Congress activists who were killed in police firing in 1993 during the Left Front regime in West Bengal. Banerjee was a leader of the Youth Congress at that time.

|R|

The firebrand chief minister is rattled by the rise of the BJP in the state after the BJP received 18 seats while Mamata Banerjee-led TMC won 22 seats in 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

In 2014 polls, the TMC had won 34 Parliamentary seats.

Ever since the Lok Sabha polls came to an end, the TCM faced an all-out assault by the BJP both internally as well as externally. There has been an exodus from its ranks to the BJP with several district and panchayat level leaders as well as councillors and the BJP.

The BJP has also cornered the TMC government on the issue of cut-money or bribe taken by TMC leaders for providing government welfare schemes to the people. This issue led to a widespread protest by the people on the streets of the state thereby denting the image of the TMC, which has been in power since May 2011.

Sounding off the bugle for the 2021 Assembly elections in the state, Mamata countered BJP’s cut money allegations saying that the BJP should walk the talk by returning the "Rafale deal cut money" first.

Mamata Banerjee's speech comes to an end with the crowd chanting- 'BJP Hatao, Desh Bachao', 'Jai Trinamool', 'Jai Hind' and 'Jai Bangla' soon follow.
