J&K Governor tells militants to kill the corrupt who looted Kashmir, Omar Abdullah responds

Jammu and Kashmir Governor, Satya Pal Malik said on Sunday the militants, if they have to, should kill the corrupt people who have looted Kashmir instead of the innocent.

Inaugurating the Kargil Ladakh tourism festival 2019 at Khree Sultan Choo stadium in Kargil, he said, "Why are you (militants) killing innocents including SPOs and PSOs. What will you gain by this?

"If you have to kill why don't you kill the corrupt who have looted the country and Kashmir for so long."

Responding to Satya Pal Malik's statements, former chief minister of the state Omar Abdullah slammed the Governor for telling militants to kill the politicians perceived to be corrupt.

In a tweet, Omar Abdullah said, "This man, ostensibly a responsible man occupying a constitutional position, tells militants to kill politicians perceived to be corrupt. Perhaps the man should find out about his own reputation in Delhi these days before sanctioning unlawful killings & kangaroo courts."

This man, ostensibly a responsible man occupying a constitutional position, tells militants to kill politicians perceived to be corrupt. Perhaps the man should find out about his own reputation in Delhi these days before sanctioning unlawful killings & kangaroo courts. https://t.co/bsa9khBjkC July 21, 2019

Satya Pal Malik also said that the militants do not have the power to erode the authority of the Indian government. "Yours is a futile struggle. You are losing your lives for nothing."

"Our estimates are that at present there are 250 militants including 125 foreign militants. During encounters, the foreign militant takes two days to die and the local two hours. LTTE was once the most powerful terrorist organisation in the world. Where is it today?" Satya Pal Malik asked.

Noting that the militants' Deobandi preachers were promising them heaven after death. the Governor said, "I cannot question your religious belief. But, I can give you two heavens instead of the one promised to you by your 'maulvis'. I can give you Kashmir, which is a heaven on earth, and if you live like good human beings, you will get another heaven after your death."

He expressed satisfaction over the change in the ground situation in Kashmir, saying that the people are now talking of peace.

"It is for the first time in 30 years that there was no strike on the visit of the country's Home Minister to Kashmir," Malik said referring to the recent visit of Amit Shah to the Valley.

He also spoke of the administration's attempts to bring back the Kashmiri Pandits saying that the effort has been welcomed by Hurriyat Conference chief Mirwaiz Umar Farooq.
