"In Fit Of Anger": J&K Governor On Shocking 'Suggestion' To Terrorists

Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik said India will never bow down before violence.

Highlights Satya Pal Malik has often accused leaders of Kashmir of corruption

On Sunday, he faced backlash over one of his remarks

Today, he said he made the remark "in a fit of anger and frustration"

In a hugely controversial statement, Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik said at a public meeting that terrorists should "kill corrupt politicians who have looted the entire wealth" of the state" rather than innocent people and security personnel.

"These boys who have picked up guns are killing their own people, they are killing PSOs (personal security officer) and SPOs (special police officers). Why are you killing them? Kill those who have looted the wealth of Kashmir. Have you killed any of them?" Satya Pal Malik said at an event in Kargil on Sunday, causing shockwaves.

After the backlash over his comments, Mr Malik clarified today that he had spoken "in a fit of anger and frustration" due to rampant corruption.

"As Governor, I should have not made such a comment, but my personal feeling is the same as I said. Many political leaders and big bureaucrats are steeped in corruption here," he told news agency ANI.

There was no mistaking the target of his provocative comments yesterday..

More so, because he had made the remarks right after he accused "big families" of Kashmir of accruing properties across the world by looting public money.

The governor has often accused political leaders of Kashmir of corruption and having no mass support because of the poor turnout in elections.

"The big families who have ruled Kashmir have got unlimited wealth. They have one house in Srinagar, one in Delhi, Dubai, one in London and elsewhere. They are shareholders in big hotels. It is the common man of Kashmir who is suffering," he said.

Reacting strongly to the Governor's comments, former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah posted: "Save this tweet - after today any mainstream politician or serving/retired bureaucrat killed in J&K has been murdered on the express orders of the Governor of J&K Satyapal Malik."

Save this tweet - after today any mainstream politician or serving/retired bureaucrat killed in J&K has been murdered on the express orders of the Governor of J&K Satyapal Malik. — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) July 21, 2019

"This man, ostensibly a responsible man occupying a constitutional position, tells militants to kill politicians perceived to be corrupt. Perhaps the man should find out about his own reputation in Delhi these days before sanctioning unlawful killings and kangaroo courts," Mr Abdullah wrote.
