Sandalwood trees under threat in Urban Coimbatore

COIMBATORE: After a lull sandalwood smugglers have started to strike again in the city.Last week, three attempts were made by smugglers to chop off sandalwood trees and smuggle the wood.Sandalwood trees grow naturally at Race Course, Peelamedu and few more places in the city. The smugglers can easily identify these trees and axe them.While police say they neither know the locations of sandalwood trees in the city nor the count, forest officials say they could not stop such attempts simply because the trees are not in their jurisdiction.However, police and forest officials can stop the smuggling by cracking down on the network if they work together, environmentalists say.According to the forest department, 1kg of sandalwood would fetch Rs 12,000 – Rs 14,000 in black market. The smuggled sandalwoods are supplied to oil factories in neighbouring states.District forest officer D Venkatesh said there are no official counts of sandalwood trees located in urban Coimbatore. The forest department could not take census on sandalwood trees in urban Coimbatore due to shortage of manpower. “We are sharing information with police about sandalwood smugglers. We are working together with police to prevent sandalwood smuggling,” Venkatesh said.Deputy commissioner of police (law & order), Coimbatore city, L Balaji Saravanan said sandalwood trees were found in various places in the city. So, police alone cannot protect these trees. “If people have sandalwood trees on their house premises, they could furnish the information to the city police. Then our police patrol teams would often visit during the night rounds. If people provide information, we would also prepare a data of sandalwood trees located in the city,” Balaji Saravanan said.Three masked men entered the premises of a jeweller’s house on Sarojini Naidu Street at Ram Nagar and axed a sandalwood tree in the early hours of July 17. But their luck ran out when a private security guard alerted the house owner and police. The gang escaped from the house leaving behind the chopped wood. The Kattoor police are investigating the case.On the next day early morning, a gang tried to fell another sandalwood tree at the staff quarters of Murugan Textile Mill on Mettupalayam Road. But it was averted after a private security guard alerted the Saibaba Colony police who reached the spot immediately and the gang had to flee from the area in a car. Three police vehicles chased the car. However, smugglers abandoned the car at Mullai Nagar near Vadvalli and escaped. Police seized the car with sandalwood logs and tools used to chop off the tree.There are several sandalwood trees in the city grown on the premises of government as well as private lands without proper security, especially in the night which has made the urban landscape a happy hunting ground.
