License To Kill? J&K Governor Asks Terrorists To Gun Down Corrupt People In State

In a rather bizarre statement, Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satyapal Malik has asked terrorist to kill those looted the state for long and not innocent Kashmiris.

“These boys who have picked up guns are killing their own people, they are killing personal security officers (PSOs) and special police officers (SPOs). Why are you killing them? Kill those who have looted the wealth of Kashmir. Have you killed any of them?” Malik asked while speaking at a tourism even in Kargil on Sunday.

BCCL/ FILE

The governor, however, said that violence was not the solution and added that “The government of India will never go down before a gun.”

He also cited the example of LTTE in Sri Lanka to explain his comment.

“There was an outfit called LTTE in Sri Lanka and it had support as well but it has also been finished,” he said.

Without taking any names, Malik blamed the politicians and bureaucrats from the state who have amassed wealth while most of the population live in poverty.

"They have one house in the state, another in Delhi, Dubai, and London… I guarantee you that in the next two-three months, you will see two-three big fish, who have been ministers, seeking bail. And then, I will ask you to applaud,’’ Malik said.

Malik also claimed that if he had the mandate, he would file cases against all the corrupt and recover their wealth and distribute it to the poor.

The governor's comments however, has attracted criticism from various corners, claiming that it was a call for violence.

Former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah posted: "Save this tweet - after today any mainstream politician or serving/retired bureaucrat killed in J&K has been murdered on the express orders of the Governor of J&K Satyapal Malik."

Save this tweet - after today any mainstream politician or serving/retired bureaucrat killed in J&K has been murdered on the express orders of the Governor of J&K Satyapal Malik. — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) July 21, 2019

In recent years, Kashmir has seen a spike in the number of attacks targeting Kashmiris working in the Police Department and with other security agencies.

There have also been instances when the families and properties of such people were targeted by the terrorists in an attempt to intimidate them.

REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

Last year the Hizbul Mujahideen had issued a threat to all officers to either quit government jobs or face death.

Just days after the threat, three police officers were abducted and killed in Kashmir, for all of them which the outfit had claimed responsibility. This had led to a series of resignations. As many as cops from south Kashmir had reportedly resigned and posted videos of them announcing the resignations.
