HD Kumaraswamy loses trust vote, it’s Cong-mukt south

BJP state president B.S. Yeddyurappa with his party MLAs show victory sign after H.D. Kumaraswamy lost the vote of confidence during Assembly Session at Vidhana Soudha, in Bengaluru, on Tuesday. (Photo: AP)

Bengaluru: The Congress-Janata Dal (S) alliance government's turbulent 14 months in power ended on Tuesday after Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy lost the trust vote in the state Assembly by a margin of six votes, after four full days of tortuous debate and delaying tactics, ending the Congress' hold over its last bastion in the South, leaving it with a mere four states and one Union Territory.

Capping a three-week-long high-voltage intense power struggle triggered by a raft of resignations by rebel lawmakers that pushed the government to the brink of collapse, the confidence motion was defeated with 99 members voting for the motion and 105 against it, with the two Independent MLAs, R. Shankar and H. Nagesh and the lone BSP MLA N. Mahesh abstaining from the voting.

Acting swiftly, BSP supremo Mayawati expelled Mahesh from the party as she had specifically instructed him to support the coalition during the trust vote.

The Congress on Tuesday was quick to accuse the BJP of carrying out "one of the most heinous" horse-trading the country has ever seen and said that it will hold nationwide protests against the "immoral political destabilisation".

What finally brought about the downfall of the Kumaraswamy government was the rebellion by 15 MLAs of the Congress and JD(S), now camping in Mumbai – allegedly under the BJP's protection – who did not return to Bengaluru or participate in the trust vote proceedings, sounding the death knell for the coalition.

Soon after he lost the vote, Mr Kumaraswamy who said earlier that he was ready “to happily sacrifice this position” and would not “drag the vote,” submitted his resignation to Governor Vajubhai Vala. He was accompanied by Deputy CM Dr G Parameshwar and other senior colleagues, paving the way for the installation of a new BJP government headed by BJP State President B.S. Yeddyurappa, who has indicated he could swear in a cabinet this coming Monday.

The governor has instructed HDK to continue till alternative arrangements are made and also reminded him that no executive decisions should be taken during this period.

The ruling of the apex court that the rebels "cannot be compelled to participate in the trust vote proceedings in the Assembly" proved to be the last nail in the coffin of the coalition government, virtually freeing them from the whip issued by their parties.

BSY no Margadarshak yet... 75 just a number for CM-in-waiting

If and when Mr Yeddyurappa takes over as CM, it will be his fourth stint in the top post - he headed a short lived BJP-JD(S) government in 2007 which collapsed after the JD(S) refused to back him under a 20-20 month power sharing deal.

Mr. Yeddyurappa swept back to power in 2008, alleging betrayal by the JD(S) and remained CM for three years before resigning in 2011 following his alleged involvement in illegal mining and land deal scams. His latest stint as CM was for only 3 days in 2018 after the BJP became the single largest party in the state Assembly with 104 MLAs but could not prove its majority in the House.

Jubilant MLAs of the BJP are now set to meet at a resort on the outskirts of Bengaluru on Wednesday to formally elect Mr. Yeddyurappa as the Legislature party leader, overlooking the party's bar against appointing anyone over 75 to a senior position.

The BJP which has been waiting in the wings for power for the last six years, is all set to form the new government by the weekend with jubilant party legislators likely to elect former CM B.S. Yeddyurappa as their legislature party leader on Wednesday.

The legislature party meeting will be held at Ramada resort in the outskirts of Bengaluru, said BJP MLC and state general secretary N. Ravikumar. Before meeting the governor to stake claim to form the new government, the BJP will have to complete certain formalities.

After the legislature party elects Mr. Yeddyurappa as its leader, the party's parliamentary board headed by the prime minister has to approve Mr Yeddyurappa's name. At least two days will be required for this and unless the central BJP gives the green signal, Mr. Yeddyurappa will not meet the governor to stake claim, said BJP sources.

Source said that he is likely to take oath on Friday after which the legislature session may reconvene on July 29.

Prez rule an option?

Notwithstanding the euphoria over the formation of a new BJP government led by B.S. Yeddyurappa, the top brass of the party is reportedly in two minds over forming the government and is reportedly getting feedback from the RSS and various senior leaders before deciding if President's Rule was a better option than government formation. For one, the leadership is concerned about the disqualification procedure involving the rebel MLAs and feels that if it drags on for too long, it may impact the prospects of the new government. The popularity of Congress leader Siddaramaiah in N. Karnataka if snap polls are held is a concern.
