Face off over minimum wage: Govt tables new wage bill in Lok Sabha, CITU calls for nationwide protest

The Code on Wages Bill was earlier introduced in the Lok Sabha on August 10, 2017 | Photo: Vikram Sharma

Modi Government introduced the Code on Wages Bill in Lok Sabha on Tuesday with the intention to fix a single mandatory floor for minimum wages to be followed by state governments.

The bill is part of National Democratic Alliance's (NDA) major push to labour reforms agenda.

But the Centre is yet to clear air over what this minimum floor level wage will be. Communist Party of India (Marxist) backed trade union -- Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) -- has called workers to organise nationwide protests against the bill.

Union Labour Minister Santosh Gangwar introduced the Code on Wages Bill in Lok Sabha amid protests by the Trinamool Congress (TMC) and Left MPs. The bill seeks to replace four existing bills related to workers remuneration: Payment of Wages Act (1936), Minimum Wages Act (1948), Payment of Bonus Act (1965) and Equal Remuneration Act (1976).

The Code on Wage universalises the provisions of minimum wages and this would ensure "Right to Sustenance" for every worker and intends to increase the legislative protection of minimum wage from existing about 40 per cent to 100 per cent workforce.

Introduction of statutory Floor Wage to be computed based on minimum living conditions, will extend qualitative living conditions across the country to about 50 crore workers, Santosh Gangwar further said.

Labour ministry claims that the new bill proposes introduction of statutory Floor Wage to be computed based on minimum living conditions. It will reduce the number of minimum wages in the country from existing more than 2,000 rates of minimum wages.

Trinmool Congress and Left MPs opposed the bill.

TMC MP Saugata Roy said, "I don't understand the need to bring this law out of cold storage. Now, who asked for this among the trade unions? This is being done at the behest of the employers."

"The FICCI [Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry], CII [Confederation of Indian Industry] they want that if it will be single legislation it will be easier for us, therefore workers will be put into trouble, their representatives voices will not be heard and a single code on wages covering all wages will be brought forward," Saugata Roy added.

CPM backed trade union CITU has called upon workers to organise immediate protests countrywide.

General Secretary Tapan Sen said that the Code on Wages Bill did not incorporate the concrete formulae of minimum wage (based on 2,700 calorie intake etc) decided unanimously by 15th Indian Labour Conference.

Tapan Sen further alleged that the new bill has practically placed the minimum wage fixation (including national floor level minimum wage) under the total discretion of the government and the bureaucracy; although provision of tripartite Minimum Wage Advisory Board has been kept in the bill, provision has been so designed that the recommendation of the board will not be binding on the government.

The Code on Wages Bill was earlier introduced in the Lok Sabha on August 10, 2017, and was referred to Parliamentary Standing Committee which submitted its report on December 18, 2018.

However, owing to dissolution of 16th Lok Sabha, the bill has lapsed.

Therefore, a fresh bill namely the Code on Wages Bill, 2019 has been drafted inter alia, after considering the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee and other suggestions of the stakeholders.
