No foul play in death of University of Hyderabad PhD scholar in hostel room: Police

No foul play in death of University of Hyderabad PhD scholar in hostel room: Police

Dipika Mahapatra, from Kharagpur in West Bengal, was found dead in her hostel room on the university campus on July 22.

news Death

No foul play is suspected in the death of a 29-year-old PhD scholar at the University of Hyderabad (UoH), police said on Tuesday.

Dipika Mahapatra, from Kharagpur in West Bengal, was found dead in her hostel room on the university campus on July 22.

Preliminary investigations revealed that she was suffering from a neurological disorder and died of epileptic seizure. No suspicions were raised by her family also.

"As per the medical record available at the university health centre and the information given by her relatives, she has been suffering from neuro related disease and epilepsy. She was under medication for the same," said inspector R. Srinivas.

According to police Dipika was found in an unconscious state in the common toilet of the hostel. The other girl students noticed her and alerted the university authorities, who shifted her to a nearby private hospital. Doctors declared her brought dead.

The body was shifted to the government-run Osmania Hospital for autopsy.

No injuries were found on the body. However, a case of suspicious death was registered at Gachibowli police station.

In November last year, another PhD scholar from Odisha at UoH died from dengue. Rashmi Ranjan Suna, a native of Kalahandi in Odisha, had visited the University Health Centre complaining of fever and vomiting. He was later referred and shifted to Himagiri hospital, where his health condition worsened. Soon, he was shifted to another private hospital, Citizens Hospital, where he succumbed to his condition due to multiple organ failure.

At the time, students had protested the medical negligence by the University Health Centre, which referred the student to a hospital that had already been blacklisted by UoH authorities.

IANS inputs
