Standoff as Bombay Cambridge stays shut, irate parents want answers

Bombay Cambridge International School

BMC

K-East ward

Adani Electricity

building proposal

occupation certificate

No power, water after school’s compliance and fire chief’s nod; irate parents want answers.Frustrated at the deadlock between thein Andheri and theover safety compliance, a section of parents staged a protest outside the school on Wednesday. The school has been shut for nearly a month and has had no electricity and water supply. According to the fire brigade, the school was cleared of irregularities through a letter on July 20 but the connections haven’t been restored yet. While the school management remains helpless without the basic facilities, the parents are frustrated over loss of students’ study hours.The 25-year-old school has been locked in a dispute with the civic authorities since June 26, when the school’s water supply was abruptly cut for violation of fire safety norms. Later, power services were suspended. The plot on which the school building stands is reserved for a school and a dispensary, which the school is supposed to hand over to the BMC.Chief fire officer Prabhat Rahangdale sent a letter on July 20 to assistant engineer ofand, assuring them of school’s safety compliance and asking to restore water and electricity connections. “Despite assurances, the school hasn’t opened yet and our children are suffering the most,” said a parent who was part of the protest that abated only after parents were told about Rahangdale’s letter. Until then, a posse of 15 police personnel, including women police officers, stood guard at the school.“We are naturally angry because children are at home. We are not getting any information as to why this issue came up. The school only keeps giving new deadlines for re-opening. Some parents are thinking of taking their wards out of the school, but at present there are no options,” a parent told Mirror.“I can’t even put my children in another school. I inquired in two schools, but they are asking for a letter from the current school,” another parent said. Some have demanded a look at all the documents and approvals of the school.When asked if the services will be restored, additional municipal commissioner Ashwini Joshi put the ball back in Rahangdale’s court. “The school has complied. You can ask Rahangdale if he has issued any order. We have also sent his report to BMC Commissioner,” she said.A source from the school who wished to remain anonymous, said that restoration of electricity and water was subject to approval forand that the handover of the dispensary was still pending. “Any building requires a building proposal. Forget, this building does not even have a commencement certificate,” Joshi said.
