Triple talaq bill passed in Lok Sabha amid walkout by Opposition

Lok Sabha on Thursday took up for consideration the contentious bill to make the practice of instant triple talaq illegal with up to three years in jail for the husband. (Photo: PTI)

With voting mostly in favour, the triple talaq bill was on Thursday passed in Lok Sabha. The Congress staged a walkout as a protest as the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Bill, 2019 was passed with the most number of voice votes in favour of the legislation. Earlier, Janata Dal (United) and Trinamool Congress (TMC) MPs, too, had staged a walkout in protest against the bill criminalising the instant divorce.

Meanwhile, the Parliament session has been extended till August 7, announced Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla.

Lok Sabha on Thursday took up for consideration the contentious bill to ban and make the practice of instant triple talaq illegal, with up to three years in jail for the husband.

While moving the triple talaq bill for consideration, Union Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said that the legislation was needed for gender equality and justice since, he argued, Muslim women are being divorced by "talaq-e-biddat" despite the August 2017 Supreme Court verdict, striking down the instant divorce.

He said, since January 2017, as many as 574 triple talaq cases and since the Supreme Court order, more than 300 such cases were reported by the media. "There have been 345 cases of triple talaq after the judgment till July 24. Should we leave these women on roads?" he said, later adding, "I am a minister in the Narendra Modi government, not the Rajiv Gandhi government."

He said the Supreme Court had noted that 20 Islamic countries including Pakistan, Afghanistan, Malaysia, Indonesia, Jordan, Egypt and Tunisia had outlawed Triple Talaq. And if they could do it, he asked, why it cannot be done in India which is a secular country?

"The Supreme Court has said that Triple Talaq is arbitrary and unconstitutional and asked Parliament to make a law. When we come up with a law, it is opposed. What should our Muslim women do in this situation? Should our Muslim sisters be left [in this situation]?" asked Ravi Shankar Prasad, adding, "The Indian Constitution is equal for all daughters. So the bill is needed."

During the debate proceedings on triple talaq bill, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) ally Janata Dal (United) opposed the triple talaq bill and walked out, saying there was a need to create public awareness on the issue with the help of Muslim community leaders.

JD(U) MP Rajiv Ranjan Singh said his party believed the triple talaq bill would cause harm to the society. "The Bill will produce a different feeling in the society because no one wants that there should be differences in the relationship between wife and husband," he said.

The Trinamool Congress (TMC) and the Congress MPs also staged a walkout to protest against the triple talaq bill.

During the arguments and suggestions, Congress Kishanganj MP Mohammad Jawed opposed the triple talaq bill and said that the government should bring "laws for separated women of all communities" and not just Muslims.

"The Bill which has been tabled is another way to jail Muslims... I oppose this Bill and request the minister to send this Bill to the standing committee for review and make laws for separated women of all communities, not just Muslims," Jawed said in Lok Sabha.

Asserting that the triple talaq bill was in "violation of Article 14 of the Constitution as it discriminates between Muslim women and women of other religion", Jawed said, "Section 498 (A) of the Indian Penal Code; Domestic Violence Act and Dowry Prohibition Act already applied to Muslims too. Therefore, there is no need for having an additional law to protect only Muslim women."
