Top And Trending News From AP & Telangana On July 25

1. Four TDP MLAs Suspended For Obstructing Budget Session In Assembly

Four Telugu Desam Party (TDP) MLAs were suspended from Andhra Pradesh Assembly for stalling the House proceedings on Thursday.The four MLAs - Ashok Bendalam, Vasupalli Ganesh Kumar, Velagapudi Ramakrishna Babu, Dola Bala Veeranjaneya Swamy - were suspended by Speaker Tammineni Sitaram for the rest of the day.

2. YS Jagan Condoles Lyricist Indraganti Srikanth’s Demise

Telugu lyricist Indraganti Srikanth Sharma passed away in Hyderabad due to age-related illness on Thursday morning. The 75-year-old writer is survived by his wife Janakibala, son - noted Telugu film director Indraganti Mohana Krishna and daughter.

3. Jashith Spills The Beans About Kidnappers After Returning Home

The kidnap drama of four-year-old Jashith ended on a happy note, after the kidnappers left the kid near a brick kiln in Kuthukuluru at Anaparthi mandal in the early hours of Thursday.

4. Transport Department In AP Trembling At This Warning

It’s quite rare for such a corruption-ridden department as the RTA wing to see an IPS officer, who is not just incorruptible, but also is someone who strikes terror in the minds of the corrupt and the unscrupulous.

5. Doctor Held For Molesting Nurse

The Chandrayaangutta police had taken into custody a doctor for molesting a nurse On Monday morning. The person was taken to a local court and was sent to remand after.

6. TDP, TJS And CPI Leaders In Custody For Staging Protest

There was a bit of tension that lurked around the city as Police took into custody members of Congress, TDP, TJS, CPI and other organizations for protesting outside the Indhra Park. Protesters took a rally from Indhra Park to Dharnna Chowk protesting against the demolition of the Assembly and Secretariat building.

7. Under-Trial Prisoner Escapes From Jail

A prisoner who has been under-trial has managed to escape out of the Shanakarpally jail of Ranga Reddy district on Thursday. The person who escaped was arrested in a theft case.

8. Woman Kidnapped In Hayathnagar

A miscreant kidnapped a girl under Hayathnagar police station limits. According to police, Yelimineti Yadaiah from Konda Mallepally, Nalgonda district ran a tea stall near Bangalore gate. He has two daughters and one son. The elder daughter Sony (21) is studying B Pharmacy at SLC College, Piglipur and his son David is a student of Intermediate.

9. Nizamabad Kids Die Of Suffocation After Getting Locked Up Inside Car

Two children got locked in a car and suffocated to their death in Nizamabad. The Kids were aged 5 and 10, and were from Mujahed Nagar in Nizamabad.
