Government is taking advantage of its number to bulldoze the passing of bills, says TMC's Saugata Roy

The Right To Information law essentially guaranteeing us the fundamental right to question our government | Photo Credit: Representative Image

New Delhi: The Parliament on Thursday approved an amendment to the Right To Information Act, 2005. The amendment gave the government, powers to decide salary and service terms of the body's head and its members. After the bill was tabled in Rajya Sabha and the Upper House witnessed the high drama as the opposition negated and demanded to send it to a house panel.

The Lok Sabha passed The Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2019 on Monday. News agency PTI reported the opposition walked out of the parliament over what it said was "intimidation" tactics by treasury benches to influence voting on the motion to send the bill to a Select Committee for greater scrutiny.

Upon asking if the bills are being passed without adequate scrutiny, Saugata Roy of the All India Trinamool Congress party told Mirror Now that the government is taking advantage of its number to bulldoze the passing of bills. He added, "so far the parliamentary standing committees have not been formed, it has been the rule that every new legislation should be scrutinised by the parliamentary committee."

#TheUrbanDebate | Story 3 -- Bills in Parliament



Govt is taking advantage of its nos. to bulldoze the passing of bills. It has been a rule that every new legislation should be scrutinised by Parliamentary Standing Committee. It's undemocratic.



TMC's @SaugataRoyMP to @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/YFnu3tJOMN — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) July 25, 2019

He further mentioned that now the government has extended the parliament session by two weeks, this means they will pass more bills without scrutiny. I think it is totally undemocratic, he added.

RTI activist Anjali Bhardwaj, who has been protesting against the amendment bill told Mirror Now, that these are very dark times for democracy. The Right To Information law essentially guarantees us the fundamental right to question our government and even the Supreme Court has mentioned this in the right to freedom and expression for the citizens.

#TheUrbanDebate | Story 3 -- Bills in Parliament



These are very dark times for democracy. The Right To Information law essentially guarantees us the right to question our govt: RTI Activist, Anjali Bharadwaj to @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/NNBGPpRiyZ — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) July 25, 2019

She further mentioned that RTI act states that whenever the government passes any policy, they have to inform the citizens in advance so that the people's right to know is fulfiled and they can actively engage in the implementation.

Although the entire opposition walked out of the House, a count of the vote on the motion to send the bill to Select Committee was taken with 117 voting against and 75 in favour. News agency PTI reported that TRS, BJD and YSR-Congress members remained in the House and are said to have voted with the ruling NDA on the motion.

Opposition benches wanted the Select Committee motion to be voted first but Chair said it would be taken up only after the debate. However, with empty opposition benches, the Bill was passed by a voice vote.
