Titu Bania to protest outside Vidhan Sabha on Aug 2

Ludhiana: A day after the date of monsoon session of Punjab assembly was announced, comedian Titu Bania of Mullanpur has declared he would stage a dharna against speaker Rana KP Singh with a ‘band baja’ outside the Punjab assembly on August 2, the inaugural day of the session. Notably for the past some time, Titu has been protesting against the speaker and the Punjab government for not accepting the resignation of Mullanpur Dakha MLA HS Phoolka. Recently, he staged a protest on a three-wheeler in Mullanpur against Phoolka, in which he drew a lot of public attention. On the sidelines of this on Thursday, Titu also shot off a letter to ADGP (Security) seeking protection for himself and his family, claiming he was receiving threats from several persons ever since he started a campaign against Phoolka’s resignation.Titu — who runs a home appliances repair shop, and has unsuccessfully contested several elections — said: “As I have promised the people of Mullanpur that I will do whatever it takes to get Phoolka’s resignation accepted, I have decided to protest against the Vidhan Sabha speaker on August 2 with a ‘band baja’ to wake him up. It’s really sad that MLA HS Phoolka made a false promise with the people of Mullanpur Dakha to get himself elected, and once he made it to the assembly, he ditched us and wasted crores of rupees of public money by tendering his resignation. What is even more shocking is that for months, the speaker is sitting on the resignation of Phoolka and not accepting it, without citing any solid reason for it. Therefore, someone needs to raise a voice against this cruel joke being played on the people of Mullanpur Dakha, and I know once I start this protest outside the assembly, more people will come forward and join me.”Clearing the air on the security cover demanded by him, Titu said: “Ever since I started raising a voice against social evils like ‘chitta’, the drug traffickers are after my life, and several times I have got death threats from them. Moreover, after my frequent protests against civic issues, and demanding the acceptance of Phoolka’s resignation, more people have become my enemies, and now there is a bigger danger to my life. What is even worse is that when I complained to the police in one of the cases, a police personnel too harassed me, which clearly speaks of how the system is working against me. Therefore, in the wake of such circumstances alone, I requested the ADGP to provide me security.”
