Breaking News July 26: GST Council meeting to be held through video conferencing on Saturday

New Delhi:

Supreme Court to hear plea seeking safety and security of doctors in government hospitals across the country. The plea was filed last month in the wake of protests by doctors in West Bengal against the assault on their colleagues by the family of a patient. Meanwhile, all schools and colleges in Ghaziabad and Meerut districts will remain closed from July 26 to 30 due to Kanwar Yatra. Issuing the order, District Magistrate of Ghaziabad, Ajay Shankar Pandey said 'Shravan Shivratri' will be observed on July 30.

Check all the latest updates of July 26 here:

11:50 pm: GST Council meeting will be held tomorrow through video conferencing at Ministry of Finance.

11:27 pm: Part of a wall on second floor of Khakhar Building in Mumbai collapses. No injuries reported so far.

10:52 pm: Andhra Pradesh Infrastructure (Transparency through Judicial Preview) Bill 2019, passed by State Assembly.

9:33 pm: Eknath Gaikwad appointed as Working President of Mumbai Regional Congress Committee (MRCC).

8:00 pm: IMA Ponzi scheme case: IMA founder Mansoor Khan's Enforcement Directorate (ED) custody has been extended for 7 days.

7:14 pm: Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla appoints Meenakashi Lekhi as the Chairman of the Committee on Public Undertakings for the term 2019-2020. The Committee consists of 15 Lok Sabha members and 7 Rajya Sabha members.

6:10 pm: BJP Karnataka President BS Yediyurappa takes oath as Chief Minister at Raj Bhavan in Bengaluru.

5:30 pm: Kulbhushan Jadhav's family met Former External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj yesterday.

4:42 pm: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee writes to Prime Minister Narendra Modi over "electoral reforms to prevent corruption & criminality". Letter states, "time has come for government funding of elections which is the norm in 65 countries".

4:00 pm: Jharkhand BJP minister caught on camera forcing Congress lawmaker to chant 'Jai Shri Ram'. READ HERE



3:10 pm: As on today, a total of 2,753 number of villages in 67 revenue circles of 18 number of districts are flood affected.

3:00 pm: There's danger in boycotting polls. If there's a boycott, then like what happened in parliamentary polls will happen in assembly polls too, there'll be a BJP MLA from Tral from where Burhan Wani & Zakir Musa belonged. They(BJP)have their eyes on some constituencies here: Omar Abdullah.

2:55 pm: Chief Minister of Odisha, Naveen Patnaik has announced ex-gratia of Rs 5 lakh each to the next of the kin of the deceased persons in Talcher coal mines accident.

2:40 pm: His statement is against the dignity of women, it is hurtful. It is highly condemnable, he should not only apologize to the Lok Sabha but also to all women. (file pic): Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) Chief Mayawati on Azam Khan's remark against BJP MP Rama Devi.

2:20 pm: Fire breaks out in an apartment building in Ahmedabad. Rajesh Bhatt, Fire Officer says, "Fire broke out on 5th-6th floor of the building. All people have been safely rescued, 2 were in serious condition, their status will be updated by the hospital."

2:10 pm: Agriculture Minister Narendra Singh Tomar in Rajya Sabha on being asked if Artificial Intelligence (AI) can be used in agriculture: Yes it can be used in multiple domains of agriculture such as weather, crop and price forecasting, yield estimation, etc.

2:00 pm: Railway Minister Piyush Goyal in Rajya Sabha: Rs 139.20 crore was earned from the sale of platform tickets in the year 2018-19. 230.47 crore was earned from advertisements and shops including those on platforms in the year 2018-19.

1:40 pm: One dead and at least ten injured in an explosion at a factory in Mundian Kalan, Ludhiana.

1:45 pm: National Remote Sensing Center represents ISRO as member of International Charter Space&Major Disasters. By combining Earth observation assets from different space agencies, Charter allows resources to be coordinated for response: MEA on sharing satellite data for flood relief: MEA on sharing satellite data for flood relief.

1:30 pm: A Delhi Court dismisses Corporate Lobbyist Deepak Talwar's anticipatory bail application in the CBI case against him. CBI has also sought 14 day custody of Talwar.

1:20 pm: I will call a meeting of leaders of all parties and then take a decision on this issue: Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla on Azam Khan.

12:50 pm: To politicize an issue related to women is outrageous, we have to stand together so why the hesitation in some? Why the dilemma? Why add riders? I am not naming anyone for ppl( pointing towards Congress MPs) to interrupt my speech: Nirmala Sitharaman in Lok Sabha on Azam Khan

12:21 pm: Navy Chief Admiral Karambir Singh, Air Force Chief BS Dhanoa and Army Chief General Bipin Rawat paid tributes wearing their respective forces’ combat fatigues, in Drass today.

12:10 pm: Delhi High Court has dismissed a PIL against the Board of Control for Cricket and Indian Premier League's auction process. The Plea stated that auctioning of players in IPL is illegal and should be stopped.

12:05 pm: Today BS Yeddyurappa ji has staked claim to form Govt, party high command has supported him. Numbers in assembly are not a problem, also the rebel MLAs are firm on their stand and if they want to join BJP,we will welcome them: Shobha Karandlaje, Karnataka BJP MP.

12:00 pm: Heavy to very heavy rainfall likely to occur at isolated places in districts of Nainital, Champawat, Pithoragarh, Chamoli, Haridwar, Dehradun and Pauri during next 24 hrs: Indian Meteorological Department, Dehradun.

11:55 am: Rahul Gandhi reaches late former Delhi CM, Sheila Dikshit's residence to meet her son Sandeep Dikshit. Rahul Gandhi arrived in India yesterday morning.

11:30 am: President Ram Nath Kovind pays tribute at Badami Bagh Cantonment in Srinagar, on 20th Kargil Vijay Divas.

11:25 am: Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Devendra Fadnavis pays tribute at Shaheed Samarak in Colaba, on 20th Kargil Vijay Divas.

11:10 am: Locals in Jhunjhunu yesterday rescued five people from a car submerged in water at an underpass.

11:00 am: Supreme Court refuses to entertain PILs relating to treatment of children suffering from Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) in Muzaffarpur district of Bihar, SC asks petitioners to approach the Patna High Court.

10:55 am: Peace and tranquility prevails along the Line of Actual Control (LAC), situation is under control: Army Chief Bipin Rawat in Dras, on Kargil Vijay Divas.

10:45 am: Senior lawyer and counsel for rebel Karnataka MLAs, Mukul Rohatgi(file pic), today apologized to the Supreme Court for being absent before the Court despite being asked by it to be present yesterday. Bench headed by CJI Gogoi accepted his apology.

10:30 am: Prime Minister Narendra Modi plants a sapling in Parliament as part of a tree plantation campaign by Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla.

10:10 am: He has never respected women, we all know what he had said about Jaya Prada ji. He has no right to stay in Lok Sabha, I will request Speaker to dismiss him. Azam Khan must apologize: Rama Devi, BJP MP on Azam Khan's remark on her.

9:50 am: Army Chief General Bipin Rawat pays tribute at Kargil War Memorial in Dras, on 20th Kargil Vijay Divas.

Jammu & Kashmir: Army Chief General Bipin Rawat pays tribute at Kargil War Memorial in Dras, on 20th #KargilVijayDivas pic.twitter.com/fYwysrFFvJ — ANI (@ANI) July 26, 2019

9:45 am: Delhi Police Special Cell in an ongoing operation has seized over 260 jute bags containing 130 kilograms of soaked and dried Afghan Heroin from a container in Navi Mumbai. Total recoveries in ongoing operation has exceeded 330kg worth approx Rs 1,320 Crores; Two people arrested.

9:40 am: President Ram Nath Kovind to now celebrate '20 years of Kargil Vijay Divas' at Badami Bagh Cantonment in Srinagar today. He was supposed to visit Drass memorial, but due to bad weather his visit was cancelled.Three Services Chiefs will pay homage at Drass war memorial.

9:30 am: Defence Minister Rajnath Singh pays tribute at National War Memorial on 20th Kargil Vijay Diwas.

Delhi: Defence Minister Rajnath Singh pays tribute at National War Memorial on 20th #KargilVijayDiwas. pic.twitter.com/PWssdObUJY — ANI (@ANI) July 26, 2019

9:00 am: Due to bad weather along the Jammu-Srinagar national highway on Friday, Amarnath yatra has been suspended for the day.

8:45 am: Samajwadi Party MP, Ravi Prakash Verma has given Zero Hour notice in Rajya Sabha over 'need for legislation to prevent mob violence'.

8:30 am: My battalion had fired 10,000 rounds during the war. I am proud of this fact. We had only one target in mind that is to defeat the enemy. I have come here to pay tribute to soldiers who lost their lives in Kargil War: Naik Deepchand, 1889 Missile regiment, Kargil.

Naik Deepchand,1889 Missile regiment,Kargil:My battalion had fired 10,000 rounds during the war. I am proud of this fact. We had only one target in mind that is to defeat the enemy. I have come here to pay tribute to soldiers who lost their lives in Kargil War. #KargilVijayDivas pic.twitter.com/4VOHfgea7R — ANI (@ANI) July 26, 2019

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
