Hydrocarbon projects: Over 1,400 booked for protesting

Trichy: Police on Thursday booked 1,457 people including farmers, functionaries of their associations and members of opposition parties in Nagapattinam and Tiruvarur for protesting against hydrocarbon projects on Tuesday. The farmers from the delta region have been protesting against the ongoing and proposed hydrocarbon extraction projects for a while.

As announced earlier, the protesters had taken out a massive rally in Thanjavur, Tiruvarur and Nagapattinam districts on Tuesday urging the government to announce the delta region as a protected agriculture zone after shutting down all the ongoing projects that were feared to turn the fertile land into a desert. Thousands of protesters including women had come together under the banner of Federation for Protection of Cauvery Basin and taken out rallies from various places to their respective collector offices, pressing their demands.

Tiruvarur police have registered cases against the protesters numbering about 770 including the organiser of the federation, P S Masilamani, as well as 30 women under various sections on charges including unlawful assembly and causing nuisance to the general public. Similar cases have been booked against farmers and protesters in Nagapattinam. Velippalayam police booked cases against 750 protesters including 355 women who participated in Tuesday’s rally. Police also registered cases against former MP and DMK leader A K S Vijayan, CPM district secretary Nagai Mali and other functionaries of various political parties.

Meanwhile, farmers who participated in the farmers’ grievance meeting at Tiruvarur appealed to the district collector to withdraw all the cases registered against them. Since they were staging protest in a democratic way, it was unfair to book them, they said. Meanwhile, as announced earlier, a section of farmers and various opposition party cadre started sending one lakh postcards to Prime Minister Narendra Modi urging him to withdraw hydrocarbon projects from the delta region.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
