Light summer mate V

Attractive outpost

In this game Black's knight on g4, main carrier of his attack, went to this square no less than three times.

Oliver Reeh in ChessBase Magazine

Do you like these lessons? There are plenty more by tactic expert Oliver Reeh in ChessBase Magazine, where you will also find openings articles and surveys, endgames, and of course annotations by the world's top grandmasters.

Strike like the world champions 88 times, IM Oliver Reeh leads you step by step through the most brillant game conclusions of the world champions - in interactive Fritztrainer format, enabling you to enter the winning moves yourself.

Highlights of this issue

No passive position!

Fabiano Caruana shows his black victory over Georg Meier

Fabiano Caruana shows his black victory over Georg Meier Fighting fire with fire

Yago Santiago’s hot tip against the Leningrad Dutch

Yago Santiago’s hot tip against the Leningrad Dutch No Catalan, por favor!

Igor Stohl stops this popular white opening with an early …b5

Igor Stohl stops this popular white opening with an early …b5 Carlsen insider

Peter Heine Nielsen analyses three current games of the World Champion

Peter Heine Nielsen analyses three current games of the World Champion Meeting world class

Vincent Keymer looks back at his draw against Levon Aronian

Vincent Keymer looks back at his draw against Levon Aronian "If you are thrown out of your preparation, you should react aggressively!"

Alina Kashlinskaya (cover) looks back at the victory which paved her way to become new European champion.

Alina Kashlinskaya (cover) looks back at the victory which paved her way to become new European champion. Ladies to the fore!

Oliver Reeh presents 29 tactical highlights from the European Women’s Ch



Oliver Reeh presents 29 tactical highlights from the European Women’s Ch Videos:

Rainer Knaak demonstrates a trap in the French Steinitz Variation.

Karsten Müller explains to you an instructive model game from Shamkir.

And: Get to know two of the greatest chess hopes from India, Nihal Sarin and Gukesh!



... and much more!

Links
