IT raids Congress leader Kuldeep Bishnoi's properties, unearths foreign assets worth Rs 200 crore

Congress leader Kuldeep Bishnoi had earlier criticised the BJP for trying to "harass" him and his family. (File Photo)

In a development which can have far-reaching political implications, the Income Tax (IT) department has unearthed foreign assets to the tune of over Rs 200 crore after four days' of searches on the properties of Haryana Congress leader Kuldeep Bishnoi and his family members.

The searches, initiated on July 23, were conducted on Kuldeep Bishnoi's group covering 13 premises across Delhi, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh.

The group, controlled by Bishnoi and his family members, according to IT department officials, "has a significant political presence in a neighbouring state for decades and are occupying responsible political positions, has been generating large amounts of undisclosed income over several decades."

The tax department claims that the evidence collected so far reveals undisclosed cash dealings of huge amounts in immovable property transactions, construction etc.

"The black money generated in India through various means has been stashed abroad in the form of lavish properties in the names of foreign trusts/companies," the IT department said.

Sources say that the foreign holdings of Bishnoi and his family members have remained hidden for decades beneath complex multi-layered structures, located in different countries including British Virgin Islands (BVI), Panama, the UK, the UAE and New Jersey.

Sources claim that during raids, the agency got hold of certain documents that indicates that one of the family members of the Congress leader was trying to seek citizenship of a Caribbean country.

"These structures have involved various frontmen and corporations across continents. One of the persons covered during the search operation was trying to obtain citizenship of a Caribbean Island," the IT department added.

The IT department claims that "apart from domestic tax evasion of more than Rs 30 crore which, may, inter alia lead to severe criminal consequences under the Black Money Act, 2015, apart from action under the Income Tax Act, 1961. These findings may also have multi-agency ramifications."

Congress on Saturday protested in Hisar against the searches by the IT department. The party has alleged that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is using the central agencies to target their leaders.
