Northern parts of Madurai get three new police stations

They are expected to share the huge burden on Anna Nagar and Tallakulam police stations, the jurisdiction of which have grown manifold

For the first time in recent years, Madurai City Commissionerate that was formed in 1990, is getting three new police stations. The new police stations are expected to share the huge burden on Anna Nagar and Tallakulam police stations, the jurisdiction of which have grown manifold after the Commissionerate became co-terminus with the expanded jurisdiction of the Madurai Corporation in 2015.

While the area under city police grew from a meagre 50 sq km to 150 sq km, with additional police stations and areas from rural district police, the city police faced shortage of manpower. The city limits grew from 72 wards to 100 wards. Policing, especially crime controlling, became a challenge in police stations where jurisdiction expanded manifold, like Anna Nagar, Tallakulam and S.S. Colony.

However, Chief Minister Edappadi K. Palaniswami recently announced two new police stations - Mattuthavani by bifurcating Anna Nagar police station, and Tiruppalai by bifurcating Tallakulam police station. Already, the city police have a new police station exclusively for the Madurai Bench of Madras High Court.

With the three new police stations all in the northern side of Vaigai river, the city police have embarked on redrawing the jurisdiction of Anna Nagar, K. Pudur, Mathichiyam and Tallakulam police stations for optimum usage of manpower.

“The first attempt will be to have a clarity on the jurisdiction of a police station for which we have taken major roads to divide their boundaries,” Commissioner of Police S. Davidson Devasirvatham said.

Secondly, the burden of some police stations will be shared with “lighter” stations.

“Though we have identified some of the major areas for change in jurisdiction, we are yet to finalise them,” Mr. Devasirvatham said.

Anna Nagar

“It will be a great relief for police personnel as well as residents. Anna Nagar police station had to cover a vast area - from Mattuthavani to Kuruvikkaran Salai, from there to Ring Road along Vandiyur. Vandiyur area per se required a police station for it is thickly populated and crfime infested,” a police officer said.

It also has the District Court, Central Vegetable Market, Flower Market, Food Grains Market, MGR Integrated Bus stand and Omni Bus stand. The areas north of K.K. Nagar Arch along Melur Highway will go to Mattuthavani.

As a result, Central Vegetable Market, Flower Market, MGR Integrated Bus Stand (from Anna Nagar police station), Uthangudi and Ulaganeri (from K. Pudur police station) will form the new Mattuthavani police station.

On the other side, Lake Road (connecting Melur Road with Anna Nagar) and areas north of Sivaganga Road and up to High Court premises boundary and Seeman Nagar will also go to the new police station.

Among the rest of Anna Nagar police station, Government Press, Rifle Club, Corporation Zone 2 Office, TNEB Office, Judicial Academy and a portion of SIDCO will go to K. Pudur police station to make the jurisdiction compact.

However, Anna Nagar police station will get ever-busy Collectorate and Gandhi Museum from Tallakulam.

Similarly, other important places such as American College, Corporation Commissioner’s camp office on Gandhi Museum Road, Rajaji Park, Madurai Medical College, Old Ramanatahpuram Collectorate and multi-speciality hospital on Panagal Road will go to Mathichiyam.

Already, the police outpost of Government Rajaji Hospital has been attached to Mathichiyam. Similarly, southern side of 80 Feet Road from Aavin Junction upto Kuruvikaran Salai and Sathamangalam will be attached to Mathichiyam.

Tallakulam

Tallakulam police station had the largest area what with 11 wards out of 100 coming under it. It started from Goripalayam and ended at Tiruppalai, bordering with Oomachikulam police station.

Almost all important government agencies - Collectorate, Madurai Medical College, Income Tax office, BSNL offices, Tamukkam Ground, Muthuramalinga Thevar statue, a host of government quarters and numerous educational institutions - come under it.

“With most of the protests taking place in and around its jurisdiction, the Tallakulam police are always kept busy,” the Commissioner said. This police station will be bifurcated and areas north of Iyer Bungalow-Moondrumavadi Road will go to the newly-created Tiruppalai police station.

However, the jurisdiction of Tallakulam station will begin from Goripalayam junction and extend up to Iyer Bungalow.

Earlier, the boundary of old Tallakulam (before expansion of city limits) was only upto Athikulam junction, a police officer said. The significant relief for Tallakulam will be Collectorate building, where protests galore, almost every day, going to Anna Nagar police station.

On Alagarkoil Road side, Tiruppalai police station will share its boundary up to Kadachanendal junction.

Still, the jurisdiction of Anna Nagar police station will remain bigger. “We have already sent a proposal for a new police station at Vandiyur. When it becomes a reality, it will become compact,” the officer said.

High Court

The burden on K. Pudur police station will also be reduced with High Court Bench getting an exclusive police station. “We have already appointed police officers and men for that police station,” Mr. Devasirvatham said.

The city police is still attempting to prune the jurisdictions of various police stations on the northern side of Vaigai river except for Sellur and Koodal Nagar, before finalising them.

However, formalities such as clearance from local body, Town Planning and judiciary are required before the revised jurisdictions become a reality.
