Salcete residents force Cabral to beat a hasty retreat

NT NETWORK

Margao

Environment Minister Nilesh Cabral had to beat a hasty retreat from the site of presentation on the draft Coastal Zone Management Plan (CZMP) held for Salcete taluka in Margao on Saturday after the audience booed him and did not allow him to speak. They demanded that the draft CZMP be scrapped outright.

A crowd of nearly 600 people gathered at the Ravindra Bhavan with black flags and placards to protest against the presentation held by the Minister for Environment. They shouted slogans against the minister and hurled abuses for over 45 minutes which upset the minister.

Alleging that some activists and politicians of the opposition parties are misguiding the people, Cabral promised to prepare a people’s plan after completing the presentations on draft CZMP in all the talukas. He said that





such presentations though are not a part of the process. “The presentation on draft CZMP is to explain to the people what the CRZ 2011 notification is,” he said.

Reacting to the protests, the visibly upset minister said, “Today’s presentation was for the people to understand what the CZMP is and what you can suggest and what we can do. People were shouting from behind. We completed the showing of the slides. Some vested interests raised their voices. Even though this presentation is not a part of the procedure, we tried to present it, taking pains to show first what the CRZ 2011 is,” Cabral said and added that the presentation was 90 per cent complete when some vested interests disturbed the meeting.

Stating that whatever lies between zero and 200 metres and between 200 metres and 500 metres from the coast comes under the coastal regulatory zone (CRZ) and that wherever there is 5 ppt salinity in river, CRZ comes into the picture, Cabral said that this concept came about only in the CRZ 2011 notification whereas it was not the case in 1991. “Shouting slogans will not help resolve the issue, we have to sit across and discuss,” he said.

Stating that the draft CZMP cannot be scrapped, Cabral said that it has been sent back with his comment that he is not happy with it. He said that it has been sent back to the National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM), the agency, which has prepared it. He said that a people’s plan will be prepared by taking panchayats into confidence and the NCSCM will later be asked to make the changes accordingly.

“I accept that the plan prepared by the NCSCM is wrong. I have spoken about it. People tried to understand about the draft CZMP elsewhere but here they were not ready to listen. I am trying to create a plan in two ways. Presently, I do not have any data on the 1991 notified plan. The need is to discuss with the people what the CRZ 2011 notification is and what is there at the site. Many houses have not been shown. I am ready for that plan. But for that we need the information. People should give factual information which can be complied with so that we can convince the Centre to make a case for Goa,” Cabral said. He said that in the next week, he, along with his team, will meet the Chennai-based agency NCSCM in this regard.
