Doctors, medical students raise pitch against NMC Bill

‘The Union government intends to privatise medical education’

Doctors, representatives of Indian Medical Association (IMA) and MBBS students staged a protest at the King George Hospital (KGH) on Monday, demanding that the Centre must drop the proposal to introduce the National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill-2019 in the Parliament.

‘Draconian measure’

Terming the proposed NMC Bill as a ‘draconian measure’, the protesters holding banners and placards raised slogans against the move. “The Bill intends to privatise the medical education in the country,” they alleged.

Later, the doctors and IMA representatives burnt the draft copies of the proposed bill.

“It is a pro-private management bill which will pave the way for widespread corruption by removing all the regulations for setting up a medical college,” the protesters said.

The Bill, if becomes an Act, will allow private medical colleges to increase UG and PG seats on their own, leaving only up to 40% of seats to be regulated by the government.

Management quota

“The Bill proposes increase in the management quota from 15 % to 60%. With this, the cost of medical education and healthcare would go up astronomically, putting the students from lower socio-economic groups to a big disadvantage,” they alleged.

IMA (Visakhapatnam) vice-president P.A. Ramani, central working council member M. Vijay Shekar said that only five States would be represented in the National Medical Commission at a given point of time.

The State medical councils which are functioning as sovereign bodies would come under the direct purview of the NMC.

Of 25 members proposed for the NMC, only five would be elected which means the non-elected members would be either government officials or those nominated by the government, they explained.

National Exit Test

Further, the Bill has proposed that all medical graduates have to undergo the National Exit Test (NEXT) examination for obtaining licence to practise and it would also be the basis for allocation of PG seats, they added.
