odisha: Odisha: No information with govt about private girls', women’s hostels in cities

BHUBANESWAR: With the mushrooming of educational institutions and training centres, several houses in the cities have been converted into hostels. Even women or girls working in different firms stay in private hostels in the cities including Bhubaneswar and Cuttack But the state government does not have any information regarding the number of girls or women’s hostels in the cities. Minister of state for home Dibya Shankar Mishra told the state assembly here on Monday.Owners of these hostels rake in the mullah and do not register details about their hostels and its inmates with the state government. The minister also said that there is no particular direction to the owners for registration of their hostels in other cities except Bhubaneswar-Cuttack commissionerate area.Mishra said the state government had published Bhubaneswar- Cuttack Police Commissionerate (Registration of Private Residential Hostels of Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2017, to provide security to inmates of private hostels of educational institutions. The Bhubaneswar-Cuttack commissionerate of police has been declared as the licensing authority, he added.Only 10 owners had submitted applications before the commissionerate police to register their girls/women hostels in Bhubaneswar and Cuttack, but it could not be registered due to lack of some legal documents. So there is no information regarding these hostels, clarified the minister in his reply.He said the local police provide security to the women or girls hostels if they get any prior information regarding any disturbances near the hostels.“It is unfortunate that the state government has no data regarding the women’s or girls hostels in the cities. It is important to keep database of these hostels to provide them security. Besides, there are hundreds of boys’ hostels in the state. It is the responsibility of the state to ask the owners for registration and also collect tax from them,” said Sankar Prasad Pani, a lawyer of the city.He said sometimes inmates of boys’ hostels indulge themselves in criminal activities. The proper database will help police to detect the case and also create fear among the inmates before committing any crime, he added.On August 19, 2013, Manmohan Pradhan, an M Pharma student, was killed by his cotenants at Laxmisagar after he protested against their unruly behaviour.On September 13, 2012, police arrested some hostel boarders in connection with the sensational murder of an elderly woman and brutal attack on her husband at Acharya Vihar.
