Lok Sabha passes Bill to replace MCI with medical commission

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, July 29

The Lok Sabha on Monday passed the National Medical Commission Bill which would replace the 63-year-old Medical Council of India (MCI) with a new commission and aims to change the medical education sector.

Notably, all students in the final year of MBBS will take an “exit exam”. It will be a common exam for the entire country. On the basis of this “exit exam”, the postgraduate seats will be allocated. Postgraduation after MBBS is when doctors specialise in a particular stream for example in cardiology, internal medicine or orthopaedic, among others.

The Bill seeks to repeal the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. Union Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan, while piloting the Bill, said MMBS students in their final year are more focused on preparing for their postgraduation entrance exam than acquiring clinical acumen. The PG seats will be allocated as per merit in the exit exam, he said.

“Selection to PG courses will be objective and as per global standards,” Dr Harsh Vardhan said. He assured the Centre does not intend to usurp the powers of the states saying the centre will have no role in day-to-day operation, the state governments will run it. The advisory council will have all 36 state medical councils.

The Bill, the minister said, proposes to appoint full-time regulators who have no vested interests and move away from prevailing ‘inspection raj’ which medical colleges face now with more than 10 inspections annually.

Fatehgarh Sahib MP Dr Amar Singh, while making a point during the discussion, said this Bill aims to ‘over centralise’ everything; from the search committee to the appellant authority all powers are with the Centre. “Sections 45 and 46 of the Bill provide for absolute powers to the Centre,” said Dr Amar Singh, who is an MBBS and worked as a doctor before joining the IAS.

He questioned the minister as to how will the Centre appoint primary health workers in the villages. “Is it even feasible?” he asked.

‘Bill centralises everything’

This Bill aims to ‘over centralise’ everything; from the search committee to the appellant authority, all powers are with the Centre. Sections 45 and 46 of the Bill provide for absolute powers to the Centre... how will the Centre appoint primary health workers in the villages? Is it even feasible? — Dr Amar Singh, Fatehgarh Sahib MP
