Unnao Case: Opposition attacks govt over Unnao accident case; 'don't politicise issue,' counters Union minister

For God’s sake, Mr. Prime Minister, divest this criminal and his brother of the political power your party is givin… https://t.co/KwfgG41iWM — Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) 1564467816000

Why do we give people like Kuldeep Sengar the strength and protection of political power and abandon their victims… https://t.co/ynupSJz65O — Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) 1564467741000

NEW DELHI: The opposition on Tuesday raised the Unnao accident case in Lok Sabha and demanded a statement from Union home minister Amit Shah even as the rape survivor battles for her life in a Lucknow hospital.The rape survivor and her lawyer were critically injured and her two aunts killed in a road accident, which the opposition alleges was a conspiracy to eliminate her. While Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury called the incident 'a blot on civilised society', the govt accused the opposition of politicising the issue."People of India are feeling ashamed today due to Unnao incident , it's a blot on civilized society, where a minor girl was gang-raped. A truck hit the victim's car (in Raebareli)& killed a witness, victim & her lawyer are in critical condition," Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury said in Lok Sabha. "We demand that home minister comes to the House and gives a statement," he said.Responding to opposition, Union parliamentary affairs minister, Pralhad Joshi said: "The case should not be politicised, CBI inquiry is already underway , FIR has been registered. Government is investigating with impartiality."Meanwhile, several members of the opposition parties staged a protest outside Parliament demanding justice for the survivor.Congress general secretary Priynaka Gandhi, who has been relentless in her attacks against the UP government and the Centre, urged the Prime Minister to act against BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, who has already been booked by the police."Why do we give people like Kuldeep Sengar the strength and protection of political power and abandon their victims to battle for their lives alone? This FIR clearly states that the family was threatened and apprehensive. It even mentions the possibility of a planned accident," Priyanka said in a tweet.Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Singh met the survivor's kin in Lucknow and reiterated his charge of conspiracy."Accident of Unnao rape victim is unfortunate and condemnable. It has shocked women of the country. Her father was beaten by police on instructions of BJP leaders, FIR was registered after she tried to immolate herself. It's natural that people are questioning the government and the BJP MLA," Akhilesh said.According to news agency IANS, the truck involved in the accident belongs to a Samajwadi Party leader. SP, incidentally, was the first party to demand the Central Bureau of Investigation probe.
