Triple talaq bill passed in Rajya Sabha, PM Modi terms it historic | Highlights

Follow us on Triple Talaq Bill tabled in Rajya Sabha

The triple talaq bill criminalising instant divorce in the Muslim community was passed by the Rajya Sabha on Tuesday, with the government mustering numbers for its smooth sailing in the Upper House where it still lacks majority support. The contentious bill was passed with 99 members voting in favour and 84 against it. It was passed by the Lok Sabha last week.

Parliament Session Live Updates: July 30

09:45 pm: Sushma Swaraj tweets: "I congratulate the Prime Minister and all members of parliament who helped in the passage of the revolutionary Bill on triple Talaq."

09:00 pm: The All India Muslim Personal Law Board tweets: "Certainly, it's a black day in Indian democracy. Despite Indian Muslim women's opposition to the #TripleTalaqBill, the Modi led government passed the bill in both the lower house and the upper house. We on behalf of millions of women condemn this action."

08:50 pm: President Kovind, in a tweet, says: "Passage in the Rajya Sabha of Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Bill completes Parliament's approval of ban on the inequitable practice of triple talaq. A milestone in the quest for gender justice; a moment of satisfaction for the entire country."

08:20 pm: Omar Abdullah tweets: "The floor management of the BJP/NDA in the Rajya Sabha is quite something. So much for the treasury side not having the numbers in the upper house! I’d be amazed if there is a single piece of legislation the Government will struggle with in the Rajya Sabha."

08:15 pm: Owaisi tweets: "#TripleTalaqBill should be seen only as one part of many attacks on Muslim identity & citizenship since 2014. Mob violence, police atrocities & mass incarceration won't bog us down

With a firm belief in the Constitution, we've withstood oppression, injustices & denial of rights"

08:00 pm: Mehbooba Mufti says she cannot understand why the bill was passed

07:45 pm: Home Minister Amit Shah calls it historic

07:30 pm: PM Modi hails passage of triple talaq bill

07:00 pm: BJP MP Meenakshi Lekhi responds

06:43 pm: Triple talaq bill finally gets Rajya Sabha nod

06:30 pm: Final voting begins

06:15 pm: Rajya Sabha declines proposal to send bill to Select Committee by 16 votes

06:10 pm: Voting on triple talaq bill is underway in Rajya Sabha

06:00 pm: Ravi Shankar Prasad slams Opposition

2:45 pm: "When the husbands come out of jail, they will either commit suicide or become dacoits and thieves -- that is the intention of your bill," Ghulam Nabi Azad on triple talaq bill.

2:00 pm: YSR Congress Party leader, Vijay Sai Reddy: YSR Congress party will oppose Triple Talaq Bill and vote against it (ANI)

12:44 pm: Discussion on Triple Talaq underway in Rajya Sabha

12:09 pm: This is a matter of gender justice, dignity and equality: Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad

12:07 pm: Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad tables Triple Talaq bill in Rajya Sabha.

11:30 am: Union Parliamentary Affairs Minister, Pralhad Joshi in Lok Sabha on accident of Unnao rape victim: It should not be politicised, CBI inquiry is already underway, FIR has been registered. Government is investigating with impartiality.

11:20 am: BJP MP Jagdambika Pal: Congress is misleading the nation. The truck was of an SP leader so they need to answer now. The accused MLA is in jail. They opposition is playing politics. DGP had already said that this could be an accident. CBI probe has been ordered. They are just trying to defame the UP government.

11:11 am: Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, Congress in Lok Sabha: We demand that Home Minister comes to the House and gives a statement. What kind of a society are we talking about, where such an incident (accident of Unnao rape case victim in Raebareli) happened with the victim.

11:10 am: Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, Congress: People of India are feeling ashamed today due to Unnao incident, it's a blot on civilized society, where a minor girl was gang-raped. A truck hit the victim's car(in Raebareli) and killed witness, victim and her lawyer are in critical condition.

11:00 am: Unnao accident case storms Lok Sabha. Opposition parties hold protest

10:58 am: Union Minister Pralhad Joshi: Triple Talaq bill will be tabled in Rajya Sabha at 12 pm today. We have 11 bills pending to be passed today. So far, 15 bills have been passed in both Lok Sabha & Rajya Sabha. 6 bills have been passed only in Lok Sabha and 4 bills only in Rajya Sabha.

10:44 am: Congress leader in Lok Sabha, Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury and 5 other party MPs give Adjournment Motion Notice in Lok Sabha over "gruesome crimes against women, a matter of great concern (in connection with Unnao)".

10:41 am: Delhi: Samajwadi Party & Trinamool Congress MPs protest in front of Mahatma Gandhi's statue at the Parliament premises over "attack on Unnao rape victim & ex-soldier beaten to death (in Amethi, UP)"

10:04 am: BJP Parliamentary Party meeting underway at Parliament premises.

10:00 am: All India Trinamool Congress issues whip to its Rajya Sabha MPs to be present in the House today and following two days.

9:27 am: Union Home Minister Amit Shah and Union ministers Arjun Ram Meghwal and Prahlad Joshi arrive for BJP Parliamentary Party meeting at Parliament premises.
