Solid and not so solid walls

Understand minor piece endgames

Karsten Mueller is an expert on all endings, but minor piece ending is one of the few for which he has yet to record a dedicated FritzTrainer. However, his book on the subject can tide the eager learner over until that day comes.

Karsten Mueller in ChessBase Magazine

Chess Endgames 14 - The golden guidelines of endgame play Rules of thumb are the key to everything when you are having to set the correct course in a complex endgame. In this final DVD of his series on the endgame, our endgame specialist introduces you to the most important of these rules of thumb.

Do you like these lessons? There are plenty more by internationally renowned endgame expert Dr Karsten Müller in ChessBase Magazine, where you will also find openings articles and surveys, tactics, and of course annotations by the world's top grandmasters.

Apart from his regular columns and video lectures in ChessBase Magazine there is a whole series of training DVDs by Karsten Mueller, which are bestsellers in the ChessBase Shop.

Karsten Mueller regularly presents endgame lessons in the ChessBase Video Portal

ChessBase Magazine 190 Analyses by Caruana, Nepomniachtchi, Anand, Kashlinskaya, Wojtaszek, Navara, Meier, Keymer etc. from recent top-class tournaments. Videos by King, Trent, Pelletier and Marin. 12 opening articles with new repertoire ideas and much more!

Highlights of this issue

No passive position!

Fabiano Caruana shows his black victory over Georg Meier

Fabiano Caruana shows his black victory over Georg Meier Fighting fire with fire

Yago Santiago’s hot tip against the Leningrad Dutch

Yago Santiago’s hot tip against the Leningrad Dutch No Catalan, por favor!

Igor Stohl stops this popular white opening with an early …b5

Igor Stohl stops this popular white opening with an early …b5 Carlsen insider

Peter Heine Nielsen analyses three current games of the World Champion

Peter Heine Nielsen analyses three current games of the World Champion Meeting world class

Vincent Keymer looks back at his draw against Levon Aronian

Vincent Keymer looks back at his draw against Levon Aronian "If you are thrown out of your preparation, you should react aggressively!"

Alina Kashlinskaya (cover) looks back at the victory which paved her way to become new European champion.

Alina Kashlinskaya (cover) looks back at the victory which paved her way to become new European champion. Ladies to the fore!

Oliver Reeh presents 29 tactical highlights from the European Women’s Ch



Oliver Reeh presents 29 tactical highlights from the European Women’s Ch Videos:

Rainer Knaak demonstrates a trap in the French Steinitz Variation.

Karsten Müller explains to you an instructive model game from Shamkir.

And: Get to know two of the greatest chess hopes from India, Nihal Sarin and Gukesh!



... and much more!

Links
