Unnao: In scathing tweet, Priyanka Gandhi urges PM to 'divest' BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar of political power

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, Congress general secretary | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Priyanka Gandhi on Tuesday took to Twitter to urge PM Modi to take action against Unnao MLA accused of rape Priyanka Gandhi has slammed the BJP for not expelling accused BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar Unnao rape survivor and her family members met with a car accident on Sunday night

Lucknow: As the Unnao rape survivor battles for her life following a car accident, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi on Tuesday wrote scathing tweets, urging Prime Minister Narendra Modi to "divest" rape accused BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar of the political power that the BJP has given him.

In a series of tweets, Gandhi said it was “not too late” for the Prime Minister to take action against Sengar, who has been accused of raping the teenager and allegedly having his henchmen threaten the family to withdraw the case.

She said, “Why do we give people like Kuldeep Sengar the strength and protection of political power and abandon their victims to battle for their lives alone?”

The Congress leader further said, “For God’s sake, Mr. Prime Minister, divest this criminal and his brother of the political power your party is giving them. Its still not too late.”

Gandhi had tweeted on the issue on Monday as well, posting a picture of the accused BJP MLA with UP CM Yogi Adityanath.

She said in the tweet, "What is the BJP waiting for? Why has this man not been expelled from their party even when his name is in the latest FIR in the Unnao Rape Case?"

For God’s sake, Mr. Prime Minister, divest this criminal and his brother of the political power your party is giving them.



Its still not too late.#BJPSackSengar — Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) July 30, 2019

What is the BJP waiting for? Why has this man not been expelled from their party even when his name is in the latest FIR in the Unnao Rape Case?#BJPSackSengar pic.twitter.com/cTpQ0HbFNT — Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) July 29, 2019

A two-week-old letter to the Supreme Court by the teenager’s family revealed that the henchmen and relatives of the jailed BJP MLA had allegedly threatened them with dire consequences if they did not withdraw the rape case.

In the letter, the victim’s mother claimed that BJP MLA’s brother was among the men who had come to their house to threaten them.

Sources told Times Now that Priyanka along with her brother and former Congress chief Rahul Gandhi were “likely to meet” the survivor at the King George’s Medical University (KGMU) in Lucknow, where she is undergoing treatment after the accident.

Opposition leaders have slammed the BJP government in Uttar Pradesh and CM Yogi Adityanath over the Unnao rape case, terming the accident of the survivor as “possible murder conspiracy.”

Earlier today, Congress workers staged protests outside BJP office in Lucknow while Samajwadi Party and Trinamool Congress MPs staged protests in front of Mahatma Gandhi statue in Parliament’s premises over the issue.

On Sunday, a speeding truck rammed into the car in which the teen rape survivor, her lawyer and her two aunts were travelling near Rae Bareli. The girl and her lawyer were critically wounded while her two aunts succumbed to their injuries.

The driver, cleaner and the owner of the truck have been arrested, police said.

The Uttar Pradesh government, meanwhile, has sent a request to the Centre to transfer the case of the Unnao rape victim’s accident to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).

Sengar, who is presently in jail, has been booked for charges of criminal conspiracy and murder in connection with the Sunday accident.


