VG Siddhartha missing news: Multi-agency search for Cafe Coffe Day boss VG Siddhartha draws a blank

MANGALURU: A multi-agency search for VG Siddhartha , sexagenarian founder of Café Coffee Day (CCD), suspected to have jumped into the swollen Nethravathi river from the bridge late on Monday, drew a blank on Tuesday. Acting on a complaint from Basavaraj Patil, his driver who brought Siddharatha from his Sadashiva Nagar residence in Bengaluru to this city, local authorities first swung in to action, and later broad based their search and rescue (SAR) operations.The district administration decided to continue SAR operations on a limited level through the night too, noted Sasikanth Senthil S, Deputy Commissioner. City police chief Sandeep Patil said watch will be kept in the river through the night and special search light would be used. Police were deployed on both sides of the river to check for activity in the night. Indian Coast Guard too continued their vigil out at the sea through the night with its fast patrol vessel ICGS Savitribai Phule.The SAR operation on Wednesday will concentrate on the Nethravati river bank, seashore areas of Ullal, Panambur, Bengre and Someshwara beaches. The limited search operation from the night will resume in a full-fledged manner at 7am, Sasikanth Senthil said. In a related development, city police quizzed CCD chief financial officer Javed Parvez and others with whom Siddhartha was last in touch over phone. Police said Siddhartha’s last call was made to Parvez.Earlier in the day, personnel from fire and emergency services, NDRF, Coast Guard, home guards, local fishermen and city police were pressed in to service to locate Siddhartha as the news of him missing spread like wild fire. Coast Guard first pressed its fast patrol vessel ICGS Rajdoot and later ICGS Savitribai Phule that patrolled off old Mangaluru Port to keep a sharp vigil close to the harbour mouth and also its air cushion vehicle for SAR operations in the Nethravathi.The multi-agency SAR was also fuelled by a statement given by Simon, a local fisherman who claimed he saw a person jump into the river from the bridge sometime between 7pm to 7.30pm and attempts to rescue him, individually first and with help from other fishermen in the area, were futile. The SAR operations gained momentum as daylight broke with city police blocking traffic on the old bridge routing traffic on the adjacent new bridge.City police chief Sandeep Patil, who was in Bengaluru initially, said he spoke to wife of Siddharatha and other relatives and collected some information on what might have prompted the CCD chief to take this extreme step. Patil, who subsequently air dashed to the city to coordinate the SAR operations, said he has sent the CCB PSI to Bengaluru for inquiry. The CCB team will talk to relatives and visit his office to glean any information, he said.With dusk descending, the district administration pressed portable floodlights to help the SAR in the river below. City police also questioned Basavaraj Patil to ascertain the veracity of chain of events as narrated by him in the complaint dictated to police at the jurisdictional Mangalore Town Police station. Police also seized the compact MPV (KA 03 NC 2592) in which Siddharatha travelled from Bengaluru as part of their investigation.Incidentally, Indian Coast Guard was ready to deploy their air asset as well for SAR, but bad weather prevented helicopters from operating. The incident saw politicians and locals alike make a beeline for the bridge, curious to catch the action. CCTV cameras at Brahmarakootlu toll plaza have captured Siddhartha’s MPV cross the plaza. Fishermen out fishing were put on alert to inform the authorities if they spot body floating in the sea.
