J&K governor rejects speculation on Article 35-A, says it’s fake news

Srinagar: Jammu and Kashmir governor Satya Pal Malik dismissed rumours over abrogation of Article 35 (A) and said none of the purported government orders, being circulated on social media for the past few days hinting at special preparations for a law and order situation, was valid.The rumour mill in Kashmir is overactive and if somebody sneezes at Lal Chowk , it transforms into the news of a bomb blast till it reaches the governor house, Malik said, even as he urged people not to pay heed to misinformation. “There is no valid order and those orders shown are not of the government.Lot of rumours spread here. Don’t pay heed to this. Everything is normal. Everything is fine,” Malik said Tuesday on the sidelines of a function of Navodaya Vidyalaya principals here.Following the governor’s clarification, former chief minister and National Conference leader Omar Abdullah demanded a CBI investigation into the spread of rumours. “Fake orders were circulated under the signature of senior government officers. This is not something that can be dismissed with a simple sound bite. The CBI must be asked to investigate these fake orders & their origin,” Abdullah tweeted.Malik, while addressing the function, said development and education were the panacea for all problems of the state. He said local politicians had always lied to the people of Kashmir.“They spoke of autonomy. They would come back from Delhi and take out green handkerchief from their pockets to deceive people that they enjoy the support of Pakistan,” Malik said, adding: “This is not a disease that was caused in one day and we have to bear it. This is the mistake of past governments in Delhi, who cheated and installed chief ministers without elections and forced probable winners to lose.”The governor said dynasty rulers were not the solution for Kashmir and many politicians and bureaucrats had looted all wealth and money that came from New Delhi. “We have to groom a new leadership from ground level because they know the problem and they would provide with the solution,” said Malik.The governor said gun was not the solution to any issue, whether it was the gun of the militant or the gun of government forces.
