Expanding Oceania Dairy to bring 80 new jobs to South Canterbury

Oceania Dairy supply and environment manager Shane Lodge says the site in Glenavy will have a staff of 400 by Christmas.

At least 80 new jobs will be created when two expansion projects, one a $30 million laboratory, at Glenavy's Oceania Dairy, are completed by next July.

The South Canterbury factory employs 328 staff but development to its canning, blending and UHT operations, and the new laboratory means these numbers should swell, its supply and environment manager Shane Lodge says.

The news has been welcomed by the South Canterbury Chamber of Commerce, citing it as an enormous boost to the region's economy and status on the regional, local and global stage.

BEJON HASWELL/ STUFF Milk powder ready for export inside the Oceania Dairy warehouse.

"When we started in August 2014 we had 70 staff. We're likely to have close to 400 by Christmas and that's due to the additional two plants we're building at the moment," Lodge said.

"Lab staff employed will eventually amount to 90 in a range of positions when our new laboratory is built next year."

BEJON HASWELL/ STUFF Oceania Dairy supply and environment manager Shane Lodge explains the history of the site.

He said the site was designed for further expansion which was dictated by the demands of the various product lines made at Oceania.

"We are currently in a small expansion phase at the moment, building a smaller second canning and blending line and we're putting in a third UHT line."

Lodge said Oceania tested many of its products away from the 38 hectare site as their laboratory was too small at the moment. This led to plans to develop a brand new state of the art facility to conduct all tests within the premises.

BEJON HASWELL/ STUFF Baby formula destined for the Chinese market being packaged at Oceania.

"We're about to start building a $30 million laboratory. This will allow us to do all of the testing on all of the range of products we do here on site.

"We already do all in process testing and some final product testing but we do send products away for testing in Christchurch and Auckland."

Lodge said groundwork and the foundation for the laboratory have been completed and above ground building will begin this month.

BEJON HASWELL/ STUFF Supply and environment manager at Oceania Dairy, Shane Lodge, at the storage silos on the Glenavy site.

The laboratory vacancies created by the construction of the new building will include laboratory technician positions for composition, chemical, microbiological, functionale and sensory testing, he said.

"The jobs will be advertised on Seek and there are other avenues we use as well. We also go to the universities' career days so we have a presence there, particularly from Otago University in particular, Lincoln and Canterbury."

Lodge said 40 per cent of employees travelled daily from Oamaru, while 38 per cent resided in Timaru and the remainder came from the Waimate District. Oceania supply free transport by bus for their shift staff from Timaru and Oamaru.

BEJON HASWELL/ STUFF Baby formula cans being boxed up ready to be shipped from Oceania Dairy's Glenavy site.

The site is "very multicultural", Lodge said. In addition to the many New Zealanders, Oceania employs people from China, Australia, The Philippines, Nepal and India among others.

South Canterbury Chamber of Commerce chief executive Wendy Smith said Oceania Dairy's level of investment demonstrates it commitment to a future in South Canterbury.

"The development of further laboratory work will see South Canterbury taking a more prominent role attracting highly trained laboratory technicians and scientists and building on the strong presence in this area created by South Pacific Sera, Fonterra, Barker's and many of our other leading businesses."

She said although some South Canterbury businesses have had challenges finding skilled workers, key developments like this will raise the region's profile both nationally and internationally.

Oceania is owned by Inner Mongolia Yili Industrial Group (Yili), the ninth largest dairy company in the world. Production at the Glenavy site began in August 2014.

"That first stage was a 10 ton drier which makes a range of different types of powders. We added a small AMF plant to the side of that. The plant manufactures baby Infant milk formula and other milk powders bound for China," he said.

"Then Stage 2 came along and we built a canning and blending plant to package infant formula for sale to consumers. Also as part of Stage 2 we built a UHT plant, two UHT lines making 1 litre cartons and 250ml cartons of UHT milk for China."

Stage 2a is the new canning and blending plant and new UHT line which will be commissioned towards the end of the year, he said.
