Inflated water bills burn a hole in pocket

editorial@tribune.com

Kuldeep Chauhan

Tribune News Service

Shimla, July 30

Residents in the state capital are getting inflated water bills. Flaying the BJP-run Shimla Municipal Corporation (SMC), they said they were paying Rs 45 per kilo litre, the highest water tariff in the country. They alleged that Shimla Jal Prabandhan Nigam Limited (SJPNL) issued them inflated water bills after a year or every six months. “Ideally, we should be getting these every month,” they said.

The consumers accused the SMC and the SJPNL of slapping “inflated water and sewerage bills”, which were 14 times more than the previous bills from October 2018 to March 2019 under the volumetric system of water tariff.

The government constituted the SJPNL this year when the BJP government came to power in the state.

“I got a hefty bill of Rs 30,000 for six months last month, which was reduced to Rs 22,000,” said Govind Singh, a resident of Lower Cemetery.

“We paid Rs 45 per kilo litre due to delayed water bill. The SJPNL charges Rs 14.50 per kilo litre up to 20 kilo litre, which is almost three times more than Rs 5.27 per kilo litre, the tariff that Delhi charges,” he added.

Govind is not the only one. There are hundreds of consumers who are getting inflated bills.

“We were issued the water and sewerage bills of Rs 22,000 and Rs 17,000 for six months, respectively, under the new system. Earlier, we used to pay Rs 1,500 for four months,” said residents of New Shimla.

“Are we running some water mill and each family consumes not more than 200 litre water every day,” they said.

“The SJPNL charges Rs 45 per kilo litre if consumption exceeds 30 kilo litre from domestic consumers. If it is charging as per the volumetric system, it should issue bills every month, not after six months or a year, which changes the slab chart and results in inflated bills,” the residents demanded.

Congress and CPM councillors accused the BJP of looting residents by slapping hefty water and sewerage bills.

“Shimla Jal Prabandhan Nigam Limited has increased the sewerage charges by 100 per cent,” said Inderjit Singh, Congress councillor, Surender Chauhan, Narender Thakur, Sushant Kapret, Deepak Rohal, all former Congress councillors, who addressed the press conference here today.

“More than 50 per cent of the consumers have not got water bills for the last one year,” they said.

The SJPNL has decided to increase water tariff by 10 per cent from April 1 every year, which has further raised the ire of residents. It is the common man, who lives as a tenant as house owners charge hefty water bills from them and it is an open loot by the firm,” said Sanjay Chauhan, former Mayor.

“We will gherao the Mayor tomorrow. We have fixed the water tariff at the flat rate and fixed sewerage charges at 30 per cent. But the volumetric system has resulted in inflated bills, which is an open loot,” Chauhan said.

Chief Executive Officer, SJPNL, Dharmender Gill said the households, which had multiple users, were getting hefty bills under the volumetric system. “We are checking all such cases and trying to start the monthly billing system,” he added.

Tariff within MC limits
