India lodges strong protest against Pakistan for 'killing of innocent civilians' in ceasefire violations

File photo | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights A 10-day-old infant died after being injured in ceasefire violation on July 29 An Indian Army soldier Naik Krishan Lal was killed on Tuesday

New Delhi: India on Tuesday, lodged a strong protest against Pakistan for 'killing of an innocent Indian civilian in an unprovoked act of firing'. New Delhi made a strong demarche with the Pakistan High Commission against the killing of an innocent Indian civilian in an unprovoked act of firing by Pakistan forces, news agencies reported citing sources. A 10-day old baby that was injured in cross-border firing by Pakistani forces, died at a hospital in Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir on July 29.

"Government of India deplores and condemns in the strongest terms, such deliberate targeting of innocent civilians by Pakistan forces. This is against all established humanitarian norms and professional military conduct," Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) said in a letter to Pakistan High Commission in India.

"Pakistan authorities are called up to investigate into such heinous acts of killing innocent civilians and instructs its forces to desist from such acts immediately," the MEA letter further said.

On July 29, an infant, his mother, 35-year-old Fatima Jan, and a civilian named Mohammad Arif were injured when Pakistani troops resorted to mortar shelling along the Line of Control (LoC).

"Pakistan Army resorted to unprovoked ceasefire violation along the Line of Control (LoC) in Sunderbani sector, District Rajouri (J&K). Indian Army responded strongly and effectively. Heavy damage to Pak Army posts and casualties to Pak soldiers have been inflicted by own troops. In the exchange of fire, Naik Krishan Lal attained martyrdom (sic)," Northern Command said in a statement on Tuesday.

In ceasefire violation by Pakistan on Tuesday, one Indian soldier was killed. The Indian Army retaliated and in the resulting fire, two Pakistani soldiers were killed. On July 22, an Indian soldier was killed in Rajouri district of Jammu and Kashmir and a civilian was injured in ceasefire violation on July 20.
