Chennai Metro Rail: Miles To Go To Realise Its Potential; Its Chief Says Effective Measures Are Being Taken

There are many in Chennai who feel that the Metro Rail has overpriced ticket rates. Though compared with call taxis and auto rickshaws they are cheap, the fares are high when compared with either share auto or bus fares. Then again, many in Chennai prefer to use their own two-wheeler or four-wheeler for last-mile connectivity. Currently, every second person you come across in Chennai owns a two-wheeler, according to a Times of India report .

“Share autos are one reason why Chennai Metro Rail isn’t getting its numbers. You can board a share auto anywhere and get down anywhere and the fares are affordable. In addition, Chennai has a variety of transport options and they seem to tell on Chennai Metro Rail ridership,” says C Ramasubramanian, who commutes to Ekkaduthangal every day.

Chennai Metro was projected to carry 7.76 lakh commuters a day but actually only around one lakh use the services. Chennai Metro is also handicapped by inadequate last-mile connectivity though the corporation has been trying to address this issue. Metro Transport Corporation does not ply its buses to metro stations from some localities.

Though the Tamil Nadu government operates mini buses, few services link commuters’ residences to the nearest metro stations. Lack of funds and revenue loss are cited by the Metro Transport Corporation for the tardy progress in helping the Metro Rail corporation with last-mile connectivity.

“There are other issues like parking facilities. For instance, when I drove to Koyambedu from Avadi and tried to park my car there, the people manning the facilities said there was no space on a day when it had rained in the morning,” says a commuter who drives his four-wheeler from Avadi to Koyambedu and then takes the metro to Nandanam.

“When I questioned them pointing out vacant spots, the parking lot staff tell me that they become slushy during heavy rainfall and they didn’t want to take the risk of being shouted at by commuters if more showers followed during the day. Poor maintenance of its properties is hurting the corporation,” the Avadi commuter said.

Bansal says CMRL has taken up several initiatives to address the first- and last-mile connectivity issues through operation of feeder share auto, electric auto, shared cab, and maxi-cab services at select metro stations. “At present, CMRL is working towards introducing app-based dedicated feeder service for all metro stations. CMRL is also collaborating with leading IT firms and is operating dedicated feeder services for them,” he says.
