Mamata, Raj Thackeray join hands against EVMs; MNS chief demands return of ballot papers for Maharashtra polls

Raj Thackeray meets Mamata Banerjee in Kolkata | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Mamata, Raj Thackeray demand EVMs be scrapped and polls held using ballot papers Mamata hits out at NDA government over state of economy If industrialists commit suicide, don't you think it is a dangerous signal for the country, Mamata asks

Kolkata: At a meeting in West Bengal’s capital Kolkata, Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chief Raj Thackeray joined hands with Trinamool Congress supremo Mamata Banerjee to push for the return of ballot papers. Addressing reporters after their meeting on electoral reforms at state Secretariat Nabanna, the two leaders vowed to fight for the junking of electronic voting machines (EVMs) and return of ballot papers.

Stating that he has no faith in the (Bombay) High Court, the Supreme Court or the Election Commission, Raj Thackeray announced that he would hold a protest for the return of ballot papers on August 21. Thackeray has invited leaders of other opposition parties to join him in the protest. Mamata Banerjee, while supporting the call, will not be joining the MNS chief’s agitation.

“I have no expectations from High Court, Supreme Court and the Election Commissioner,” he said in response to a question on whether he will move court against EVMs.

Thackeray even demanded that the upcoming Assembly elections in Maharashtra later this year be held using ballot papers. He said Mamata didi has agreed to lend him support on the matter.

“I came to meet her on the issue of use of EVMs in polls. I've invited her to a 'morcha' in Mumbai. She told me that her party is committed towards saving democracy. She said, ‘Main hun, aisa samajh lena’," Thackeray said.

This Lok Sabha election has raised a lot of questions, Thackeray said further, adding even many developed nations have abandoned EVMs. Not everything is fine with the machines, the MNC chief stated.

He also announced that Mamata has agreed to campaign for his party in the Maharashtra state polls.

Mamata Banerjee, meanwhile, hit out at the NDA government over the death of Café Coffee Day founder VG Siddhartha’s death.

Alleging government agencies have been unleashed on industries, Mamata asked, “If all industrialists leave the country like this or commit suicide, don't you think it is a dangerous signal for the country? I'm feeling sad today because it should not be the future of the industry or agriculture.”

“This government won the election. It's fine… you work for the people. But from the second day onwards, they started what they had done in the past five years. Horse-trading, economic disaster... Agencies are after industries. Public sectors units are being shut,” she said.

She went on to say that economic growth has suffered under the current regime and unemployment has become very high. She also accused the BJP of trying to break opposition parties.
