Cut in power tariff's fixed charges an admission of mistake by AAP govt: Oppn

Hours after the Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission announced a major cut in fixed charges of power tariff, the Opposition BJP and Congress on Wednesday termed the reduction an "admission of mistake" by the Kejriwal government.

Delhi BJP leaders including its president Manoj Tiwari also sought to share the credit for the major cut in fixed charges.

"The BJP's (city unit) continuously pressurised the Delhi government over the issue and Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal has now admitted his mistake. The government will also have to refund Rs 7000 crore realised from the people by increasing the fixed charges," said Tiwari.

In a joint statement, Delhi Congress' working presidents Haroon Yusuf, Devender Yadav and Rajesh Lilothia also demanded that the reduction in power tariff be implemented retrospectively from the time it was increased.

The fixed charges have been slashed by up to 84 per cent. According to the new rates, the fixed charges up to 2 kilowatts (kW) have been reduced from Rs 125 to Rs 20, while the charges above 2 kW but less than 5 kW have been slashed from Rs 140 to Rs 50.

"The fact that the Kejriwal government has reduced the fixed charges is proof enough that it has admitted looting the people of Delhi in the past one and a half years by hiking the charges," they said.

They alleged the AAP government, by increasing fixed charges and surcharge in power bills, had put an "unnecessary" burden on citizens to benefit discoms.

Instead of ordering a total roll back of the fixed charges, the AAP government is doing a "piecemeal job" in an attempt to "fool" the people ahead of the Delhi assembly polls to be held next year, they added.

BJP's Leader of Opposition in Delhi Assembly, Vijender Gupta said the discoms should compensate power consumers for the financial loss on account of payment of increased fixed charges since April 1 last year.

"The reduction in fixed charges is a big victory for the BJP. The party had protested against it," he said.

He also alleged that the power consumers were being made to pay power purchase cost adjustment charges (PPAC) and surcharge for a pension trust fund in an "unauthorised" manner.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
