Outpatient services in pvt. hospitals suspended

Doctors go on strike as part of nationwide protest against National Medical Commission Bill

Outpatient services in private hospitals in Erode, Salem and Namakkal districts were suspended on Wednesday in response to the Indian Medical Association’s call for a nationwide strike urging the Central government to withdraw the National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill. However, doctors in government hospitals supported the strike by wearing black badge and performing their duty.

All the emergency, casualty and ICU and related services functioned normally at private hospitals while the OP services remain suspended for 24 hours from 6 a.m. on July 31 to 6 a.m. on August 1. The strike is in protest against the Lok Sabha passing the Bill and the IMA calling it as ‘draconian’, ‘anti-student’ and ‘anti-poor’.

In Salem, members of Federation of Government Doctors Association, staged a protest at IMA building premises and raised slogans demanding the withdrawal of the Bill. They also wanted to retain the democratic statutory body, Medical Council of India, to monitor the medical education in the country.

In Namakkal, doctors staged a protest in front of the district headquarters hospital by covering their eyes with black cloth. They said that the Bill compromises the quality of treatment to the poor and also compromise the quality of medical education. They also said that provisions of the Bill will enable privatisation of the medical education and termed it as ‘anti-student’.

In Erode, protest was held at IMA branch premises at Sampath Nagar in which doctors raised slogans urging the government to withdraw the Bill.

In Krishnagiri, doctors staged a protest boycotting non-essential services.

They staged a protest demonstration boycotting outpatient services at the government hospital.

The Indian Medical Association has slammed the Bill that seeks to replace the Indian Medical Council that had regulated medical education profession and medical institutions in India.

It introduces a new category called community health providers, who will be a new class of medical practitioners and will form one-third of registered practitioners.

The strike affected outpatient services at the Krishnagiri government headquarters hospital.

In Dharmapuri, government medical college hospital doctors staged a protest demonstration wearing black flags and black bands tied across their mouths.
