Bengaluru hospitals protest against NMC Bill

National Medical Council

Indian Medical Association

OPD

draconian law

By Akhila DamodaranIn protest against the passing of(NMC) Bill by the Lower House, the(IMA) had called for a 24-hour withdrawal of non-essential services from 6 am on July 31 to 6 am on August 1. The director of Health Services, Karnataka had asked all District Health Officers and District Surgeons to ensure uninterrupted and maximum service on Wednesday and not to sanction any kind of leave for doctors and other staff and not to allow any untoward incidences. Though the government hospitals continued their services, many private hospitals had their(Out-Patient Department) shut. However, the emergency services were open.The notice issued by the IMA, a copy of which is available with BM, calls the NMC Bill ‘’. It states that section 32 of the Bill provides for licensing for 3.5 lakh unqualified non-medical persons to practice modern medicine. It further states that it legalises ‘quackery’.The Sakra World Hospital joins the IMA and Private Hospitals and Nursing Homes Association (PHANA) in protest against the Bill in its current form. Dr Deepak Balani, Chief of Medical Services at Sakra, says the NMC Bill, passed in the Lok Sabha, is intended to bring quality healthcare but it has flaws. “The proposed structure and composition of NMC, the Medical Advisory Council and Advisory Boards are not conducive for an independent, free and fair Commission. The proposed National Exit Test for medical graduates promises to be a logistical nightmare in its uniform conduct and simultaneous administration across the country. Formal en masse enabling of non-MBBS personnel to practice modern medicine is bound to dilute standards of care and at the same time, it appears that education, qualification, registration and practice of practitioners of modern medicine would be more stringently regulated and monitored,” he says.The Manipal Hospitals also supports the fight for the medical fraternity. “Consultants who have pledged support have been requested to make alternate arrangements so that patients are not inconvenienced in any manner,” he says. The OPD at the Apollo Hospitals was shut on Wednesday but they conducted all scheduled surgeries.
