Azam Khan's son accuses UP police of 'gundaraj' after being released from detention

Samajwadi Party MLA Abdullah Azam Khan | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights MLA Abdullah Azam Khan was detained for obstructing police work in Rampur Police had carried out raids at Khan's Mohammad Ali Jauhar University His father Mohammad Azam Khan is the founder and chancellor of Mohammad Ali Jauhar University.

Lucknow: Samajwadi Party (SP) MLA Abdullah Azam Khan, the son of SP MP Azam Khan, was released after being taken into custody at Mohammad Ali Jauhar University on Wednesday for obstructing police work.

“I asked police for search warrant. They didn't have any order. It is 'gundaraj' here of administration and police. This University is our heritage, we can't let it go, we'll save it. They can arrest us if they want,” Abdullah said after being released.

The police carried out raids at the university and recovered dozens of books stolen from other institutes in Rampur. Khan later held candle light vigil to protest his arrest outside the University. The father of the SP MLA from Suar, is the founder and chancellor of the university.The incident adds to Azam Khan's woes, after Uttar Pradesh police has filed an FIR against him for allegedly stealing two lion statues which were installed at the Rampur club.

The statues were allegedly stolen from the club at the directions of the Rampur MP and were later installed at his Maulana Ali Jauhar University in Rampur.

The police have decided to seize the statues and return them to their rightful place.

This comes days after the sub-divisional magistrate’s office ordered the removal of the varsity gate claiming that it was built on government land. The SDM court’s order claimed the land belonged to state-owned Public Works Department and also sought the removal of the gate within 15 days on claims that it blocks the road outside.

The SP leader has also been booked for the theft of about 2,000 books and manuscripts from the ancient Aaliya Madarsa in Rampur which is about 250 years old.

The books have been recovered from Khan’s Jauhar University's library, Rampur Superintendent of Police Ajay Pal Sharma told reporters, news agency IANS reported. The official said that recovered books are ancient and valuable.
