Rampur protest: Azam Khan's son Abdullah released after brief detention during protest

Azam Khan's son Abdullah and other SP workers being detained in Rampur. (Sanjay Kumar/India Today)

A day after Samajwadi Party (SP) MP Azam Khan's son was detained from outside the Jauhar University in Rampur the party has planned a huge show of strength in support of Azam and his son. SP chief Akhilesh Yadav has asked all party workers to reach Rampur to support the father-son duo on their allegations that the Yogi government has launched a witch-hunt against them.

Uttar Pradesh Police has meanwhile put traffic restrictions on all highways connecting Delhi and other parts of UP to Rampur to avoid a law and order situation.

RAMPUR PROTEST UPDATES:

02:20 pm: Police release Azam Khan's son Abdullah and SP supporters on condition of not protesting anymore. Police deployed outside his residence.

01:21 pm: Azam Khan's son detained. Several other Samajwadi Party workers have also been detained after clashing with police.

12:11 pm: Around 100 Samajwadi workers coming from Bijnaur and Sambhal stopped from entering Rampur

10:55 am: Office of Azam Khan in Rampur under security cover.



Azam Khan's son Abdullah Azam Khan had held a candlelight protest yesterday evening against his detention and police searches at Mohammad Ali Jauhar University in Rampur. He was joined by supporters from his party and university students at the protest.

10:30 am: Police is frisking all vehicles entering Rampur, including state buses, causing huge traffic jam on National Highway 24.

10:20 am: Rampur DM AK Singh said, "Section 144 is already in place in view of the Kanwar Yatra and Bakra Eid. We have got additional forces and will not let anyone enter from the border. Anyone who violates law and order will be dealt with strictness."

10:15 am: Samajwadi Party workers from different parts of the state are expected to reach Rampur in the morning to join the protests. Sources say the situation may escalate later in the morning. Security across Rampur has been heightened in anticipation of the tension.

MLA Abdullah Azam was detained on Wednesday for allegedly obstructing officials during a raid at Mohammad Ali Jauhar University in Rampur, triggering the protests by party workers that are likely to intensify on Thursday.

Till now, 2,500 rare, stolen books have been recovered from the university, founded by Azam Khan, in the raid which began on Tuesday, police said.

SP MLA from Suar Assembly seat Abdullah Azam was detained for obstructing the raids and creating hurdles in government work, Rampur SP Ajaypal Sharma said.

He was later released on bail. Samajwadi Party has alleged that their party men were being deliberately harassed and framed in fake cases.
