DGP set to get extension

editorial@tribune.com

Pradeep Sharma

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, January 16

Haryana Director General of Police (DGP) BS Sandhu, whose extended tenure ends on January 31, is likely to get another extension; this time till September 30.

Sources said the Centre’s decision to give extension to Punjab DGP Suresh Arora till September 30 has set a precedent for the Haryana Government to seek extension for its DGP as both cases were similar in nature.

Both Arora and Sandhu were due to retire on September 30, 2018, but were given a three-month extension till December 31. Later, the Supreme Court allowed them to continue in office till January 31.

The Haryana Government’s intention to retain Sandhu was demonstrated recently when it sought a seven-month extension for him apparently “in line” with the Supreme Court directions regarding a two-year tenure irrespective of the date of superannuation for DGPs. Sandhu was appointed to the post on April 27, 2017.

However, the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) granted three-month extension to Sandhu after relaxing Section 16 (1) of the All India Service (Death-Cum-Retirement Benefits) Rules.

In fact, the Assembly had recently amended the Police Act, circumventing the July 3 judgment providing absolute powers to the state government to select the DGP.

On July 3 last year, the SC had directed all states and Union Territories not to appoint any police officer as acting DGP and issued certain other directions on police reforms to check favouritism and nepotism in appointments after it was pointed out that many states were appointing acting DGPs and then making them permanent just before their superannuation to extend them the benefit of an additional two-year tenure.

According to the July order, the states were required to send a list of senior police officers to the UPSC at least three months prior to the retirement of the incumbent officer. The UPSC would prepare a panel and inform the state concerned. The state government would immediately appoint one of the persons from that panel.

Meanwhile, Supreme Court’s Wednesday’s order asking the states to follow the UPSC route for selecting the new DGP would give ample time to the Haryana Government to seek extension for the incumbent police chief.
