Junior doctors in Hyderabad boycotts medical practices

Hyderabad: Junior doctors in the twin cities on Friday boycotted their medical practices and continued to stage protest opposing the National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill passed by the Parliament.

In the last three days, medical students have continued agitation and continued the boycott.

Speaking to media Dr. Arjun Chief Secretary Junior Doctors Association Gandhi Hospital said that they strongly object to the Bill as it is objectionable to the modern medicine and the entire fraternity,”

Dr. Arjun requested the Centre to rectify and amend the Bill, as it is related to public health.

General Secretary of junior doctors association, doctor Navdeep said, “Without discussing or consulting with doctors or any others from the medical fraternity, the lawmakers themselves passed the Bill in Parliament, ignoring its consequences. The strike will be witnessed until the bill is taken back.”

The Telangana Junior Doctors Association at Gandhi Medical college also continued with their indefinite hunger strike and boycotted their medical practices. Nearly 1000 doctors at Osmania General Hospital staged a protest and raised slogans “we want justice “ “Awaz Do Hum Ek Hain” They boycotted the medical services both electives and emergencies. Likewise, Protest was seen across Telangana including RIMS Adilabad where a two km rally was taken out.

The doctors across India, under different banners, today continued their strike in protest against the passage of the NMC Bill.

The Bill will replace the Medical Council of India (MCI) by a National Medical Commission (NMC).

Doctors have also been raising their voices against sections 32 and 15 of the Bill pertaining to licensing of health providers and the entrance exam for post-graduate course/NEXT. They say that the Bill empowers Central government to override any suggestion of the NMC. he NMC will have responsibilities such as approving and assessing medical colleges, conducting common MBBS entrance and exit exams and regulating course fees.

The Bill will decrease the representation of elected members from 75 percent in MCI to 20 percent in NMC.

The Rajya Sabha on Thursday approved the National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill, 2019 by a voice vote with Health Minister Harsh Vardhan says the Bill will go down in history as the biggest reform of the Narendra Modi government.

Siasat News
