University teachers are not government servants: Applying CCS rules to them militates against higher education

The chargesheeting of 48 teachers of Jawaharlal Nehru University, many of them senior and distinguished academics, by the university’s administration can scarcely be described as a normal or routine event. The disciplinary proceedings initiated against a twelfth of the total faculty strength who belong to diverse disciplines has come as a shock.

The proceedings envisage the possibility of ‘major penalty’ being imposed – which includes a range from dismissal from service to reduction in pay scale. What is the charge against these 48 teachers? Nothing more than the fact that they were among several participants in a peaceful protest against the administration’s policies organised by the JNU Teachers’ Association (JNUTA) a year ago, on July 31, 2018.

The treatment of a simple protest as rank misconduct which merits major penalties is beyond comprehension. Such protests are by no means uncommon occurrences in universities across India and many teachers at some point or the other have been participants in them. The full significance of what is happening in JNU, however, goes way beyond the institution, and beyond the banning of protests in the university campus.

To ‘punish’ the 48 teachers, the JNU administration has used the Central Civil Services (CCS) Rules – claiming that through their participation in a peaceful JNUTA protest, the teachers violated provisions within these rules.

It is certainly true that the CCS (Conduct) Rules of 1964 prohibit the participation of government servants in protest actions of different kinds even on their service matters. They also disallow the participation of government servants in political activities and elections, restrict their right to publicly comment on government policies in writing or in the media. CCS (Conduct) Rules mandate prior government approval for publishing any work as well as editing any periodical, and give the government several other powers to decide what government servants may or may not do. Are all such restrictions on the freedom of expression and of actions applicable to teachers, and should they be?

In addition to them taking to the streets to press their demands, aren’t academics also routinely sought out by the media and other organisations and forums for their expert opinions on several issues including government policies? Aren’t several of them invited to write articles for newspapers and magazines on different issues? Don’t teachers routinely author papers and books that have not been ‘cleared’ by government?

Don’t they frame the curriculums of the courses they teach and define their own research agendas? Don’t we also have several ministers, MPs and MLAs who have been university teachers? How did all of this become possible if CCS (Conduct) Rules were applicable to teachers? More importantly, what does all this tell us about the terrible loss the nation’s public and intellectual life would suffer if university teachers are brought within the ambit of these rules?

The fact of the matter is that universities, even public ones, are created as autonomous bodies and their teachers are not government servants. Attempts have, however, often been made to obliterate this difference.

Nationwide protests last year against attempts at several places, including JNU, to impose CCS Rules and other such restrictions on teachers had prompted the HRD minister to come out with an assurance that the government had no intention of curbing freedom of expression in universities. Even as a proposal to bring Delhi University under ESMA was scrapped, the JNU administration also retreated from its original position on the applicability of CCS Rules to its teachers, announcing in October 2018 that no CCS Rules were being incorporated in the ordinances on the service conditions of teachers.

Is there, then, a hidden political agenda behind the JNU administration’s revival of a matter on which it sat for so many months doing nothing? Is the JNU case intended to create the precedent through which teachers in all higher education institutions are going to be robbed of more of their freedoms?

If this fear is misplaced, it can be easily dispelled by the government simply making it clear that it doesn’t endorse the JNU administration’s actions. Given the potentially far-reaching consequences of the JNU administration’s actions, a government not backing these steps should in fact feel some responsibility to clarify its position on the matter.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
