NMC Bill protest: Safdarjung doctors asked to resume work or face action

Resident doctors of AIIMS, Safdarjung and RML Hospital continued their strike in protest of the bill and withdrew services. (Image | ANI)

Resident doctors at Safdarjung Hospital have been asked to resume work with immediate effect, failing which they would face action. Doctors all across the nation are protesting against the National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill which was passed Thursday in Rajya Sabha by the Modi government.

Various medical associations alleged that there are provisions in the bill that are anti-poor, anti-student and anti-democratic. Rajya Sabha passed the National Medical Commission Bill for replacing the corruption-plagued MCI with a new body.

Resident doctors of AIIMS, Safdarjung and RML Hospital continued their strike in protest of the bill on Friday and withdrew services even from emergency departments.

Following are the demands of Resident Doctor's Association sitting in protest against NMC bill.

Also, a delegation of doctors from Delhi met Union Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan to discuss the matter. After the meeting, Dr Harsh Vardhan said he has removed their misconception about certain provisions of the bill. He added that he has also requested them to end the strike.

Many patients who have come for the treatments are facing issues due to the prevailing strike. Some are waiting for the past 3-4 days and few are scared that their condition will deteriorate due to the delay.

The Indian Medical Association (IMA) also extended its support to the striking doctors on Friday and said its core concerns over the National Medical Commission Bill remained unaddressed.

In a statement, the IMA said it would never accept the provision of the bill which provides for unqualified non-medical persons being registered and allowed to practice. The IMA has also called for on emergency All India Action Committee meeting on Sunday. The Bill will now go back to Lok Sabha as two amendments need to be approved by it.
