India about to launch biggest genocide in history of mankind: Syed Ali Geelani

If you kept quite over Indian brutalities seeing us all die you will be answerable to Allah: Geelani

SRINAGAR (Dunya News) - Chairman All Parties Huriyat Conference (APHC) Syed Ali Geelani said Indians are about to launch the biggest genocide in the history of mankind. He said if you kept quite over Indian brutalities seeing us all die you will be answerable to Allah the Magnificent.



In a tweet the Kashmiri leader said” This tweet must be taken as an SOS (Save Our Souls) message to all Muslims living on this planet. If we all die and you kept quite you will be answerable to Allah the Magnificent. Indians are about to launch the biggest genocide in the history of Mankind. May Allah protect us.

This tweet must be taken as an SOS (Save Our Souls) message to all Muslims living on this planet. If we all die and you kept quite you will be answerable to Allah the Magnificent. Indians are about to launch the biggest genocide in the history of Mankind. May Allah protect us. — Syed Ali Geelani (@sageelani) August 3, 2019

Earlier, in occupied Kashmir, Indian troops in their fresh act of state terrorism martyred two Kashmiri youths in Pandoshan area of Shopian district, and Baramulla.

Even after the act of aggression, several protesters were arrested by the forces as they took to streets for protests. The troops martyred the youth during a cordon and search operation after killing of an Indian soldier and injury of another.

To disperse the protestors, police and forces used pellet guns and tear gas, resulting in injuries of several protesters. Meanwhile, Shopian administration suspended mobile phone internet service in the region. The operation continued till last reports came in.

On the other hand, Indian forces arrested several Kashmiris during raids on houses in Pulwama district. A vehicle of Indian army was damaged by a bomb detonated on a roadside in Zahid Bagh area of Pulwama. Moreover, Indian investigation agency Enforcement Directorate has seized a property worth Rs17.3 million owned by Kashmiri trader Zahoor watali who has been detained in New Delhi.
