Gang of miscreants loots 'Muga Paat' clothes worth Rs 14 lakh in Biswanath

Biswanath: In an incident, a gang of miscreants loots clothes made of Muga Paat worth Rs 14 lakh rupees in the midnight hours on Saturday in Biswanath.

As per reports, the gang managed to break open the shutter of the ‘Suwalkuchi Silk House’ and barged inside the store in the midnight hours. The miscreants later managed to escape from the spot.

Following the incident, Biswanath police started an investigation into the matter.

It may be mentioned that such kind of incidents had sparked sensation in the entire district since the past few weeks.

So far no arrests have been made in connection to the matter.

Further police investigation is on.

Biswanath: In an incident, a gang of miscreants loot clothes made of Muga Paat worth Rs 14 lakh rupees in the mid night hours on Saturday in Biswanath.

As per reports, the gang managed to break open the shutter of the ‘Suwalkuchi Silk House’ and barged inside the store in the mid night hours. The miscreants later managed to escape from the spot.

Following the incident, Biswanath police started an investigation into the matter.

It may be mentioned that such kind of incidents had sparked sensation in the entire district since past few weeks.

So far no arrests have been made in connection to the matter.

Further police investigation is on.

Muga Silk

Muga silk is the product of the silkworm Antheraea assamensis endemic to Assam. The larvae of these moths feed on som (Machilus bombycina) and sualu (Litsaea polyantha) leaves. The silk produced is known for its glossy, fine texture and durability. It was previously reported that muga silk cannot be dyed or bleached due to "low porosity", but this is incorrect; muga takes dye like any other silk. This silk can be hand washed with its lustre increasing after every wash. Very often the silk outlives its owner.

A set of mekhela chadors made with muga silk from Assam arranged around a jaapi and set on a shawl made with eri silk.

In 2015, Adarsh Gupta K of Nagaraju's research team at Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad, India, discovered the complete sequence and the protein structure of muga silk fibroin and published it in Nature Scientific Reports.

Pat Silk

Pat silk is produced by Bombyx textor silkworms which feed on mulberry (Morus spp.) leaves. It is usually brilliant white or off-white in colour. Its cloth can dry in shadow.

Also Read: Miscreant’s loots cash Rs 60,000 by offering spiked drink to man in Guwahati
