Wagholi locals plan semi-nude protest

Local residents of Wagholi have decided to stage a semi-nude protest in front of Pune Metropolitan Region Development Authority's (PMRDA) office in Aundh to protest against its "selective" approach to dealing with encroachment on nallahs and live streams.



They allege that authorities surveying the area have excluded many developers and only a handful have been asked to stop construction.



A survey conducted on Friday found that only three developers, including Rohan Builders, Dhawal Shivtirth and Suyog Developers, have flouted the norms. PMRDA has asked these developers not to go on with the work until the damage has been ratified. Notices have been served to these developers. However, locals say that 95 sites are equally at fault and the construction sites on waterbodies need to be demolished.



The PMRDA team, while surveying the area, visited sites, including Rohan Abhilasha, Jade Residency, Majestic Towers, Marvel, Chamadia Developers, Dhawal Shivtirth and Suyog Developers, which were allegedly constructed on the stream or by diverting the stream.



Talking to Pune Mirror, Sarjerao Waghmare, local resident and member of Haveli panchayat samiti, said, "We have demanded cancellation of permission to the other sites as well and demolition of present constructions which have been found at fault. Any leniency towards these constructions will invite major tragedy."



"The officials of PMRDA and irrigation department have given permissions to projects despite the fact the direction of nallahs and streams have been changed. Despite the instructions from the district collector to stop all such illegal activity on water bodies, the PMRDA officials are shielding the guilty officials. With no other option, we have decided to conduct semi-nude protest outside the office of PMRDA," he added.



Milind Pathak, additional collector with PMRDA, said, "A team of town planners, anti-encroachment department and executive engineers have visited the sites. All the constructions are going on with building permission plans. However, we have given standing instructions to six major developers to rectify the illegal diversions of nallahs," he said.



"The survey is still going on, wherever possible we are instructing the developers to make changes accordingly in the structure, so that the water will be drain out without any hurdle," said Pathak.


