History-sheeter arrested for murder and loots

SURAT: Crime branch sleuths of city police arrested a 20-year-old history-sheeter on Saturday for his alleged involvement in a murder and six armed robberies. Manya Dukkar had been arrested multiple times in the past since the age of 15 for seven loots, five chain-snatchings, two vehicle thefts, two attacks and twice for possessing firearms. He was lodged at correction home, but it did not help law enforcement authorities in improving his life.Sagar alias Nitin alias Manoj Santosh Sonavane alias Manya Dukkar, a resident of Rukshmani Society, Palsana was arrested by police from Dindoli. Police recovered a car, Rs1 lakh cash, a mobile phone and a knife from him.Manya informed police during questioning that he and his associates, including a minor, killed Pawav Ashok Savant on July 19, 2019 after kidnapping him from near V R Mall. The minor, who is yet to be arrested, wanted to avenge his elder brother Pawan’s murder for which he got Savant killed. The minor suspected that Pawan was killed by Vishal Vagh and his brother Rakesh. Since Savant used to hangout with Vagh brothers, the accused minor got him killed with help of Manya. Savant was stabbed to death.Police investigation found that Manya and the minor had attacked Vishal Vagh on July 8 at Limbayat. They opened fire at Vishal and escaped. Vishal was unhurt. Manya informed police that he looted Rs1.20 lakh from a man on motorcycle at Sita Nagar crossroads bridge. Manya along with his gang members namely Himanshu, Aanya alias Aakash, Hansraj, Samadhan and the minor executed the loot on two motorcycles. The gang had looted gold chain and phone from a man near Bread Liner Circle in July.In another loot, they stabbed a man for his gold chain, mobile phone and cash at Limbayat near Capital Square. On May 10, the accused stabbed Ravindra Patil in Limbayat since he used to spend time with Vishal. On May 12, Manya attacked and stabbed Sunil Bhisikar near Marathi School in Godadara.“Police are yet to arrest the minor and other gang members for a series of crime in the city. Manya has been involved in criminal activities since he was 15 year old and arrested multiple times in the past,” said a crime branch officer.
