City battles water, ward 36 fights thirst

Ludhiana: At a time when the entire city is reeling under waterlogging problem, residents of ward number 36 have been battling drinking water shortage for the past 10 days.

On Saturday, residents of the area in Quality Chowk, Shimlapuri, held a protest to show their anger against the authorities. They asked the authorities to fix the problem as soon as possible.

The issue has taken a political turn. While Akali Dal leaders have blamed the tubewell operators for not running the units, Lok Insaaf Party leaders have claimed that a technical snag in the tubewell has interrupted the water supply.

Ram Verma, a resident, said, “I am repenting the day when I had decided to shift in this locality which lack basic amenities. On the back of our minds, we are always thinking whether there will be water supply at home or not.” He said they have been dependent on water tankers for the past 10 days but these are also sent occasionally in the area, leaving them with inadequate water.

Sukhwinder Singh, another resident of area, said they had to block the chowk on Saturday as they were left with no other option. But even then, nobody came to their help, he said adding they had to call the former councillor from Akali Dal Jagbir Sokhi for a solution.

SAD leader Sokhi alleged that tubewell operators have not been given a salary for the past few months due to which they don’t switch on the tubewells in the locality. He said residents are a troubled lot and he has arranged the tankers for them for the time being.

On the other hand, councillor of ward number 36 Harwinder Singh Kaler, who is from Lok Insaaf Party, said, “It is all politics against me. Sokhi came up with the plan after reaching the protest site.” He said while motor of one tubewell is being repaired, other tubewell has some wiring problem. He claimed that problem will be resolved shortly and till then water tankers will be used for the purpose.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
