Strike by PGI docs adds to patients’ sufferings

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, August 3

Health services were affected at the PGI today after resident doctors went on an indefinite strike in protest against the National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill.

All OPDs remained closed and no elective procedure was performed at the institute, which caused inconvenience to patients coming from far-off places. However, emergency and ICUs functioned as usual. The hospital had appealed to the faculty members to remain present on duty as nearly 1,200 resident doctors would be on strike today.

Anil Kumar, a resident of Naraingarh, said he and his elder brother travelled for nearly two hours to reach the PGI and found doctors on strike. “It is really disappointing. The doctors should adopt some other way of protest instead of holding a strike, affecting health care services,” he added.

Many patients, who were not aware of the strike, held a demonstration on the campus demanding restoration of OPD service.

The Association of Resident Doctors (ARD) of the PGIM had given the call for indefinite strike on Friday in protest against the passing of the NMC Bill in the Rajya Sabha. “All resident doctors have been withdrawn from all services, except emergencies and ICUs,” said Dr Uttam Thakur, president, ARD. He said the strike would continue until the changes doctors had sought in the Bill were not incorporated.

The Bill would replace the Medical Council of India (MCI) after the President gives his consent.

Dr Thakur said they strongly oppose several provisions of the Bill. There was ambiguity of the term ‘person connected with modern medical profession’ in the Bill. The Bill takes away the autonomy of the institutes of national importance in deciding their curriculum, he said, adding that with introduction of the National Exit Test (NEXT), the quality of medical exam would be compromised.

“There is undue favour to private medical colleges by decreasing the number of fee-controlled seats. This will put talented, economically-weaker candidates at a disadvantage and open doors for corruption,” he added.

“Until these concerns are addressed appropriately, our strike will continue. We will not hesitate from intensifying our protest by shutting down the emergency and ICU services,” Dr Thakur.

Nearly 10,000 patients visit the hospital daily for OPD services from various states, including Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh.
