Supreme Court fixes February-end deadline for Lokpal search panel to recommend names

The Supreme Court on Thursday requested the search committee on Lokpal to shortlist and recommend by February-end a panel of names for appointing the country’s first anti-graft ombudsman.

A bench led by Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi also asked the Centre to provide the search committee requisite infrastructure and manpower to enable it to start its work and finish it within the stipulated time-frame.

The directions were given after Attorney General KK Venugopal told the bench that the panel, headed by former apex court judge Ranjana Prakash Desai, met on Wednesday and discussed the difficulties it was facing in terms of infrastructure and staff.

The law officer said although funds had been allocated for the panel’s functioning, it was yet to get office premises or staff.

Venugopal apprised the court after it sought to know how many times the panel had met since it was set up last September.

“Between September and now, how many times has the committee met?” asked the bench, also comprising justices LN Rao and SK Kaul.

The court was hearing a contempt petition filed by NGO Common Cause against the government for delaying the appointment of the Lokpal. Appearing for the NGO, advocate Prashant Bhushan raised doubts on the working of the search committee.

Bhushan complained that the working of the committee lacked transparency and the panel must make public the shortlisted names.

At this, CJI Gogoi said, “Why do you want us to pass unnecessary orders? We have asked the search committee to complete work by February-end. When they will give the list, we will give it to you.”

But Bhushan persisted with its argument, prompting the CJI to remark, “Don’t look at things from a negative point of view. Look at things from a positive point. The world will be a better place to live. So try it from tomorrow.”

The CJI continued with his comments even as lawyers present in the courtroom burst out laughing: “I am sure you want to make the world a better place to live. One way to do this is to look at things positively.”

But Bhushan still stuck to his submissions and said the committee must define the parameters for making the selection and it was not known whether there were any.

Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi then told him: “Mr Bhushan, you know everything that’s happening in the country”. He looked at mediapersons present in the courtroom and said: “They are all going to write about you tomorrow.”

The case will be heard next on March 7.

The top court had on July 24 last year rejected as “wholly unsatisfactory” the Centre’s submission on the issue of setting up of a search committee for Lokpal and demanded a “better affidavit”.

It was also told that the selection committee had met on July 19 last year to deliberate upon names for members of the search committee.

Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge, who is the leader of the largest opposition party, has been giving a go by to the meetings of the selection panel.

(With PTI inputs)

SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON
