Two dead, one feared drowned as 204 mm rain lashes city

Landslide injures four in Dindoshi; incessant showers leave several areas inundated

Rain-related incidents were feared to have claimed three lives and injured four following heavy overnight rain in the city on Sunday. One person was feared drowned in Mithi river near Dharavi, two were electrocuted at Santacruz, while four were injured in a landslide in Dindoshi.

The city recorded 204 mm rainfall on Sunday, the third highest in 24 hours August in a decade. On August 30, 2017, Mumbai received 331.4 mm rainfall and on August 29, 2011 it received 232.6 mm in a 24-hour span. The highest 24-hour rainfall in Mumbai in August (all-time record) was recorded on August 23, 1997, (346.2mm). IMD has forecast ‘light to moderate rain’ for Mumbai, ‘heavy to very heavy rain’ for Thane and Palghar on Monday.

Some of the areas that received very high rain include Vikhroli (300 mm), Mulund (268), Bhandup (247), Kandivali (276), Andheri (East) (254), Dindoshi (249), Malad (235), Andheri (West) (220), Goregaon (204), and Malabar Hill (144).

A chemist shifts medicines out of his shop in flooded Badlapur. | Photo Credit: Sandeep Rasal

The rain led to waterlogging at Sion’s road no. 24, Pratiksha Nagar, Kurla, Malad subway, Dahisar subway, Milan subway, Veera Desai road, Andheri, Jogeshwari, Ghatkopar, Chembur, Mulund, Kanjurmarg, and Kherwadi junction.

There were 11 incidents of slabs collapsing, 45 complaints of short-circuit, and 138 complaints of trees or branches falling.

Around 11 a.m. on Sunday, Mehboob Mazar Shaikh (20) was feared drowned in the Mithi river near the Dharavi-end of Mahim Nature Park. A resident of Rajiv Gandhi Nagar, Mr. Shaikh had gone there with 10 friends and, according to Dharavi police, is a good swimmer.

“His mother told us he had gone to answer nature’s call, but we later learned that he and his friends had gone there to make a TikTok video. Mr. Shaikh told his friends he was going for a swim, but he went in wearing his clothes. We suspect he may have drowned because of the weight of the clothes. It is likely that he got stuck in muck and could not free himself,” police inspector Mohan Patil said.

Two divers of the fire brigade, along with the police, civic staff and locals searched for the youth till late in the night. but did not find him. The rain and high tide made the search operations challenging.

A view of the submerged parking lot at Pallava Society in Dombivli. | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

The Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) commissioner Praveen Pardeshi, meanwhile, inspected Mithi river near Kala Nagar, which crossed the 3-meter ‘danger mark’. As many as 400 residents of Kranti Nagar in Kurla were shifted to a neighbouring civic school.

Around 6.45 a.m. rubble and mud collapsed on 16 shanties at the base of a hill in Rajiv Gandhi Nagar, Dindoshi, injuring four of a family sleeping in one of them.

According to the BMC, many houses in the area had been vacated but the family in question, Zubeda Shaikh (60), her son Abdul Jabbar (42) and grandsons Ahmed Hussain (14) and Mohammad Hussain Shaikh (15), continued to stay as they had nowhere to go.

The fire brigade was called in, but locals had already rescued and taken the injured to the HBT Trauma Care hospital in Jogeshwari. The four had injuries to their head, chest and abdomen and were treated at the outpatient department. Three of them were advised hospitalisation, but they chose not to do so. All were said to be stable.

Abdul Jabbar Shaikh told The Hindu, “We have been staying here for 30 years, but only after this construction began such incidents started happening. We will now be staying with some relatives.” He was referring to a set of residential high-rise towers built on top of the hill.

The Shri Ganesh Jan Seva Society, a residents’ association of Rajiv Gandhi Nagar, had written to the BMC on July 10 that the area had experienced small landslides due to the continuous discharge of waste water from the buildings above the settlement, and sought action. They had also written to Goregaon MLA Vidya Thakur on July 2.

“We have been writing to the authorities for the past three years, but nobody heeded our requests,” said Suresh Prajapati, a resident of the area. “We have been living here for 30 years, but had never witnessed such incidents prior to the construction of the building,” he said.

Chanda Jadhav, assistant municipal commissioner, P South ward, said a survey conducted by the Geological Survey of India had already declared the area of the settlement unsafe and residents had been asked to evacuate in April. “They were also instructed to move to a temporary accommodation provided at a nearby school,” she said. On Sunday, the BMC shifted the residents to the school.

Two electrocuted

Two people were electrocuted near Sahayuvak Sahajeevan Pragati Mandal at Patel Nagar in Santacruz (East) at 4.30 p.m. The police said Mala Bhupanna Nagam (50) was climbing a metal staircase opposite her residence at Golibar road when she suffered an electric shock and collapsed. When her son, Sanket Bhupanna Nagam (26) tried to rescue her he too was electrocuted. The two were rushed to V.N. Desai Hospital where both were declared dead.

Following this, residents took to the streets to protest the deaths, causing traffic on Western Express Highway to be suspended for 15 minutes. A case of accidental death has been registered at the Nirmal Nagar police station.

A minor fire broke out at Pydhonie, though no casualties were reported. At 6.45 p.m., a fire engine and a tanker were deployed and the fire brought under control.
