Growing similarity between Central Islamic State and West African affiliate

As per a comparative analysis of 2019 video releases by the Islamic State’s Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya and print output by the central leadership, a homogenous trend between the two outfits is conspicuous. Separately, the videos also possibly indicate at subsuming of the Islamic State’s Sahel-based affiliate into Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya.

Messaging from the mainstream faction of the Islamic State’s Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya affiliated to Abu Abdullah Umar al-Barnawi has continued frequently throughout 2019, predominantly occurring through the transmission of short statements claiming attacks on local security forces, and occasionally through the release of still images depicting the incidents. At least 108 different attack claims have been released by the faction in the first half of 2019. Some trends in recent Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya messaging demonstrate close media connections to the central Islamic State apparatus, in addition to an overall domination of Nigerian militant Islamist messaging, despite recent outputs from both the dissident Shekau faction of Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya and the long dormant Ansaru faction.

Relations between the Islamic State’s central leadership and its West African affiliate have always been most visible in terms of media productions, but recent developments have provided further evidence of this dynamic. A notable development is the promotion of Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya activities by central Islamic State media outlets. For example, the weekly Arabic-language newspaper Al-Naba has regularly reported Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya activities across 2019, featuring several operations by the affiliate on its cover, such as a February 2019 rocket attack on Maiduguri. In addition, Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya has distributed videos that bear similarity to the style and content of execution videos previously released by Islamic State wilayaat in Iraq and Syria.

Such aspects had previously been present in Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya messaging, but there has been a greater recent focus on executions in its media production, with three different such videos over the past four months. Furthermore, a video from 15 June 2019, showed militants in Mali and Burkina Faso reaffirming their pledge of allegiance to Islamic State leader Ibrahim al-Badri (alias Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi) but under the Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya banner, while a series of photos from the area released on 01 May 2019, depicted militants gathered around a laptop to watch a video of Baghdadi. The former was followed by videos from other provinces reaffirming their pledges to the Islamic State, such as in the Sinai, demonstrating its production as part of a wider and co-ordinated campaign.

Several other micro trends have emerged in recent messaging as well, which demonstrate some shifting tactics. Stand-off attacks using GRAD rockets have been reported more frequently – at least 13 such attacks reported since February 2019 – while the promotion of up-armoured suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices (SVBIEDs) has also surfaced more prominently in recent messaging. Both point to a continued evolution in Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya attack tactics, potentially driven by the influence of the Iraq/Syria theatre.

Targeting has also showed evidence of evolution – the primary target of violence overwhelmingly remains the security forces of the Lake Chad Basin countries (Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria), which collectively comprise the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), but recently claimed incidents have include an attack on a Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) facility in Maïne-Soroa, Niger, two attacks on Christians, and the targeting of village heads accused of working with security forces.

Although the overall focus of the group’s attacks has not shifted, such violence beyond security force targeting was rarely promoted previously, a potential indication of slightly more expansive guidelines in terms of attack target reporting.

The recent messaging also reinforces the Barnawi faction of Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya’s seemingly dominant position in Nigeria’s northern Borno State, given the near-daily claiming of assaults against local security forces. A continued string of military base assaults, claimed in Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyya messaging and verified by local media accounts, demonstrates the faction’s growing offensive capabilities.

Photo Credit : Shutterstock

Like this: Like Loading...
