Rally against mining turns violent near Talaja, 15 hurt

RAJKOT: The simmering anger among Bhavnagar farmers against limestone mining reached a flashpoint as violent clashes broke out after police stopped them from going to the mining site of UltraTech Cement near Bambhor village on Wednesday.Farmers of 10 villagers of Talaja and Mahua talukas, who are protesting against mining activity by UltraTech Cement Ltd, had organized a peaceful march to voice their grievances. However, complete pandemonium broke out when police resorted to lathicharge on the farmers and women who were part of the protest rally.At least 11 farmers and four policemen were injured in the clashes. The injured farmers were admitted to Mahua civil hospital.On Wednesday morning, nearly 1,500 farmers led by former Mahua MLA Dr Kanu Kalsaria began a march from Nicha Kotda village in Talaja taluka, but barely had they walked two km, police stopped them near Bambhor. There was heated arguments between the farmers and police as they stopped them from going to the mining site. Soon, cops began to lathicharge the protesters that included women. Seeing women being assaulted, some farmers started pelting stones on the policemen and situation turned tense. Police lobbed 35 teargas shells to disperse the mob.Farmers have been opposed to the limestone mining on the grounds that their fields would be rendered non-fertile. They said the water in their wells has also turned saline as the company digs land 300 to 400 feet deep for mining limestone. UltraTech transports this limestone to it’s Pipavav plant.Ghanshyam Baraiya, sarpanch of Methla village, said, “We had undertaken a peaceful march but police didn’t want us to reach to the mining site. They even targeted our women and children. Police first detained five to six people and thereafter, they called us for talks and arrested 50 more people. Farmers were beaten without any provocation even after the arrest.”The company had sought police protection to begin mining work after farmers warned of protest.Bhavnagar superintendent of police (SP) Pravin Mal told TOI: “We have arrested 90 persons for rioting and preventing police from discharging their duty. Two police jawans have received serious head injury and they are under treatment at Sir T Hospital in Bhavnagar while two other have suffered fractures.”When asked why police resorted to lathicharge, he said “We asked them to come for talks, but they were not ready and started hurling stones at the cops. They even sent women to take the lead and therefore police had no option.”Heavy police deployment has been made in the villages and situation, though tense, is under control.Kalsaria told reporters, “Our protest rally was peaceful. We have also filed a petition in National Green Tribunal (NGT) regarind this issue.”The cement company wants to mine limestone in Bambhor, Talli, Kalsar, Nicha Kotda, Uncha Kotda, Zanzmer, Methla and Gadhula in Talaja and Mahuva talukas.
