Modi govt scripts history: Article 370 abrogated; Jammu and Kashmir set to be divided into two UTs

Bharatiya Janata Party workers celebrate government's decision to abolish Article 370 that gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The Rajya Sabha passed the Jammu and Kashmir (Reorganisation) Bill 2019 and adopted the resolution to scrap Article 370 Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah detained Ajit Doval, Amit Shah expected to visit Kashmir

New Delhi: In a big victory for Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led National Democratic Alliance government, the Rajya Sabha on Monday adopted the resolution to abrogate Article 370 of the Constitution and passed the Jammu and Kashmir (Reorganisation) Bill, 2019, paving the way for the bifurcation of J&K into two Union Territories – Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh.

Though the government’s move was opposed by the Congress, many non-NDA parties, such as the AAP, the AIADMK, the BSP, the YSRCP and the BJD, backed the government.

The Rajya Sabha also passed the Jammu and Kashmir Reservation (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019, giving 10 per cent reservation for the Economically Weaker Sections of upper castes in the state.

Celebrations erupted in states such as Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Delhi, Arunachal Pradesh after the Centre revoked Article 370.

Earlier today, Union Home Minister Amit Shah introduced two resolutions and two Bills related to Jammu and Kashmir. The two resolutions were Constitution (Application to Jammu & Kashmir) Order, 2019, which was issued by the President to supersede the 1954 order pertaining to Article 370, and resolution for Repeal of Article 370 of the Constitution. The two Bills were Jammu and Kashmir (Reorganisation) Bill, 2019, and Jammu and Kashmir Reservation (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019.

While talking about Article 370, which gives special status to Jammu and Kashmir, Shah said that as per Article 370(3), the President, on the recommendation of Parliament, possesses the power to amend or cease the implementation of Article 370, through a public notification. "This has already happened on a number of occasions in the past," he added.

Later, Shah said: "I would just say that the Bill that the government is bringing is historic. Article 370 has prevented J&K from merging with India, rather than being a basis of its merger. The politics of vote bank has looted the youth of the state for over 70 years."

"Politics of religion must be avoided at all costs. Article 370 is equally harmful to people of all religions," added the minister.

Shah described the provisions of Article 370 as discriminatory on the basis of class, caste, gender, and place of origin.

He also described Article 370 as the biggest hurdle in ending terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir. "Terrorism began in Jammu and Kashmir and reached to its peak. Now we are on the path to eliminating it. The youth of Kashmir were misguided due to Article 370 and 35A. Pakistan took advantage of it. Can we leave these youths on the mercy of separatists, who throws them into terrorism and send their children to foreign countries for studies?" said Shah.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi took to Twitter to hail the speech made by Home Minister Amit Shah in Parliament. Sharing the home minister’s speech on his Twitter handle, the PM described Shah’s views as "extensive and insightful".

"It accurately highlighted the monumental injustices of the past and coherently presented our vision for the sisters and brothers of J&K. Do hear," the PM tweeted.

Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah detained

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief ministers Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah, who were under house arrest since Sunday night, were detained on Monday night. Jammu and Kashmir People's Conference leaders Sajjad Lone and Imran Ansari have also been detained.

Lok Sabha adopts resolution on J&K (Reorganisation) Bill

The Lok Sabha adopted a resolution moved by Union Home Minister Amit Shah for introducing the Jammu and Kashmir (Reorganisation) Bill, 2019. The resolution was adopted by the House with a voice vote.

New J&K UT to have 7 more Assembly seats

According to the Jammu and Kashmir (Reorganisation) Bill, 2019, the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir will have a Lieutenant Governor. The maximum strength of the Assembly of the UT will be 107 seats and after a delimitation exercise, it will be increased to 114. At present, the effective strength of the Jammu and Kashmir Assembly is 87. The Union Territory of Ladakh will have Leh and Kargil districts.

"...the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall be increased from 107 to 114, and delimitation of the constituencies may be determined by the Election Commission in the manner hereinafter provided," read the Bill.

Ajit Doval, Amit Shah expected to visit Kashmir

National Security Advisor Ajit Doval is likely to visit Jammu and Kashmir. Union Home Minister Amit Shah is also expected to pay a visit to Jammu and Kashmir after the end of Parliament session. As per sources, the Army, the Air Force and the Navy are on high alert and are keeping a close watch on the overall security situation in the border state.

Congress, other parties oppose J&K’s bifurcation

Senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad vehemently opposed the government's move to repeal Article 370 and bifurcate Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories. Speaking in the Rajya Sabha, Azad said that the people of Jammu and Kashmir had opted to side with secular India but the BJP government has "disintegrated" the country.

Meanwhile, TMC leader Derek O'Brien said that it was a mockery of the Constitution. “What this basically means is that apply the President's rule in the state, then you dissolve the House. Then you bring a Presidential resolution. Then in the morning, you do this... So, Bengal can become four states, Odisha, what is your lucky number, make it seven. Worst still, you make it a Union Territory (UT).”

Samajwadi Party MP Ram Gopal Yadav also opposed the government's move.

Protest at Jantar Mantar against scrapping of Article 370

The Left parties slammed the Modi government and protested at the Jantar Mantar in the national capital against the scrapping of Article 370. Senior Left leaders like CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury, Prakash Karat, Brinda Karat, among others, took part in the protest. "This protest is just the start, we will take to the streets and continue this fight. Unity does not mean territory alone, it involves unity of the people also," said Yechury.

PDP members tear copy of Constitution in Rajya Sabha

Peoples Democratic Party members Mir Fayaz and Nazir Ahmed Laway tore a copy of the Constitution while protesting against the government’s move to abrogate Article 370 in the Rajya Sabha. In the wake of their act, the two were physically removed from the upper house of Parliament. "Indian Constitution is supreme. Nobody can do it," said Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu before ordering the marshals to physically remove the MPs from the House.

Revocation of Article 370: Kashmiri Pandits call it a ‘historic event’

Kashmiri Pandits, who were displaced from the Valley in the 1990s, described the withdrawal of special status to the state as a "historic event". They further expressed hope that the government’s move to abrogate Article 370 would pave the way for their return to homeland with honour. However, Kashmiri students in the national capital tagged the Centre’s move as "dictatorial".
