Article 370: How India’s special status for Kashmir works

TOPSHOT - Yemen's Shiite Huthi rebels shout slogans during a gathering to mobilise more fighters to battlefronts to fight pro-government forces, on June 18, 2017, in the Yemeni capital Sanaa. / AFP PHOTO / MOHAMMED HUWAIS (Photo credit should read MOHAMMED HUWAIS/AFP via Getty Images)

Still unvaccinated? You could be fined $4,000 in this EU country

A medic prepares a dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine against the coronavirus at a private nursing home in the Israeli central coastal city of Netanya on January 5, 2022. - Israel began on January 3 administering fourth Covid vaccine shots to people over 60 and health workers amid a surge driven by the Omicron variant. (Photo by JACK GUEZ / AFP) (Photo by JACK GUEZ/AFP via Getty Images)

Russia expert: Putin wants a 'replay of the end of the Cold War'

Britain's Prime Minister Boris Johnson leaves from 10 Downing Street in London on January 25, 2022. - London's police chief on Tuesday said her officers are investigating several parties that took place at Prime Minister Boris Johnson's office and government departments during Covid lockdowns. "The Met is now investigating a number of events that took place at Downing Street and Whitehall in the last two years in relation to potential breaches of Covid-19 regulations," Metropolitan Police Commissioner Cressida Dick told the London Assembly local authority. (Photo by Daniel LEAL / AFP) (Photo by DANIEL LEAL/AFP via Getty Images)

Opposition leader speaks out as Putin's ally allows Russian military to enter the nation

North Korean leader Kim Jong Un observes the firing of suspected missiles in this image released by North Korea's Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) on March 22, 2020. KCNA/via REUTERS ATTENTION EDITORS - THIS IMAGE WAS PROVIDED BY A THIRD PARTY. REUTERS IS UNABLE TO INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY THIS IMAGE. NO THIRD PARTY SALES. SOUTH KOREA OUT.

Opinion: These maps show why Putin might want to invade Ukraine

Here's why the US doesn't want its F-35 wreckage to fall into China's hands

220119-N-EE352-1075 PHILIPPINE SEA (Jan. 19, 2022) A Sailor fuels an F-35C Lightning II, assigned to the "Argonauts" of Strike Fighter Squadron (VFA) 147, on the flight deck aboard Nimitz-class aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson (CVN 70), Jan. 19, 2022. Operating as part of U.S. Pacific Fleet, USS Carl Vinson is conducting training to preserve and protect a free and open Indo-Pacific region. (U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist Seaman Leon Vonguyen)

A view shows Russian BMP-3 infantry fighting vehicles during drills held by the armed forces of the Southern Military District at the Kadamovsky range in the Rostov region, Russia January 27, 2022. REUTERS/Sergey Pivovarov

Tourists walk past Indian security forces during curfew like restrictions in Jammu, India, Monday, Aug. 5, 2019. An indefinite security lockdown was in place in the Indian-controlled portion of divided Kashmir on Monday, stranding millions in their homes as authorities also suspended some internet services and deployed thousands of fresh troops around the increasingly tense region. (AP Photo/Channi Anand)

New Delhi CNN —

Article 370 of India’s constitution has been a bone of contention in the country’s politics for years.

In place since 1949, it gives special status to the state of Jammu and Kashmir – which encompasses the section of the disputed Kashmir region controlled by India – including the power to have its own constitution, flag and autonomy over all matters, save for certain policy areas such as a foreign affairs and defense.

Revoking it was one of the promises made by Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) ahead of recent national elections.

On Monday, the government made good on its pledge and announced it had scrapped Article 370, prompting criticism from Pakistan, which also claims Kashmir and described the move as illegal.

Under normal circumstances, in order to make a constitutional change like this, the state’s local legislature would need to be consulted. But Jammu and Kashmir doesn’t have one at the moment.

What happens now?

Last June, the BJP pulled out of a coalition government with the Jammu & Kashmir’s Peoples Democratic Party (PDP), and the state was put under the rule of the governor – the constitutional representative of India’s president – which in effect handed rule directly to the government in New Delhi.

That’s allowed New Delhi to move ahead with the scrapping of Article 370 without the backing of local politicians in Indian-controlled Kashmir, according to Happymon Jacob, a professor at Jawaharlal Nehru University who has written extensively on India and Pakistan.

“These decisions require constitutional amendments, which cannot be done with a presidential order, which is what they have done, but it has a weak legal foundation. It will be challenged in court but I don’t think the BJP is worried about this. They will fight it out, it will go on for a long time, and in the mean time they will come [with] radical changes in the state,” Jacob told CNN.

“At the moment, there is no legal opposition. There is only the governor who can oppose it, but he is Home Ministry-appointed.”

Left party supporters and students hold placards during a protest against the Indian government revoking Kashmir's special constitutional status in New Delhi, India on Monday. Manish Swarup/AP

What else is Modi’s government doing?

In addition to revoking Article 370, the government also introduced a bill to change Jammu and Kashmir’s administrative status from a state to a union territory. In the Indian system, state governments retain significant authority over local matters. But New Delhi has more of a say in the affairs of a union territory.

The bill passed India’s upper house of parliament later Monday and will be put to the lower house soon.

“We don’t have any examples where a state has been downgraded to a union territory. The fact that you have changed the politics in Jammu and Kashmir so radically and fundamentally is surprising,” Jacob said.

“They have gone about doing that because once a state becomes centrally-administered, you don’t have to go through the state assembly for any decision-making power.”

Under the plans, the remote mountainous region of Ladakh, currently part of the state of Jammu and Kashmir, will be separated and turned into a standalone union territory.
