PM Modi hails Amit Shah’s speech on Article 370 – a compilation of BJP strongman’s fiery speeches

Amit Shah | Photo Credit: PTI

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday hailed home minister and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) chief Amit Shah's speech on Article 370 as "extensive and insightful".

“Home Minister @AmitShah Ji’s speech in the Rajya Sabha was extensive and insightful. It accurately highlighted the monumental injustices of the past and coherently presented our vision for the sisters and brothers of J&K. Do hear,” PM Modi tweeted along with a video of Shah's speech.

This is not the first time that Shah, who is touted as the strongman of the saffron party and the close confidante of PM Modi, delivered a remarkable speech. His fiery speeches have also grabbed attention and hogged the limelight in the past.

Here are some of his speeches:

Amit Shah’s speech on Article 370

The home minister delivered a fiery speech in Parliament on Monday (August 5) while announcing an unprecedented decision of the central government on Jammu and Kashmir.

Shah moved a resolution in Rajya Sabha to revoke the provisions under Article 370 of the Constitution of India, which granted a special status to the state of J&K. Besides this, he also introduced the Jammu & Kashmir (Reorganisation) Bill, 2019 proposing bifurcation of the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories -- Jammu and Kashmir division and Ladakh.

In his speech, the home minister said that Article 370 prevented J&K to merge with India rather than being a basis of its merger.

“The politics of vote bank has looted the youth of the state for over 70 years. I would call on the opposition members to debate and discuss on why the benefits of development were not allowed to reach the common people of J&K till now. Politics of religion must be avoided at all costs. Article 370 is equally harmful for people of all religions,” he said.

Shah also termed the provisions of Article 370 as discriminatory on the basis of gender, class, caste and place of origin. He also said that because of Article 370, democracy never took root in J&K and no socio-economic infrastructure could come up.

The home minister further said that Article 370 was the root cause of terrorism, corruption and poverty.

Amit Shah’s tough stance on illegal immigrants, infiltrators

Last month, Amit Shah put forth Centre’s tough stance on illegal immigrants, infiltrators with his speech in Parliament.

Speaking during the Question Hour in Rajya Sabha, Shah said, “We will identify all the illegal immigrants and infiltrators living in every inch of this country and deport them as per the international law."

Amit Shah speech on Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment (UAPA) Bill

On August 2, Rajya Sabha passed the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2019 that gives powers to DG, NIA to attach properties acquired from proceeds of terrorism.

Replying to the debate in Parliament, Amit Shah said, “Terrorism has to be uprooted from this country. A strict law is utmost necessary in this regard to strengthen the investigation agencies. The urgency of this matter needs to be understood by all.”

He also underscored that individuals engaging in terrorist activities or sympathising with terrorist would not be spared.

“An individual's psychology is the birthplace of terrorism, rather than an institution. If in the first place, an individual is stopped from attracting other individuals into terrorism by providing ideological and financial support, this menace can be finished. Hence, designating an individual as a terrorist, after following the due process of law, is of prime importance to nip terrorism in the bud,” he had said.

When Amit Shah slammed Opposition for politicising Balakot air strikes and warned Pakistan

In March, Amit Shah had hit out at the Opposition for questioning air strikes that were carried out by India in Pakitan's Balakot targetting terror camps. "When the government is fighting against terrorists to protect the nation, they are questioning it," he had said during an elections rally in West Bengal.

Shah had also warned Pakistan of punitive action if the neigbouring country tries to attack India. "If Pakistan fires a single bullet, we will answer with artillery fire," Shah was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.
