J&K stripped of special status; bifurcated into 2 UTs

J&K stripped of special status; bifurcated into 2 UTs

NEW DELHI, Aug 5: In a far-reaching move, the Centre on Monday revoked Art 370 (3) of Jammu and Kashmir that grants special constitutional status on the state proposing to bifurcate it (state) into two Union Territories (UTs) -- J&K with a legislature and Ladakh without one.

While Rajya Sabha today only approved resolution abrogating Article 370 (3) for Jammu and Kashmir and a bill to bifurcate the state into two union territories, in Lok Sabha, they were introduced yet would ‘formally’ be moved for consideration of the House on Tuesday.

“Special status to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 of the Constitution has been removed by a presidential order that would come into force “at once”,” Home Minister Amit Shah said in parliament adding that the controversial provisions were responsible for poverty and lack of development in the state. However, Shah assured the people of Jammu and Kashmir that the government would reinstate the region's statehood ‘when the situation goes back to normal.’

The announcement came after Prime Minister Narendra Modi held a meeting of his cabinet at his house this morning. Later Amit Shah also introduced a bill to bifurcate Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories, which was passed in the Rajya Sabha.

Later the Home Minister moved a resolution in the Lok Sabha for bringing a bill to reorganise the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh amid a walkout by opposition parties. Moving the resolution following the President’s order abrogating Article 370, Shah sought the permission of the House to bring the bill.

He assured the opposition members that he would move the bill and the resolution for consideration of the House on Tuesday and was only seeking the permission of the House for the same now.

Earlier Shah tabled a statutory resolution in the Rajya Sabha, seeking abrogation of Article 370 (3). He also introduced Jammu and Kashmir Re-organisation Bill, 2019 amid uproar.

He said that no change has been made in the Article 370A but the rest of the subsections of the Article 370(3) have been proposed for amendment.

The bill to reorganise Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories sailed through Rajya Sabha with several opposition parties walking out, bringing down the majority mark and others siding with the government.

Amid a political storm that started since morning since home minister Amit Shah's announcement in parliament, the resolution was passed through a voice vote - 125 members voted in its favour and 61 voted against it. The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 was passed by Rajya Sabha after MPs voted on the bill using paper ballot due to a technical glitch in the electronic voting system.

Prior to these developments, the President Ram Nath Kovind issued a notification to end Article 35 ‘A’ of the Constitution relating to Jammu and Kashmir.

The President, exercising his powers under Section ‘A’ of Article 370 of the Constitution and with the consent of the State Government, has abolished Article 35 A i.e., ‘The Constitution (with reference to Jammu and Kashmir) Order 1954.’

Now, in its place the Constitution (with reference to Jammu and Kashmir) Order 2019 will apply. This order will come into force with immediate effect.

Article 35 ‘A’ related to Jammu and Kashmir was related to the identity and special rights of the people of the state.

Under Article 370 of the constitution, the state of Jammu and Kashmir enjoyed complete autonomy and the state legislature was free to draft its own laws except in the areas of communications, defense, finance, and foreign affairs, while non-state subjects were prohibited from purchasing land in the state. In the lead up to the controversial order, restrictions were put in place on prominent political leaders, schools shut and Internet snapped across the state, mainly in Kashmir.

While replying to debate amid uproar on Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 aiming to provide status of Union Territory to Ladakh and a separate Union Territory for Jammu and Kashmir, the Union Home Minister said Ladakh will get status of Union Territory without Legislature.

He said, “The existing state of Jammu and Kashmir will be a separate Union Territory with an Assembly.”

Shah said, “There has been a long-pending demanding of people of Ladakh, to give it the status of a Union Territory to enable them to realise their aspirations. The Ladakh division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir has a large area but is sparsely populated with a difficult terrain. The Union Territory of Ladakh will be without Legislature.”

“Further, keeping in view the prevailing internal security situation, fuelled by cross border terrorism in the existing state of Jammu and Kashmir, a separate Union Territory for Jammu and Kashmir is being created. The Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir will be with legislature,” he said.

Amid opposition uproar, Shah moved a resolution providing for ‘revocation’ of Article 370 granting special status to Jammu and Kashmir. Opposition parties including Congress, DMK and Trinamool Congress trooped into the Well of the Lower House raising anti-government slogans. The Home Minister said, “These Bills are also historic and they will create history.” He also charged that the only three families looted Kashmir for all these years. “We don’t want to make vote bank or politics. Narendra Modi government is for development. Over 41,000 people would not have lost their lives in Kashmir valley if Article 370 was not there,” he said.

“The nation wants to know why the children of Pandits are not considered Kashmiris,” he said.

“The entire constitution will be applicable to Jammu and Kashmir state,” Shah said to loud protests from opposition lawmakers who were against the repeal of Article 370.

Shah quoted Article 370 (3) of the Constitution to assert that the President of India can make the Article 370 inoperative under this provision. He said that President Ram Nath Kovind signed the official notification abrogating Article 370 and since the Jammu and Kashmir constituent assembly no longer exists, and the state assembly stands dissolved, the powers of the assembly wrested with both houses of parliament.

“The President's order can be discussed and passed by both houses of Parliament,” he told members in the Rajya Sabha. Reading out provisions of Article 370 (3), the Home Minister said, “There are provisions within that state that Article 370 shall cease to be operative or can be amended and the President has the right to issue such a notification or constitutional order.”

"We are adopting the same path as adopted by the Congress in 1952 and 1962 by amending the provisions of Article 370 the same way through a notification,” Shah said, as Samajwadi Party member Ram Gopal Yadav questioned whether the constitution can be amended without a Constitutional amendment.

The Home Minister said the “constituent assembly of Jammu and Kashmir” means Jammu and Kashmir assembly. Because there is no constituent assembly today, the rights of it were vested in the assembly of Jammu and Kashmir. And as there is President Rule in the state, the rights of the assembly were with the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.

“We can pass the Presidential order unanimously. This has not happened for the first time. In 1952 and 1962, the Congress had amended the Article 370 using the same provision. We have followed the same route,” Shah said.

He said that Article 370 was the biggest obstacle in ending terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir and its abrogation would open up the path of development in the state. Shah also urged the people to give the Modi government five year without Article 370 and judge it with the situation prevailed during 70 years under Article 370.

He also said Kashmir is “crown” of India and would remain “heaven” while claiming that Modi government would take the state to a new path of development. “Terrorism began in Jammu and Kashmir and reached to its peak. Now we are on the path to eliminate it. The youth of Kashmir were misguided due to Article 370 and 35-A. Pakistan took advantage of it. Can we leave these youth on the mercy of separatists, who throws them into terrorism and sends their children to foreign countries for studies,” he said. He said those want continuation of Article 370 made money and were befooling the youth of the Kashmir. “We want to embrace the youth of J&K and give them flourishing opportunities of employment. Even the separate bill for reservation for economically backward classes would not be required if the resolution is passed in both houses as the provision will get automatically applied to J&K, as in rest of India,” he said. He said it has been a stated policy of Pakistan to support Article 370 and keep the youth away from getting into the mainstream of development and brainwash them into jihad. “All the political parties with separatist ideology have vested interests to continue Article 370. Their children do not get killed in the bloodshed caused due to terrorism,” he said.

Allaying opposition fears of all hell breaking loose after the move, Shah replying, “Nothing will happen” and it won't be allowed to turn into another battle torn Kosovo. “It was heaven on earth and will remain so,” he said replying to the debate on the resolution and the bill which were taken up together. He said full statehood will be restored to Jammu and Kashmir at “appropriate time” and after “normalcy” returns.

Rebutting the apprehension that removing Article 370 would destroy Kashmiri culture, Shah said that all states preserved their culture and language after becoming a part of the Union of India. “It is only and only political propaganda that has blinded the youth of Kashmir into believing it for 70 years. I assure the youth of J&K that give this government 5 year and it will become the most progressive region in the country,” Shah said.

He said that post the repeal of Article 370, doors to private investment would be opened, which would, in turn, increase the potential for development there. “Increased investments would lead to increased job creation and further betterment of socio-economic infrastructure in the state. Opening of buying of lands would bring in investments from private individuals and multinational companies and give a boost to the local economy, as opposed to the apprehensions raised by those opposing this historic step,” he said.

Remembering the sacrifice of civilians and soldiers, who have lost their lives during 1989-2018, Shah said had Article 370 would not been there, these people wouldn't have lost their lives. “Refugees who came from Pakistan after partition did not get citizenship till now. They cannot become councillors in the state. This has been a historical injustice to these people. As opposed to this, in rest of India two Prime Ministers Manmohan Singh and I K Gujral were elected from those refugees,” he said.

Shah said Article 370 did not allow proper integration of Jammu and Kashmir with India and should have been removed without delay of a second. He asserted that BJP-led government had the "political will" to take decisions concerning the "temporary" provision in the constitution. He rejected Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad's contention that 370 had integrated the state with the country.

“Article 370 has been regarded as a temporary provision and it had to go. It should have gone long back. But nobody showed will power to do so due to vote bank politics. We are not worried about vote banks nor do we lack political will under Prime Minister Narendra Modi,” he said. He said there should be discussion why Article 370 remained for so long and why there was corruption in Jammu and Kashmir. “Why did weaker sections such as tribals did not get political reservations?” he asked.

He said maximum amount of development money went to Jammu and Kashmir. “There should not be a second's delay in abrogating Article 370," he said.

“Several MPs have asked how long will J&K remain a Union Territory- I want to assure them when the situation gets normal and the right time comes, we are ready to make J&K a state again. It may take a little longer, but it will become a state once again, one day,” Shah said.

On the bill to reorganise Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories, those that sided with government were Mayawati's Bahujan Samaj Party, Naveen Patnaik's Biju Janata Dal, Jagan Reddy's YSR Congress, N Chandrababu Naidu's Telugu Desam Party and in a surprise addition -- Arvind Kejriwal's Aam Aadmi Party. Together with government, that took the number to 117.

In the 242-member Rajya Sabha, the ruling National Democratic Alliance has 107 members, well short of the 121 majority mark.

But Trinamool Congress, which has 13 members walked out and BJP ally Nitish Kumar's Janata Dal United, which has six members, boycotted the voting. Two lawmakers of the People's Democratic Party were suspended for tearing up the constitution in protest against home minister Amit Shah's announcement. There were also reports that several opposition members might skip the voting.

With the abrogation of Article 370, Jammu and Kashmir will now have no separate flag or Constitution and the tenure of the assembly will be for a period of five years like any other state and two union territories in the country, officials said on Monday.

The Indian Penal Code (IPC) will replace the Ranbir Penal Code (RPC) to deal with criminal matters and Article 356, under which President’s rule can be imposed in any state, will also be applicable in union territories (UTs) Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh with the unprecedented decision of the Centre.

There will be no separate flag of Jammu and Kashmir and the tricolour will be the only national flag for the entire country, a Home Ministry official said.

Full text of President’s order on Article 370 is as follows:

THE CONSTITUTION (APPLICATION TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR) ORDER, 2019

In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of Article 370 of the Constitution, the President, with the concurrence of the Government of State of Jammu and Kashmir, is pleased to make the following Order:

1. (1) This Order may be called the Constitution Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 2019.

(2) It shall come into force at once, and shall thereupon supersede the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 as amended from time to time.

2. All the provisions of the Constitution, as amended from time to time, shall apply in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the exceptions and modifications subject to which they shall so apply shall be as follows: To article 367, there shall be added the following clause, namely:”(4) For the purposes of this Constitution as it applies in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir

(a) references to this Constitution or to the provisions thereof shall be construed as references to the Constitution or the provisions thereof as applied in relation to the said State:

(b) references to the person for the time being recognized by the President on the recommendation of the Legislative Assembly of the State as the Sadar-i-Riyasat of Jammu and Kashmir, acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers of the State for the time being in office, shall be construed as references to the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir:

(c) references to the Government of the said State shall be construed as including references to the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir acting on the advice of his Council of Ministers, and

(d) in the proviso to clause (3) of Article 370 of this Constitution, the expression “Constituent Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2)” shall read “Legislative Assembly of the State”.”

RAM NATH KOVIND,

President
