J&K not the first, Delhi too, was stripped of statehood once

J&K not the first, Delhi too, was stripped of statehood once (File | Reuters)

The Modi government's proposal to strip Jammu and Kashmir of its statehood and bifurcate it into two Union territories has drawn sharp reactions from across the nation. While several political leaders and people have hailed the decision as a positive step towards the unification of India, others condemned it as 'murder of democracy'.

But Jammu and Kashmir is not the first state to be ripped off its statehood. Interestingly, Delhi used to be a full state and was later converted into a Union Territory.

In fact, it was not until several decades later that the national capital was given the status of a partial state, allowing it its own CM.

Delhi's journey from state to UT and then partial statehood

Delhi started off as a state. The first Delhi Legislative Assembly election to the Delhi Legislative Assembly was held on 27 March 1952. Delhi, at the time, had 48 assembly seats. Congress emerged victorious on 39 of those seats and Chaudhary Brahm Prakash became Delhi's first CM.

But in 1956, the government undertook one of the largest reform of the boundaries of India's states and territories under the States Reorganisation Act. Delhi lost its statehood on November 1 and became a Union Territory.

Next legislative assembly elections in Delhi were held in 1993 when Union Territory of Delhi was formally declared as National Capital Territory of Delhi by the Sixty-ninth Amendment to the Indian Constitution.

The amendment gave Delhi partial statehood, which has been contested by time and again by the chief ministers.

Delhi's battle for full statehood

The matter of full statehood has been in a permanent fixture in the manifesto of parties contesting for the Delhi government.

After Delhi was granted partial statehood in 1993, the BJP was the first to form the government and first to raise the demand. The matter had reached the Parliament and the Centre, led by the NDA, had also agreed. However, the bill never saw the light of the day. Former CM and BJP leader Madan Lal Khurana had used full statehood promise as a major poll plank against the Sheila Dikshit campaign in 1998, but she managed to sweep the House.

Efforts to grant Delhi full statehood was also a key feature of Congress's manifesto in 2003, but the government failed to deliver on it over the next decade, despite favourable government at the Centre during nine out of the next 10 years.

The latest and memorable fight for Delhi's statehood has been fought by incumbent CM Arvind Kejriwal. The Aam Aadmi Party chief has knocked the doors of parties, public and judiciary to gain better control of the region. Even as he has been denied hope for all quarters, Arvind Kejriwal continues to fight for his cause.
