[PICS] Parliament decked up with lights after historic decision to revoke Article 370

Parliament decked up with lights after scrapping Article 370 | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Prime Minister Narendra Modi hailed Shah's speech as "extensive and insightful" Today, Narendra Modi govt has corrected a long-overdue historic wrong, said Home Minister Amit Shah

New Delhi: Marking the historic day of revocation of Article 370 that provided special status to Jammu and Kashmir, Parliament was decked up with lights on Monday night. The day marked a special day in the history of the Indian democracy as the resolution to revoke Article 370 and 35A was passed in the Rajya Sabha along with the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill.

The Bill proposes bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir into Union Territories of Jammu and Kashmir, with an Assembly, and Ladakh, without an Assembly. The Bill will be taken up by the Lok Sabha where BJP enjoys a majority on Tuesday.

Addressing the Rajya Sabha, Home Minister Amit Shah had said that the existence of Article 370 caused economic backwardness and hindered the development of Jammu and Kashmir. He also stated that Article 370 was the biggest obstacle in ending terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir, and its abrogation will open up the path of development in the state.

Delhi: Parliament illuminated after resolution to revoke Article 370 & 35A was passed in the Rajya Sabha today. #JammuAndKashmir pic.twitter.com/nCnZnPhXRj — ANI (@ANI) August 5, 2019

“The politics of vote bank has looted the youth of the state for over 70 years. I would call on the opposition members to debate and discuss on why the benefits of development were not allowed to reach the common people of J&K till now. Politics of religion must be avoided at all costs. Article 370 is equally harmful to people of all religions,” he said.

Terming the Article as the root cause of terrorism, corruption, and poverty, Shah said that it was discriminatory on the basis of gender, class, caste, and place of origin.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi hailed Shah's speech as "extensive and insightful" saying that it accurately highlighted the monumental injustices of the past and coherently presented our vision for the sisters and brothers of the state.

Shah on his part congratulated Prime Minister Narendra Modi for his "unwavering commitment" towards ensuring the unity and integrity of the country. "Today, Modi govt has corrected a long-overdue historic wrong. I congratulate PM @narendramodiji for his unwavering commitment towards ensuring unity and integrity of our motherland. This historic decision will usher in a new dawn of peace and development in J&K and Ladakh region," Shah tweeted shortly after The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 was passed by Rajya Sabha
