Rajasthan nursing student suicide case: Probe handed over to Crime Branch, family stage protests

The case will be reportedly investigated under the supervision of a police officer of additional director general rank. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The case will be reportedly investigated under the supervision of a police officer of additional director general rank The Parliamentary Affairs Minister Shanti Dhariwal announced the decision in the state Legislative Assembly A murder complaint against the accused was lodged by the student's family members

Jaipur: In a recent development in the suicide case of a medical student in Nagaur district, the government has decided to hand over the probe to state's Crime Branch. The decision was made by the authorities on Monday.

The Parliamentary Affairs Minister Shanti Dhariwal announced in the state Legislative Assembly that the Crime Branch under its Criminal Investigation Department will probe the matter. The minister further told the house that considering the seriousness of the case, the state government will get the matter investigated by the CID. The case will be reportedly investigated under the supervision of a police officer of additional director general rank.

He mentioned that the probe in the case is underway and people will have to wait for the outcome till the probe is over. Meanwhile, the relatives of the deceased are on a dharna demanding speedy justice. Dhariwal added that the inspector general of police, the district collector and the district superintendent of police have talked to the relatives in the matter. The police have also detained two accused in the case and their interrogation is underway.

The preparation to get the postmortem conducted by a medical board is being done and the reports of the examination are awaited. The Nagaur Nursing College student had allegedly committed suicide on August 2 and the family have suspected a foul play in the death. A murder complaint against the accused was lodged by the student's family members and the police are trying to nab the accused.

However, the opposition leaders too joined the family members in the protest against the state authorities.
