AJYCP staged sit-in demonstration in front of DC office against Subansiri Lower Dam

Lakhimpur: In the wake of the National Green Tribunals’ verdict in favour of the Lower Subansiri Hydro Electric Project (LSHEP) set up by NHPC Limited at Gerukamukh in Dhemaji-Arunachal border, the activists of the Lakhimpur district unit of Asom Jatiyatabadi Yuva Chatra Parishad (AJYCP) held a sit-in demonstration in front of the Deputy Commissioner Office on Monday.

The organisations also slammed the decision of constitution of a three member expert committee to study the 2,000-MW Lower Subansiri hydroelectric project on the border of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh.

It is to be noted that the National Green Tribunal (NGT) had earlier rejected an appeal filed by social activists last year.

Shouting various slogans against big river dam, NHPC Limited, State Government and Union Government, the protesters demanded that construction of the LSHEP, which had been in halt from 2011, should be stopped. The organization further reiterated its stand once again against the big river dam which was considered to be a water bomb to destroy the valley of Subansiri covering Lakhimpur and Dhemaji up to the island district of Majuli.

They also threatened to intensify their protest in the near future if the project doesn’t get scrapped.

Earlier, Assam Public Works and Tularam Gogoi demanding fresh formation of an expert committee with better local representation and limited government intervention filed a case in NGT. The NGT later retained the three-member committee, including Prabhas Pandey, PM Scott and ID Gupta.

About Lower Subansiri Hydro Electric Project (LSHEP)

The Subansiri Lower Dam, officially named Subansiri Lower Hydroelectric Project (SLHEP), is an under construction gravity dam on the Subansiri River in NorthEastern India. It is located 2.3 km (1.4 mi) upstream of Gerukamukh village in Dhemaji District and Lower Subansiri District on the border of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. Described as a run-of-the-river project by NHPC Limited, the Project is expected to supply 2,000 MW of power when completed. The project has experienced several problems during construction to include landslides, re-design and opposition. It was expected to be complete in 2018. It is notable that, if completed as planned, it will be the largest hydroelectric project in India.

As of early 2019, work was not progressing on either of the two major dam projects in the Assam region, the Dibang and the Lower Subansiri.

Also Read: AJYCP Stages Blockade Against Lower Subansiri Project in Lakhimpur
