India moves to scrap special status for troubled Kashmir

The Indian government yesterday scrapped the special status given to the trouble-torn state of Jammu and Kashmir, which it has struggled to integrate into the country. It also moved ahead with plans to split the state in two, in decisions that are widely expected to trigger a backlash.

Indian Home Minister Amit Shah announced the changes for Kashmir, which has been on lockdown in anticipation of possible violent protests over the government's gameplan.

Residents of Muslim-majority Kashmir have long opposed the scrapping of provisions of Article 370, which was a condition on which the princely state of Kashmir agreed to join India during the partition of India from Pakistan in 1947. Different states had been allowed to choose which country to join.

"After abrogation of Article 370, Jammu and Kashmir will truly become an integral part of India. Scrapping 370 is the only way forward for Kashmir... it was the root cause of the lack of development in Jammu and Kashmir," said Mr Shah in the Upper House of Parliament.

The scrapping of Article 370 - which allows the state to have its own Constitution and exclusive rights in all matters except foreign affairs, communications and defence - means Kashmir will be subject to the laws governing the rest of India, a key election promise of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

The state will also be split into the Union Territory of Ladakh, which will not have a legislature, and the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, which will. The legislation was passed by the Upper House and will be taken up today in the Lower House of Parliament, where BJP has a majority.

Kashmir has been on the edge since last Friday when the government asked all tourists and Hindu pilgrims, who were taking part in an annual pilgrimage to Amarnath cave, to leave the state. An additional 25,000 security personnel were also mobilised.

Early yesterday, several politicians, including former chief ministers Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah, were placed under house arrest. Both were later arrested for defying house arrest.

All educational institutes were ordered shut, public meetings and rallies banned and restrictions placed on phones and the Internet.

Kashmiris living outside the state tweeted about how they could no longer connect with family and friends. Reactions ranged from anger and shock to celebration.

"Government of India's unilateral and shocking decisions today are a betrayal of the trust that the people of Jammu and Kashmir had reposed in India when the state acceded to it in 1947. The decisions will have far-reaching and dangerous consequences," said Mr Abdullah.

BJP leaders called it a historic move, even as Congress party leader Ghulam Nabi Azad called it a "black blot on India's history".
