BJP has beheaded India, says Oppn

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, August 5

Opposition parties, including Congress, today accused the government of “beheading” India by dismembering Jammu and Kashmir and alleged that BJP’s move to bring resolutions on J&K were motivated by electoral considerations.

Warning the BJP of long-term protests to preserve the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad said, “The government has destroyed Jammu and Kashmir and wiped it off from the map of states of India. This is a black day. The BJP has beheaded India. We will fight this tooth and nail.”

Former Home Minister P Chidambaram termed the resolutions “constitutional monstrosity” saying, "The dismembering of J&K means the government can tomorrow follow the same path to convert any state into a union territory. All they have to do is dissolve an elected government, impose President’s rule and bring a resolution like they did today. This is the beginning of disintegration of India.”

Flanked by TMC’s Derek O Brien, DMK’s Tiruchi Siva, RJD’s Manoj Jha and Left leaders, Congress veteran Azad said Article 370 was the very tool that kept J&K integrated with India.

“There was a basis to the accession of J&K with India. J&K is culturally, politically and geographically special. What are you doing to J&K, a state that borders China and Pakistan? In a border state you cannot fight the enemy with the Army. You need local support. Look how you are garnering local support – by destroying people culturally, politically, geographically,” Azad warned the government citing “potential repercussions of these decisions”. Visibly distressed, Azad accused the BJP of acting with “votes in mind”.

Chidambaram said the government had dismembered J&K by mischievously misinterpreting Articles 370 and 35A. “This is the worst day in the constitutional history of India,” he rued.

Congress leaders slammed the abrogation of Article 370 saying, “By one stroke today, the BJP has destroyed J&K and undermined the sacrifices of Kashmiri people, political leaders, and the Army and paramilitary forces who have worked together for years to defeat terrorism.”

Azad did not answer if the Congress would move the Supreme Court on the issue.

Former Law Minister Ashwani Kumar, meanwhile, said the decision to alter the special status of J&K in the present circumstance without consulting major political parties and stakeholders was fraught with serious consequences. “This could alienate the Kashmiri people and lead to serious internal security issues. Pakistan would internationalise the Kashmir situation to divert attention from terrorist activities in the state. Undoing history with the stroke of a pen without a broad national consensus behind the move is an act of political misadventure with long term consequences,” Kumar added.

Voices

A historical wrong has been undone today. Article 35A came through the backdoor without following the procedure under Article 368 of the Constitution of India. It had to go. — Arun Jaitley, BJP leader

Shiv Sena had been long fighting for this. If Balasaheb Thackeray had been alive today, he would have been very happy... His dream has come true with this.— Uddhav Thackeray, Shiv Sena president

Articles 370 and 35A empowered the Jammu and Kashmir legislature, but these were not there in other states of the country. It was a discrimination which was tolerated decades back, maybe for different political reasons at that point of time, not that it was justifiable. — N Santosh Hegde, Supreme Court ex-judge

I congratulate and thank PM and Home Minister for returning the people of the Valley their freedom and identity. — Vasundhara Raje, Rajasthan former CM

PDP MPs tear Constitution copy
