Virgin Bride row: Professor Sarkar asked me to 'bathe with him in river', claims female student

Students at the Jadavpur University protested against professor Sarkar (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Kolkata: Damning allegations have emerged against professor Kanak Sarkar of the Jadavpur University in West Bengal who was debarred from teaching after a social media post by him trigerred outrage from women's rights activists and varsity students. In a post titled "Virgin Bride-Why Not?", professor Sarkar compared virgin brides to bottles of soft-drink and packs of biscuits.

After his post of social media platform, Facebook went viral on social media, professor Sarkar defended his remarks by citing freedom of speech and even went to the lengths of calling his post 'Sunday Fun'. However, his remarks led to protests by students of the Jadavpur University who wrote to the head of the department (HoD) of Internal Relations demanding that Sarkar is stopped from teaching 'western thoughts'.

Jadavpur University professor Kanak Sarkar who made controversial remarks in a Facebook post has been divested of his duties with immediate effect. pic.twitter.com/OlmdshSSUI — ANI (@ANI) January 16, 2019

In light of the outrage, an order was issued divesting professor Sarkar from his duties on Wednesday. He was also disbarred from teaching by the varsity after several student bodies deemed his Facebook post as "sexist and misogynistic".

New allegations have now emerged against the tainted professor accusing him of asking a female student whether she would like to bathe with him. A student at Jadavpur University has alleged that professor Sarkar asked her if she would like to bathe with him in any river. He put up the question when I went to his office to submit a presentation, added the student. However, the latest reports indicate that the student is yet to file an official police complaint in this regard which would lead to an inquiry into the allegations.

Must Read: Gurmeet Ram Rahim verdict: Dera chief gets life imprisonment in murder of journalist Ram Chander Chhatrapati
