Mumbai mayor manhandles woman protesting against electrocution, watch viral video

A video has gone viral on various social media platforms showing Mumbai Mayor Vishwanath Mahadeshwar manhandling a woman.

The woman was part of a group of protestors demonstrating at Sanatacruz in Mumbai, Maharashtra.

The incident reportedly happened on Sunday.

Several resident of Golibar road area were protesting the death of 52-year-old woman Mala Nigam and her 23-year-old son Sanket due to electrocution.

According to the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC), Mala Nagam and her son Sanket died due to electrocution as they entered their waterlogged residence on Golibar road.

Mala was electrocuted when she reportedly came in contact with a live wire while her son got electrocuted as he tried to help his mother.

Residents of the Golibar locality then staged a rasta roko (road blocking) on Western Express Highway. Mumbai Mayor Vishwanath Mahadeshwar then reached the area to pacify the angry protestors.

WATCH | Mumbai mayor twists arm of woman protesting against electrocution

Make his resign or sack him!



Mayor of Mumbai Vishwanath Mahadeshwar manhandled a woman when he had gone to visit a family of the mother-son duo electrocuted in Santacruz. In the video here is seen twisting her hand & saying, "Don't act smart, you don't know who I am." @ShivSena pic.twitter.com/6cArPhu7lp August 6, 2019

Local sources said, "Mahadeshwar reached the spot and met the protestors, of which mostly were women. A video of the incident has been. The video shows a heated exchange of words between Mahadeshwar and the protesting women. The protestors questioned why Mahadeshwar was not present in the area to which he responded that he was there in the hospital and further added that he had to look after the whole Mumbai city. A woman, amongst the protestors, tried to speak to Mahadeshwar and Mahadeshwar then held her hand and tried twisting it. Mahadeshwar can be heard saying, 'You dont know me, are you trying to act smart over here?' Several protestors can be heard asking Mahadeshwar to leave the woman's hand."

When India Today tried speaking to Mumbai Police regarding the incident, Mumbai Police spokesperson DCP Pranay Ashok said, "We haven't received any complaint as of now."

When asked that the video has now gone viral, will the police take any action suo moto, DCP Pranay Ashok said, "We are verifying the veracity of the incident."

Meanwhile, the local MNS and Swabhiman Sena leaders sought action against Mumbai Mayor Vishwanath Mahadeshwar for the act.
