PoK, Aksai Chin: How China and Pakistan illegally occupied swathes of Jammu and Kashmir

Dalai Lama

Key Highlights China, on October 20, 1962, invaded India in Ladakh, and across the McMahon Line in the then North-East Frontier Agency. India, in the 1962 war, lost around 3,250 soldiers and about 43,000 square kilometres of land in Aksai Chin Pakistan sent in its army regulars with its Pashtun tribal militias on October 22, 1947, crossed the border of Jammu and Kashmir and moved to take Srinagar

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Tuesday reiterated New Delhi's long-held position on Kashmir in the Lok Sabha that Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) and Aksai Chin were part of Jammu and Kashmir.

"When I say Jammu and Kashmir, it includes PoK. Both Indian and J&K constitutions also say that the state is an integral part of India and this gives us the right to form laws for the state, which includes PoK and Aksai Chin," he said.

Here's what you should know about the illegal occupation of these swathes of Kashmir:

China's invasion of Aksai Chin

India and China have shared a bitter-sweet relationship since 1947 (when India gained Independence from the colonial British power). Despite good trade ties, both countries have had a longstanding border dispute, which is yet to be resolved. The Macartney–MacDonald Line - a boundary line proposed by the British Indian Government to China in 1899 via its envoy to China, Sir Claude MacDonald - keeps Aksai Chin on the China side though India has reiterated that it is rightfully Indian territory.

India and China signed the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, known as the Panchsheel Treaty in 1954, under which the former acknowledged the latter's rule in Tibet. China had occupied Tibet in the early 1950s, a move which India opposed at that time. Although India acknowledged China's rule in Tibet, it did make the bold move to grant asylum to the Dalai Lama in 1959, who fled Tibet amid the rebellion against Chinese rule.

India's support to the Tibetan spiritual leader led to the deterioration of ties between New Delhi and Beijing, with Mao Zedong falsely claiming that India was behind the Lhasa rebellion. China used the pretext of what was a home-grown rebellion in Tibet to launch unprovoked aggression against India, triggering the 1962 Sino-Indian War.

China, on October 20, 1962, invaded India in Ladakh, and across the McMahon Line in the then North-East Frontier Agency, catching a complacent India off guard. New Delhi had naively assumed that China would respect the various treaties signed between the two Himalayan neighbours. The war lasted till November 21, 1962, when China withdrew unilaterally from Indian territories. India, in that war, lost around 3,250 soldiers and about 43,000 square kilometres of land in Aksai Chin.

Pak's invasion of Kashmir

Almost two months after India and Pakistan became independent nations, Pakistan's Pashtun tribal militias - backed by Pakistan's army - on October 22, 1947, crossed the border of Jammu and Kashmir and moved to take Srinagar. The then ruler of the state Maharaja Hari Singh, till then had dithered on choosing between India and Pakistan and had harboured hopes of holding an independent kingdom between the two nations. Therefore though most tiny and big princely states and territories had made their choice before or immediately after Pakistan was carved out of undivided India by Agust 1947, Kashmir had not taken the step. In November 1947, Hari Singh was shocked to see the tribals loot, attack and takeover his state's swathes of land.

Upon reaching Baramulla, the qabayilis (tribals) sent forth by Pakistan started looting people and stopped there. Meanwhile, Hari Singh requested India's assistance. New Delhi agreed to help but on the condition that the maharaja would first sign the Instrument of Accession, a legal document that enabled rulers of princely states under British paramountcy to join India or Pakistan.

Following the signing of the Instrument of Accession, Indian troops were airlifted to Srinagar. Indian forces established a defence perimeter and defeated the tribal forces on the outskirts of the city.

Pakistani soldiers were initially not directly involved in the fight with Indian soldiers. However, the armies of both countries came face-to-face in 1948. The two countries declared a ceasefire on the night of 31 December 1948, which became effective on the night of 1 January 1949. But by the time the ceasefire was enforced, Pakistan had illegally occupied a large swathe of land in Kashmir, which India identifies as PoK. Pakistan's illegal occupation of nearly 13,300 sq km of Indian land in Kashmir continues to this day.
