For many in distress, Sushma was ray of hope

When Sushma Swaraj was named foreign minister by the first Narendra Modi government, there were political ripples within the BJP ecosystem. She did not enjoy the close relationship with Modi that some others did, but was a top-level BJP leader in her own right.Over the next few months, Sushma reinvented herself. With Modi himself taking a huge interest in foreign affairs, she soon carved out a unique space for herself in the foreign ministry that made the most of her political and people skills.She took to social media as if she was born to it. She brought the exalted foreign minister down to the average Indian, particularly one in distress or in need, stranded in a foreign land. She responded directly to calls for help on Twitter — whether it was a worker in a Gulf state, duped by unscrupulous agents, or out of money; a honeymoon couple stranded without visas, or a family struggling to bring back the body of a loved one from a foreign land.In the process, she gave the otherwise snooty foreign ministry a homey, embracing feel. All of Twitter shared a laugh with her when she responded to one desperate citizen whose refrigerator needed fixing: “Brother I cannot help you in matters of a Refrigerator. I am very busy with human beings in distress.”She worked closely with Harish Salve to get the Kulbhushan Jadhav case going in the ICJ. Salve may have been fighting the case at The Hague, but Sushma was providing emotional support to his family. In fact, after the verdict, Jadhav’s family called on Sushma, who was no longer the foreign minister, but a family mentor. Salve said he was supposed to collect his fees of Re 1 that he charged for the Jadhav case from her tomorrow.During one of those difficult periods between India and Pakistan when all conversation had stopped, Sushma kept her own back channel working, tweeting out clearances for medical visas for Pakistani citizens in need. For the families of 39 Indian workers who disappeared in Iraq , Sushma was their only ray of hope, who sat with them and assured them that she was trying everything to determine whether they were still alive.In later years, Sushma and Modi built a much closer relationship than they had started out with. It was to her that he entrusted the delicate relationship with Nepal that had got frayed after India’s blockade.Moreover, she also took the passport simplification system started by her predecessor and broadened it, so that now you can go to a Post Office and find a Passport Seva Kendra.
