‘Drug peddler’ uses cop’s pistol to shoot self at police station

Ludhiana: A registered medical practitioner (RMP), who was arrested for drug peddling on Monday, allegedly shot himself dead in Samrala police station using the service weapon of an assistant sub-inspector (ASI) on Tuesday morning.

ASI Rajinder Singh, also the investigating officer in the case, was questioning Nardeep Singh in his cabin to ready his case file in order to present him before the court, when he left the cabin for a few minutes, leaving his service weapon (9mm pistol) in his table drawer. Nardeep took the pistol out and shot himself.

Following Nardeep’s death, his relatives staged a protest outside the police station and blocked Ludhiana-Chandigarh state highway, demanding registration of a murder case against the cop. They alleged the police have murdered Nardeep.

Meanwhile, Khanna senior superintendent of police (SSP) Gursharandeep Singh has suspended ASI Rajinder Singh with immediate effect and has marked a departmental inquiry against him.

Nardeep Singh, 47, of Manjaliyan village of Samrala, who had a clinic in his village, was arrested by Samrala police on Monday. The police had recovered 70 intoxicating pills, including 40 tramadol tablets and 40g narcotic powder.

Khanna superintendent of police (detective) Jasvir Singh said the incident occurred at 11.30am. ASI Rajinder Singh, who was the investigating officer in Nardeep’s case, was supposed to take him to the court. Before that, the ASI took him to his room on the first floor to complete the case file, the SP said. Both were inside the room for almost an hour. In the meantime, the ASI came downstairs to get some documents, leaving his service weapon in the table drawer in his room. In the next few minutes, Nardeep took out the weapon and shot himself in the head.

Soon after the incident, senior officials followed by forensic experts reached the spot.

Nardeep’s wife Paramjit Kaur alleged that her husband has been murdered and demanded registration of a murder case against inspector Sukhvir Singh, SHO, and the ASI.

She also alleged that the police are trying to make the crime look like a suicide.

Relatives of Nardeep staged a protest for almost three hours. Though the police tried to pacify them saying that a judicial inquiry has been marked into the matter, the protesters refused to budge.

“The family finally ended the protest when magistrate visited the spot by late afternoon. The family has not agreed to accept the judicial inquiry report,” added SP Jasvir Singh.

Box: ASI suspended for negligence

Khanna SSP Gursharandeep Singh said, “It was definitely a case of negligence on the part of ASI Rajinder Singh as he left his service weapon in the room while leaving the spot. Therefore, the ASI has been suspended with immediate effect and departmental inquiry has been marked against him.”

When asked about the rules on carrying or keeping service weapon, the SSP said there are no specific rules for the same, but it is understood that a cop should never leave a weapon just like that.

On asked if leaving an accused alone in the room is justified, the official said there is nothing wrong in leaving him alone in the room as security was there outside the room.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
