A new, refined Didi | India Today Insight

Emotional and impulsive, Mamata Banerjee was a brand in herself in her formative days, and she reaped huge dividends for it too, in terms of popularity and people's acceptability. The simple white cotton saree, flip-flops, the way she spoke and conducted herself made her the people's "Didi". Between 2001 and 2011, she was the face of the opposition, an unparalleled crowd-puller at any political rally. Demonstrations and protest marches organised by Mamata used to paralysed Kolkata. People accepted her as the fearless, go-to girl next door, taking on the then mighty Marxist establishment alone.

But being in power comes with its own problems, especially as her party, the Trinamool Congress, is in its second term with anti-incumbency and a rampant BJP nipping at its heels. Mamata today is in the process of getting an image make-over, courtesy master election strategist Prashant Kishor and his consultancy firm, IPAC (Indian Political Action Committee). Apparently, her family members (including nephews Abhishek and Aakash Banerjee and nieces Aditi and Agnisha) were worried at her recent outbursts--like at the junior doctors' strike--and prevailed upon her to seek professional help.

The result is now there for everyone to see. Mamata has been asked to talk and mingle less. Her speech, the measured gait, the composure, everything has changed. And it's all so un-Mamata like. On July 29, at a party's internal meeting, she was perched on the dais with her comrades seated in the auditorium far, far away.

It was supposed to be an interactive programme-- Didi's pep talk followed by sharing of ideas at all levels. But unlike other party programmes, there was big change this time. Where earlier it was Trinamool Congress youth members and volunteers managing the crowd and the event, now 40-odd urban, polished boys of Kishor's team in black t-shirts and denim were managing the show. And it was all done corporate-style -- they chalked out everything, from seating arrangements of party leaders and cadre inside the venue to who would ask questions and who was allowed on the podium.

Even the speech Mamata delivered was scripted, as was the press conference held later. Mamata came with a sheaf of papers and took her seat alone, unlike earlier when a couple of favoured accomplices would field the uncomfortable questions. Didi even read out what she had to say from a printed sheet. Not a word extra and not a word less. Even answers to questions were calibrated. The chief minister, famous for her personal touch and speaking extempore, was now parroting lines written by Kishor and his team.

Mamata has been asked to avoid the media, channel her interactions through social media - Facebook, tweets - as far as possible. She's also launched a website -- didikbolo.com (Tell Didi) and a special helpline number for a seemingly 'direct connect' with people. But, in reality, it is just a virtual outreach programme with customer care service taking, transferring and recording calls and giving recorded messages.

The Trinamool rank and file are worried. The way her visibility has increased in the virtual world, party leaders are concerned she might become inaccessible in the long run. Her informal meetings, the way she mixed with people, all that might not be possible with a management team from outside Bengal dictating her moves. She has been asked to introduce a 'go to the booths' drive, much on the lines of the booth-chalo drive of the BJP. Another thing which has left the flock disturbed is her strict instructions not to engage in brawls or political fights with the Opposition. The TMC, known for its physical confrontations and silencing of voices of dissent, has earned a bad reputation. The general perception now is that the lumpen elements in the Trinamool are given a long rope by the administration. Efforts are now being made to change that image with party supporters and activists directed to keep away from the police and administration.



Will the image-makeover, aimed at giving the party and its leaders a face-lift, work? Since the party's USP is Mamata and her brand of politics, rebranding on the lines of the BJP and RSS might not be wise, say some quarters. Mamata has been allowed to go on roadshows over social issues such as conservation of water, 'save the trees' etc, but under heavy security bandobast. The party leaders are tense and worried. Rumours are doing the rounds that Kishor will filter access to Didi and that he might play a crucial role in deciding who gets tickets for the 2021 assembly election (based on an independent survey by his team, again on the same lines as the BJP's 'market survey' by an independent agency in the state before the Lok Sabha election).

Kishor comes with a proven winning track record, but what worked for Jaganmohan Reddy, Amarinder Singh, Nitish Kumar and Narendra Modi might not for Mamata. Didi is a successful, tried and tested brand and there are already doubts on whether the deconstruction of the brand would be wise.
