In pictures: Protests continue as Indian occupation forces lockdown Kashmir

Members of the Communist Party of India take part in a protest in Hyderabad on August 7, 2019, in reaction to the Indian government scrapping Article 370 that granted a special status to Jammu and Kashmir. PHOTO: AFP

In this picture, people arrive with their bags at the tourist centre to board buses to leave from Srinagar. PHOTO: AFP

A security personnel stands guard on a street in Srinagar. PHOTO: AFP

Protestors and social activists take part in a protest in Kolkata, in reaction to the Indian government scrapping Article 370 that granted a special status to Jammu and Kashmir. PHOTO: AFP

A Kashmiri woman holds a child as she looks on outside her a damaged house following recently cross border shelling at the Line of Control, the de facto border between Pakistan and India, in Neelum Valley of Pakistan-administered Kashmir. PHOTO: AFP

Members of the Communist Party of India take part in a protest in Hyderabad, in reaction to the Indian government scrapping Article 370 that granted a special status to Jammu and Kashmir. PHOTO: AFP

Members of the Communist Party of India are detained by police at a protest in Hyderabad, in reaction to the Indian government scrapping Article 370 that granted a special status to Jammu and Kashmir. PHOTO: AFP

Labourers from across India working in Kashmir wait outside Jammu Railway Station as they leave to go back to their home states due to the heightened security situation in Jammu. PHOTO: AFP

A security personnel stands guard at a roadblock in Jammu. PHOTO: AFP

A security personnel stands guard at a roadblock in Jammu. - A protester died after being chased by police during a curfew in Kashmir's main city, left in turmoil by an Indian government move to tighten control over the restive region, a police official said on August 7. PHOTO: AFP

Labourers from across India working in Kashmir wait outside Jammu Railway Station as they leave to go back to their home states due to the heightened security situation in Jammu. PHOTO: AFP
