Coimbatore corporation’s swachh drive yet to reach Periyar Nagar

COIMBATORE: The city corporation is being lauded for its activities to scale up the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan ranking. However, the initiatives haven’t so far benefitted the residents of Periyar Nagar near Sowripalayam in the city – they are still struggling to prevent worms from entering their houses from overflowing drains.According to Pappammal, a 70-year-old resident of the area, the city corporation last desilted the drain more than five years ago. “Hence, the 4ft-deep drain is always on the verge of overflowing. If it rains for even 30 minutes, it overflows and the sewage water carrying dreadful worms enters our houses.”When it rained a couple of days ago, Pappammal had to spend the night cleaning the sewage water that kept entering her house. “The next morning, I tried to unclog the drain, so that I need not spend the entire night worrying about the sewage water and worms. As the floor of my house is below the road level, water enters the house quickly. We have made several representations to the city corporation, but to no avail,” she said.Rajeshwari, another resident, said sanitary workers used to clean the drains only once in two to three months. “They leave the waste on roadside for a few days. They had cleaned the drain a day ago, but it continues to overflow.” Waste is often dumped in front of her house, blocking its entrance. “I had told the sanitary workers not to block the entrance to the house by dumping waste there, but they haven’t changed their ways. For every gust of wind, the waste enters the house.”N Umapathy, another resident, said they had stopped allowing corporation workers, who chlorinate the water in tanks or check stored water, into their houses long ago. “What is the point in checking the water when they pay no attention to our actual concerns? We can’t have a meal peacefully because of the foul smell emanating from the drain.”Another resident, Veeramani, said earlier they used to lodge complaints in Swachh Bharat app. “The drains were then cleaned neatly as the complaint would be closed only if the complainant gives a feedback. Today, the app itself is not functioning.”Corporation officials were, however, not available for comment, despite several attempts to reach them.
