Parliament session 2019: The most productive inaugural session since India's Independence

The Parliament budget session came to a conclusion in the Lok Sabha on Wednesday with a history of passing numerous such bills which had long been reeling and put in the backseat in the fear of controversies and debates. If seen from the point of view of the historical bills passed in the current session of the parliament, then it must be termed as one most successful budget session.

Right from the revocation of Article 370, bifurcation of Jammu & Kashmir into two union territories, passing the landmark bill on Triple Talaq, the Supreme Court justices bill and to the Motor vehicles bill, several significant and historic bills were approved to mark it as the most productive inaugural session of Lok Sabha since Independence.

Reportedly, a total of 30 such bills are passed by both Houses and this undoubtedly is the highest ever number of bills passed in any Parliament session in the past decade. The Parliament this year was also attended by 241 out of 265 first term MPs who were also seen participating in various debates. One more noteworthy factor about the sessions this year is that the sessions witnessed 70 out of 78 women MPs present in the parliament.

The total duration the Lok Sabha sessions sat was more than 280 hours during which 36 bills were passed. Of the total 543 members in Lok Sabha, 303 are from the Bharatiya Janata Party. Although the party has a minority in the Rajya Sabha despite having an alliance, it came up with a majority in the lower house. Also, the sudden resignation of the Congress members has also helped the BJP in triggering a majority in the Parliament and easily passes the bills without much difficulty.

The record set by the Modi government in passing the bills in the parliament has made one thing clear that the days of disruption are gone for the time being. Although protests to certain bills had risen from the opposition parties that was not enough to prevent a bill from being passed in the Parliament. With just 44 members in Congress in the last Lok Sabha, the party could only create an uproar in the floor.

Also read: Political Parties In For Extending Parliament Session

Also Watch: Ladakh MP Jamyang Tsering, in his fiery speech, slams Congress
