Karnataka political crisis not over yet? Despite Congress' whip 4 party MLAs skip CLP meet

Congress workers held protest outside Gurugram hotel where BJP MLAs were lodged I Photo credit: ANI | Photo Credit: ANI

Bengaluru: Despite the whip issued by Congress leadership, four Congress MLAs skipped the crucial Congress Legislative Party (CLP) meet on Friday. After facing a crisis in its ranks following an alleged attempt by the BJP to dislodge the seven-month coalition government of Karnataka, Congress had made it mandatory for its MLAs to attend its Legislature Party meeting on Friday. In a letter to the MLAs, former Karnataka chief minister and Congress leader Siddaramaiah had even warned that skipping the meeting would mean they have quit the party and section 10 of anti-defection will be evoked against the errant lawmakers.

Earlier, Karnataka Congress faced tense moments on Wednesday after half-a-dozen of its lawmakers went incommunicado amid talk of BJP’s alleged ‘Operation Lotus’ to topple the seven-month-old Congress-JD(S) government in the state. Siddaramaiah's office in a statement said the CLP meeting is significant as the party will try to address the demands of its disgruntled MLAs who are allegedly ready to jump ship.

#KarnatakaTwist: 4 Congress MLAs skip part meet despite Congress issuing a whip. @madhavgk with details pic.twitter.com/hpG5kSdLMD — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) January 18, 2019

Among Congress leaders who reportedly went missing and were lodged in a Mumbai hotel include: Jagdish Shettar, Govind Karjole, V. Somanna, Umesh Katti, Murugesh Nirani, B. Sriramulu, Arvind Limbavali, Basavaraj Bommai, Jyoti Ganesh, Mutthuswamy, Ashwath Narayana, Balachandra Jarkiholi, CM Udasi, Karunakar Reddy, Ravindra Nath, Uday Garudachar.

Meanwhile, Karnataka BJP MLAs are nestled in a Gurugram hotel and will return to their constituencies once the Congress Legislature Party meeting is over. Over 75 BJP lawmakers including Shobha Karandlaje are cooped up inside the hotel and await a nod from senior party leaders to return to Karnataka.

The BJP on Tuesday rejected the allegations that it is trying to topple the Karnataka government. In the 224-member Karnataka Legislative Assembly, the BJP has 104 members, Congress-79, JD-S 37, BSP, KPJP and Independent one each, besides the Speaker. The Bahujan Samaj Party, KPJP and an Independent were backing the JD(S)-Congress coalition.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
