Karnal farmers seek CBI probe into land consolidation row

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Karnal, August 7

Scores of farmers of five villages protested here on Wednesday, demanding a CBI inquiry into the land consolidation exercise of 1999 and arrest of all accused.

The Vigilance Bureau, Karnal, has registered an FIR in this connection.

Farmers handed over a memorandum to Sub-divisional Magistrate Narinder Kumar Malik for Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar.

Pardeep Kalram, who led the protest, said: “The revenue records of Kalram, Ariapura, Bharatpur, Amritpur Kalan and Lalupura villages 1965, showed that land was registered in the names of protesting farmers or members of their families. Some officials changed the girdawari in April 1999 and made false revenue entries for our land in the name of other persons.”

He said the revenue record of villages was found from the rented accommodation of an official, indicating that officials were involved in the case. “We demand a CBI inquiry into the case as after the land consolidation exercise of 1999, the actual landowners were deprived of their land.”

The farmers threatened to stage a dharna at Jantar Mantra, New Delhi, on August 14 if their demands were not met by then. “We will observe Independence Day as a black day and also observe black Raksha Bandhan at Jantar Mantra,” Kalram said.

Rashtriya Kisan Mazdoor Sangathan state president Rajinder Arya extended his support to protesting farmers.

Meanwhile, scores of farmers, who claim to be the real owners of the land as per the 1999 land consolidation exercise, said of the 500 farmers whose land was involved in the consolidation exercise of 1999, 480 of them were in favour of it.

Baljit Singh, former sarpanch of Amritpur Kalan, said: “Only 20 farmers are misguiding the authorities and protesting to mount pressure on them. They had lost the case in the High Court and the Supreme Court. Now, they have been resorting to pressure tactics such as taking out processions and staging a dharna.”

He added, “After the court order, the district authorities had provided them a piece of land in 2013, but they have encroached upon our land. The ‘jamabandi’ and ‘intkal’ are yet to be registered in their names. As a result they are not getting the Krishi cards.”

Case details
