Andhra police officer caught on cam slapping doctor protesting against NMC bill

Andhra police officer caught on cam slapping doctor protesting against NMC bill

The incident sparked widespread outrage, with former CM Chandrababu Naidu also condemning the high-handedness of the DCP.

news Protest

In an incident that smacks of police high-handedness, Vijayawada Deputy Commissioner V Harshavardhan Raju was caught on camera holding a protesting student by the collar and slapping him on Wednesday.

According to reports, at around 10 am, the junior doctors who are protesting against the National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill, gathered outside New Government General Hospital in Vijayawada, and raised slogans.

The protestors later formed a human chain on the Kolkata-Chennai national highway, leading to a traffic jam. In an attempt to clear the road, the police forcibly removed the protestors. The medicos tried to resist, leading to pushing and jostling.

Vijayawada cop can be seen slapping a junior doctor who is protesting against proposed National Medical Commission Bill. Incident took place today in Vijayawada as the students of Siddhartha Medical College tries to take out protest demonstration. pic.twitter.com/efZjWEI9cU August 7, 2019

During this scuffle, Deputy Commissioner of Police V Harshavardhan Raju held one medico by his collar and slapped him. The incident triggered tension as the medicos intensified their protest, demanding action against the official.

The incident caused widespread outrage. Leader of Opposition and Telugu Desam Party chief N Chandrababu Naidu also condemned the incident.

The former Chief Minister alleged that impatience to dissent was growing under the YSR Congress government. He said the government was trying to suppress the voice of the people and tackling protests by different sections in a high-handed manner.

The students later made a representation to Director General of Police Gautam Sawang, demanding action against the DCP. Members of the A.P. Government Doctors’ Association and the Junior Doctors’ Association complained about the incident to Home Minister Sucharita.

Responding to their plea, she assured that an inquiry would be conducted into the incident.

Meanwhile, police booked cases against the protesting students for violating Section 30 of the Police Act and Section 144, according to The Hindu.

IANS inputs
