Pakistan’s Kashmir retaliation: New Delhi must prepare to meet any challenges thrown by Islamabad

TOI Quick Edits are written by a team of seasoned journalists from the Times of India's Edit Page and TOI-Online who respond to important news stories as they develop. The team comprises senior journalists with wide-ranging interests who debate and opine on the news and issues of the day. LESS ... MORE

Stung by the nullification of Article 370 in Jammu & Kashmir, Pakistan has reacted sharply and expelled India’s ambassador to Islamabad. It has also suspended bilateral trade with India and is reportedly looking to once again reimpose airspace restrictions for Indian flights. Additionally, it has said that it will protest against India’s decision on J&K at the UN Security Council. All of this suggests that Pakistan is looking to assuage its domestic audience on Kashmir. Islamabad is keen to keep Kashmir as the core issue between India and Pakistan. And New Delhi’s nullification of Article 370 undermines this strategy, as it creates tighter links between J&K and Ladakh with the rest of India.

That said, Pakistan could still stir up trouble for India. It could give its anti-India terror groups a further boost and we could see a spike in infiltration in the days ahead. Pakistan also seems to be confident that it can get the US – which is keen to withdraw from Afghanistan and needs Pakistan’s help – and China on its side.

However, Pakistan has no moral authority to express concern for Kashmir. It has practically cleansed the ethnic Kashmiri population in PoK and itself hived off Gilgit-Baltistan from Kashmir. Whatever may be the merits or otherwise of New Delhi’s recent moves, for Islamabad to object against them is a bit rich.

Nonetheless, India must remain alert to thwart any malevolent designs on Pakistan’s part. Pakistan will try to undermine India both diplomatically and strategically. New Delhi must be ready to meet those challenges.

Read Also: Pakistan closes a corridor of its airspace

Read Also: Pakistan expels Indian envoy, suspends all bilateral trade

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email
