Train service linking India and Pakistan suspended over rising Kashmir tensions

P akistan has suspended a rail service linking it to India as tensions rise over the contested Kashmir region.

The Himalayan region is jointly claimed by Pakistan and India but this week New Delhi revoked its special status, downgrading it from statehood to a territory.

It also imposed a communications blackout and security clampdown, forcing people to hole up in their homes for four days. More than 500 people have been arrested by Indian security forces.

On Thursday, Pakistan responded by suspending a key train service, the Samjhota Express, that links it to India, also known as the Friendship Express.

Indian migrant labourers who were working in Kashmir valley, flee from Kashmir as they board a train to leave for their homes. / EPA

Rebels in Muslim-majority Kashmir have been fighting Indian rule in the portion it administers, known as the Rajouri sector, for decades.

State-run All India Radio said cross-border firing by Indian and Pakistani troops hit Rajouri late on Wednesday.

Prime minister Narendra Modi is expected to address the nation on Thursday to discuss the situation.

In New Delhi, opposition Congress party activist Tehseen Poonawalla said he expected the Supreme Court to hear his petition on Thursday seeking the immediate lifting of a curfew and other restrictions, including blocking of phone lines, internet and news channels.

A Pakistani woman embraces her Indian Muslim relative ahead of her departure to India via the Samjhota Express train. / AFP/Getty Images

He also sought the immediate release of Kashmiri leaders who have been detained.

Pakistan's railways minister Sheikh Rashid Ahmad announcement to suspend the Express, came as passengers were waiting to board a train in the eastern city of Lahore to travel across the border.

Pakistan's Foreign Ministry spokesman Mohammad Faisal said authorities were considering approaching the International Court of Justice for a case against India for downgrading Kashmir's special status.

People hold pictures of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi during a protest after Indian government's strike down the special constitutional status granted to the disputed Kashmir region. / EPA

He condemned the communications blackout and security clampdown, saying: "Kashmir has been converted into the world's biggest jail."

"They are taking such actions in a panic," he said, adding India has "touched something they don't know how to get out of it".

India and Pakistan have fought two of their three wars over control of Kashmir.

The first ended in 1948 with a UN-brokered ceasefire that left Kashmir divided and promised its people a UN-sponsored referendum on the region's future.
