India imposed direct rule in Kashmir to free it from 'terrorism and separatism', says PM Modi

The UN has called for 'maximum restraint' in Kashmir after India imposed direct rule in the region amid heightened tensions with Pakistan.

United Nations chief Antonio Guterres called Thursday on India and Pakistan 'to refrain from taking steps that could affect the status of Jammu and Kashmir.'

His remarks came as Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi said the Kashmir region was stripped of its autonomy to free it from 'terrorism and separatism' which was encouraged by Pakistan.

Amid an increasing war of words, Pakistan looked to ease tensions saying it would not take military action against its nuclear-armed rival.

The statement from Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi eased fears of an all-out clash between the South Asian neighbours, which have fought two of their three wars over the Himalayan region - but none since they both gained nuclear weapons.

The UN has called for 'maximum restraint' in Kashmir after India imposed direct rule in the region amid heightened tensions with Pakistan

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi (pictured) said the Kashmir region was stripped of its autonomy to free it from 'terrorism and separatism' which was encouraged by Pakistan

Indian paramilitaries patrol the streets of Jammu, in Jammu-Kashmir state, which was placed on lock down after its autonomous privileges were revoked

On Monday Delhi stripped the Indian-held portion of Kashmir of its special autonomy, bringing it under its direct rule and deepening animosity with Pakistan, igniting days of debate over how the country should respond.

'Pakistan is not looking at the military option. We are rather looking at political, diplomatic, and legal options to deal with the prevailing situation,' Qureshi said at a press conference in Islamabad.

Tensions remained high, however, with Qureshi's comments coming on the heels of a decision by Islamabad to downgrade its diplomatic ties with India, suspend bilateral trade, and expel the country's envoy.

Pakistan has also promised to take the matter to the United Nations Security Council, while its military has said it 'firmly stands' with Kashmiris.

In his first comments since his government's decision, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday also defended the move as necessary to help end Pakistani-backed terrorism there.

India's communications blackout on Kashmir: Indian authorities imposed a communications blackout on Kashmir for a fourth straight day on Thursday, stopping India's media from being able to report what is happening in the disputed region after the government revoked its special status. The unprecedented clampdown is prompting criticism from an increasing number of Indian media organisations and senior editors, though some also support Modi's government - saying the curbs were important for national security. Editors at newspapers and television stations say that in many cases it has been days since they have heard from their correspondents based in the Indian-controlled part of Kashmir. They don't even know whether they are safe. There is virtually no information coming out of most of the Muslim-majority Kashmir Valley. Journalists who are communicating in some way say they are only able to report from a very small part of the state of Jammu and Kashmir, mainly a few blocks in the summer capital Srinigar. If they try and go outside that area they face layer upon layer of security checkpoints at which they are often turned back. Reporting by Reuters Advertisement

'Friends, I have full belief that we will be able to free Jammu and Kashmir from terrorism and separatism under this system,' Modi said Thursday in a televised live address.

He accused Pakistan of using the special status 'as a weapon against the country to inflame the passions of some people' against India.

Modi spoke just before a petition was filed with the Indian Supreme Court by an activist challenging the curfew in Kashmir, which was imposed to suppress any unrest in response to the loss of autonomy.

Activist Tahseen Poonawala and lawyer M.L. Sharma asked the Supreme Court to lift the lockdown and release people who have been detained as part of the crackdown.

University professors, business leaders and activists are among the 560 people rounded up by authorities and taken to makeshift detention centres - some during midnight raids - in the cities of Srinagar, Baramulla and Gurez, the Press Trust of India and the Indian Express reported.

ANI news agency also reported that the leader of the opposition in the upper house, Ghulam Nabi Azad from the Congress party, was stopped at Srinagar airport when he flew to the city and sent back.

Pakistani Nobel laureate Malala Yousafzai, who was shot in the head by the Taliban in 2012, on Thursday tweeted that she was 'worried about the safety of the Kashmiri children and women, the most vulnerable to violence and the most likely to suffer losses in conflict'.

'I believe we all can live in peace,' she added, in comments that were supported and criticised by Twitter users from India and Pakistan.

Tens of thousands of Indian troops are enforcing the lockdown which includes no internet or phone services, and are allowing only limited movement on streets usually bustling with tourists flocking to the picturesque valley.

The cities of Jammu (pictured) and Srinagar have been left virtual ghost-towns amid the curfew, though protesters have tried to defy it

Experts warn that the valley is likely to erupt in anger at the government's shock unilateral move once the restrictions are lifted, which could come on the Muslim festival of Eid on Monday.

Late Wednesday India's aviation security agency advised airports across the country to step up security as 'civil security has emerged as a soft target for terrorist attacks' on the back of the Kashmir move.

New Delhi is enforcing a curfew to suppress unrest in Kashmir after stripping the region of its special status on Monday, bringing it under direct rule in a move which has angered Pakistan.

Kashmir remained under a communications blackout on Thursday with mobile networks and internet services suspended.

Muslim-majority Kashmir is claimed in full by both India and Pakistan, and rebels have been fighting Indian rule in the portion it administers for decades.

As tensions worsened again today, Pakistan's railways ministry announced it was cutting off a key train service which links the two countries.

Last night the old quarter of Srinagar, Kashmir's largest city, was locked down with policemen in riot gear deployed every few metres, and barbed-wire checkpoints every few hundred yards.

Protesters march through the streets of New Delhi shouting slogans against the government

Protests have been sparked in both India and Pakistan by the decision, including in the Muzaffarabad, the capital of the Pakistan-administered portion of Kashmir

Thousands of paramilitary police have been deployed in Srinagar, schools shut and roads and neighbourhoods barricaded.

A petition was filed meanwhile in India's top court challenging the lockdown.

The detentions came as Prime Minister Narendra Modi was set to address the nation on the radio later Thursday to explain his government's decision.

The move is especially sensitive because Kashmir is India's only Muslim-majority state, while Modi's ruling party is made up of Hindu nationalists.

Experts warn that the valley is likely to erupt in anger at the government's shock unilateral move once the restrictions are lifted, which could come as soon as the Muslim festival of Eid on Monday.

Pakistan suspends key train service Pakistan has suspended a key train service with India over a change in the status of the disputed region of Kashmir. Federal Minister for Railways Sheikh Rashid Ahmad says the Express, or Friendship Express, train service is suspended from today. The railway suspension announcement was made as passengers were waiting to board a train in the eastern city of Lahore to travel to India. Advertisement

Young Pakistani doctors, paramedics and nurses chant anti-India slogans as they take part in a protest in their home countr
