Pakistan says India’s decision to strip Kashmir of statehood could lead to war

High in the mountains a disputed boundary has been called “the most dangerous place on Earth”. And it’s just erupted after a shock decision.

Don't miss out on the headlines from World. Followed categories will be added to My News.

There is a deathly silence hanging over the valley of Kashmir today despite the disputed mountainous region becoming a flashpoint that has brought two nuclear powers to the brink of war.

Although thousands of troops have been funnelled into the region from India, its internet, mobile phone and landline networks are all down — so it’s unclear what’s happening in the valley that’s home to seven million people.

However, what’s clear is that India’s arch rival Pakistan is not backing down from confrontation — vowing to “fight until the last drop of blood” if it is provoked any further over Kashmir.

Kashmir is disputed region high in the Himalayas. It’s spilt between three nuclear nations — India and Pakistan control a large chunk each while China governs a section of the east of Kashmir.

The co called “Line of Control” separates Pakistani and Indian controlled Kashmir. It’s not an internationally recognised boundary, but more akin to a ceasefire line. Another disputed boundary separates Indian Kashmir from China.

For decades, the three nations have faced off against one another in a place former US President Bill Clinton called “the most dangerous place on earth”.

A closed shop is pictured during curfew in Srinagar Picture: Sajjad HUSSAIN / AFP.

Pakistan is reacting in anger to India’s move. Picture: Banaras Khan / AFP

Tourists have been booted out of Indian controlled Kashmir, politicians have been placed under house arrest and there are unconfirmed reports of murders and beatings beginning to circulate on social media.

Now there are fears the region could become “another Palestine” after India overnight passed a bill that strips statehood from the Muslim-majority region.

In a nutshell, the move means the former state is now under the direct control of India.

The constitutional provision, known as Article 370, allowed Kashmiris the right to their own constitution and flag and the power to make laws — such as banning Indians from outside the state buying homes there.

Before today, it could also accept or shoot down national laws passed by the Indian national government.

Critics say the historic move means a seven-decade struggle for Kashmir’s future has become irrelevant

“A rubicon has been crossed, a boundary has been breached, a state has been erased and a populace has been blanked out of the national conversation,” Huffington Post’s India editor-in-chief Aman Sethi wrote overnight.

Pakistan is furious, and its Prime Minister Imran Khan says the nation is ready for war.

Indian Muslim passengers wave from the Samjhota Express train, also called the Friendship Express that runs between Delhi and Attari in India and Lahore in Pakistan. Picture: ARIF ALI / AFP.

It’s feared India’s decision could spark warfare with Pakistan. Picture: AP Photo/K.M. Chaudhry

In an address to parliament, he feared the Kashmiri people could attack Indian security forces out of anger, and India could blame Pakistan for it.

He then gave a bleak warning for the neighbouring nation of more than 1.3 billion people.

“If India attacks us, we will respond,” he said. “We will fight until the last drop of blood.”

Tensions between Pakistan and India have been simmering — and twice escalating into warfare — for more than 70 years over Kashmir, a region that’s claimed by both superpowers and divided between them.

Dr Claude Rakisits, an international affairs expert at the Australian National University, told news.com.au the bad blood goes back to the partition of British India — which created the two independent dominions of India and Pakistan in 1947.

Pakistan was split into two parts, one of which was known as East Pakistan and is now Bangladesh, after it seceded from West Pakistan in 1971 in a bloody war with the help of India.

“So Pakistan lost half of its country to India and that doesn’t make you friends,” said Dr Rakisits. “But the biggest issue which has created this bad blood from the very beginning was the partition.”

The bloody historic event displaced over 14 million people along religious lines — as Muslims moved north to Pakistan and Sikhs and Hindus moved south towards India — and millions are estimated to have died in the violence that came about as a result.

Indian security personnel patrolling on a street in Srinagar, as widespread restrictions on movement and a telecommunications blackout remained in place after the Indian government stripped Jammu and Kashmir of its autonomy. Picture: Saqib MUGLOO / AFP.

Kashmir is now under India’s direct control as curfews and a communications blackout come into force. Picture: Sajjad Hussain / AFP

Kashmir has been left divided ever since, and in the decades that followed, India has accused Pakistan of funding separatist and terrorist groups there.

In turn, Indian troops have been accused of raping, torturing and killing civilians.

However, the bad blood has intensified since 2015 when India’s Narendra Modi leader swept into power with a Hindu nationalist agenda — and used rhetoric that has been widely perceived as anti Muslim.

Shortly before he was voted in again this year, street violence in Kashmir erupted when Pakistani militants killed 40 Indian soldiers in a suicide attack.

This triggered the first cross-border air skirmishes between the two nations in almost 50 years — bringing them closer to war than at any time since the Kargil conflict in 1999.

Analysts claim the Indian nationalist sentiment that followed helped the Modi government achieve its landslide re-election in May — and he may be seeking to stoke tensions now to help him in the upcoming state elections.

Other commentators have suggested the decision to undo Article 370 could be a rebuke aimed at US President Donald Trump, just weeks after he publicly offered to mediate over Kashmir.

India insists its move is legal, and it will put right decades of underdevelopment in the impoverished valley, bringing jobs and educational opportunities.

Some are celebrating the Indian Government’s historic decision. Picture: AP Photo/Rajesh Kumar Singh

However, Amnesty International has warned India’s “unilateral decision”, including a “complete clampdown on civil liberties and communications blackout”, is “likely to inflame prevailing tensions, alienate the people in the state and increase the risk of human rights violations”.

China, which also lays claim to a portion of Kashmir, is also “seriously concerned” about the situation, foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said.

“The relevant sides need to exercise restraint and act prudently. In particular, they should refrain from taking actions that will unilaterally change the status quo and escalate tensions,” she said.

However, India continues to send troops into the region, and there are fears they could crack down on anti-India dissenters.

Rebels have been fighting Indian control for decades, and many Kashmiris support the rebels’ demand that all of Kashmir be united under Pakistani rule or become independent.

Security lockdowns, general strikes and civilian street demonstrations against Indian control are routine.

About 70,000 people have been killed in the rebel uprising and the ensuing Indian crackdown.

— with wires

Originally published as Pakistan says India’s decision to strip Kashmir of statehood could lead to war
