Hundreds of protestors expected at rally outside Indian Consulate in Birmingham over Article 370 law

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Never miss breaking news by signing up to our free email updates

Hundreds of people are expected to attend a rally outside the Indian Consulate in Birmingham after a law was scrapped.

Kashmiris are furious because India has revoked a law which had given the disputed state of Kashmir semi independence.

It will take place at the venue in the Jewellery Quarter at 3pm on Friday, August 9.

Previous pro-Kashmiri rallies in Birmingham have attracted thousands of people.

This latest one has been organised by pro-Kashmiri independence campaigners in Birmingham. There are believed to be around 150,000 Kashmiris living in the city.

Protests are held in Victoria Square every July to mark Kashmir Martyrs' Day, the anniversary of the deaths of 22 Kashmiris died in an uprising in 1931.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

Friday's protest has been set up following a move by the Indian government on Monday to scrap Article 370 - a law which gives Kashmir a certain amount of autonomy.

The Indian government argued that it had to be scrapped to integrate Kashmir and put it on the same footing as the rest of India.

It means Kashmir will no longer have a separate constitution but will have to abide by the Indian constitution.

All Indian laws will be automatically applicable to Kashmiris, and people from outside the state will be able to buy property there.

Kashmiri campaigners in Birmingham claim scrapping Article 370 is a move by India to break up the state of Jammu and Kashmir.

What is the background to the Kashmir dispute?

Kashmir sits between India and Pakistan and has a population of around 20 minillion. Both countries own portions of the region but have fought wars to gain complete control.

Of concern to the rest of the world is the fact that both India and Pakistan are believed to have nuclear weapons.

In 1948 the struggle for self-determination was supported by a United Nations resolution. But the resolution has never been implemented.

The disputed part of Kashmir has been under Indian rule, or occupation, and the scene of conflict and human rights atrocities for 70 years despite the UN resolution and many others around the world backing the right of the population to a vote to determine their own future.

Campaigners regard the occupation by India as illegal and say the population have been subjected to large scale human rights abuses.

With continued violence in Kashmir and a heightened terror threat by Pakistan-based militant groups, the threat of a clash between India and its neighbour Pakistan is high.

Both have maintained a fragile ceasefire since 2003 but still exchange fire across the contested border.

Any conflict between these two countries is likely to be extremely bloody. India and Pakistan have fought three wars over Kashmir, including the Indo-Pakistani Wars of 1947 and 1965, as well as the Kargil War of 1999.
