Narendra Modi’s Kashmir announcement: A historic coincidence or deliberated timing?

File picture: Prime Minister Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Modi government has bifurcated Jammu and Kashmir The government has revoked the special status of J&K The moves are radical measures towards bringing peace

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has taken a colossal leap into the valley of hope by bifurcating Jammu and Kashmir and abrogating Article 370. In a persuasive address on Thursday night, meant to win the hearts and minds of the people of Kashmir, he held out a promise of a better tomorrow. The Prime Minister presented a vista where the people of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh can hope to confidently stride into the future along with the rest of India, being an equal to any other citizen.

Government staff and police will now enjoy same benefits, progressive policies like Right to Information, Right to Education and mid-day meals, better sops for women and the girl child, along with reservations for backward castes would automatically come into play.

The Prime Minister repainted the pristine picture of Kashmir that has been imprinted on our minds through several memorable cinematic portrayals – sun-kissed picnics near the Dal Lake, beautiful wintery evening, auburn leaves of maple trees, roasted chestnuts and rose coloured apples; the list is long.

Life today for the ordinary Kashmiri is anything but that perfect depiction of jannat; the state has been restive owing to a plethora of reasons, from political instability, frequent protests, separatist agendas, sponsored stone-pelting and unrelenting sponsorship of cross-border terrorism. Pakistan has never come to terms with the accession of Kashmir to India, and it is the people of this exquisite region who have had to suffer and pay the price.

Perpetuity of a concept, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said, was behind the permanency of the problem. Was time, therefore, not ripe to think afresh and bring a new approach to finding a solution? But that would require us to throw away the encumbrance of history that weighed over the Valley and beyond. And make a clean break from past policies of two Constitutions, two flags and a slew of clauses that prevented fellow Indians from settling or working in the region.

One obvious reason for Narendra Modi to have taken the bold step now is that the BJP government has returned to power at the Centre with a gargantuan majority; strengthening the PM’s ability to push through bold initiatives and getting a parliamentary sanction for them. The fact that this is the beginning of his second term also gives him the leisure of time to see his proposal through to a natural conclusion in terms of definitive implementation. Besides, the PM had got a lot of spadework done to gather feedback and Home Minister Amit Shah and National Security Advisor Ajit Doval had brought background reports that time was ripe for such a bold if drastic action.

(Dr Syama Prasad Mookerjee|Pic courtesy: Twitter)

However, besides these logical reasons, there is an interesting coincidence. It was on August 07, 1952 that Dr Syama Prasad Mookerjee had addressed the Constituent Assembly about the need to abrogate Article 370. The Jana Sangh founder is an iconic figure in the history of BJP and undoubtedly might have inspired Modi to make a similar declaration on the very same day about the fruition of his dream. In fact, the Prime Minister was slated to address the nation on August 07, however, the death of Sushma Swaraj on the same day was one reason that the PM might have postponed the speech.

Leaders like Ram Madhav were quick to make the comparison, saying that the “martyrdom” of Dr Mukherjee for complete integration of J&K had finally been honoured.

Dr Syama Prasad Mookerjee, who hailed from Bengal, was a member of Pandit Nehru’s cabinet but fell out with the then prime minister and had resigned on 8 April 1950 due to a disagreement over the 1950 Delhi Pact with Pakistan and differences over Kashmir.

Mookerjee had hit out against the Special Status of Kashmir saying: 'Ek desh mein do Vidhan, do Pradhan aur Do Nishan nahi chalenge' (A single country can't have two constitutions, two prime ministers, and two national emblems).

Dr Mookerjee entered the state protesting against the requirement of citizens of India to carry ID cards (through a permit system) in Kashmir and was arrested for illegal intrusion. He passed away under mysterious circumstances in detention on June 23, 1953.

Eventually, the government was forced to revoke ‘Permit raj’ in the state and abolish the posts of Wazir-e-Azam (Prime Minister) and Sadr-e-Riyasat (President).
