Fabricated, incorrect: Centre debunks reports of mass protest in Srinagar over abrogation of Article 370

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Centre rejects reports of protest involving 10,000 people in Srinagar Home ministry says reports are “incorrect and fabricated” Article 370 that accorded special status to Jammu and Kashmir was revoked earlier this week

New Delhi: The Ministry of Home Affairs on Saturday rejected as “incorrect and fabricated” media reports claiming there was a protest involving 10,000 people in Srinagar against abrogation of Article 370.

The home ministry, in a statement, clarified that there were only a few stray incidents of protests in Srinagar and Baramulla.

“There are media reports claiming there was a protest involving 10,000 people in Srinagar. This is completely fabricated & incorrect. There have been a few stray protests in Srinagar/Baramulla and none involved a crowd of more than 20 people,” the statement reads.

Earlier, several media reports claimed that at least 10,000 people in Srinagar took to the streets to protest against Centre’s decision to revoke Article 370 that accorded special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

As per the reports, the protestors marched toward Srinagar following afternoon prayers on Friday, allegedly saying “We want freedom” and “Abrogation of Article 370 is not acceptable”.

The police reportedly fired live bullets in the air and used tear guns and pellets to disperse and tackle the protesting crowd.

On Tuesday, Parliament cleared a resolution revoking Article 370 of the Indian Constitution that gave Jammu and Kashmir rights to take decisions for all matters except for defence, foreign affairs, finance, and communications. The temporary provision also restricted the non-residents of the state from acquiring land, permanently living in the state, holding local government jobs and securing education scholarships.

It also gave its nod to the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation bill that sought bifurcation of the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories -- Jammu and Kashmir division and Ladakh.

Ahead of these developments, the Central government had deployed thousands of additional troops across Jammu and Kasmhir to prevent any untoward incidents and protests. The government also snapped the internet and telephone services and imposed Section 144 of CrPC, prohibiting the gathering of more than four persons in an area.

On Thursday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that Article 370 had failed to benefit the state and only fuelled separatism, corruption, terrorism and family rule.

“This decision will not only assist in the economic progress of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh but also the entire country. When there will be peace and happiness in this part of the territory, it is natural that it will strengthen the efforts to achieve world peace,” PM Modi had said, assuring the people of Jammu and Kashmir that there will be normalcy in the due time.
