Rohith Vemula death’s anniversary held amid tight security

For the first time in three years, mother and brother allowed inside UoH campus

The third death anniversary of Rohith Vemula was organised at the University of Hyderabad amid high security, with the State police deploying personnel including paramilitary forces. However, in a first in three years, the police allowed Rohith’s mother Radhika Vemula and his brother Raja Vemula to enter the campus to pay respects at the Rohith Vemula stupa erected on the campus.

Rohith Vemula, a Dalit research scholar of University of Hyderabad committed suicide on January 17, 2016. His death triggered nationwide protests demanding social justice for Dalit and other marginalised students. The anniversary titled ‘Rohith Vemula Shahadat Din’ was organised by Ambedkar Students Association along with other student outfits barring Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP).

Speakers at the event included Radhika Vemula and Fathima Nafeez, mother of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) student, Najeeb Ahmed who went missing in October 2016. Perumalla Balaswamy, father of P. Pranay, a Dalit Christian youth who was reportedly killed by his upper caste wife’s family, was also present at the venue. Brothers of two Dalit students of UoH, Pulyala Raju and Madari Venkatesh, who had killed themselves before Vemula, also attended the event. Other speakers included UoH faculty member K.Y. Ratnam, founder of Nalanda Academy of Wardha, Maharashtra, Anoop Kumar and Advocate Bheem Rao.

All speakers at the event spoke against the Bharatiya Janata Party even as Ms. Radhika and Ms. Fatima called citizens to vote the party out of power in 2019 general elections. “The communal, casteist agenda of the BJP which is anti-constitutional resulted in the persecution of marginalised communities including Dalits. This government should be voted out of power,” said Ms. Radhika. Ms. Fatima accused the BJP of having caused the disappearance of her son Najeeb. “Najeeb will return and tell us the truth,” she said.

Tension prevailed throughout the function as, just days prior to the anniversary, the administration had allegedly removed a protest spot on the campus, Velivada, meaning Dalit Ghetto, which Rohith Vemula and four other Dalit students had erected on January 4, 2016, days prior to the 26-year-old scholar’s death. The spot was where Vemula spent his last days after he was barred from using the hostel facility. The students have lodged a complaint with the city police under SC-ST Prevention of Atrocities Act, even as the administration filed another complaint against ASA leaders for having tried to build an illegal structure on university property.

On Thursday, civil society organisations including Kula Nirmulana Porata Samithi (KNPS) attended the event. All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) MP Asaduddin Owaisi tweeted a plea to make “universities less hostile and inclusive”. He further wrote, “Institutional murder of Rohith three years ago should not be forgotten. Rohith was vocal, articulate and a voice of unity for the oppressed. His absence is felt by all those who defied Hindutva”.
