Common man in Valley rejoicing abrogation of Article 370: Jitendra Singh dismisses reports of unrest

Union minister Jitendra Singh

Key Highlights People rejoicing the withdrawal of special status to J&K: Jitendra Singh Some reports claim that several people protested against Centre’s decision to revoke Article 370 Modi govt called reports of violence, mass protest "fabricated"

New Delhi: Debunking reports of violence in Kashmir over the abrogation of Article 370, Union minister Jitendra Singh on Sunday said that common man in the Valley is rejoicing the withdrawal of special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

He further said that the administration has lifted the restrictions which were imposed across the state under Section 144 of CrPC.

“Common man in Kashmir is rejoicing abrogation of Article 370. Wherever Section 144 was imposed, it is being taken off. On the eve of Eid, there is an atmosphere of peace this time compared to several other occasions of Eid in the years gone by,” he said.

Responding to Congress leader Rahul Gandhi’s comment on Kashmir situation, Singh said that he was among people who flourished in an atmosphere of “uncertainty and fear-mongering”.

“It wasn't the decision which would have pleased or sounded like music to the ears of Rahul Gandhi and allies, as they are the ones who have actually flourished and thrived in an atmosphere of uncertainty and fear-mongering,” he was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

Union Minister Dr Jitendra Singh on Rahul Gandhi's statement on J&K: It wasn't the decision which would have pleased or music to the ears of Rahul Gandhi and allies, as they are the ones actually who have flourished&thrived in an atmosphere of uncertainty and fear-mongering. — ANI (@ANI) August 11, 2019

Gandhi on Saturday asked the central government to apprise the people of the country about the current situation in Jammu and Kashmir.

Referring to reports of mass protest in Kashmir, the Congress leader said, “Reports have come that things in Jammu and Kashmir are going very wrong. There are reports of violence, there are reports of people dying in Jammu and Kashmir.

Earlier, several media reports claimed that at least 10,000 people in Srinagar took to the streets on Friday to protest against the Centre’s decision to revoke Article 370 that accorded special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

The reports also said the police fired live bullets in the air and used tear guns and pellets to disperse and tackle the protesting crowd.

However, the central government has been maintaining that the situation is normal in Kashmir and there has been no incident of violence.

“There are media reports claiming there was a protest involving 10,000 people in Srinagar. This is completely fabricated and incorrect. There have been a few stray protests in Srinagar/Baramulla and none involved a crowd of more than 20 people,” the home ministry had said in a statement yesterday.

The Jammu and Kashmir police also dismissed the reports of protests and violence in the state, asserting that the situation was normal and peaceful in the Valley. It also warned people against “fabricated and motivated news” regarding firing incidents in the Valley.
