Ravidas community gives Punjab bandh call for tomorrow

editorial@tribune.com

Avneet Kaur

Jalandhar, August 11

A day-long protest, organised by the various organisations representing the Ravidas community against the demolition of Ravidas Temple at Tughlaqabad in Delhi, continued on the second day today.

Read more: Schools, colleges in Jalandhar, Hoshiarpur, Kapurthala and Gurdaspur to be closed Tuesday

The community members have also given a call for Punjab bandh on August 13, if their demands are not met by Monday.

Various organisations and political leaders from AAP, SAD, under the banner of the Sarva Samaj Sangharsh Committee, gathered at the local Ravidas Chowk to lend support to the Dalit community.

They held a demonstration, set vehicle tyres and wooden doors afire, raised slogans against the government, and stalled the traffic from Nakodar Chowk to Wadala Chowk. Commuters traveling on the route had to face problems.

Jagdish Disha, president of the Sarva Samaj Sangharsh Committee said Delhi Government and Parliament had to accept a resolution to grant the same land at Tughlakabad to the Gurudwara Committee for the reconstruction of the temple.

He said the move had hurt the religious sentiments of a large number of followers, while the Modi-led-BJP government is maintaining a silence on the issue. He said the protestors want the intervention of the Central Government and they wanted temple to be reconstructed on the same land.

SAD leader Seth Satpal said his party members were in full support with the Ravidas Community and would participate in the state-wide bandh called on August 13 in order to show rage against demolition of the temple carried out by the Delhi Development Authority after the apex court orders.

Sharing similar views, AAP District President, Shiv Dayal Mali said this was not a political issue neither the political leaders should use it for their personal gains.

He also said it was a social issue and people from all regions are standing as one against this act of beadbi (sacrilege). He further said he would lend full support to the community in their future course of actions.

Vijay Sampla meets BJP, SAD leaders

Former Minister Vijay Sampla held a meeting with the BJP and SAD leaders over the issue of demolition of Guru Ravidass Temple here today at Circuit House. He said that the BJP and SAD leaders will meet the President of India.

He said that they will also meet senior leadership in Delhi and to seek appropriate solution of the matter and to ensure that the temple is reconstructed.

Others present in the meeting include SAD MLA’s Pawan Tinu and Baldev Khaira and ex Akali minister Sohan Singh Thandal.

Commuters a harried lot

Various organisations and leaders from AAP and SAD, under the banner of the Sarva Samaj Sangharsh Committee, gathered at Ravidas Chowk to lend support to the Dalit community. They held a demonstration, set tyres and wooden doors afire, raised slogans against the government and blocked the traffic from Nakodar Chowk to Wadala Chowk. Commuters travelling on the route had to face problems.

.
