AJYCP's protest against big river dam continues in Lakhimpur

A CORRESPONDENT

LAKHIMPUR: The Lakhimpur district unit of the Asom Jatiyatabadi Yuva Chatra Parishad (AJYCP) continued strong protest against the Lower Subansiri Hydro Electric Project (LSHEP) set up by NHPC Limited at Gerukmukh in the Dhemaji-Arunachal border area.

As part of the serial agitation programme against LSHEP resorted by AJYCP after the National Green Tribunal's (NGT) verdict in favour the controversial big river dam, the organization has initiated 100-hour long blockade against the transportation of LSHEP construction materials. The organization kicked off the programme, led by AJYCP Lakhimpur president Mondeep Neog and general secretary Jyoti Das, from 5 pm on Saturday, staging demonstration at Khelmati in North Lakhimpur town near Khelmati Police Outpost in association with the regional committees under the district body.

By initiating the programme, over 100 activists of the organization are keeping 24-hour close watch on the vehicles carrying LSHEP construction materials to the project site at Gerukamukh. They are determined not to allow any vehicle carrying such materials to go to the project site.

Notably, the organization blocked NH-15 near Ranganadi Bridge and staged sit-in in front of the Lakhimpur DC's office few days ago after the NGT's verdict to demand the closure of the big river dam. In support of this demand, the organization submitted consecutive memoranda to the Prime Minister of India, simultaneously issuing warning to the NHPC authority not to resume the construction works of the big river dam by ignoring the sentiments of the people of the State and the security of lives and properties of the Subansiri riverine people.

The day the organization started the programme against NHPC and LSHEP, the Chief Managing Director of the NHPC, Bolraj Joshi declared in front of media persons in New Delhi that the construction works of the river dam, which had been stopped since December, 2011, would be resumed as soon as the water level of the Subansiri River had receded. He reportedly said that there was no obstacle for the resumption of the LSHEP construction work after the NGT's verdict.

Reacting to his statement, AJYCP State committee assistant secretary Saurabh Das said that the organization would never allow the NHPC to construct the river dam at any cost. He added that the justice was denied to the Subansiri riverine people in the NGT's verdict. "The agitation against LSHEP will be intensified in the coming days," he said.

Also read: Asom Jatiyatabadi Yuva Chatra Parishad protests against Lower Subansiri project at Gerukamukh
