Quotas have made Marathas happy but Devendra Fadnavis's popularity has dipped

After Devendra Fadnavis (in pic), Uddhav Thackeray and Sharad Pawar were second in line as most popular choices for the next Maharashtra CM.

The recent legislation giving 16 per cent quota to the Maratha community seems to have made the BJP government more popular in Maharashtra, but didn't create much traction for Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis whose popularity took a dip in the last three months, India Today's Political Stock Exchange (PSE) has revealed.

Although Fadnavis bags the top spot as the choice for the next chief minister, the poll showed that his popularity has declined to 37 per cent from 39 per cent in October when the last PSE was conducted.

On the other hand, his government scored four per cent in three months, with 41 per cent of respondents expressing they were satisfied. Thirty four per cent gave the state government's performance a thumbs down, an increase by two per cent from the last poll.

Was the government justified in giving reservation to Marathas? A whopping 77 per cent of the respondents said "yes" while 15 per cent said "no", the poll showed.

As choice for the next CM, both Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray and NCP leader Sharad Pawar stood second at 15 per cent, while Maharashtra Congress chief Ashok Chavan bagged the third spot with 10 per cent votes.

Interestingly, Union Minister Nitin Gadkari (fourth spot) witnessed a substantial rise in his popularity in three months.

The Maratha reservation is the second major move by the Fadnavis government after farm loan waiver which didn't show expected results.

Farmers had protested against the government, demanding a complete and unconditional loan waiver.

When asked if the situation of farmers improved in the last four years, 45 per cent farmers said "no" whereas 31 per cent said "yes".

As many as 36 per cent respondents replied negatively when asked whether farmers were getting proper prices for their produce. A good 46 per cent didn't know what to answer.

The recent losses in the assembly elections failed to dent the image of Prime Minister Narendra Modi as he still remains top on the popularity chart with 48 per cent backing him as the next PM, a one per cent rise since October 2018.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi trailed behind at 29 per cent, a dip of two per cent from the last PSE.

The central government's performance in the last four and a half years has shown some fluctuation with a two per cent increase in the levels of satisfaction and dissatisfaction.

The poll showed that 45 per cent of respondents gave a thumbs up to the central government while 33 per cent expressed their dissatisfaction.

The state is reeling under drought and the situation is likely to worsen as summer advances. In November, the state had declared drought in 151 tehsils.

The PSE showed that 48 per cent of those surveyed were satisfied with the steps taken by the government to deal with drought. As many as 46 per cent sounded dissatisfied.

Though the Rafale fighter jet deal remains a crucial issue in Parliament, 63 per cent of respondents in the state were not aware of the issue. Thirty five per cent said there was no corruption in purchasing the fighter jets while 30 per cent raised doubts.

Employment opportunity worried 25 per cent of respondents followed by drinking water (21 per cent) and price rise (20 per cent).

The PSE in Maharashtra was based on telephone interviews across 48 parliamentary constituencies conducted between January 9 and 16 with a sample size of 5,200.
