Tamil Nadu Teacher Wins XSEED Superteacher Award

Chennai: XSEED Education’s month-long nationwide search identifies India’s Super teacher! The winner is Cassandra Fernandez, an XSEED teacher from Point Calimere International School, Nagapattinam Tamil Nadu. Yesterday she demonstrated an exciting live experiential class in front of 1200 delegates at the Sir Mutha Venkata Subba Rao Concert hall. She was awarded the glittering XSEED SuperTeacher Trophy by Ashish Rajpal, Founder & CEO, XSEED Education. The winning prize includes a residential training workshop in Singapore.

Commenting about her India’s SuperTeacher award, Ms. Cassandra Fernandez remarked: “When you teach from the heart, it makes a lasting impression in the mind of a child. Education is my way to make an impact and better the lives of the children. I am grateful to XSEED for the opportunity for professional development in Singapore!”

The XSEED SuperTeacher is a first-of-its-kind talent discovery program to find India’s best of the best teaching professionals. Close to 7000 teachers, drawn from schools across India, participated. The process included four rounds of rigorous selection that involved written assessments, personal interviews, and classroom demonstrations. The finale of the contest featured three finalists teaching a LIVE CLASSROOM that was evaluated by an expert jury, audience voting and student assessment results.

The finale culminated on 10th August in Chennai at the XSEED Education Conference which is among India’s largest and most relevant gatherings in education. The theme for the conference this year was the ‘The Professional K-12 Teacher in the 21st Century’. Acclaimed international educators like Wendy Horn of South Africa, Matthew Hood from the UK, & Prof. Yew-Jin Lew from Singapore spoke at the conference.

Ashish Rajpal, Founder & CEO of XSEED Education noted while delivering the keynote address noted that “Becoming a professional teacher for the 21st Century is going to be about embracing teaching technique over content. While there is a lot of talk about treating teachers with respect, there are almost no opportunities for the best teachers to showcase what truly outstanding teaching actually looks like. The XSEED SuperTeacher Search has provided a platform to find, nurture, and reward the best of our best teachers.”
