Eid in J&K concludes peacefully barring fringe protests, DTC suspends Delhi-Lahore bus: 10 points

On the eve of Eid al-Adha, restrictions were eased in Kashmir to allow people to shop for the festival and visit the nearby mosques to offer prayers. (Photo: AP)

The festival of Eid al-Adha in Jammu and Kashmir concluded peacefully barring a few minor incidents of protests against the abrogation of Article 370. The festive buzz, according to the authorities, was reportedly missing across the state. No person was reportedly injured in the protests.

J&K Principal Secretary Rohit Kansal said that the district and divisional administration carried out a number of activities including interacting with maulvis, people, organising mandis on the occasion of Eid. We have had an extremely peaceful and relaxed festival," he said.

Clarifying on the reports of a firing incident, Rohit Kansal said that "not a single bullet has been fired by the security agencies nor has there been any casualty".

Days after Pakistan suspended the bus service between Delhi and Lahore, the Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) on Monday canceled the Delhi-Lahore bus service. A DTC bus was scheduled to leave for Lahore on Monday at 6 am. However, it did not leave due to Pakistan's decision to suspend the bus service.

"Consequent to Pakistan's decision to suspend the Delhi-Lahore bus service, DTC is not able to send bus [from Delhi to Lahore] from August 12," said a statement from DTC.

HERE ARE THE TOP DEVELOPMENTS ON THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR SITUATION

1. Greeting people on Eid al-Adha, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday said he hopes that the festival will further the spirit of peace and happiness in the society.

2. On the eve of Eid al-Adha, restrictions were eased in the Kashmir Valley to allow people to shop for the festival and visit the nearby mosques to offer prayers. The festive buzz was, however, missing with roads deserted across large swathes of the Valley.

3. After the Eid prayers concluded, the J&K Police tweeted that no untoward situation took place in the state on the occasion of Eid and the prayers concluded peacefully in various parts of the Valley.

4. Peoples Democracy Party (PDP) MP Nazir Ahmad Laway, however, claimed that security was not relaxed in the Kashmir Valley, and people were not able to offer Namaz at the mosques. "I would like to tell you that many people were not able to offer Namaz in Kashmir Ghati on the occasion of Eid-Ul-Adha today, due to high security. The situation is such that I am not able to contact my own family members there. Security has not been relaxed here on the occasion of Eid, Kashmir Ghati is still under high security," Laway told ANI.

5. The customary exchange of sweets between the Border Security Force (BSF) and Pakistan Rangers along the international border did not take place on the occasion of Eid al-Adha, officials said. They said the Pakistani side did not respond to BSF's move to exchange sweets and greetings along the border running through the states of Jammu, Punjab, Rajasthan, and Gujarat.

6. National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval undertook an aerial survey of the city and South Kashmir areas to take stock of the security situation as the Valley celebrated Eid al-Adha amid strict restrictions.

7. Protesting the abrogation of provisions of Article 370, the Kashmiri students at the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) boycotted the lunch invite from the liaison officer of the Central government. They claimed that the invite was aimed at "rubbing salt on the wounds of the people of Kashmir".

8. During a bilateral meeting, External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar told his Chinese counterpart Wang Yi that India's decisions on Jammu and Kashmir are country's "internal" matter. The remarks came in response to Wang, who brought up developments pertaining to the recent developments regarding J&K.

9. Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi has asked the Opposition parties in the country to come together on Kashmir and said that the country should have a united stand on the issue. Addressing the media, Qureshi said the entire "Pakistani nation and political leadership is united on the issue of Kashmir and one voice will be sounded on August 14 in support of Kashmiris."

10. Pakistan Army chief General Qamar Javed Bajwa has said that the country has initiated multiple efforts to "redress" the situation in Kashmir and will support the Kashmiri people "whatever effort it takes".
