Kolkata: Relative of patient attacks doctor

According to police, the incident took place around 6 am on Monday when the patient, Mohd Zakir, was declared dead.

A doctor at Kolkata’s SSKM Hospital was assaulted by a relative of a patient who died of cardiac arrest on Monday morning.

According to police, the incident took place around 6 am on Monday when the patient was declared dead. Police intervened quickly and arrested the dead patient’s brother.

Police said the patient, Mohd Zakir, died of cardiac arrest. “He was suffering from kidney failure and had chest problems,” said an official.

As per police, after Zakir was declared dead by the doctors, his brother, Sajid, who was allowed to stay inside with the patients as his attendant, got furious and started abusing the on-duty doctor and medical staff alleging delayed response.

“Sajid first hit a glass panel with his fist and shattered the glass. He received severe injuries in his hands and started bleeding profusely, and then he started assaulting a doctor, who was on duty,” said police.

Sajid allegedly also assaulted other medical staff who tried to prevent him.

After a police team reached the spot on time, and due to their timely intervention, the situation was brought under control, said members of the hospital staff.

“The accused, Sajid, has been arrested. A complaint has been filed by the doctor who was assaulted,” said a police officer.

According to police, Sajid has been booked under various section of the Indian Penal Code and West Bengal Medicare Act.

Two months ago, on June 11, doctors in West Bengal had gone a strike demanding actions to prevent such incidents of violence against them after two junior doctors at NRS Medical College and Hospital were beaten up by a patient’s relatives.

The strike spread to other parts of the country as doctors joined the protest, demanding security for themselves.

On June 17, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee met 31 junior doctors and assured them of strict action.

Following her instructions, several steps were taken by the state government to ensure the safety of doctors at the government hospitals. From extra security outside Emergency to installation of a panic button in the wards that are directly connected to the police.

“Such incidents can’t be stopped in a day, and we also understand that. But the good thing to happen is the positive intent of the police to stop such an incident without delay. Now, they have senior police officer dedicated for the different hospitals as a nodal officer,” said a doctor at SSKM Hospital on the condition of anonymity.

He was also a part of the cease work agitation two months ago.
