Lord Rama lineage: After Kush's descendants, now Karni Sena chief says he came from Luv

After a BJP MP claimed that she is the directed descendant of Kush, Lord Rama's son, now the Rajasthan-based Karni Sena founder has claimed that he has descended from Luv, the elder son of Lord Rama.

The debate over who are the real descendants of Lord Rama seems to be snowballing after BJP MP and Jaipur princess Diya Kumari's claim.

Karni Sena, which was earlier in limelight for protesting against the Hindi film Padmaavat, has also jumped into the fray of being the descendants of Rama.

Lokendra Singh Kalvi, founder of Shri Rajput Karni Sena, has claimed that his family is the descendant of Luv, the elder son of Lord Rama.

"I am the descendant of Lord Rama's elder son, Luv. I am Sisodiya Rajput, who was considered the descendants of Luv," Kalvi said.

Kalvi, while speaking with India Today TV, also claimed that he would want to be a party in the ongoing Ayodhya dispute being heard in the Supreme Court.

He also expressed his support towards Diya Kumari, of the former Jaipur royal family, claiming that her family is the descendant of Kush and his family of Luv. Kalvi also mentioned that the dispute is not about the descendants of Rama but about the land in Ayodhya.

Earlier, Diya Kumari told India Today TV, "My family is the descendant of Lord Rama. My father was the 309th descendant of Lord Rama. We have documents that show that we descended from Kush. We belong to the Kushwaha or the Kachhawa clan," Diya Kumari said.

Her comments came after the Supreme Court, during a hearing in the Ayodhya dispute asked, "Is anyone from the Raghuvansh dynasty still here?"

This question by the Supreme Court during a hearing by the five-judge bench ignited the debate on whether the descendants of Lord Rama are still alive and if yes, who are they.

During the hearing in the apex court, senior advocate K Parasaran, counsel for 'Ram Lalla', argued that the deity and his birthplace were "juristic entities".

Parsaran quoted Ramayana, Purana to claim that Ayodhaya was the "janambhoomi" of Lord Rama. The senior advocate argued about the historical and mythological beliefs of the existence of Lord Rama.

Kumari, from Jaipur's erstwhile royal family, mentioned that there were several others who also claimed to be the descendants of Lord Rama and that every Indian would feel proud of claiming to be the descendant of Lord Rama.
