Passengers left stranded at city railway station

Ludhiana: Railway passengers were left stranded at the station waiting for their trains for hours as trains coming from Kolkata, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh were severely delayed due to protesters blocking the Dhandari-Ludhiana stretch for over half an hour on Tuesday afternoon.

The rail traffic disruption caused the delayed arrival of premium trains like Shan-e-Punjab, Malwa Express and Paschim Express. Apart from that, the protesters also blocked the Jalandhar Cantt-Ludhiana route for several hours, resulting in the delay of the train arriving from the Jammu and Pathankot side.

On Tuesday, people in several areas of Punjab came out on roads to participate in the bandh called by the Ravidassia community, protesting the demolition of the historic temple of Guru Ravidass in Delhi on the order of the Supreme Court a few days ago.

Apart from the delays, several trains were diverted to overcome the traffic disruption.

Major long-route trains Swaraj Express, Jammu Mail Express and Hemkunt Express were among the most-affected trains.

With the blockage of the rail route disrupting the ongoing festive season, passengers wanting to visit the Vaishno Devi shrine in Jammu were left disappointed with the delay. Moreover, the passengers on board the trains were in a state of confusion as the trains came to a standstill for hours.

College student Amanpreet Kaur, who had to travel to Delhi for an entrance exam, said: “It seems that both the railway authorities as well as the civil administration failed to curb the problem faced by the passengers. I did not know if my train would even reach the station in the next few hours or not. The railways did not make any announcement.”

Frequent commuter Joginder Sharma said: “Railways should make the use of railway security forces to counter such situations.”

On the other hand, Ludhiana railway station director Tarun Kumar said: “The railway security force resolved the issue of traffic disruption within a few minutes. Railways also made the arrangements for the passengers so that in case of any emergency, they would not have to face any difficulties in managing the basic needs.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
