Ravidas temple demolition: Congress leader appeals to Dalits to observe ‘black day’ on August 15

Members of Guru Ravidass Sabha stage a demonstration against the the demolition of Ravidas temple in Delhi on the orders of the Supreme Court | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Congress slammed the Narendra Modi government for the demolition of temple adding that it had hurt sentiments of people Due to the demolition of the temple, normal life was thrown out of gear in Punjab on Tuesday Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh appealed to PM Narendra Modi to personally intervene and resolve the issue

New Delhi: Punjab Congress MP Shamsher Singh Dullo has appealed to Dalits, SC MPs, MLAs and other public representatives of the community to not celebrate Independence Day in the wake of the demolition of a 15th Century temple of Guru Ravidas in South Delhi's Tughlaqabad area.

It is believed by many that the site in Tughlaqabad was visited by Guru Ravidas when he was going to Punjab from Varanasi around 1509 during the reign of Sikander Lodi.

Issuing a statement Dullo said, “Dalits of India feel that after 72 years of independence they have no religious, political, social and economic freedom and are not treated equally. Reservation in Parliament, Assemblies, Local Bodies and Panchayats is given by Dr BR Ambedkar in our Constitution and is a compulsion.”

Meanwhile, the Congress slammed the Narendra Modi government for the demolition of the temple adding that it had hurt sentiments of people.

Calling the Bharatiya Janata Party "anti-Dalit", Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala demanded that the Guru Ravidas temple in Tughlaqabad needs to be rebuilt.

However, a senior police officer claimed that the demolition was carried out by the authorities in the presence of the police and as per the orders of the Supreme Court.

"The standing permanent structure was dismantled peacefully without any resistance or use of force in the presence of Guru Ravi Das Jayanti Samaroh Samiti members," the DDA had said.

Due to the demolition of the temple, normal life was thrown out of gear in Punjab with reports of violence from some parts of the state.

Punjab observed a complete shutdown on Tuesday after Dalit groups called for a protest against the demolition of the temple.

The Jalandhar-Delhi national highway was blocked causing huge traffic jams. Many trains also were terminated, diverted or cancelled.

Earlier, Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh appealed to PM Narendra Modi to personally intervene and resolve the issue after members of the Ravidas community, under the banner of the Guru Ravidas Jayanti Samaroh Samiti, announced to observe August 15 as a 'black day'.

The chief minister further said that he would not comment on the Supreme Court order, which led to the razing of the religious structure, but added that he was personally against the demolition of monuments and structures of great historical importance.

“Very painful that while in Delhi there are hundreds of religious monuments on government lands which have not been touched by the DDA, only Dalit temples have been touched,” said Dullo and added that despite submitting a memorandum to Union Minister for Housing and Urban Affairs Hardeep Singh Puri, no action was taken by the ministry.
