Temple demolition in Delhi shakes Punjab, Haryana

Temple demolition in Delhi’s Tughlaqabad shakes Punjab, Haryana

Parts of Punjab observed a complete shutdown on Tuesday in a strike called by Dalit groups to protest against the demolition of a temple in Delhi’s Tughlaqabad.Markets and educational institutions were closed in Jalandhar, Hoshiarpur, Phagwara and Kapurthala due to the strike. There was partial impact of the strike in Amritsar, Ludhiana, Bathinda and Gurdaspur. National and state highways and other roads were also blocked to protest against the demolition.The maximum impact of the bandh was seen in Doaba, having the highest population density of Ravidassia/Adidharmi community. The Dalits form one-third of Punjab’s population and Ravidassia community is the most dominant Dalit group along with Valmikis and both are about 25% of the total population.At most places, the protesters targeted the Modi government, BJP and RSS in their speeches and slogans. Congress MLAs participated in the protest at most places and also addressed the agitators. The BJP and SAD leaders also addressed the sit-ins. Sikh groups and activists also participated in protests at some places.Biggest turnout of the community members, including women, was at Phagwara where thousands blocked the National Highway-44. The highway was also blocked in Jalandhar. The protesters also blocked the Una-Chandigarh-Nangal-Hoshiarpur highway in Ropar district.The protests over the demolition of the temple continued for the fourth day in Punjab’s Malwa region.In Harse Maansar, a small town between Mukerian and Pathankot on the national highway, a clash took place between supporters of bandh and shopkeepers. In Karnal Haryana , the community members blocked the busy NH-44 for two hours and the blockade caused massive traffic jam on both sides.The community held peaceful protests in Kurukshetra, Ambala, and Yamunanagar districts in northern Haryana.The Punjab leader of opposition (LoP) Harpal Singh Cheema led an AAP delegation to meet Union minister Hardeep Singh Puri and apprised him of the protests erupting in Punjab. Cheema attacked the BJP-led NDA government at the Centre, saying the demolition was “sacrilegious”.
