Monkeys kill twice in a week in Indian state Uttar Pradesh

Two people from the same state in India were killed in the space of a week following monkey attacks.

One victim, Hari Shankar Goyal, 55, was chased inside his home in Agra, Uttar Pradesh by monkeys.

He died while fleeing from the primates, falling while climbing a staircase and hitting his head.

The second victim, Kusum Chaturvedi, 50, was attacked while drying clothes on her terrace in Mathura, Uttar Pradesh.

She was with her sister-in-law when they were set upon by 15 to 20 monkeys.

Her sister-in-law fell on the terrace but Kusum lost her balance and fell down into the courtyard, where she died.

Kusum Chaturvedi, 50, died after she was attacked while drying clothes on her terrace in Mathura, Uttar Pradesh

Hari Shankar Goyal, 55, was chased inside his home in Agra, Uttar Pradesh by monkeys and fell, hurting his head. Pictured is a monkey in Agra

The deaths have led to renewed calls to solve the monkey menace in the state.

Goyal was sitting outside his home talking to neighbours when he was attacked on August 7.

Anurag Agarwal, a relative, told the Hindustan Times: 'Simian menace is a routine affair in this area.

'These monkeys run on the walls of dilapidated houses leading to bricks falling on the ground. We have to keep our children indoors due to the scare.

'Due to fear, no teacher comes to teach our children and none of our relatives visit us because of monkeys in Phulatti, Kuncha Sadhuram and Maithan areas. All our complaints including those in writing have fallen on deaf ears of Agra administration.'

Lawyers in the city recently went on a two-day strike to urge officials to tackle the monkey problem.

Their deaths have led to renewed calls to tackle the issue of monkeys in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh, India

The second victim, Kusum Chaturvedi, was rushed to hospital after her fall on July 31 but was declared dead shortly after.

Her niece told the Times of India that 'no one bothers about the death of poor people'.

She said: 'No one bothers about the death of poor people. If someone from the family of a politician or bureaucrat is killed, they will wake up from the slumber and do something.'
