‘Deshbhakti’ curriculum to be introduced in Delhi government schools from next year

Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal made the announcement on the eve of Independence Day.

The Delhi government will introduce a Deshbhakti curriculum in its schools from the next academic year to inculcate in students love for the country and make them aware of their responsibilities, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal announced on the eve of Independence Day.

Speaking at the launch of the ‘Constitution at 70’ campaign on Wednesday, Mr. Kejriwal said the decision to introduce the curriculum was taken at a meeting on Tuesday between him and Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia, who also holds the education portfolio.

The campaign, which will end on November 26, the day the Constitution of India was adopted in 1949, is being held in all government schools. Students of Class VI to IX and XI will be part of the campaign.

“We are reminded of our love for the country either when there is an India-Pakistan match or when there are tensions on the border. In our day-to-day lives we forget about our country. The Deshbhakti curriculum is being introduced so that each and every citizen of this country truly loves their country,” Mr. Kejriwal said at the event.

“When our children grow older and start working, and at any point if they accept a bribe, then they must feel from within that they are betraying Bharat Mata. When they jump a traffic light, they must feel they’ve wronged their country,” he said.

“We hear of foreign nationals in India facing loot, assault and rape. When we hear stories of Indians returning from Japan, we only hear praises for the Japanese and their hospitality. We have to love our country to the extent that we respect it and respect our guests,” he said.

Three goals

The curriculum is aimed at achieving three goals– instilling pride for the country among children, creating awareness of their responsibility and duty towards the country, and inculcating selflessness for the sake of the nation, the Chief Minister said.

“Each child must be made aware of their responsibility and duty towards the country. India has a hundred problems. We are poor, our farmers commit suicide. But who will solve these problems? It is us who will have to find solutions,” he said.

The curriculum will be the “biggest gift to the nation” on the occasion of the 73rd Independence Day, Mr. Kejriwal said. Mr. Sisodia said teachers and principals of government schools will be at the forefront in designing this curriculum, similar to how the Happiness curriculum and Entrepreneurship Mindset curriculum were designed.

“I have directed the department to form a cell to drive this and take inputs from people across the country. I am optimistic that by the next academic year we will be able to launch the curriculum,” he said.
