Hundreds expected at second rally in a week against scrapping of Article 370 in Kashmir

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Never miss breaking news by signing up to our free email updates

Hundreds of people are expected at a rally in support of Kashmir in Birmingham tomorrow, Friday.

It will be the second protest against the Indian Government's treatment of the state in less than a week.

Last Friday, more than 500 protestors gathered outside the Indian Consulate in the Jewellery Quarter.

(Image: Darren Quinton/Birmingham Live)

Organisers said Friday's event would be the "biggest yet". It will take place outside the consulate in Augusta Street between noon and 2pm.

Kashmiris are furious at the Indian Government's scrapping of Article 370, which gave Kashmir special status.

Since that happened, there has been widespread unrest and violence in Indian-administered Kashmir.

There are around 150,000 Kashmiris living in Birmingham and they regularly hold rallies and protests against the Indian occupation of their homeland.

(Image: Darren Quinton/Birmingham Live)

One of the organisers of Thursday's rally is Zubeda Khan, from the Daughters of Kashmir group.

She said: We are protesting because of the Humanity Crisis and Genocide which has been created by the Modi Government. Children and women will be coming to the protest."

She went on: "There are 14.5 million people who are living in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir, and especially 8 million in the Kashmir Valley.

"They are very worried about current situation of Indian-occupied Kashmir, because their blood relatives living there are under a lock down and blackout.

(Image: Darren Quinton/Birmingham Live)

"Human rights violations are being committed on a daily basis - with forced disappearances, the use of pellet guns, genocide and political leaders under house arrest who are being tortured."

She said since the lockdown, there was also a shortage of food and medicine.

Speaking at last Friday's rally, Majid Mahmood, city councillor and proud Kashmiri, said the mood amongst Kashmiris living in the West Midlands was "very sombre".

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

"People are disgusted with what has happened and the stance of the Indian Government," he said.

"We are calling for solidarity from the international community and want to see pressure exerted on Prime Minister Modi over his actions."

August 15 has been chosen for the next demo because it coincides with Independence Day for India.

Time Line Key events in Kashmir 1 August 1947 - Partition The Indian subcontinent is partitioned into predominantly Hindu India and mainly Muslim Pakistan. Mass migrations follow, with Hindus and Muslims moving to their country of choice. More than a million people are killed in the violence that ensues. 1 October 1947 War breaks out over Muslim-majority Kashmir. The war ends in 1948 with a UN-mandated ceasefire, leaving Kashmir divided between the two nations. A referendum is promised for its people to choose which nation they wish to join. A further war erupts in August 1965 over the region; then, in December 1971, a third war is fought in East Pakistan, leading to the creation of independent Bangladesh. 10 May 1974 India detonates a nuclear device in a confirmed nuclear test. It is the first by a non permanent member of the UN Security Council. 1 December 1988 India and Pakistan sign an agreement that neither will attack each other's nuclear installations or facilities; it takes effect in 1991. 8 May 1998 Armed resistance to Indian rule in Kashmir begins. India says Pakistan supports local fighters with weapons and training, which Pakistan denies, saying it only gives local Kashmiris "moral and diplomatic" support. 1 December 2001 Indian troops mass along its border with Pakistan and the Kashmir boundary - it blames Pakistani insurgents for a deadly attack at the Indian Parliament. International mediators intervene and the issue ends in autumn 2002. 8 September 2016 Suspected rebels sneak into an army base in Indian controlled Kashmir and at least 18 soldiers are killed. Indian forces attack militant bases in Pakistan-controlled Kashmir. 14 February 2019 A car bomb explodes, killing 40 Indian soldiers in Indian controlled Kashmir. Militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed claims responsibility - they are based in Pakistan and so India promises a 'crushing response'. 5 August 2019 PM Modi's central government changes part of the Indian constitution and downgrades Jammu and Kashir from one state to two territories of India. The change eliminates Kashmir's right to its own constitution, limits its decision making powers and allows non-Kashmiri Indians to settle there.

(Image: BBC)

What is the background to the Kashmir dispute?

Kashmir is a volatile region, split between India and Pakistan. Wedged between the two nuclear states, Kashmir has been bitterly contested since Indian independence in 1947.

The 12 million inhabitants of Kashmir are divided between the Indian and Pakistani controlled zones, with a heavily patrolled dividing line between the two.

Kashmir was granted autonomy in exchange for joining the Indian union after independence in 1947. The controversial move to strip it of that right by India’s Hindu nationalist prime minister, Narendra Modi, has led to fears of widespread unrest and paralysed normal life.

Tens of thousands of extra troops and security personnel were reportedly dispatched to add to the estimated 500,000 already present on the border, making it one of the world’s most militarised zones.

Most of the 1.1 million British Pakistanis originate from Kashmir - including an estimated 150,000 living in Birmingham
