Pakistan observes Black Day in protest against India

Pakistan's flag flies at half-mast to observe Black Day against India for its atrocities in Kashmir.

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – Pakistan on Indian Independence Day (August 15) is observing Black Day in protest against India’s unconstitutional move to revoke Article 370 of the special status of Kashmir and blatant human rights violations and oppression in occupied Kashmir.

As Indian forces further intensify the clampdown in Kashmir, the Black Day is being observed on both sides of the Line of Control (LoC).

Black flags hoisted on roof tops and vehicles across Pakistan and Azad Kashmir to symbolise rejection of Indian nefarious designs.

Protest rallies are being taken out in all small and major cities of the country and seminars are also being organised to highlight plight of oppressed Kashmiris who are being subjected to unprecedented persecution over the last ten days.

Meanwhile, the twitter display picture of Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been displayed black to mark India’s independence day as Black Day today.

In a statement, the Foreign Office spokesperson Dr Mohammad Faisal said: “We stand with our Kashmiri brothers and sisters.”

Moreover, a protest demonstration will be held in front of India High Commission in Islamabad to express solidarity with the people of Occupied Kashmir who are facing continued atrocities by Indian occupation forces.

The decision to mark India’s independence day as black day was taken at the National Security Committee meeting, chaired by Prime Minister Imran Khan, last week in the wake of the Indian move to revoke Article 370 that gave occupied Kashmir an autonomous status and to split the held Valley into two territories.

Anti-India rallies followed by protest demonstrations in all towns and cities of Kashmir on both sides of the LoC will be the day’s highlight.

In Mirpur, a procession to be taken out from district courts premises will pass through major streets of the city.

Punjab Chief Minister Usman Buzdar has appealed to the people to come out in large numbers to participate in a rally being organised in Lahore to tell the world that the people of Pakistan and Kashmir were inseparable.

India’s decision this month, along with a communications blackout and curbs on the movement of those in Indian-administered Kashmir, has generated a strong response from nuclear-armed rival Pakistan, which cut trade and transport links and expelled India’s envoy in retaliation.

Newspapers in Pakistan printed editions with black borders on Thursday and politicians, including Prime Minister Imran Khan, replaced their social media pictures with black squares.

The largely symbolic move comes amid growing frustration in Islamabad at the lack of international response over the Kashmir dispute.

The 15-member United Nations Security Council is set to discuss the dispute on Friday, as Pakistan has guaranteed support from China, which also claims part of India’s Jammu and Kashmir state.

Yesterday, the Independence Day of Pakistan was celebrated as the Kashmir Solidarity Day on August 14. Prime Minister Imran Khan addressed the AJK Legislative Assembly in Muzaffarabad on Wednesday amid soaring tensions with arch-rival India over occupied-Kashmir disputed territory.

Prime Minister Imran Khan warned India of a strong response if it attempted to attack Azad and Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) and that international organisations would be responsible if the war breaks out between the two nuclear-armed rivals.

Regarding the possibility of war with India amid simmering tensions, Prime Minister Imran Khan said: “Modi has played his last card and it will cost him a heavy price, and he will be paid back in his own coin.”

“The entire nation and Pakistan Army is ready for it,” he said, while stating that judges in India were afraid of Modi-led regime, and they have controlled media and the state of Kashmir has been locked down for the last 11 days.”

PM Khan revealed that Pakistan would take the matter to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) as Modi has thrown aside United Nations Security Council resolutions regarding the disputed terrority.

The premier stated that Modi’s ideology has defied his own constitution. “The entire world is worried about the people of Kashmir and looking towards resolution of the dispute.”
