Resident doctors at Mumbai's Sion Hospital seek consultation to 'cope with fear psychosis' after attack

Resident doctors outside the psychiatric ward in protest (Photo Courtesy: @mynameismugdha) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Junior resident doctor thrashed by elderly patient's kin at Sion Hospital Medicine department of Hospital goes on strike Resident doctors seek consultation to combat 'psychosis of fear' Attacking doctors to be made non-bailable offence: Health Ministry Those found guilty of assaulting doctors could be imprisoned for up to ten years: Union Health Minister

Mumbai: Continuing their protest against attacks on medical professionals, about 200 resident doctors thronged the psychiatric ward of Mumbai's Sion hospital on Wednesday. The protesters sought consultation on "coping with fear psychosis" while citing a recent incident where a first-year resident doctor at the same hospital was physically assaulted by family members of a patient who succumbed to long-term kidney disease in the 'medicine' ward.

Following the attack on Dr Pravin Shilkande on August 12, all resident doctors working with the renowned hospital's medicine department refused to resume work. While raising their demand for provision of security for medical professionals, the protestors claimed that a mob of over 20 people barged inside the ward in the absence of security guards and thrashed the resident doctor who had just resuscitated the patient before handing him over to the doctor in charge.

Eyewitness accounts suggested that the patient died even before Dr Shilkande could leave the room which angered the kin of the deceased senior citizen. While the attacked resident doctor left the hospital soon after, his fellow medicos approached the police and filed a complaint in this regard against the patient's relatives. A counselling session was later conducted for resident doctors by the psychiatry department on Wednesday, said a report.

The hospital dean also met the protesters and directed the organisation of a five-member committee of resident doctors and senior teaching faculty to draft a standard operation protocol to tackle such instances in the future. Shockingly enough, this attack comes two days after doctors and nurses at SSKM, a government hospital in Kolkata were beaten by family members of a patient following his death.

This incident comes barely months after resident doctors called for a nationwide protest over the brutal attack on one of their own by a patient's relatives at the Nil Ratan Sircar (NRS) Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata. Relatives of an elderly patient who passed away at the state-run medical facility reportedly broke open the gates and mercilessly assaulted an intern doctor who suffered a skull fracture as a result of the attack. Within hours, the protest had reached the national capital with resident doctors at Delhi's AIIMS and Safdarjung hospitals demanding legislation to safeguard medical professionals against such attacks.

In fact, Union Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan earlier this week approved a draft Bill to impose stringent punishments for those found guilty of physically assaulting medical professionals. Under this law, these acts will be deemed cognisable non-bailable offences and will attract punishment up to ten years in prison. The draft Bill will soon be presented in the public domain for suggestions. The Minister said that it will then be approved by the Cabinet and presented before Parliament for approval.
