Mahatma Gandhi was not in Delhi when India was partitioned. Where was he and why?

Mahatma Gandhi reading a book beside his charkha. | File image: Bardoli Ashram

Key Highlights From the ‘Non-cooperation movement’ in the 1920s to ‘Salt Satyagraha’ in 1930, Gandhi spearheaded mass movements across the country for decades, campaigning for millions of people across India and being the voice of the unheard While the Indian National Congress rallied for a British-free India, the All India Muslim League advocated for a separate Muslim-majority state

New Delhi: ‘Independence’ is a very subjective term if you try to see from the point of view of a person born in the 20th Century. We might not have witnessed the Partition of 1947 unlike our ancestors but certain historical anecdotes of the event are yet to be debunked.

India will be celebrating her 73rd Independence Day on 15 August, as many as 72 years after the partition of undivided Bharat into Pakistan and India, and 162 years after the first war of Independence – the sepoy mutiny of 1857.

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, or ‘Mahatma Gandhi’ as he was fondly called, spent over two decades in South Africa, first as a lawyer and then as a civil rights crusader. He returned to India in 1915 seeing a rising anti-British sentiment and armed with a will to play an active role in the nation's nascent freedom movement.

From the ‘Non-cooperation movement’ in the 1920s to ‘Salt Satyagraha’ in 1930, Gandhi spearheaded mass movements across the country for decades, campaigning for millions of people across India and being the voice of the unheard.

The build-up to our Independence was, however, marred by demands and criticism by a person who wanted a separate nation for Muslims – Mohammed Ali Jinnah. Jinnah sold the idea of a new nation to lakhs of Muslims, much to the chagrin of Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru.

Gandhi’s idea of an independent Bharat was now diluted into a vision of a British-free land, not of a ‘unified India’. While the Indian National Congress rallied for a British-free India, the All India Muslim League advocated for a separate Muslim-majority state.

The massive exodus of people from the newly-constituted nation of Pakistan to India and vice-versa witnessed a religious massacre that killed over 12 million people.

This hurt Bapu, as Gandhi was fondly called by his followers, and he did not partake in the celebrations when the British handed over the reins of Pakistan to Jinnah at the stroke of midnight on 14 August 1947, and India to Nehru on 15 August.

For someone who dedicated all his life to the cause of his motherland, Gandhi was heartbroken to see people getting separated and India getting divided in the cause of the very freedom he fought for.

Always a ‘people’s person’, Bapu decided it was important to be among the masses than be in Delhi at the time of Independence. With his charkha in tow, Gandhi spun, fasted and appealed for peace in riot-stricken Calcutta, stationing himself for the cause of refugees from the then-East Pakistan (now Bangladesh), while the rest of India was celebrating the end of British rule and the advent of a new era on 15 August 1947.
