In pictures: Pakistan observes Black Day on August 15

This photo shows a banner hanged near the Parliament building in Islamabad on August 15, 2019, as the country observes 'Black Day'. PHOTO: AFP

Policemen ride past a banner hanged near the Parliament building in Islamabad on August 15, 2019, as the country observes 'Black Day'. PHOTO: AFP

Protesters of the All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) shout anti-Indian slogans near the Indian High Commission during a protest rally in Islamabad. PHOTO: AFP

A protester of the All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) holds a back flag near the Indian High Commission during a protest rally in Islamabad as they observe a 'Black Day' on India's Independence Day over the recent move to strip Indian-administered Kashmir of its autonomy. PHOTO: AFP

Activists of Hizbul Mujahideen (HM), a Kashmiri separatist group, release black balloons during a protest in Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan-controlled Kashmir. PHOTO: AFP

Riot policemen try to stop protesters of the All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) during a rally near the Indian High Commission in Islamabad. PHOTO: AFP

Protesters burn an Indian flag during a protest in Hyderabad on August 15, 2019, as the country observes 'Black Day' on India's Independence Day. PHOTO: AFP

Activists of Hizbul Mujahideen (HM), a Kashmiri separatist group, write comments on an Indian flag during a protest in Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan-controlled Kashmir, as the country observes 'Black Day’. PHOTO: AFP

Pakistan's flag flies at half-mast to observe Black Day over India's decision to revoke the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, above the Provincial Assembly of Sindh building in Karachi. PHOTO: Reuters

Riot policemen try to stop Kashmiri protesters of the All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) during a protest rally near the Indian High Commission in Islamabad. PHOTO: AFP

Protesters of the All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) shout anti-Indian slogans near the Indian High Commission during a protest rally in Islamabad. PHOTO: AFP
