Protest against Indian atrocities in occupied Kashmir held outside Foreign Office

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – A protest rally was organized on August 15 (Independence Day of India) in front of Foreign Office in Islamabad to express solidarity for people of India-occupied Kashmir.



According to details, Asad Umer, Amir Kayani, Senator Faisal Javeed, Abida Raja MPA PTI, Kashif Ch JI, Abdul Hameed Loon, advisor to PM Iftikhar Durrani and President Anjuman-e-Tajran Islamabad Kashif Chaudhry participated in the protest.

About 7000 people attended the rally. MNA from NA-164 Sardar Zulfiqar Ali Khan led 400 to 450 people who entered Faizabad from Chakwal.

The protesters raised slogans ‘Kashmir Banay ga Pakistan’ and ‘Hum Kaya Chahtay Azadi’. They also set ablaze posters of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Addressing the rally, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) leader Asad Omar said, “UN must remind India of its resolutions. We want Kashmiris to have freedom without bloodshed. Otherwise, there should be no misunderstanding.”

“The United Nations was created to end injustice. There is a Hitler from the East whose name is Modi. Modi wants to spread fascism through genocide. The people of Pakistan and the armed forces stand with the Kashmiris,” he added.

Aamir Kayani said, “We are ready to go all the way. A resolution has been submitted in UN. Today we have to tell the world that children and women in Kashmir are deprived.”

“We have come to tell them that the situation in Kashmir is tragic. Modi cannot decide Kashmir on a piece of paper,” he asserted.

Senator Faisal Javed stated, Indian measures have been rejected by the world. Protests are happening all over the world today. The rally will now march towards the Indian Embassy. Modi’s actions are hurting India. Kashmir has now become a global agenda. Today will be a big demonstration of black day in London.”

Iftikhar Durrani said, “Occupied Kashmir is fully locked down, lack of food and medicine have perturbed life in the valley. PTI leaders submitted memorandum to UN observer office on Kashmir situation, he told.
