Rallies held worldwide in solidarity with occupied Kashmir

(Dunya News) – Dozens of solidarity rallies across the world were held as mark of support for people of India-occupied Kashmir on August 15 (India s Independence Day) as the curfew continues to paralyze the valley, following repeal of articles 370 and 35A.

A protest was held in Denmark’s capital Copenhagen, to show concern over the plight of Kashmiris. People, while holding aloft Pakistani and Kashmiri flags, chanted slogans against human rights violations by India.

In Rome, protesters including Sikhs and Indians gathered outside the Indian Embassy during its flag hoisting ceremony and raised voice against killing of innocent Kashmiris.

Similarly, hundreds of students organized a protest rally in front of United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Office in Mashhad, Iran. They chanted slogans against India exposing its atrocities in IOK, and urged Muslims across the world to rise for Kashmir and give befitting response to India.

Separately, in relation to Kashmir Black Day in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysian Islamic Organizations’ Consultative Council (Mapim) organized a protest demonstration outside Indian High Commission. Large number of Kashmiri students, Pakistani community and friends from local Malaysian Community participated in the protest. A memorandum was also submitted to Indian High Commission.

Pakistani community in Austria also observed India s Independence Day as Black Day by staging a protest in front of Indian Embassy in Vienna. Protesters condemned Indian abrogation of occupied Kashmir’s special status and chanted slogans demanding international community to play its role on Kashmir issue.

A historic protest demonstration was organised by all parties of Pakistani / Kashmiri and Sikh diaspora in front of Indian High Commission in London as an expression of solidarity with Kashmir after repeal of articles 370 and 35A depriving the valley of its original status.

By holding Pakistani and Kashmiri flags, around 10,000 to 12,000 protesters, including women and children from all walks of life, participated in the rally. Prominent organisers like Fahim Kiayani, Raja Sikandar, Ch Shaban and others delivered short speeches whereas Lord Nazir and George Galloway also addressed the participants.

The protesters highlighted the brutalities and grave human right violations of Indian occupational forces in Kashmir. They strongly condemned Modi’s move which has converted the valley into a big jail. They also urged UN and international community to intervene and exert their influence over India to revert recent unconstitutional changes.



The protest was a success in terms of numbers and desired impact. No untoward incident happened.

In Toronto, different Sikh organisations led a protest demonstration in front of Indian Consulate. Local Canadians, Pakistan origin Canadians and Kashmiris attended the rally and termed PM Narendra Modi as terrorist. They also demanded India to restore previous status of IOK.

Moreover, a massive protest by all segments and parties was also staged outside Indian Consulate in Frankfurt.
