More than 20,000 protesters rally in support of Kashmir in London

Nearly 20,000 protesters, waving Pakistani and Kashmiri flags, rallied outside the Indian High Commission in London

LONDON: Nearly 20,000 protesters, waving Pakistani and Kashmiri flags, rallied outside the Indian High Commission here, as central London came to a complete halt in support of the Kashmiri people and against Narendra Modi’s revocation of Article 370 which has deprived Kashmiris of their special rights in violation of the local and international conventions.



The unprecedented show of outrage against Modi was unique in its nature as those who assembled belonged to all backgrounds and came together to show solidarity for the oppressed people of Kashmir. The massive protest defied all expectations and assessments of the police and organisers of the protest. It was estimated that around 2,000 protesters would converge in London, but none anticipated that thousands will pour in central London on their own to stand for the people of Kashmir.

Prime Minister Imran Khan’s special adviser on overseas Pakistanis, Zulfi Bukhari especially travelled from Pakistan to attend the protest and addressed the charged rally. Several British parliamentarians addressed the rally and condemned the inhumane treatment of eight million Kashmiris by the occupying Indian army. Shabana Mahmood MP, Khalid Mahmood MP, Lord Nazir Ahmed, Muhammad Yasin, Muhammad Yaseen MP, Lian Burn MP, George Galloway and others addressed the mammoth crowd.

The speakers condemned India’s decision to revoke the special status of occupied Kashmir, along with the communications blackout and curbs on movement causing fury worldwide. The protesters were carrying placards with “Kashmir is Burning”, “Free Kashmir”, “Modi is Hitler,” “Kashmir Banega Pakistan”, “Kashmir wants freedom”, and “Modi: Make Tea Not War”.

Many of the protesters had come to the capital from other English cities on specially chartered buses

Many of the protesters had come to the capital from other English cities on specially chartered buses, on their own initiative.

Zulfi Bukhari thanked the protesters on behalf of the Pakistani government for coming in thousands. He said it was a moral obligation of everyone to speak up for the Kashmiri brothers and sisters living in the challenging circumstances under the Nazi-like regime of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. He said that Imran Khan has linked Modi with Hitler and Nazi-RSS ideology because of Modi's actions.

He said: “We stand here united for the people of Kashmir and their human rights. I congratulate all of you for putting aside your differences and for standing for the rights of Kashmiris. We are here as one nation and one people. Under Modi, there is a fascist, racist regime killing Kashmiris, Muslims, Christians and minorities. Modi has a history of massacring minorities and the man doing this all is called the butcher of Gujarat.”



Zulfi Bukhari thanked the protesters on behalf of the Pakistani government for coming in thousands

Bukhari said that it was important for the world to know that India has unleashed history’s worst atrocities and terrorism against people in occupied Kashmir. “The observance of Black Day is aimed at expressing indignation against Indian imperialism in state. We have displayed unity to show to the whole world that we are one people, one nation and all standing behind our Kashmiri brothers and sisters."



The parliamentarians said it was essential for the whole world to take a stand against Modi and save Kashmiris from ethnic cleansing. They said Modi posed a threat to endangered communities and especially minorities of India.

Former British MP George Galloway said: "Modi has taken the world to the brink of war — nuclear war — and as a result risked the safety and security of people all over the world.”

More than 300 police security officers were on duty. There were brief incidents of violence as protesters clashed with the police.

The trouble began when around two dozen supporters of the Indian government also appeared to stage protest in support of Modi but they left as the number of Kashmiri protesters kept growing throughout. The police detained a few protesters. A group of pro-Khalistani protesters set the Indian flag on fire at the doorsteps of India House.

Kashmiris were joined at the protest by robust groups of Sikhs, who carried the flag of Khalistan and raised the flag outside India House as a mark of defiance. The protest received coverage on English media as BBC, SKY, ITV, Reuters and Press Association covered the event. The traffic around central London remained blocked at four places for more than three hours as the protesters made their way to India House on foot.
