Mamata Banerjee rally: Opposition leaders descend on Kolkata for Mamata's anti-BJP rally

(This story originally appeared in on Jan 19, 2019)

KOLKATA: West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee 's anti-BJP "United India" rally at Brigade on Saturday will have representation from most non-NDA parties across the country, with leaders arriving in Kolkata on Friday for the big event.The ruling parties of Odisha and Telangana, BJD and TRS respectively, are the only big non-NDA parties that will not be part of the rally .Among the leaders who have confirmed that they would attend the rally are Sharad Pawar (NCP), Akhilesh Yadav (SP), Satish Mishra (BSP), Chandrababu Naidu (TDP), M K Stalin (DMK), H D Deve Gowda and his son H D Kumaraswamy (JD-S), Mallikarjun Kharge and Abhishek Manu Singhvi (Congress), Arvind Kejriwal (AAP), Farooq Abdullah and his son Omar Abdullah (National Conference), Tejashwi Yadav (RJD), Hemant Soren (JMM) and Sharad Yadav (Loktantrik Janata Dal) besides BJP rebels Yashwant Sinha, Shatrughan Sinha and Arun Shourie. Most of them had arrived in Kolkata by Friday evening .However, beyond the broad agreement that Narendra Modi's government needs to be unseated, every party is anticipating the situation to be fluid for some time.The ambivalence over the emerging opposition front was reflected in Congress chief Rahul Gandhi's decision not to attend the rally but send Kharge and Singhvi for the event. He wrote a letter to the West Bengal chief minister, saying: "I extend my support to Mamata di on this show of unity and hope we send a powerful message of a united India together."While the call for opposition unity has been given, there is no clarity on who will lead the front against Modi. This was inherent in Akhilesh's remark soon after landing here. "Desh naye pradhan mantri ka intezaar kar raha hai (The country is waiting for a new Prime Minister)," he said, but refused to name the future PM.Congress and its allies would like to be the biggest bloc within the opposition space. But the decision to send Kharge and Singhvi, Congress leaders in Kolkata said, kept options open. They said that on its part, Trinamool Congress - along with SP and BSP - would like to emerge as an opposition axis by collectively having a sizeable presence in the next Lok Sabha. And the post-poll situation might be such that Congress would not be able to ignore the SP-BSP-TMC bloc, they explained.Banerjee herself met all the leaders on Friday evening and the encomiums followed. Deve Gowda, who has run a Third Front government at the Centre, commended Banerjee's efforts. "I would like to congratulate Madam Mamata Banerjee for the pains she has taken to bring opposition parties together," said former Arunachal Pradesh chief minister Gegong Apang, who left BJP earlier this week. Calling Banerjee a "great leader", Apang, who will also attend the Brigade rally, announced that he would float his own party.But the overwhelming response from the opposition parties at the national level contrasted with the opposition's response in Banerjee's own West Bengal, where the Left Front chose to stay away from Saturday's rally despite their strong anti-BJP stance. Bengal state Congress president Somen Mitra said there was no question of attending the rally because he did not get an invite.Both Biju Janata Dal and Telangana Rashtra Samithi will not be part of the rally as they don't want to share dais with Congress. "We would stick to our policy of equi-distance from both the Congress and the BJP. We are more concerned about Odisha's development," Rajya Sabha member and BJD spokesperson Pratap Keshari Deb said.The West Bengal BJP called Banerjee's Kolkata rally a "circus". The party's state unit president Dilip Ghosh said, "All the formers - retired and tired - politicians who have little footing in their own states are coming for the rally. People in their own states have rejected them. They are coming to Kolkata to hog the limelight. We will see the circus tomorrow."
