Here is the latest news from The Associated Press at 11:40 p.m. EDT

Estimated read time: 2-3 minutes

This archived news story is available only for your personal, non-commercial use. Information in the story may be outdated or superseded by additional information. Reading or replaying the story in its archived form does not constitute a republication of the story.

JERUSALEM (AP) — A Muslim-American congressman barred by Israel from travelling to Jerusalem is disputing Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's claims about her planned visit. Minnesota Rep. Rashida Tlaib says she had asked to meet with Israeli government and opposition officials before a visit to the occupied West Bank next week. Talaib now rejects a permit on humanitarian grounds to visit relatives in the West Bank. She says the terms were "oppressive" and meant to humiliate.

NEW YORK (AP) — Lawyers for financier Jeffrey Epstein say they're dissatisfied with the medical examiner's conclusions and plan to view prison videos themselves from a facility operating under "medieval conditions." Three lawyers issued a joint statement after a medical examiner announced Friday that an autopsy and other evidence confirms the 66-year-old registered sex offender hanged himself. Epstein was declared dead after he was found in his cell Aug. 10 at the Metropolitan Correctional Center.

EL PASO, Texas (AP) — Hundreds of strangers have come to pay their respects for a victim of the El Paso, Texas, mass shooting who had few family members. The mourners braved 100-degree heat Friday to stand outside an El Paso funeral home to honor 63-year-old Margie Reckard. She was one of 22 people killed by a gunman who opened fire at a Walmart in the city earlier this month.

WASHINGTON (AP) — President Donald Trump has been warning of an economic crash if he loses reelection. He says that even voters who personally dislike him should base their decision on what's happening with the stock market, factories and the unemployment rate. But financial markets warned this week that a recession could unfold before Election Day.

LOS ANGELES (AP) — Actor Peter Fonda, the son of a Hollywood legend who became a movie star in his own right both writing and starring in counterculture classics like "Easy Rider," has died. His family says in a statement that Fonda died Friday morning at his home in Los Angeles. He was 79. The official cause of death was lung cancer.

Copyright © The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

×

Tags World
