Hundreds of protesters clash with police in held Kashmir

SRINAGAR: Hundreds of protesters in Indian-occupied Kashmir clashed with police on Friday who responded with tear gas rounds and pellet-firing shotguns, an AFP reporter at the scene said.

The clashes broke out after several thousand people rallied in Srinagar, where a security lockdown entered its 12th straight day after New Delhi stripped Kashmir of its autonomy. The protesters rallied inside the Srinagar locality of Soura that has witnessed regular protests since New Delhi announced its surprise move on August 5.

Police attempted to disperse hundreds of protesters who tried to march down the main road. Protesters hurled stones and used shop hoardings and tin sheets as improvised shields, as police shot dozens of rounds into the crowd. A drone kept vigil over the area as thousands of men and women gathered inside a popular shrine.

“We are trying to breach the siege and march to the city centre but police is using force to stop us,” one protester told AFP, adding that three people were injured on Thursday in clashes with police officers and reservists.

Sporadic clashes were also reported in other parts of the occupied Kashmir Valley, the main hotbed of resistance to Indian rule for decades, where communications have been cut off for nearly two weeks.

Major towns and cities in the restive valley remained under curfew, with occupation forces allowing people to move only on special passes. Indian government forces erected steep barricades and used concertina wires to block roads. No big gatherings were allowed in the valley and most mosques were shut for the second consecutive Friday. “We want what is ours. We are not begging for anything but demand India should respect its promises,” another protester told AFP. “We will not sit back until we achieve complete independence from India,” he said.

The protesters marched inside the lanes, carrying black flags — signifying grief — and placards with slogans including “Go India, go back”.Meanwhile, Jammu and Kashmir Chief Secretary BVR Subrahmanyam said authorities would begin restoring phone lines in Kashmir on Friday evening. However, he did not make clear however whether mobile phones and internet connections would also be reinstated in the Muslim-majority northern region.

“You will see a gradual restoration (of telephone lines) from tonight and tomorrow onwards. You will find a lot of Srinagar functioning tomorrow morning,” Subrahmanyam said. “Exchange by exchange they will be switching it on. Over the weekend you will have most of these lines functioning most probably,” he told reporters. He said the easing would “(keep) in mind the constant threat posed by terrorist organisations in using mobile connectivity to organised terrorist actions.”

New Delhi stripped Jammu and Kashmir of its special status on August 5, scrapping an article in the constitution that prevented outsiders from buying property there. It also split the region in two.
