Fake robbery bid lands Bhosari duo in police net

Under debts, cash logistics staff collects Rs 34.4L but keeps at friend’s house instead of depositing in banks



Apparently being inspired by a popular TV serial, two youth, in their early 20s, made a fake robbery of Rs 34.40 lakh on August 14. Both the Bhosari residents Kunal Ravindra Pawar and Omkar Bhogade were arrested within hours.



According to Pimpri-Chinchwad commissionerate’s crime branch (unit 5), Kunal is the main accused of the crime, as the duo is running into huge debts. While Kunal, 20, is working with a cash logistics company, Omkar, 21, is a former employee of a multinational e-commerce giant. When they were not able to pay the huge loans — Kunal took credit of Rs 3 lakh while Omkar’s debts are around Rs 10 lakh — they hatched a conspiracy of cash robbery.



On the afternoon of August 14, Kunal collected cash from different places of Bhosari, Dighi, Nashik Phata, Pimple Saudagaur, Pimpri, Dehugaon and Dehu Road areas like his daily practice. He collected the money to deposit in banks. However, when the cash count that day was Rs 34,39,463, Kunal planned the fake robbery. With the help of Omkar, they grabbed all the collected cash and called police that an unknown biker looted him. In the initial complaint, Kunal said an unidentified man on a two-wheeler knocked his car and threatened around 6 pm on Wednesday.



However, after a thorough inquiry, the police found inconsistencies not only in Kunal’s words but also in his act of deleting messages from his cell phone. Finally, he admitted during police interrogation that he created the fake robbery case with the help of Omkar. The police detected the case within 12 hours and picked up both. According to confession made to the police later, Kunal said he had planned the robbery eight days ago after watching a popular crime serial on aHindi channel. He also admitted that they wanted to go out and have fun in Goa. Dehu Road police filed an FIR.



Vivek Mugalikar, senior police inspector, crime branch unit 5, told Mirror that Kunal’s job was to collect cash and deposit in banks. “He picks up cash from different companies and deposits that in banks. According to his company rules, if the amount collected is Rs 10 lakh or less, he can ride his motorcycle else he has to take a car if heavy amount is collected from customers. Two employees of Kunal’s company have the responsibility to collect cash. As the other employee was on leave because of Eid and out of town, Kunal took advantage of the situation. With the help of Omkar, he stashed the entire cash in Omkar’s house. But when we checked Kunal’s cell phone, it was found he had deleted all calls and messages. This aroused our curiosity. We tightened the noose around Kunal, and he cracked after some hours,” he said.


