Ghaziabad: Protest against 'illegal' landfill dumping strengthens as Indirapuram residents extend support

Residents in Pratap Vihar protest as dumping continues in the city's only landfill (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Ghaziabad: The residents of Siddharth Vihar were joined by the residents from Indirapuram in their protest against the illegal dumping of solid waste in the city's only landfill on Thursday, the second day of the protest. Organised against the dumping of solid waste in Pratap Vihar landfill, the protest has gained momentum due to the increase in the number of participants.

On Wednesday, over 10 trucks were stopped from entering the landfill area by the protesting residents. The residents from Siddharth Vihar set up tents near the entrance of the landfill even at night in order to prevent dumping in the landfill. On Thursday, the residents of Indirapuram joined the sit-in against the dumping.

Also Read: Gurugram shocker! Father's friend attempts to strip and rape four-year-old

According to the instructions provided by the solid waste monitoring committee which has been constituted by the National Green Tribunal (NGT), the Ghaziabad municipal corporation was asked to stop the dumping of solid waste at the landfill after January 15.

The municipal councillor, Asif Chaudhary told Hindustan Times that they had attempted to stop trucks on Thursday and that they have put up tents in order to ensure that there is no dumping at night. He also added that they are making constant efforts to gather the support of the neighbouring localities and traders' associations in order to strengthen the protest.

The general secretary of Ganga-Yamuna Hindon Apartment, Abhishek Singh said that they have sent their complaints regarding the dumping to the monitoring committee and that the residents continued the dharna for the entire night.

The coordinator of the Confederation of Trans Hindon RWAS, Kuldeep Saxena, while talking to HT also revealed that they were constantly fighting to shift the landfill site at Indirapuram and that their petition is pending with the NGT. However, the monitoring committee authorities denied receiving any application from the corporation.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
