Indian Journalist Stands Up To Pakistani Protester Who Tore India’s Flag, Snatches It From Him

Thousands of people waving Pakistani flags, Kashmiri flags protested outside the Indian Embassy, London against scrapping of Section 370. The protesters also carried banners saying ‘Kashmir is Burning’, ‘Free Kashmir’ and ‘Modi: Make Tea Not War’, according to Reuters.

Amidst all this, an Indian journalist earned praises for standing up against what can only be called unnecessarily disrespectful. The journalist saw a Khalistani supporter making his way to where a group of Indians were standing. He then managed to grab the tricolour and threw it over to the Pakistan side before returning to his own group.

While the security standing there turned a blind eye to the act, the journalist crossed over to the Pakistani side, snatched the tricolour from the man’s hand and brought it back to the Indian side. A video of the same has gone viral on social media. The video also shows the Pakistani man mutilating the flag and challenging Indians to retrieve it.

‘Journalist Poonam Joshi covering for ANI the #IndianIndependenceDay celebrations outside Indian High Commission in London, where Pro-Pak & Pro-Khalistan protests were also underway, snatches 2 torn parts of tri-colour from Khalistan supporters who had seized it from Indians,’ news agency ANI wrote on Twitter.

Here is the video:

#WATCH: Journalist Poonam Joshi covering for ANI the #IndianIndependenceDay celebrations outside Indian High Commission in London,where Pro-Pak & Pro-Khalistan protests were also underway, snatches 2 torn parts of tricolour from Khalistan supporters who had seized it from Indians pic.twitter.com/Go7X2tVZXg — ANI (@ANI) August 17, 2019

“As I was standing outside the police cordon, I instinctively ran over to the Pakistani side, grabbed the first part of the flag off the floor and the second part from the other man's hands,” Poonam was quoted as saying by ANI.

Poonam also said that she had covered many protests in her career, but never witnessed such an ugly and disrespectful behaviour by protesters.

Four people were later arrested for affray, obstruction of police and possession of an offensive weapon, police said.
