Protests after tweet tributes to Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose on ‘death anniversary’

KOLKATA: Tweets paying tribute to Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose on his ‘death anniversary’ evoked strong protests from various quarters on Sunday.At least two political parties joined the Press Information Bureau (PIB) in remembering Bose, who had mysteriously disappeared from Taiwan on August 18, 1945. But it was a tweet by PIB that led to a sharp reaction from a section of historians and Netaji researchers, who pointed out that there was yet no proof that the leader had indeed expired in an air crash 74 years ago.Chief minister Mamata Banerjee on Sunday asserted that people have the right to know what happened to Netaji, while remembering the “son of the soil” on the day he reportedly went missing 74 years ago. She said the whereabouts of Netaji after he “disappeared” on August 18, 1945 were still not known.“On this day, in 1945, Netaji went on a flight from Taihoku Airport in Taiwan, only to disappear forever. We still do not know what happened to him. People have a right to know about the great son of the soil,” Banerjee tweeted.“PIB remembers the great freedom fighter Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose on his death anniversary” — read the PIB tweet. The Gujarat wing of BJP and Congress uploaded similar messages in their respective Twitter handles.BJP leader and Netaji’s grandnephew Chandra Kumar Bose said the tributes were unfortunate since they ignored the fact that the plane-crash theory has not been proved. “Three successive enquiry commissions failed to provide evidence of the crash. The Justice Mukherjee Commission — that had been formed in 1999 and submitted its report in 2005 — ruled out the crash. So, it is unfortunate that a central government agency has posted a tribute to Netaji mentioning August 18 as the day of his death,” said Bose.Historian and former MP Sugata Bose — also a grandnephew of Netaji — said the leader had died battling for the country. “We should be focusing on his life and ideals rather than encouraging a controversy surrounding his death,” he said.
