Citizens hold march to protest traffic woes

Say randomly parked vehicles main cause of jams; the silent drive taken out by Bavdhan residents aims to draw attention of civic bodies, provide assistance



Around 50 members of the Bavdhan Citizens’ Forum took to the streets on Sunday evening to stage a protest surrounding the traffic menace in the vicinity. The protest was a silent one and aimed at reaching out to the authorities from the traffic department and municipal corporation to intervene and bring about changes to solve the issue.



The residents alleged that random parking of vehicles outside stores, restaurants and ATMs without paying any heed if it is a parking zone or no is the prime cause of the traffic woes. The members, most of whom are IT professionals and people working in private sectors, conducted awareness programmes in Bavdhan every evening from August 12 to 18.



Dushyant Bhatia, resident of Bavdhan and volunteer of the Bavdhan Residents’ Association, said, “The protest we staged was a silent one as we only wanted to grab attention of the departments concerned so that some sort of help is extended on their part. We have been spreading awareness for a week now, but we have our limitations. While we are volunteering to manage the traffic, there is a need for civic intervention.”



Another resident, Shantaram Ahire, added, “The volunteers are doing what should have been ideally done by the traffic department. It is high time that the authorities intervene. Most congestions are caused by those parking their vehicles randomly.”



The local corporators too have joined the residents in spreading awareness relating to the traffic rules and the need for people to follow them.



Kiran Dagade Patil, the corporator of Kothrud-Bavdhan, told Mirror, “I was present in the rally along with the citizens and live in the same area as those who protested. I am aware of the pressing issues, of which traffic concerns occupy a major chunk. I have arranged a meeting with the city traffic department on August 22, which the residents will also attend and discuss their issues.”



“On a municipal corporation level, we have been consistently writing to the traffic department with the aim of drawing some attention and solving the issues,” Patil added.



Pimpri-Chinchwad police commissioner RK Padmanabhan was impressed by the initiative taken by the residents and said, “Such kind of public participation is essential not just as an added help but also from the perspective of understanding the enforcement problems.”


