Sarnia rally to raise awareness of conflict in Kashmir

A rally in support of the people of Jammu and Kashmir is planned for Sarnia City Hall Sunday from 1 p.m. to 3 p.m., says the Muslim Association of Sarnia.

A rally in support of the people of Jammu and Kashmir is planned for Sarnia City Hall Sunday from 1 p.m. to 3 p.m., the Muslim Association of Sarnia says.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

Protests in Kashmir began following the Aug. 5 decision by the Indian government to withdraw the Muslim-majority region’s special status.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Sarnia rally to raise awareness of conflict in Kashmir Back to video

India responded by shutting down communications and clamping down on freedom of movement.

Syed Zahid Ali, president of the Muslim association, said there are Sarnia-area residents who have strong ties to the Kashmiri region.

“We want to protest the human rights violations which are happening in Kashmir,” Ali said. “The purpose is to bring the attention of our government and our people about what is happening.”

The Reuters news service said some schools in Indian Kashmir’s main city reopened Monday as restrictions were eased, but most classrooms remained empty as parents kept children home. There was fear of continuing unrest over the government’s decision to withdraw the region’s special status and integrate it fully into India, with equal rights for all Indians to buy property there and compete for government jobs.

Critics said the decision alienated many Kashmiris and would add fuel to a 30-year armed revolt in the Himalayan territory that Pakistan also lays claim to.

Under the restrictions, Ali said residents of Kashmir were forced to stay in their homes without access to communication.

“Telephone is off. Internet is off,” Ali said. “It is a very difficult situation for all the Kashmiris there.”

Ali said the Indian government is attempting to tell the word it’s actions are for the betterment of the people of Kashmir, “but that is not the case.”
