PM Modi speaks to Boris Johnson, raises issue of violent protest outside Indian mission in London

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday dialled his British counterpart Boris Johnson and raised the issue of violent protests outside the Indian mission in London on Independence Day.

Thousands of Pakistani and Khalistani protesters descended on Indian mission on August 15 and held a violent protest, clashing with Indian diaspora, tearing up tricolour and raising disrespectful anti-India slogans.

In his conversation with Johnson, Prime Minister Modi "drew attention to the challenges posed by vested interests pursuing their motivated agenda, including by violent means," an Indian government readout said.

"In this context, he referred to the violence and vandalism perpetrated by a large mob against the High Commission of India in London on the last Independence Day of India," it added.

The British Prime Minister regretted the incident and assured the safety of the Indian mission.

"Prime Minister Johnson assured that all necessary steps would be taken to ensure safety and security of the High Commission, its personnel and visitors," the readout said.

Thousands of protestors from Pakistani and Khalistani groups in London clashed violently with the Indian diaspora that had gathered outside the Indian High Commission on Independence day even as the authorities tried to control the mob. Four people were arrested by the London authorities and one person was injured in the incident.

Though the Indian mission was informed that protest will take place and asked to take all precautionary measures, the scale at which it took place and dramatic visuals that were seen left many members of Indian diaspora shocked.

India has already taken up with the United Kingdom the violent protests which took place outside the Indian high commission on Independence day and conveyed its concerns on how the security of the mission was undermined.

G7 summit in France: Boris-Modi to interact

British and Indian PM are expected to interact in Biarritz during the 45th G7 summit that will take place over the weekend.

During the phone call, Modi congratulated Boris Johnson on his election as the British PM and "expressed his readiness to work with him for strengthening the strategic partnership between India and the United Kingdom."

Terror was also raised by Prime Minister Modi who pointed out that "terrorism had plagued all parts of the world, including India and Europe" and stressed the "importance of effective steps to ward off the threats posed by radicalisation, violence and intolerance, particularly in the context of the expanding footprint of terrorist organisations such as ISIS."
