Morning digest: U.S. flags Kashmir detentions, Modi takes up London protests with Boris Johnson, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day

The U.S. believes that the abrogation of Article 370 by India is an internal matter for the country but has external ramifications. This was conveyed to a group of reporters in Washington DC by a senior State Department official, who did not want to be named.

U.S. President Donald Trump said he would do his best to mediate or help somehow with the tensions between India and Pakistan over Kashmir. Mr. Trump drew attention to the fact that he had spoken to the Prime Ministers of both countries on Monday and that he would be meeting Prime Minister Modi in Biarritz, France, for the G7 summit over the weekend.

In a telephone conversation with his British counterpart, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on August 20 took up the anti-India protest that took place outside the Indian mission in London on August 15.

Sporadic stone-pelting continued in parts of Kashmir Valley for the 16th consecutive day on Tuesday, as the J&K government plans a major outreach to bring normalcy by organising public durbars.

CBI pastes a notice on the wall outside Mr. Chidambaram’s house, asking him to appear before the probe team within two hours of the receipt of summons.

Communalism as a political mobilisation strategy had made “disturbing progress” over the past several years, said N. Ram, Chairman, THG Publishing Private Ltd., on Tuesday, while remarking that the ‘Hindu Rashtra’ ideology preached by the powers that be flagrantly denied equality, fairness and justice to all citizens of the country.

Senior advocate C.S. Vaidyanathan for Ram Lalla, Ayodhya’s infant deity, told the Supreme Court on Tuesday that a stone slab, which fell out of the western wall of the disputed Babri Masjid structure, had Sanskrit inscriptions dating back to the 12th century about a Lord Vishnu temple.

The processes which lead a man to take his own life are at least as complex and difficult as those by which he continues to live.

Former kabaddi player M.K. Sandhiya has been a match official in the ProKabaddi League for the second consecutive season now.

The Indian team management will be fretting on possible team combinations for the first Test against the West Indies with a difficult choice between senior pros Rohit Sharma and Ajinkya Rahane if it opts for a fifth specialist bowler.
