Chetan Bhagat novel Half Girlfriend banned at railway stations, Twitter be like touche

The man responsible for overseeing passenger amenities at railway stations in India spotted Chetan Bhagat’s novel Half Girlfriend. Being totally clueless about the world of books, he declared Half Girlfriend too obscene for general consumption and ordered that the novel be removed and banned from railway stations.

The overly sanskari man is worried that books like Chetan Bhagat’s Half Girlfriend do a disservice to the society by spreading obscenity and railway station stalls should sell only books that inspire and not titillate.

Rail Yatri Seva Samiti chairman Ramesh Chandra Ratn was on an inspection tour at the New Delhi Railway Station recently. The motive behind the round was to check up on all the services provided to passengers at the station.

During his round, he came across a stall selling Chetan Bhagat's famous book, Half Girlfriend. He got angry and called the book 'obscene' and gave orders that all these books should be removed from railway stations in India.

According to a report in Dainik Jagran, he said that it was his responsibility to keep a check on the kind of things that are being sold at the station and what kind of messages these books are giving out in the world.

Ratn also added that the stalls at the station should emphasise on selling more cultural reading material along with newspapers. According to him, a lot of obscene books have been caught being sold at the stalls at railway stations. This kind of reading material gives out a wrong message to the country and it also leads to bad behaviour and crime against women, he said.

He told the railway officials and the bookstall vendors to immediately remove the books from the stalls and during his round, he also spoke to a lot of passengers asking about the problems that they were facing.

This is not the first time that Ramesh Chandra Ratn has done a check like this. A few months ago, he took another round at the New Delhi Railway Station, during which he got into a verbal fight with the station staff and they even protested against him.

On the topic of removing the book, Half Girlfriend from the station, the Chief Public Relations Officer of Northern Railways, Deepak Kumar said that whatever orders have been given, they will be followed according to the law.

When the news got on Twitter, like all things bizarre, this also received some of the best reactions. Have a look.

Journalist Ajit Anjum wrote, "Badhaai ho Chetan Bhagat sahab, aapki kitab Half Girlfriend ko ashleel ghoshit kar diya gaya hai. railway station par na bechne ka farman bhi jari kiya gaya hai. Zor se boliye, Bharat Mata ki jay."

, , imran khan (@imrankh43893669) August 21, 2019

?? Chetan Singh (@Chetan49164464) August 21, 2019

Preetam N Chadar (@n_chadar) August 21, 2019

ALSO READ | Shorts over skirts: Students at Kerala govt school get unisex gender-neutral uniform
