'Protests to delay NRC a ploy to legitimize Hindu infiltrators'

GUWAHATI: As Hindutva outfits step up their protests against publication of the NRC in its present form, the All Assam Students' Union (Aasu) and All Assam Minorities Students' Union (Aamsu) - stakeholders in the Supreme Court case on NRC update - said the clamour is a result of the "frustrated" design to legitimize illegal Hindu migrants from Bangladesh."If they (protesters) had something to say about the NRC, they could have approached the Supreme Court. Only making public demands that the NRC publication be deferred appears to be driven by quarters with vested interests and meant to derail the entire process," Aasu general secretary Lurinjyoti Gogoi said. On similar lines, Aamsu adviser Azizur Rahman said, "The demands of complete reverification of NRC days and postponement of the final NRC release are politically motivated."The "political motivation" driving these protests, they said, was an attempt to grant citizenship to illegal Hindu migrants. The proposed amendment to the Citizenship Act, the Centre's pet project, would grant citizenship to non-Muslim migrants from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan who entered India before 2014. The bill did not make it past the Rajya Sabha and lapsed in June."After the government failed to pass the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, the frustration right before the publication of the final NRC shows. All attempts to include the names of illegal Hindu migrants in the register have been futile, which is why such opposition at the last minute," Rahman said.The Centre and the Assam government have been seeking reverification of the NRC data, which the Supreme Court has turned down twice. A parallel movement seeking more time for NRC publication to make it error-free was led by RSS affiliates.While the government has practically washed its hands of any responsibility, Gogoi held the government accountable for any error in the final NRC."The NRC update exercise is being done under the supervision of the Supreme Court. The government was given ample chance by the apex court and was, in fact, empowered by the Supreme Court to verify the identity of NRC claimants. After such a rigorous exercise, if a single migrant enters the NRC, the government will be responsible. We want an error-free NRC," he said.
