Congress bids adieu to Babulal Gaur

BHOPAL: Former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Babulal Gaur had as many friends in the Congress party as in the BJP. When chief minister Kamal Nath was Union minister, Gaur - as minister for urban development - would travel to New Delhi and ask for funds for development of the state. Gaur himself admitted in an interview last year that Kamal Nath never let him return empty-handed. As a BJP leader, Gaur openly criticised the policies of his own party led-government but praised Kamal Nath's Chhindwara model of development.On Wednesday, chief minister Kamal Nath tweeted, "Shocked to hear news of former chief minister Babulal Gaur's sad demise, it is a personal loss for me. Today, I have lost a good friend and colleague. Condolences to the family. Pray to God for peace to his soul and strength to the family to bear the loss." The chief minister visited his residence at 10.30am to pay homage and later sent minister for law PC Sharma to be present during the last rites of the former chief minister.For Gaur, former chief minister Digvijaya Singh was not just a political colleague but a friend. In 2003, Babulal Gaur as leader of opposition was admitted in the hospital and Singh, then chief minister of the state, paid him a visit. They met like friends, hugged and joked, even with assembly elections hardly a few months away.When Gaur became the chief minister in 2004 and was embroiled in a controversy, Digvijaya Singh went to the chief minister's official residence to pay him a visit. Gaur came out to the main entrance to receive Singh. On Wednesday, Digvijaya Singh tweeted, "I am deeply pained by the demise of Babulal Gaurji. In political life, we were poles apart but practically very close to my heart. Always met with warmth. Whatever we did, it was with honesty. I have lost a political friend in his demise. Tributes."Congress' Rajya Sabha MP Vivek tankha tweeted, "He was a leader with old values. He had no enmity with anyone. Everyone was a friend. Had intense strength to bear criticism. His protests were with a light heart. Was a good person. Had mutual respect for each other. I salute him." Former leader of Opposition Ajay Singh tweeted, "He was a leader with a fighting spirit who stood above party lines. I always got his affection. This is a personal loss for me."Not just minister for law PC Sharma, large number of Congress leaders and workers reached the crematorium for Babulal Gaur's last rites. Among them was Congress MLA from Bhopal Central seat Arif Masood. A delegation of Congress spokespersons including Shobha Oza, Durgesh Sharma and others reached Gaur's residence around 11am to pay homage.At the state Congress headquarters, party office-bearers and workers gathered and paid tributes to Gaur who they recalled visited and made former PCC chief Suresh Pachauri break his hunger protest in 2008. For days, Pachauri fasted protesting against the BJP government. His own partymen did not come to pay him a visit but Babulal Gaur did and urged him to break the hunger protest.
