We get by with a lot of help (from our nannies)

By now, we’ve all seen that viral video of the Indian family in Bali being caught for pretty much looting their hotel rooms. Reams of newsprint have been dedicated to the often uncouthly behaviour demonstrated by our fellow countrymen when abroad and what prompts us to behave in such a manner when outside our home. While reading all the outrage, I couldn’t help but wonder whether in certain quarters, reactions would be quite as smug, if treatment of domestic help, especially when we’re abroad, was documented?

It's been a couple of weeks since I returned from a family holiday to London, and while the headiness of a break filled with long walks, park dates, the English countryside and some quality time with my husband and my four-year-old, wore off during the first week back (blame it on looming Vogue India deadlines!), one particular aspect of the trip has continued to rankle me.

Allow me to backtrack a little. At my age (and no I don’t plan on telling you exactly what that is), dinner conversations on most Friday nights now tend to focus on our children, schools and often most vexingly, the nanny/didi/nurse. On an aside, how is it that you get a bunch of smart, successful women in a room (by this point, of course, the husbands have totally tuned off), and yet the topic will almost always go back to domestic issues?

Full disclaimer: this is not to say that I haven’t been a participant in these conversations, but that doesn’t mean I can’t see how stereotypical and tedious it must seem to everyone around us. (Even more comically, almost every mother feigns complaints about this subject, but promptly gets involved when it begins.) Almost like clockwork, when you share possible travel plans or an upcoming family holiday, pat comes the query—“So are you taking your nanny/didi/nurse?”

Now, don’t get me wrong, this column is no way a judgment call on if you have help with your child or not. Whether you travel with your help or chose to travel solo, as with everything parenting, I’ve realised the hard way that there is really no singular way. But yes, I am judging you when you don’t treat another human being with the basic respect he/she deserves.
