Sabarimala fallout: Airlines issue travel advisories, say passengers should plan travel cautiously

In an advisory posted on its Twitter handle, Air India said the protests in several parts of Kerala may affect passengers travelling to the state. (Photo: Reuters file)

In the wake of the ongoing protests in Kerala over the Sabarimala temple issue, airlines have advised their passengers to prepare their itinerary cautiously. The airlines that have issued advisories include Air India, Jet Airways, Indigo and Vistara.

In their advisories, all airlines have said that services to various locations in Kerala may be affected due to the protests in many parts of the state.

In its advisory posted on its Twitter handle, Air India said: "Protests at several locations in Kerala may affect passengers travelling from Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram and Kozhikode. Passengers are requested to schedule their travel plans to/from airports accordingly."

#FlyAI : #AirIndia #advisory

Protests at several locations in Kerala may affect passengers travelling from #Kochi, #Thiruvananthapuram, #Kozhikode. Passengers are requested to schedule their travel plans to/from airports accordingly. — Air India (@airindiain) January 2, 2019

Similarly, Vistara in its advisory said: "Due to massive protest in various parts of Kerala, local transport may be disrupted tomorrow (January 3). Customers travelling from Kochi are advised to allow more time for their journey to the airport."

#TravelUpdate Due to massive protest in various parts of Kerala, local transport may be disrupted tomorrow (03rd Jan'19). Customers travelling from Kochi are advised to allow more time for their journey to the airport. January 2, 2019

Jet Airways said guests travelling may face transportation issues and has asked people to plan the travel accordingly.

The opposition parties and some Hindu organisations have called for a day-long shutdown across Kerala to protest the entry of two women of menstrual age into the Sabarimala temple. The state has been on the edge since Wednesday after two women, aged 44 and 42 years, entered the Lord Ayyappa shrine.

Clashes have been reported from many parts. In one such clash, a protestor sustain head injuries after being allegedly hit with a stone. He later succumbed to his injuries at a hospital in Pandalam.

The shutdown call has received mixed response in the state. News agency PTI said that as per initial reports, auto-rickshaws and two-wheelers were plying at the railway station in the state capital Thiruvanthapuram and various other places. However, in Kozhikode, protesters blocked vehicles and burnt tyres in the morning.

In wake of the shutdown call, universities have postponed their examinations that were scheduled for Thursday.

ALSO READ | Sabarimala temple shuts for purification rituals after 2 women below 50 enter Lord Ayyappa shrine

ALSO READ | Daylight rape of Hindus: This is what Union minister Anant Hegde thinks about the Sabarimala row

ALSO WATCH | 2 women enter Sabarimala temple
