Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad detained after clash breaks out over Ravidas temple demolition

New Delhi:

The Delhi Police on Wednesday night detained Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad from Tughlakabad area where a clash broke out between protesters and the police during a protest against the recent demolition of a Ravidas Mandir in the national capital.

Tension prevailed in the Tughlakabad area in south Delhi after a protest by people of the scheduled caste community against the demolition of the temple turned violent on Wednesday, prompting police to resort to "mild lathicharge" and use tear gas to disperse the crowd, an official said. According to police, the protesters set fire to two motorcycles and vandalised a police vehicle, causing injuries to a few policemen.

Azad was taken to the Kalkaji police station where senior officers were questioning him. The police are lodging FIRs against him for inciting violence.

DCP South East, Chinmoy Biswal: People protesting over Ravi Das temple demolition issue clashed with policemen today evening. Some policemen sustained injuries in the incident. Some protesters have been detained and being verified. pic.twitter.com/hUZPg5LOb6 — ANI (@ANI) August 21, 2019

Meanwhile, the Bhim Army is planning to install a bust of Sant Ravidas at the site of a temple dedicated to the 15th century spiritual leader which was demolished by the DDA, its leaders said on Wednesday.

Azad has promised to install a bust of Sant Ravidas at the site. He said that if he dies, his body should be taken to the temple, a leader of the Dalit group said. The temple was demolished by the Delhi Development Authority (DDA) on August 10 on the orders of the Supreme Court.

A scene of protest meeting at Ramlila Ground of Delhi against demolition of Sant Ravidas temple.#RavidasTemple pic.twitter.com/kKsrTWFpHr — Digvijay Singh “Dev” (@digvijaysinghd9) August 21, 2019

Earlier in the day, the stretch between Jhandewalan and Ramlila Maidan in turned into a sea of blue as thousands of the scheduled caste from various parts of the country hit the streets of the city to protest the recent demolition the mandir.

The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) had demolished the temple on August 10 on the orders of the Supreme Court.

Wearing blue caps and carrying flags, protesters of all age groups marched from Ambedkar Bhawan in Jhandewalan to the Ramlila Maidan. Traffic movement was affected in some parts of the city due to this.

Cries of 'Jai Bhim' rend the air as the protesters, who arrived from Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and other states, demanded that the government hand over the plot of land to the community and rebuild the temple.

The protest in Delhi came a week after a similar protest of Dalits in Punjab on August 13 over the issue.

The issue has taken a political hue with various parties demanding that the temple be reconstructed either at the same spot in Tughlakabad forest area or at an alternative location.

The gathering in the national capital saw the presence of Delhi's Social Justice Minister Rajendra Pal Gautam, Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad and spiritual leaders from the community.

Gautam said their fight is against the injustice meted out to the community and not against the Supreme Court order.

"I am here as a representative of the community and not as a Delhi minister or politician. We respect the Supreme Court order, but the government should answer why only temples of the Dalit community and statues of B R Ambedkar are being demolished across the country?" he asked.

Gathered under the banner of Akhil Bharatiya Sant Shiromani Guru Ravidas Mandir Sanyukta Sanrakhshan Samiti, an umbrella body of Dalit groups formed for this temple movement, the protesters resolved to continue the fight till their demands were met.

Some even proceeded on an indefinite hunger strike at the Ramilia Maidan.

Hansraj Raj, 42, who travelled to Delhi from Punjab's Jalandhar, asked, "How is our demand different from that for the construction of a Ram temple in Ayodhya? If that is so important for a particular community, this is important for us."

VP Singh, 60, from Ghaziabad said thousands of religious structures have come up on government and forest land. "Why only a temple of Sant Ravidas was razed? The government should answer".

Sonu, 30, said, "They are asking us to construct the temple at an alternative place. Why don't they shift the Ram Mandir to some other place? Everything happened in the blink of an eye. We didn't even get to know of the SC order. Are we not citizens of India?"

Another protester alleged that the apex court diluted provisions of the SC/ST Prevention of Atrocities Act, "without considering the views of Dalits".

Shrishti Devi who came from Punjab's Pathankot said she voted for the BJP in the Lok Sabha elections but the party-led government hurt their religious sentiments.

Dhail Singh, 83, said being a Dalit himself, President Ram Nath Kovind should have intervened in the issue.

"The temple was around 500 years old. Many governments have come and gone, but no one touched it. It is the anti-Dalit BJP that has hurt the sentiments of crores of people in the country," he alleged.

BJP leader and former Union minister Vijay Goel criticised the Aam Aadmi Party for allegedly politicising the issue. Goel said that he held a meeting with community leaders recently and offered them a solution, but the AAP wanted to score brownie points.

"I have proposed that the temple be built at an alternative place after the approval of the Supreme Court. If they agree, we will take the matter up with the DDA," he said.
