'Who is their leader': BJP alleges 'divided leadership' in Opposition, calls Mamata Banerjee's rally 'summit of contradictions'-Politics News , Firstpost

The BJP on Saturday described the united Opposition rally organised by TMC supremo Mamata Banerjee 'a rally of self interest and of conflicting ideologies', and exuded confidence of forming the next government in the country.

New Delhi: The BJP on Saturday described the united Opposition rally organised by TMC supremo Mamata Banerjee "a rally of self interest and of conflicting ideologies", and exuded confidence of forming the next government in the country.

Speaking at a press conference at the party office in Delhi, BJP's national spokesperson Rajiv Pratap Rudy termed the rally an anti-Modi exercise and said the party was not threatened by such events.

Mamata on Saturday organised the 'United India' rally against the Narendra Modi government in Kolkata, which was attended by more than a dozen leaders of opposition parties, including SP chief Akhilesh Yadav, NCP president Sharad Pawar, TDP chief and Andhra Pradesh chief minister Chandrababu Naidu, Karnataka chief minister HD Kumaraswamy and BJP MP Shatrughan Sinha.

"Don't know where the threat to unity is. While Mamata calls it United India, we can clearly see a divided leadership. It's a summit of contradictions and conflict. They talk of a new front but I am not sure if it's even the second or the third front," Rudy said.

He further said this rally has also exposed divisions in the Opposition camp, and that "many of these parties are just snubbing each other." "The Left refused their invitation. The SP-BSP alliance snubbed Congress in UP, which has now extended support to the rally. This is a rally of self interest," he said.

People have seen the performance of the Narendra Modi government and the BJP will form the next government with full majority, Rudy said.

"Today's Opposition rally in Kolkata is an anti-Modi exercise. Who is their leader?" he asked.

On the question of BJP MP Shatrughan Sinha attending the Opposition rally, he said BJP will take cognisance of it. "They make it a point to be present after party issues whip so that they don't lose their membership. At the same time, they are so opportunistic that they want to climb the stage and be present at a conclave."
