Naidu decries attempts to internationalize restructuring of J&K

SME Times News Bureau | 21 Aug, 2019

Vice President Naidu on Wednesday decried attempts to spread misinformation and internationalize the re-structuring of the Jammu & Kashmir state which was purely an administrative matter and within the purview of the Indian government.

Addressing the heads of Estonian diplomatic missions on the last day of his tri-nation tour to the Baltic Region,

Naidu said that India would not accept interference or mediation in the internal affairs of the country and asserted that the restructuring of Jammu Kashmir state was aimed at improving governance and fostering inclusive and equitable growth.

“This decision was taken by the Indian parliament with an overwhelming majority cutting across party lines”, he added.

The Vice Presidents said that attempts by our neighbouring country to spread misinformation was totally unwarranted and that this kind of meddling with other nation’s internal administration doesn’t bode well for world peace.

“Misinformation, disinformation and malicious, hateful rhetoric exacerbate tensions. In a world that has committed to achieve an ambitious, transformative agenda of sustainable development by 2030, these irritants can retard the progress substantially”, he added.

The Vice President also outlined a few perspectives that have been guiding India’s engagement with the world, Samvad, Samruddhi,Suraksha, Sanskriti, and Samman (Dialogue, mutual prosperity, mutual security, strengthening cultural ties and mutual respect).

“We believe that we must have an inclusive, open and free system that treats all nations equally and fairly and aims to create mutually- beneficial platforms for cooperation. We wish to see a world order that ensures security and growth for all”, he said.

The Foreign Minister of Estonia, Urmas Reinsalu welcomed the Vice President and more than 60 diplomats were present at the occasion.

Earlier in the day, he held wide ranging talks with the President and Prime Minister of Estonia, who pledged to support India’s claim for permanent membership of the United Nation’s Security Council (UNSC) and to intensify the global efforts to fight against terrorism.

The Vice President and both the dignitaries, the President, Kersti Kaljulaid and the Prime Minister, Juri Ratas have agreed to expand bilateral relations in all spheres, particularly economic, cultural and Information Technology.

Pointing out that India has been facing the menace of cross-border terrorism for long, Shri. Naidu told the Estonian leaders that more needs to be done by the international community to counter activities of terrorist groups and individuals.

He stressed that there was a need to bring greater accountability and transparency to the work of UN Security Council’s Sanctions Committee dealing with listing of terrorists.
