Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad arrested by police following protests over Saint Ravidas temple

File photo of Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Massive protests broke out over the demolition of 15th-century Saint Ravidas temple and soon turned violent Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad and 96 others have been taken into custody by Delhi Police who had to resort to lathicharge as crowds turned violent Azad was leading a protest by thousands over the demolition of a Saint Ravidas temple on August 10 by DDA on orders of Supreme Court

New Delhi: Hours after detaining Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad, Delhi Police, on Tuesday, arrested him and registered an FIR under IPC sections 147, 149, 186, 353, 332 at Govindpuri police station. Further investigations are underway. 96 other protestors have also been taken in custody.

The arrest came ahead of an announcement by Bhim Army that a bust of Saint Ravidas would be installed at the site of the 15-century temple that was demolished recently by the Delhi Development Authority (DDA). Citing a Dalit group leader, news agency PTI reported that Azad has instructed that if he dies, his body should be taken to the temple.

The demolition of the 15th-century temple on August 10 triggered massive protests in parts of Delhi and Punjab. In Delhi's Tughlakabad, the protests turned violent prompting the police to resort to lathi-charge and tear gas in order to disperse the crowd. The protestors have been urging DDA to re-build the

"People protesting over Ravidas temple demolition issue clashed with policemen today evening. Some policemen sustained injuries in the incident. Some protesters have been detained and being verified," said DCP South East, Chinmoy Biswal. "Bhim Army Chief Chandrasekhar Azad also among those detained," Biswal had further said.

RELATED NEWS Protest by Dalits against demolition of Ravidas temple in Delhi turns violent

According to agency reports, the protestors set ablaze two motorcycles and also vandalised a police vehicle. On August 13 a group of Dalits took to streets in Punjab prompting the state administration, including CM Captain Amarinder Singh to intervene. Delhi's Social Justice Minister Rajendra Pal Gautam, Azad and other Dalit leaders were present at the time of the protests.
