Former Union Minister P Chidambaram arrest: How Tamil Nadu leaders reacted

Former Union Minister P Chidambaram arrest: How Tamil Nadu leaders reacted

The senior Congress leader was arrested late on Wednesday night amid high drama outside his New Delhi home.

news Politics

Leaders from Tamil Nadu have reacted to the late-night arrest of former Union Minister P Chidambaram on Wednesday, with the DMK calling it an act of political vendetta. The AIADMK, meanwhile, has expressed its wish that the law be allowed to do its job. Chidambaram was arrested amidst high drama on Wednesday night with officials of the CBI scaling the walls of his home and whisking him away in a car sometime later. Congress cadre staged a demonstration before the Jor Bagh residence of the senior party leader who had returned home after a press conference at the AICC headquarters.

Calling it political vendetta, DMK chief and Leader of Opposition in Tamil Nadu MK Stalin said, “I have clearly come to know that these events are happening for political vendetta. P Chidambaram is a legal expert. Therefore, he will definitely face this legally.”

VCK chief Thol Thirumavalavan said the arrest was motivated by the intention to undermine the Congress. “This is an act of vengeance. By deliberately arresting P Chidambaram, the senior Congress leader, they have undertaken a political act to weaken and undermine the Congress. By going through the back entrance, scaling the walls and breaking his door, they have carried out an act that humiliates democracy and the rule of law. VCK strongly condemns this act by the BJP,” he said.

Speaking on behalf of the AIADMK government in the state, Tamil Nadu's Minister for Tamil Official Language, Tamil Culture and Archaeology Mafoi K Pandiarajan said, “He was the Finance Minister of this country. The respect due to him should be given. That is our position. If he has done wrong, law will do its job. Amma's government will never accept someone being treated with political vendetta. There is no role in this for us.”

Stating that the high drama around his arrest could have been avoided, BJP chief Tamilisai Soundararajan said, “Chidambaram has been arrested after a big confusion. He is the reason for the confusion. He could have approached it legally and honestly. Last night's drama could have been avoided if he had faced the summons. He has a set very bad example in how he has approached the case.”

Meanwhile protests erupted in different parts of Tamil Nadu against the arrest of P Chidambaram.

In Chennai, Congress party workers assembled in front of TNCC headquarters Sathyamoorthy Bhavan, Anna Nagar and in Adyar and raised slogans against the arrest. The protest march near Sathyamoorthy Bhavan was led by senior Congress leaders Kumari Ananthan, Krishnasamy and Gopanna and the protests in Adyar were led by Karate Thiagarajan.

The leaders and main functionaries who were protesting in front of the Sathyamoorthy Bhavan engaged in a road roko too after which they were detained by the police near Anna Salai as they allegedly did not have the required permission for the protest. Protests were organised in Coimbatore, Madurai, Karaikkudi and Trichy also. In Coimbatore city and outskirts, separate protests were organised under senior leaders of the party.
