Delhi govt resolves to construct ‘magnificent’ Ravidas Mandir at the ‘same site after Centre allots land’

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Delhi Legislative Assembly on Thursday resolved to reconstruct Ravidas Mandir at the "same time" Protests by Dalits against demolition of Ravidas Temple turned violent on Wednesday night Delhi Police detained Bhim Army chief Chandrasekhar Azad in connection with the violent protests

New Delhi: A day after the protests by Dalit groups against the demolition of Ravidas Mandir in Delhi’s Tughlakabad turned violent; the Legislative Assembly of Delhi on Thursday resolved that the Delhi government would construct a new Ravidas Mandir at the same site “after the Centre allots the land.”

In a meeting held on Thursday, the Aam Aadmi Party resolved, “the Government of NCT of Delhi should construct a magnificent Ravidas Mandir at the same site after the Centre allots the land".

Speaking on this in the Legislative Assembly, Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal said, "Centre should pass an ordinance immediately & allot 4-5 acres of land to Ravi Das Community. If Centre allots this land, then Delhi govt will get Ravi Das Temple constructed on that land."

Earlier in the day, a ruckus was created in the Delhi Assembly after the ruling Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) MLAs went near the Speaker's podium, sloganeering against the BJP for the demolition of Saint Ravidas Temple.

On Wednesday night, the situation in Tughlakabad turned tense after a protest by Dalits turned violent, resulting in several people, including policemen, getting injured.

"At around 7.30 pm, the mob that gathered at Ravi Das Marg turned unruly and became violent despite persuasion and appeal by police to maintain peace and started pelting stones and attacking policemen," DCP (southeast) Chinmoy Biswal said yesterday on the developments.

The top police official further added, "Mild and reasonable force had to be used to disperse the unruly mob. Some policemen have sustained injuries in the incident. There are no injuries to the public. Some members of the unruly mob have been detained and being verified. Appropriate legal action is being taken in this matter."

Following the chaos, the Delhi Police detained Bhim Army chief Chandrasekhar Azad along with a few others in connection with the violence during the protests.

Thousands of protesters, many from Punjab, Haryana and Delhi, took to the streets of the national capital and marched towards the spot of the demolished Ravidas temple in Tughlakabad forest area from Ramlila Maidan in Delhi.

The huge protest caused massive traffic jams in several areas of the city, with police claiming that the violent protesters damaged a few vehicles and two motorcycles were also set on fire.

The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) demolished the temple dedicated to Guru Ravidas earlier this month on the orders of the Supreme Court.

Following the demolition of the temple, Aam Aadmi Party supremo and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said that the Delhi government had no involvement in the demolition of the temple.

Blaming the BJP government of not taking any steps to resolve the situation, Minister of Social Welfare in the Delhi government, Rajendra Pal Gautam said, "Despite me writing a letter written to the Prime Minister on August 12 and two days of protests at the BJP headquarters, the Central government has not taken any proactive measure to solve the issue of the demolition of the Sant Ravidas Temple. Instead, the BJP government is trying to annihilate the voice of Dalits regarding this issue."
