6500 Spider-Man Fans Are Planning To Raid Sony's Offices To Bring 'Our Boy Back' To MCU

There is nothing that can beat the frenzy of Marvel fans. A day after it was announced that Spider-Man is leaving Marvel Cinematic Universe which means Tom Holland won’t be donning the blue and red costume at least in the near future, fans didn’t only protest on social media, but they also stormed Sony’s office to bring “our boy back home” to MCU.

Unless you have been living under the rock, you would know that the dispute between Sony and Disney led Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige to pull out of producing more Spider-Man movies.

After Disney took over Marvel franchise, it was looking for “a co-financing stake going forward.” It reportedly wanted Sony to help fund the movie. Sony apparently turned down the offer and has refused to come back if that was the case. Meanwhile, Marvel boss Kevin Feige has walked away from Spider-Man. With Feige not producing future Spider-Man movies, Tom Holland’s Spider-Man gets removed from MCU.

Angry and upset, about 6500 fans reportedly are planning to storm Sony’s offices in California to bring Spidey “our boy” back home.

The event has been organised by three people who urge fans to dress up in Spider-Man costumes and target Sony’s offices. The event is scheduled to take place on Oct 31, which is also Halloween.

"We storm Sony Pictures in solidarity dressed in Spider-Man costumes and bring our boy home." the event reads. " This is a peaceful demonstration and violence will not be tolerated," it adds.

But how do you peacefully storm an office?

Meanwhile, Sony had expressed disappointment about Spider-Man leaving MCU yesterday in a statement that read, “Much of today’s news about Spider-Man has mischaracterized recent discussions about Kevin Feige’s involvement in the franchise. We are disappointed, but respect Disney’s decision not to have him continue as a lead producer of our next live action Spider-Man film.”

ign.com

“We hope this might change in the future, but understand that the many new responsibilities that Disney has given him – including all their newly added Marvel properties – do not allow time for him to work on IP they do not own. Kevin is terrific and we are grateful for his help and guidance and appreciate the path he has helped put us on, which we will continue,” the statement added. But fans are still upset.

Marvel and Sony have been collaborating since 2015. Their latest film Spider-Man: Far From Home, was in fact, Sony's highest grossing ever movie.
