Catch-22 situation for MK Stalin as Radio Pakistan tweets about DMK’s protest against Article 370 removal

DMK chief MK Stalin | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights DMK had announced a day-long protest on Aug 22 against Centre's decision to abrogate Article 370 Radio Pakistan has tweeted about the DMK protest over J&K situation

New Delhi: DMK supremo MK Stalin finds himself in a rather embarrassing situation as his party’s move to stage a protest at the Jantar Mantar in New Delhi against the Centre’s move to abrogate Article 370 to revoke the special status of Jammu and Kashmir has found support from Radio Pakistan.

Earlier this week, the party had announced a day-long protest on August 22 at the Jantar Mantar against what it termed was the 'isolation' of Jammu and Kashmir following the revocation of the special status of the state.

In a tweet posted on Tuesday, Radio Pakistan, which is a Pakistani radio broadcast network, tweeted about the DMK's upcoming protest against the Narendra Modi government over the decision on Jammu and Kashmir.

The tweet read, "India: Third largest political party in 2019 election, DMK, announces to protest against @narendramodi Govt’s decision of scraping of special status of Jammu & Kashmir.”

A news article containing Stalin’s picture was uploaded along with the tweet and four hashtags calling for Kashmir’s so-called “freedom” were also mentioned along with the tweet.

The tweet has been liked more than 800 times till now and has been retweeted over 500 times. Majority of the comments on the tweet mocked both DMK and Radio Pakistan in support of the BJP government, while a few other Twitter users supported in favor of DMK's decision to protest against the abrogation of Article 370.

In a brief statement on Monday, DMK President MK Stalin said that the detention of political leaders in Jammu and Kashmir as "unacceptable" and "unconscionable."

The statement had read, "The Central government has isolated Kashmir from India by imposing curfew, using repressive forces and implementing prohibitory orders. By cutting channels of communication, the government has unnecessarily created a hostile environment."

On August 5, the Modi government had announced the abrogation of Article 370 through a Presidential order and that Jammu and Kashmir would be bifurcated into two Union Territories - Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh.


