Who is Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad, the Dalit leader arrested in Delhi?

Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Chandrashekhar Azad, who wears a blue scarf around his neck, founded the Bhim Army in 2014 along with Satish Kumar and Vinay Ratna Singh The Bhim Army has been involved in local issues, most of which centre around Dalit victimisation by the upper-castes. The Bhim Army, which claims to have a presence in almost 40 districts of Uttar Pradesh, saw a rise in membership after the Saharanpur incident.

Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad was arrested on August 21 after a clash broke out in Delhi's Govindpuri between police and demonstrators who were protesting against the demolition of the Ravidas temple in Tughlakabad. Azad was produced before a Delhi court on Thursday.

Several Dalit groups, who had come from states such as Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh, staged a protest against the demolition of the Ravidas temple on August 10 following a Supreme Court order. The protesters are demanding that the temple should be rebuilt.

While the demonstrators had permission to hold a rally in Ramlila Maidan, Azad and his supporters started marching towards the demolition site in Tughlakabad. According to some reports, the protesters who had gathered at Ravidas Marg resorted to stone-pelting and used sticks to attack policemen, who used force to contain the crowd.

Who is Chandrashekhar Azad?

Chandrashekhar Azad, a social activist and lawyer, hit the headlines in 2017 when the police accused him of spearheading violent protests in Saharanpur, Uttar Pradesh on May 9, 2017. Azad had organised a Dalit maha panchayat which allegedly turned violent. The protest erupted after Dalit houses were torched and families were beaten up at Shabbirpur village in Saharanpur

The Bhim Army chief went underground after the Saharanpur incident. During the time he was underground, he had a reward of Rs 12,000 on his head. However, he was arrested a month later at Dalhousie in Himachal Pradesh. Azad was arrested a few days after he claimed he would surrender if 37 “innocent" Dalits who were behind bars for participating in the protest were released.

Azad, who often wears a blue scarf around his neck, founded the Bhim Army in 2014 along with Satish Kumar and Vinay Ratna Singh. The organisation has been involved in local issues, most of which centre around Dalit victimisation by the upper-caste.

Azad's Bhim Army has its base in Uttar Pradesh, which is home to 20 per cent of India’s Dalit population and has one of the highest rates for crimes against them. The organisation build statues of Dalit icon Bhim Rao Ambedkar and promotes small scale businesses amongst Dalits.

The Bhim Army, which claims to have a presence in almost 40 districts of Uttar Pradesh, saw a rise in membership after the Saharanpur incident. According to reports, the Bhim Army also runs around 300 schools to improve the standards of education among Dalits.

Born in Dhadkuli village near Chatmalpur in Saharanpur, Azad, in 2015, put up a board reading ‘The Great Chamars of Dhadkauli Welcome You’, at his native place. However, the BSP's Mayawati, the foremost leader of Dalits in Uttar Pradesh, has been wary of this ambitious young Dalit activist and his brand of politics.
