Delhi NSUI chief blackens bust of Savarkar installed on North Campus

Akshay Lakra says installation on campus was an attempt to glorify a ‘traitor’

Protesting against the unauthorised installation of the bust of V.D. Savarkar, along with those of Bhagat Singh and Subhas Chandra Bose, Delhi State president of the National Students’ Union of India (NSUI) Akshay Lakra blackened Savarkar’s bust and garlanded it with footwear early on Thursday.

The president of the Delhi University Students Union (DUSU), Shakti Singh of the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP), on Tuesday installed busts of the three historical figures at the North Campus of the university without taking permission from the university or civic authorities.

The university and civic officials are yet to take action against Mr. Singh.

In a video, Mr. Lakra was seen garlanding statues of Singh and Bose with flowers. He then proceeded to garland Sarvarkr’s bust with footwear but was stopped by security guards. The incident happened around 2.45 a.m. He then spread ink on the statue and raised slogans “Bhagath Singh Zindabad” and “NSUI Zindabad.”

Calling the authorities “mute spectators”, Mr. Lakra attacked what he termed an attempt to glorify Savarkar. “He was a traitor. He was implicated in the assassination of Gandhiji. And you put his statue up next to freedom fighters like Bhagath Singh and Subhas Chandra Bose?” said Mr. Lakra.

Authorities yet to act

Despite having filed complaints with the police and the university, no action had been taken after 48 hours of installing the bust, NSUI member Nikhil Kamble argued.

The ABVP, for its part, distanced itself from the installation, saying that the bust should have been installed only after requisite permission was taken from authorities.

However, Mr. Singh had said that it was a long-standing demand to have the statues of freedom fighters installed but had not been heeded by the university. The current installation was a mark of protest, he said.

Following the incident, the ABVP in a statement called it a “heinous act” and condemned the NSUI saying that “such an act for trivial political interests reflects the Congress’ thinking of the great freedom fighter of India.”

The ABVP demanded that the administration take stern action against those involved.
