Battling the Big C: Why go abroad when our docs are world class?

One of India's most popular writers, Shobhaa De has seen it all: life as a model, a copywriter, a journalist, a socialite, a scriptwriter, a bestselling novelist and a busy mother of six children. "Politically Incorrect", which has been appearing as a column in The Times of India, carries her sharp observations on politics, society, economy and relationships. LESS ... MORE

TA fortnight or so ago, two of my close girlfriends were diagnosed with the Big C. A few days later, we lost Meera Sanyal to the disease. This week, one more acquaintance has announced her condition over social media. All these people chose to receive treatment for cancer in India. Chose. They have the means to pay for their extensive, expensive and prolonged hospitalisation anywhere in the world. But they took an informed decision to stay put. Why? Because we have the best doctors right here — and we absolutely must demonstrate faith in their abilities to treat even the most complex of cancers. Simply because they can! And have a proven track record over decades to establish their credentials along with the best global oncologists. The very fact that thousands of overseas patients seek their help and go back with glowing testimonials should be enough to convince those of us who rush overseas.

And this brings me to a super-sensitive point: We are well aware of the nature of Manohar Parrikar’s medical reports (nothing remains a secret these days). We are told Arun Jaitley has rushed to America ‘for a check-up’ (Well. Okay. If that’s the official narrative). Sonia Gandhi frequently zips off in utmost secrecy for her ‘check-ups’. There is a long list of prominent politicians who do the same. Ditto for Bollywood biggies who go off to the UK and America to battle their condition (which has been accurately diagnosed right here in Mumbai ). The medical prognosis of such high-profile patients is closely monitored by citizens — not because they are nosy or wish to pry. It’s just that the public needs to know what is likely to happen in the worst-case scenario. After all, citizens have elected some of these public figures, and as is common practice in democracies worldwide, voters are entitled to be taken into confidence during medical crises.

There is the other equally sensitive concern: who pays for these treatments, which can run into lakhs and crores? Do we know? Are we told? If taxpayers are footing these bills, there is an obligation to keep them informed. If not, let the politicians declare it is their money. But that does not happen.

In the case of Bollywood stars, they use their social media accounts to keep fans updated and in the loop, posting pictures of their treatments and inspiring others to not lose hope. Manisha Koirala has done a book solely based on her courageous battle with the dreaded disease at a prestigious hospital in New York. Earlier, Emraan Hashmi had sensitively chronicled his son’s cancer journey in a Canadian hospital, as the little fellow dealt with the trauma bravely. Sonali Bendre breaks the internet each time she posts a photograph documenting her progress. Rishi Kapoor’s condition has still not been officially disclosed, which is fine. It is his prerogative to go public or not. There are others, like Irrfan Khan, diagnosed with a relatively rare condition, who have decided to talk about their disease selectively. To all these courageous folks, a big salaam.

But if only some of them had decided to trust our specialists and seek intervention in India, a powerful message would have been delivered to other, less privileged patients in similar situations. Those who are often forced to sell precious land, jewellery and other assets to pay for expensive drugs and treatments. They don’t have the resources to rush abroad after diagnosis. They rush to our public hospitals instead — and receive top-class care from team after team of dedicated, well-qualified doctors, nurses and palliative care professionals. All this, for a fraction of the cost it takes for identical procedures in a foreign land.

In India, we can boast of a medical community that is first rate on all fronts. Our doctors and nurses have made a name for themselves wherever they go. It is time for all of us to show our appreciation and applaud them. It is also time for public figures who exert enormous influence to rethink their decisions to seek help internationally. Yes, of course, it is a highly personal decision. But frankly, I have come across any number of cases suffering because of wrong diagnosis and botched-up surgeries in fancy hospitals abroad. Combine that with staggering costs and often not enough family support in distant shores, the overall picture appears pretty grim.

We need to look more closely at our backyard and find the gems we have not yet recognised — men and women who have dedicated their lives to serving those in need. Go to Tata Memorial — which is not just a hospital, but a revered institution. See the doctors at work there — they don’t discriminate nor care if you are a Bollywood star or a mill worker. The treatment remains the same. A patient is a patient. While wishing Arun Jaitley a speedy recovery, I do hope he sets the right example by seeking medical help in Mera Bharat Mahan if, God forbid, he ever needs it in future.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
