PM Modi Speaks About India-France's Battle On 'fascism And Terrorism'

Highlighting Fascism and extremism as global threats, PM Modi on Friday, addressed the Indian diaspora at the UNESCO Headquarters at Paris, France. The Prime Minister also explained the base of India-France's united front. He claimed on liberty, fraternity and equality as the underlying principles which link India and France, in their fight to protect democracy. He talked about the two countries tough action against terrorism.

"We have fought fascism and extremism not only in India but in France too. Our friendship is based on strong principles. India and France have been built on liberty, fraternity, and equality. Today if France and India are able to fight against global threats, it is because of our strong principles only. Be it terrorism or climate change, it is our collective responsibility to fight to save democracy from these threats. India and France's other common linking factor is that we counter threats not with talks but with strong action," said PM Modi.

PM Modi's anti-corruption statement resounds in France, watch video

PM Modi slams UPA for corruption

Earlier in his address, PM Modi spoke about the action taken by the NDA government against corruption and terrorism. Speaking on the action against corruption, PM Modi launched a veiled attack the previous government. He said that the way the current government is taking action against corruption and looting of people's money has never happened in the previous UPA government. He further said that in the new India, there no stopping or getting tired when to comes to action against corruption and terrorism.

Boris Johnson's 'not proper' pose with France's Macron: The real story

"In the new India, corruption... why the silence?... don't worry, there will be no need to come to you. We only go there which is the right place. (loud cheers)... Today, in the new India, the way action is being taken against corruption, brother-nephew rule, family corruption (nepotism), looting the money of the people, terrorism, it has never happened before. In the new India, there is no question of getting tired and stopping. It has not been many days after the formation of the new government. It has yet been 75 days, there are still days to 100 days. Only in the 75 days, we have worked with the inspiration of policy and taken big decisions one by one," PM Modi said addressing the Indian community.

PM Modi pays tribute to Dr Homi Bhabha, thanks France for memorial

PM Modi's France Tour

Prime Minister Narendra Modi arrived in France on the first leg of his three-nation tour on Thursday. Upon arriving in France, PM Modi met French President Emmanuel Macron and held a bilateral meeting with him at the Château de Chantilly. PM Modi was received by the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian at the airport. PM Modi said that the visit will add to the ground covered during the previous interactions with the French leadership. France is the first destination of his three-nation tour which includes- UAE and Bahrain.

PM Modi arrives in France, holds bilateral meet with President Macron
