Prime Minister: It took 70 years to remove ‘temporary’

Paris: Prime Minister Narendra Modi , in a veiled reference to the revocation special status for Jammu and Kashmir , said there was no “provision for temporary” in his administration.“It took 70 years to remove ‘temporary’. I don’t know whether to laugh or cry,” Modi said while addressing the Indian community at the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization headquarters in Paris, on the second day of his visit to the country.Article 370's revocation and its benefits for the people of J&K had come up for discussion when Modi met French President Emmanuel Macron on Thursday night.This was the Indian PM’s maiden visit abroad since the decision to abrogate Article 370 Modi also utilised the opportunity to attack the menace of corruption.In a veiled reference to the arrest of former home minister and Congress party leader P Chidambaram, he said corruption, nepotism, loot of public money and terrorism were being tackled like never before in “New India ''. Dynasty politics is also ending in the country, he added.Modi said the huge mandate in his second term was not only for a government, but also for a "New India" that focuses on ease of doing business while ensuring ease of living."India is racing ahead not because of Modi... it is because of the stamp of approval that the people of India have given in the form of their vote,” he told the Indian community living abroad."I want to tell you that India is now surging ahead, the mandate that we got is not merely for running a government but for building a new India," he assured the diaspora, amid chants of "Modi, Modi" across the hall.The prime minister also listed out the work done by his newly formed government, such as the legislation to ban triple talaq. “We did away with the practice of triple talaq; injustice cannot be done to Muslim women in new India,” he said. “The country is moving fast on the path of development.”The country would also achieve its climate change goals in the next year-and-a-half, he asserted.Inspired by 'spasht niti, sahi disha' (Clear policy, right direction), the government has been taking one decision after another, he said."Already, you have seen the bold decisions we have taken, the record work done in parliament. The 100-day milestone is yet to arrive. Mind you, the first 50-75 days are generally taken to plan things and receive greetings and congratulatory calls, but you all can see the intent of the government of the day... And that India means business," he said.Modi also said India and France share a history of fighting imperialism, fascism and extremism. “The character of the two countries is built on the shared values of liberty, equality and fraternity,” he noted.Modi said there have been many positive developments in the last five years during which the government worked for the country’s youth, farmers, women and the underprivileged. Several studies have shown that poverty in India is being eradicated rapidly, he claimed.He also listed as significant achievements a “record number of bank accounts” that had been opened, and the many beneficiaries of the Prime Minister’s central health scheme.“We have a population of 125 crore, it’s the land of Gandhi and Buddha, Ram and Krishna,” Modi said.Modi also focused on the ease of doing business with France, and achieving goals with a team spirit, alluding to France's victory in the soccer World Cup, which was celebrated in India as well. "Today, in the 21st century we talk of INFRA. I would like to say that for me it is IN+FRA, which means the alliance between India and France."
