Oppn sounds poll bugle in Kolkata, vows to oust BJP

editorial@tribune.com

Shubhadeep Choudhury

Tribune News Service

Kolkata, January 19

Blowing the poll bugle, 23 Opposition parties, who shared the stage at a rally convened here today by West Bengal CM and Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee, vowed to put up a united front against the Narendra Modi-led Centre.

The question of who would be the Prime Minister in case the participants do manage to win enough seats to cobble up a majority was put off for a decision at the time of forming the government.

“There are too many bridegrooms (“dulha”) — one will become the Prime Minister,” SP leader and former UP Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav said. Some of the other speakers, including Mamata, said it would be the “janata” (people) who would take a call on who would be the PM.

It was also announced that more such rallies would be held in the run-up to the Lok Sabha polls. Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal and Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu announced holding similar rallies soon in Delhi and Amravati, respectively.

UPA convener Sonia Gandhi sent a message to the participants through senior leader Mallikarjun Kharge wishing success to the rally. “The upcoming Lok Sabha elections will not be an ordinary one. This will be an election to restore the nation’s faith in democracy. This rally marks an important attempt in galvanising leaders across the political spectrum to fight the arrogant and divisive Modi government. I wish it all success,” read her message.

The Gandhis — Sonia and Rahul, who sent a similar message to Mamata yesterday — kept away from the meeting. Besides Kharge, Congress spokesman Abhishek Manu Singvi, a Rajya Sabha member from West Bengal, was also present in the rally.

Kharge emphasised the need for all anti-BJP forces to join hands against the saffron party. “Otherwise, the Narendra Modi-Amit Shah duo will have a free run,” he warned.

It was the Modi-Shah duo who bore the brunt of the attack in today’s rally. None of the other BJP leaders was mentioned even in passing by any of the speakers.

The rally at Kolkata’s iconic Brigade Ground was also attended by the father-son duo of former Prime Minister HD Deve Gowda and Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy and the Abdullahs, Farooq and Omar, both former Chief Ministers of J&K.

Deve Gowda also aired the view that Opposition parties should enter into seat-sharing arrangements so that BJP candidates in each seat were challenged by a single candidate from the Opposition.

ANTI-MODI RANT

" ‘Chaukidar chor hai’ If you keep suppressing facts, people will continue to say ‘chaukidar chor hai’… There was ‘lokshahi’ during Vajpayee’s tenure and now it’s ‘tanashahi’ (dictatorship). " — Shatrughan Sinha, BJP

‘Modi a publicity PM’ Narendra Modi is a publicity Prime Minister, not a performing one. He and his government have betrayed the nation. — N Chandrababu Naidu, TDP

‘EVM chor machine’ EVM is a chor machine, which should be replaced with paper ballot… It is not there in any part of the world. It is used for theft (of votes) and we have seen this in elections. We should together move the EC and approach the President on the issue" — Farooq Abdullah, NC

‘BJP infused poison’ Many people thought SP and BSP won’t be able to clinch an alliance. The BJP is now thinking how to win at least one seat in UP. Those who used to say ‘Sabka Saath Sabka Vikas’ have turned one against the other by infusing poison in the country. " — Akhilesh Yadav, SP

‘Bengal tigress at it’ The Bengal tigress has given the call to oust BJP. I am sure it will be successful… We (Opposition leaders) have to have a single aim — that is ousting the BJP in the next LS election." — Arun Shourie, ex-minister
