Sidhartha Mallya: We are not bullet-proof

Vijay Mallya

social media

government of India

Vijay Mallya has repeatedly denied he fled the country, and has offered to pay back the loan, even as recently as in a Twitter post last week.

Nirav Modi

Jet Airways

Indian comedy

Sidhartha Mallya

Sidhartha Mallya on why he quit drinking, his new career plans, and his famous father, of course.It’s unarguably the cruellest Monday. It’s almost 10 pm and we are getting on a phone call with Sidhartha Mallya, the handsome son of the beleaguered billionaire and flamboyant former parliamentarian, who is fighting an extradition case in a UK court. “Sid”, as Mallya junior prefers to be called and is so registered with the Screen Actors Guild, chose to be an actor by profession. He lives in Los Angeles, “between West Hollywood and Beverly Hills”, he says. It’s about 9 am for him, but he says he usually wakes up each day at 6.30 am to meditate.Sid’s choice of career made him move to Los Angeles seven years ago. He lives alone, with his dog Duke, who he takes for a walk every evening before going to bed at 9 pm. It’s quite unusual for the son of the self-proclaimed “King of Good Times” to do this (thanks to his father’s highly successful United Breweries that held 50 per cent of the Indian beer market, as well as was the biggest player in the production of spirits in the country), but sunny California’s uber healthy lifestyle seems to make avocado-lovers of the most hard-nosed fried-chicken fiends.So, Sid wakes at dawn to meditate for halfan-hour before practicing his vocals and movements as part of his actor’s training, he hits the gym for a bit and spends his day in meetings, especially with his producer partner Paul Kampf. He meditates some more in the evening again. He has also given up drinking. It’s been a year of abstinence, he says, on apost. And adds that he has received so much love from that post from people who have been struggling to quit, that it has inspired him to start a foundation in India, and help them give up the bottle. The irony of the son and scion of the country’s richest booze-maker starting an alcohol de-addiction centre is biteable. But Sid says if he can do it, despite his family business, so can anyone.“I’m quite an emotional human being. The last three-four years have been very tough,” he says. “At some point we have to accept that we are not bullet-proof. I just needed to be in the best situation to deal with things. I needed to put my house in order, so I could be there for my dad.” Sid insists he’s not an alcoholic, he didn’t drink much, and he didn’t drink every day. But when he did, it added to his anxiety. When he didn’t, his head was clear. “I spoke to my therapist, this wonderful lady who I see every week, and she thought it was best for me too. I believe in self-love — it’s a very LA thing — but being in the best health, mentally and physically, was important to me.”Has he discussed his abstinence with his father? “I don’t think I have told him actually, I did it for myself,” he laughs.Mallya, Sid’s 63-year-old father, left India on March 2, 2016, defaulting on bank loans amounting to Rs 9,000 crore. In 2017, thefiled a case in the UK for Mallya’s extradition, and he is currently out on bail. Mallya has repeatedly denied he fled the country, and has offered to pay back the loan, even as recently as in a Twitter post last week.Sid, who barely lived with his father (his mum Samira Tyabjee was married to Mallya for one year before she moved to the UK), is there with him at almost every court hearing. “Yes, I travel to the UK quite often, given the situation. My mum lives outside London as well, so I get to see her. I’m there to support my dad. It’s like any family situation. If someone in a family has a problem, they need all the support they can get. I’m glad my parents are on great terms with each other, and my mum really wants me to do what makes me happy.”Is he close to his father?“We have a typical father-son relationship, but we know we are there for each other. I didn’t have him on a day-to-day basis, so there was a little distance. Personality-wise we are very similar, as we are both the only child of our parents, me from my mum’s side. But I am emotional. He doesn’t show emotion. I mean, no mid-60s Indian man will tell you what he’s feeling.”Sid says the case has been hard on him. “No one wants to see a parent go through this sort of distress. Many people have problems, but they are often contained in four walls. But everything about us is in the public domain. Everyone has an opinion these days, and everyone should have an opinion, I think, but with us, everyone thinks they are experts. My father has maintained all along that he would like to pay back the loans to the banks. He’s not the only businessman whose business didn’t survive. Others have been offered the same opportunity to pay back the money. He should be too.”Does it hurt when people put his father and jewellerin the same bracket? “I don’t really know much about the Nirav Modi situation, so it would be unfair for me to make comparisons. But it hurts when words such as ‘thief’, ‘crook’, ‘ran away’ are used to describe my father.”Whenever he shares a post or a photograph on Instagram, Sid falls victim to name-calling and abuse. But he seems to take the trolls in his stride. “The majority of social media has been kind. I also get a lot of love and encouragement. As for the abuses, it’s an indicator of how much anger there is in people. Social media is an outlet for their anger. And I don’t blame people for believing what they have been told. If they have been misinformed that Vijay Mallya has taken their money and run away abroad and lives a lavish lifestyle, I can’t blame them,” he avers. “Look at the news outlets… words like ‘jail’, ‘bail’, ‘arrest’, ‘looted’ — these shape opinions.”It is said the airline industry is the quickest way to lose money. After Vijay Mallya’s Kingfisher Airlines sank, the next was its arch rival. “It’s a very, very sad situation, and my thoughts are with all the people who lost their jobs and were adversely affected by the collapse. Regardless of whatever ‘rivalry’ there was with Jet, I would never wish something like this on anyone.”Sid is also focused on his work. He made his film debut in 2016 with an, produced by Steve Barron, and shown at the Sundance Film festival. “I’m doing what I’ve wanted to do. It’s taking longer than I thought, but I’m fine with waiting,” he says.He has also started his own production agency. Sid says he is developing a drama series based on his life and experiences. He would like it to be as authentic as Entourage, which was based on Mark Wahlberg’s experiences as a rising star, in which the actor was also the executive producer of the show. “I have a producer in LA. The series isn’t about Vijay Mallya, but it’s about the business world from my eyes. It will definitely be focused on an Indian family. India is a booming market and they watch too many drama shows about white families.”Sid does seem to have a pulse on what people tend to like. Ask him about how relevant his father’s Kingfisher calendar, famous for its bikini-clad models, is today, and he quips: “Don’t people still need to know what day it is?”
