Manikarnika producer Kamal Jain suffers paralytic stroke, condition critical

Manikarnika producer Kamal Jain has suffered a paralytic stroke and is currently in hospital. He sent a message for the team and wished them all the best.

Just a week before Manikarnika: The Queen of Jhansi's release, producer Kamal Jain has been hospitalised as he suffered a paralytic stroke on Saturday and is said to be critical. According to reports, he has been put on a ventilator.

Earlier on Saturday he had tweeted, "Dear friends, this certainly is not the best time to be in the hospital. Hope to get well soon and enjoy the success of our collective dream & hard work. My best wishes to all."

Dear friends, this certainly is not the best time to be in hospital. Hope to get well soon and enjoy the success of our collective dream & hardwork. My best wishes to all pic.twitter.com/VnYLYxXlJc Kamal Jain (@KamalJain_TheKJ) January 19, 2019

Manikarnika tells the glorious tale of Rani Laxmibai who fought the British during the 1857 revolt. The film also stars Ankita Lokhande in a pivotal role. Manikarnika is all set to hit the screens on January 25.

Lately, there have been protests against the film, as outfits were convinced that it showed a romantic relationship between a British officer. Initially, suspicion was on the Karni Sena, as several people claimed to be from the Hindu fringe outfit. However, Lokendra Kalvi, in an exclusive interview to India Today, said that they had no reason to protest against the film and that these people were unnecessarily bringing Karni Sena into disrepute.

"Karni Sena does not have any objection to Manikarnika: The Queen Of Jhansi, because no one has raised any concern with us, neither from the family nor from the community or region. Either people from Jhansi or Brahmins or family members should have an objection. Problem toh wahaan se khadi hoti na? How am I concerned?" he said.

ALSO READ | Kangana Ranaut wants to work with Salman Khan: He is a friend
