Swamy hurt Sikh sentiments: Akalis

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, August 25

A day after BJP leader and MP Subramanian Swamy’s remark on halting the work on the Kartarpur corridor, the SAD, alliance partner of the BJP in Punjab, has distanced itself from his statement.

Senior Akali leader Daljeet Singh Cheema said Swami should withdraw his statement as it hurt the religious sentiments. “When talks on the corridor are going on between the Indian and Pakistan governments, this statement was unwarranted. Lakhs of devotees are eagerly waiting for the opening of the corridor,” he added.

Congress ministers and MLAs said Swami’s statement had hurt the sentiments of the Sikhs, especially of the ‘Nanak Naam Leva Sangat’.

Taking the SAD-BJP alliance to task, Congress ministers Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa and Bharat Bhushan Ashu, besides eight MLAs, in a joint press statement, said the Akalis, who had been masquerading as the sole custodians of the Sikhs, must come clean on the issue.

They alleged that the entire state, especially the Sikhs, knows it well that the Badal family loves to cling to power rather than working for their interests.

The Congress leaders said it was part of a deep-rooted conspiracy that Swamy gave such a statement in Chandigarh. Now, the cat has come out of the bag and the state BJP leadership must also clarify their position as to whether they are in agreement with Swamy’s statement or not, they added.

Hitting back at the Congress, SAD national spokesman Manjinder Singh Sirsa said it was Capt Amarinder Singh who had raised questions over the corridor and it was the Akalis who had taken up the project with the Centre, which acceded to honour the sentiments of the Sikhs and decided to start it.

AAP also flayed Swamy. Party MLAs, including Baljinder Kaur, Rupinder Kaur Ruby, said the BJP should expel him for this irresponsible statement.

It’s painful, shocking: SGPC

Amritsar: SGPC chief Gobind Singh Longowal said it (corridor) was a cherished wish of the Sikhs for long and no one should attempt to create obstacles in its fulfilment. “Swamy’s statement has hurt the sentiments of the Sikhs. After around 70 years, the much sought-after corridor is going to be a reality. At this juncture, Swamy’s statement was painful and shocking. The corridor could work as a peace path for both the nations,” he added. TNS

Channi too slams BJP leader

Ropar: Irked over the suggestion of BJP leader Subramanian Swamy to stop the work on the Kartarpur corridor, Technical Education Minister Charanjit Singh Channi used a derogatory expression against him. He alleged that the RSS had an agenda against the Sikhs and the BJP must stop it. TNS

‘Immature behaviour’

New Delhi: The Delhi Sikh Gurudwara Management Committee (DSGMC), its president and office-bearers have ‘strongly objected’ to the statement of Subramanian Swamy on the corridor and have warned him to keep his advice on the project to himself. DSGMC president Manjinder Singh Sirsa said the Sikhs were never terrorists and never would be. He said the world knows the dedication of the Sikhs towards the nation. “By pointing fingers towards the Sikhs, Swamy has shown his immaturity and that he knows nothing about the community.”
