Activist plans hunger strike for maternal care services

PUNE: City-based activist and medical practitioner Abhijit More has decided to launch an indefinite hunger strike from Monday for starting essential obstetric services at two hospitals run by the civic body.More has criticized the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) for underutilizing the Late Bindumadhav Thackeray hospital in Kothrud , a major portion of which has been lying unused for over eight years now. He is laos unhappy with the civic authorities for the lack of facilities at Sutar maternity hospital in Kothrud. The PMC-run Sutar maternity hospital has no facility for delivery through Caesarean section (C-section)."I will begin my indefinite hunger strike in front of the Sutar maternity hospital in Kothrud around 11 am from Monday. I have been requesting the civic authorities to start the essential maternal care services at its hospitals, but in vain," More said."The PMC should start the essential obstetric and maternal care services, including the facility to conduct delivery through Caesarean section at the Sutar maternity hospital. Besides, I have been after them to make the Late Bindumadhav Thackeray hospital in Kothrud operational for common people. The major portion of this hospital has been lying unused for last years," he added."Sutar hospital is the only PMC-run maternity health hub in the western part of the city. About 50% patients, mainly women who approach it, are referred to hospitals such as the state-run Sassoon hospital or PMC-run Kamala Nehru hospital. This is not acceptable," said More, who is also an Aam Aadmi Party leader here.According to World Health Organisation, 10-15% deliveries require C-section for various complications.PMC health department chief Ramchandra Hankare said, "We have requested More not to opt for the indefinite hunger strike. We started Caesarean section services at Sutar hospital two months ago. We have also planned to utilize Late Bindumadhav Thackeray hospital as a rehab centre."
