Fort McMurray rally protests India's Kashmir move

With chants of “Free Kashmir,” and “Kashmir needs justice,” more than 100 people gathered outside the provincial building in downtown Fort McMurray Sunday afternoon over the latest crisis in Kashmir.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

Carrying home-made signs, the group walked to the provincial court building before gathering at the Markaz Ul Islam Mosque.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Fort McMurray rally protests India's Kashmir move Back to video

Asfa Nazir, an organizer of the peaceful rally, said she wanted raise awareness of the issue and make sure that people understand what is happening.

“Every little action counts. Fort McMurray, even though it’s small our hearts are extremely huge and we’re great in numbers,” she said. “Right now Kashmir needs all the support it can get so whatever we can do we should do it.”

Kashmir conflict is decades old

Kashmir is a majority-Muslim region on the northern Indian subcontinent. Most of the region has been divided between India and Pakistan since 1947. However, both country’s challenge one another’s claim to the region. The conflict has often been violent and led to war twice.

The rally comes after the Indian government recently ended the autonomous rule that was granted to Kashmir’s Indian side.

This means India will have more control over the affairs of their side of Kashmir. People from outside the region will be allowed to move into and buy property in Kashmir.

India’s government says this was done to quash violent separatist movements in the region, unify the country and improve its economic prospects.

Pakistan’s government has denounced the move, accusing India of replacing residents of the Muslim-majority region with Hindus. Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan has compared it to genocide and is cutting bilateral trade with India. The Indian government has dismissed Khan’s accusations.
