Muslim organizations in Tamil Nadu protest against the ‘black laws’ enacted by the center

Help India!

TCN News

Tamil Nadu Muslim Munnetra Kazhagam (TMMK) –a Muslim non-governmental organization and Manitha Neya Makkal Katchi (MMK) – a political party headed by Dr. M.H. Jawahirullah, organised Massive protests in Chennai, Madurai, Trichy and Tirupur to demand the withdrawal of the repressive Black laws recently enacted by the central government and also to condemn the incidents of Mob lynching happening in the country. Thousands of people participated in these Massive Protests and raised Protest slogans.

Support TwoCircles



The TMMK and MMK in their press release have said that, “The Triple Talaq Bill paves way for imprisonment of innocent Muslim men on the false claim that they have pronounced Triple Talaq and at the same time rendering the Muslim woman and her family desolate.”

The Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA) is another ‘Black Act’ that is an unjust law that trounces upon all facets of Justice. The National Investigation Agency in the name of curbing terrorism is indulging in arbitrary and unjust activities.

About the scraping of the special status of J 7 K, the press release states “It is evident that communal bias has instigated the central Government to abrogate Art 35A and suspend Art 370 from the Constitution, imprison leaders of Kashmir and divide Jammu and Kashmir in to two Union Territories by holding the people of Kashmir by the force of gun.”

The Mob lynching incidents have all been carried out in the name of beef and refusal to chant Jai Shri Ram. The videos of the inhuman acts have been circulated with impunity implying that the perpetrators have the indirect support of the Central Government and the state BJP Governments; said the statement.

“A Country should be governed by the Constitutional Laws with the aim to uphold and safeguard the welfare of the people. The Central Government in contradiction to this objective making use of the brutal majority in the Parliament has brought these Black laws,” said Dr. M.H. Jawahirullah the president of MMK.

Dr. Jawahirullah told twocircles.net, “Around 60,000 people came out to participate in the protest from the 4 cities of Tamil Nadu. Leaders from DMK, Congress, CPM, CPI, Viduthalai Chiruthaigal Katchi; representatives of other NGOs and movements such as People’s watch and Christian Goodwill Movement joined us in our protest.”

“ This mass protest is the beginning, we are going to continue our struggle, he added, “ We will educate the people about these Acts and how they are going to affect us. Already a petition against the abrogation of the special status of J & K has been filed in the SC, we will have our executive meeting in which we will decide what further action we can take to repel these black laws”.

‘The massive agitation that took place yesterday has kindled the spirit of opposition throughout the state and people are demanding their withdrawal,’ Dr. Jawahirullah concluded.

Other prominent leaders who were part of the protest are Central Chennai District President Abdul Salaam, South Chennai District President Ghori (alias) Muhammad Abu Backer, and North Chennai District President F. Usman Ali; P. S. Hameed, Vice President, TMMK and Chief Administrative Council Member P. M. R. Shamshuddin, Deputy General Secretary M. Yaqoob, Kunangudi Haniffa, Member, Chief Administrative Council of TMMK ,Dr. M. H. Jawahirullah, President of Tamil Nadu Muslim Munnetra Kazhagam and Manithaneya Makkal Katchi, D.M.K. Secretary R.S. Bharathi, M.P., Communist Party of India (Marxist) Politburo Member Mr. G. Ramakrishnan, Communist Party of India State Deputy Secretary M. Veerapandian, Viduthalai Chiruthaikal Party’s General Secretary D. Ravi Kumar M.P., Coordinator Thirumurugan Gandhi and Christian Goodwill Movement coordinator Inigo Irudhayaraj.
