Pune: AAP activists call off hunger strike in Kothrud on its first day

The Aam Aadmi Party’s volunteers sat on indefinite hunger strike in Kothrud in front of Jayabai Sutar Hospital on Monday demanding caesarean delivery facility to be started at Jayabai Nanasaheb Sutar Maternity Hospital, Kothrud and starting all medical facilities in Late Bindumadhav Thackeray Hospital in Kothrud– which has been lying unused for last eight years. The hunger strike was called off on Monday evening itself after the Health department of PMC assured to start caesarean facilities within two months and arrange a meeting with all stakeholders to resolve the issue of Late Bindumadhav Thackeray Hospital facilities.



Although Kothrud is considered to be a suburb of well-to-do to rich citizens; thousands of citizens from the low-income group call it their home, too. But Pune Corporation had neglected health care demands of this vast population. Sutar Hospital is the only hospital with a delivery facility in Pune’s Kothrud, Warje area. Low-income families from outskirts of the city have been also availing the facility in this hospital. As per the World Health Organization (WHO) statistics, 10-15 per cent of all the deliveries require a caesarean procedure. Otherwise, mother or child or both may be at risk. The caesarean facility is a must for providing secure motherhood experience. But still, Sutar Hospital was lacking this facility for so many years stated the AAP activists.



Dr Abhijit More, Aam Aadmi Party Kothrud Convenor, said, “We are not opposed to rehabilitating deaf and dumb children in this hospital, but it will be a betrayal to citizens of Kothrud as they were not taken into confidence. Due to this, 50 per cent of the patients needed to go to either Sassoon Hospital or private hospital, which may result in further complications due to precious time wasted in moving a patient. Also, private hospitals cost may set patients family back by 20-30 thousand rupees. This may set a debt trap for the family.”



It's a similar story with Thackeray Hospital in Gosavi Vasti in Kothrud also. Although this six-storeyed hospital was built some eight years back, only one floor is operational with only OPD facility. There is no delivery facility or any other surgical procedure carried out in this hospital. “Citizen’s hard-earned tax money was wasted in building a structure without any proper healthcare facilities. Needy citizens are forced to shell out money in private hospitals, which otherwise should have been provided by Thackeray Hospital. In addition to this, Corporation was planning to rehabilitate deaf and dumb children in this hospital’s building,” said Dr More. The PMC, Health Chief, Dr Ramchadra Hankare has promised to set up a meeting of Dr More with local corporater and corporation’s medical department officers to solve the issue.



Dr Hankare, said, “We have started the caesarean section surgeries at the Sutar hospital recently and seven C-section surgeries have been performed. The AAP party want to start the facility round the clock. But for this, we want to required qualified staff. We are already in the process to identify the staff and soon the facility will be operational in a couple of months at Sutar hospital. We have further decided to run the Thackeray hospital as a rehab centre and we will be discussing the issue with the PMC Commissioner to decide a further course of action.”


