DU, MCD clash on mega building

The University of Delhi and the Municipal Corporation have come face to face with the proposed 39-storey private building in the North Campus of Delhi University.

The University of Delhi has written a letter to the Centre, the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Lieutenant Governor of Delhi Anil Baijal demanding to stop the construction work immediately.

The Delhi University claims that the private high-rise buildings in educational areas such as North Campus is completely illegal and is also a big threat to the security and integrity of Delhi University. In 2001, the Delhi government had acquired the three-acre of the land of the Ministry of Defence for the construction of the Delhi University Metro Station.

Later, only one acre of land was used for the Delhi Metro and the remaining two-acre land was leased by the Delhi Metro to a private builder to construct a 39-storey building.

On December 7, 2018, the DU administration wrote a letter by the Registrar of the University of Delhi to Durga Shankar Mishra, who is the secretary of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Central Government. With the subject of letter request for restraining North DMC from granting any sanction to the Group Housing Projects of Young Builders Private Limited, near Vishwavidyalaya Metro station.

Delhi University OSD, Vipin Tiwari, told India Today TV, We saw that some construction work was on inside a large boundary line on the backside of the metro.

Tiwari explained how the Municipal Corporation gave permission to the private builder to build the 39-storey building, Delhi’s tallest building despite complaints and requests made by the Delhi University administration. He added, This place is an educational hub. There are four girls hostels near this building. The DRDO office and the Lieutenant Governor’s office are also nearby. This area is an educational area and a high-security zone. The construction of such a large private building can pose a serious threat to the privacy of the girls living in the Delhi University hostels, and also to the security of this area. It also violates the three points of Clause 11 of the Delhi Master Plan 2021.

AAP leader and Leader of Opposition in the North MCD has also raised questions on this matter. Mayor of North Delhi Municipal Corporation, Avatar Singh, said, I have written a letter to the Commissioner asking for answers to all the questions. Any person at fault won’t be spared.

Also read: Delhi University likely to conduct another special admission drive

ALSO WATCH| Image of the day: Protests at Delhi University
