7 hurt in lathi-charge on unaided school teachers

junior college teachers

Azad Maidan to Mantralaya

unaided schools and junior colleges

Maharashtra Permanent Unaided Kruti Samiti

lathi-charge

School Education Minister Ashish Shelar

School andprotesting at Azad Maidan over 100% aid; say Ashish Shelar promised aid before state polls.Seven people were injureda and four of them admitted to hospital, after the police lathicharged more than 300 unaided school and junior college teachers rallying from. The teachers are on indefinite strike and protesting at Azad Maidan for the past 15 days. They have been demanding 100 per cent grant toThe teachers, under the banner of, have been sitting on dharna since August 9. They said though they are eligible for full salaries through grants, they are getting half salary in comparison to aided schools and junior colleges. There are nearly 4,500 teachers from Mumbai and 65,000 across the state. The other cities where parallel protests are being conducted include Nagpur, Pune, Amravati, Latur, Aurangabad, Nashik and Kolhapur. The protests have hampered the functioning of unaided schools and junior colleges with most of the schools not conducting classes due to the absence of teachers.Spokesperson of the School Principals’ Association, Prashant Redij told Mirror that protesting teachers were assured that a decision would be made before Monday afternoon. “As no decision was taken and we didn’t receive any message from the government, we decided to march towards Mantralaya with our demands. While we were moving out, the police lathi-charged us at Azad Maidan gate,” he said.According to protesters, thecontinued for nearly 10 minutes until the crowd dispersed. The police officials on protest duty said they cannot allow any kind of protest or demonstration outside Azad Maidan as per the High Court’s order. “As all the protesters came at once towards the gate, we lathicharged to keep the situation under control,” said a senior police officer, adding that two male constables and a female constable also sustained minor injuries.After the lathi-charge, a delegation of five teachers met, who promised cabinet approval for the grant before the code of conduct for the upcoming state assembly elections. “Unless the government gives an approval, we will continue to protest,” Redij said. However, when Mirror contacted Shelar, he refused to comment.In 2012, the government had declared that eligible unaided schools will get aid from the state government. Starting from 20 per cent, the grant was to increase by 20 per cent each year. By 2016, the schools should have become 100 per cent aided. However, the education department said that due to financial constraints, only 20 per cent aid has been granted, which has led to state-wide protests. Teachers are also demanding that those whose jobs have been jeopardised due to a lack of aid should be declared surplus and accommodated in other schools.Meanwhile, a junior college teacher Ganesh Ghori said if the government does not grant aid to these schools, teachers will be forced to take the extreme step of taking their own lives. “A teacher had climbed a tree to commit suicide yesterday. He was, however, brought down by the police,” Ghori said, adding that two weeks ago a teacher from Gondia district had allegedly committed suicide for being left without full salary for 15 years.
