Vedaranyam caste clashes: 28 arrested, new statue erected

Security beefed up in areas neighbouring Vedaranyam

TRICHY/CHENNAI/COIMBATORE: A day after clashes erupted between members of the thevar and dalit communities at Vedaranyam in Nagapattinam , 28 people were arrested from the district on Monday while protests were held across the state, including in Chennai.Police and the district administration managed to prevent escalation of violence by erecting a new statue of B R Ambedkar, brought from Athur in Salem, at the spot where the old statue was found desecrated.The clashes had erupted when an SUV belonging to a man of the thevar community, identified as Pandyan, hit Ramachandran, a dalit. In retaliation, dalits set the SUV on fire, following which Pandyan’s supporters desecrated the Ambedkar statue near the bus stand on Sunday evening. Opposition parties including DMK, Congress and MNM condemned the desecration of the statue while members of Viduthalai Chiruthaigal Katchi, Dravidar Tamizhar Katchi and Theendamai Olipu Munnani held protests across TN. Miscreants damaged the windshield of three TNSTC buses found at Jayankondam bus stand in Ariyalur, while two buses in Coimbatore were pelted with stones.Most shops and commercial establishments remained closed at Vedaranyam on Monday. Though public transport worked as usual, there were a few passengers till evening. Central zone IG V Varadharaju told TOI that normalcy had been restored in the area. “We have deployed 750 police personnel for protection not only at Vedaranyam but also in neighbouring areas like Thiruthuraipoondi and Keelvelur to avert further incidents. Two separate cases have been filed and 28 people from both the groups arrested. This apart, five special teams headed by DIG J Loganathan ( Thanjavur range) have been formed to nab the prime accused”, he said.DMK president M K Stalin, TNCC president K S Alagiri, PMK leader S Ramadoss, MDMK general secretary Vaiko and Makkal Needhi Maiam leader Kamal Haasan were among those who condemned the incident. “The communal and caste violence, which have seen in other parts of the country, are being fanned by vested ‘sanathana dharma’ forces, with their fascist agenda here in Tamil Nadu too. We have to put an end to it. But, I wonder whether the state police intelligence has lost its ability to do so,” Stalin said in a statement. However, the swift action taken by the police in diffusing the volatile situation and their joint efforts with the district administration to erect a new statue of Ambedkar have earned praise too. “We had at once decided to replace the damaged statue with a new one. A team started searching for sculptors who already had a readymade statue of Ambedkar. They found one at Athur, and another team took care of transporting it from Salem. In the meantime, the third team swiftly arranged for a crane, masons and painters at Vedaranyam. The statue reached around 4 am on Monday and the installation work was completed at 5.45 am”, IG Varadharaju said.However, TNCC president K S Alagiri said, “Police have to be on the prowl to identify such trouble-creators in advance. Had the police acted swiftly, the enormity of the Vedaranyam trouble could have been contained to a great extent,”. MNM president Kamal Haasan termed it as “vandalism” prompted by those who wish to divide and dominate. “These acts make manipulation easy for those who think politics is a profession. It is imperative that the government takes a strong stance against such anti-social behaviour,” Kamal said.In Coimbatore, police protection was given to the statues of tall leaders to prevent any untoward incidents. Police personnel was deployed in front of the statues at over ten locations including Vadakovai, Gandhipuram, Periyar padipagam, Puliyakulam and Podhanur. Demanding the immediate arrest of the accused, advocates staged a protest on court premises
