Nirmala Sitharaman: 'Outlandish', says FM after Rahul claims government looting RBI

PUNE/NEW DELHI: A war of words broke out between Congress’s Rahul Gandhi and finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Tuesday over the former’s claims that the government was “stealing” from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) with regard to transfer of Rs 1.76 lakh crore, with the minister saying his comments were outlandish.Gandhi called the decision shortsighted and a small measure in the face of a larger looming crisis. “Stealing from RBI won’t work — it’s like stealing a Band-Aid from the dispensary and sticking it on a gunshot wound,” he said on Twitter, using the hashtag “RBILooted”.CPM described the move as a “desperate’ measure by the government.Lashing out at Rahul Gandhi for his remark that the goverment had looted the RBI, finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Tuesday said, “Whenever Rahul Gandhi raises things like ‘chor, chori’, one thing comes to my mind... the public has given him a befitting reply. What is the point of using the same words again,” she said, referencing Rahul attacking PM Narendra Modi with the “chowkidar chor hai” jibe.Sitharaman also said the government would decide how the funds drawn from the RBI will be utilised.“I don’t want to take names but the government did not appoint this committee (chaired by former RBI governor Bimal Jalan ). It was appointed by the RBI and had eminent people in it. They have factored in comfortable reserves position and other macro-economic indicators before formulating the formulae,” the FM said, rejecting the charge that the government had interfered in the functioning of the RBI.Sources said the Jalan committee was formed by the central board of the RBI comprising of six people of which five were from RBI, either currently serving or having served earlier. Only one member was from the government, the finance secretary. They pointed out that there was no intervention by the Centre, except the lone member in the panel. The sources said all the members have immense experience in the field of finance and the decisions were through consensus.Congress and CPM on Tuesday mounted a scathing attack on the government for what they said was a “catastrophic” decision for the Indian economy, alleging the Centre was pushing the Indian economy towards bankruptcy and an economic emergency.Senior Congress spokesperson Anand Sharma demanded a white paper on the state of the Indian economy in one week and said the government must release data on projects underway and investments in public and private sectors together, along with the actual factory output.“We are charging this government with monumental mismanagement of the Indian economy which is now in serious crisis if it is not a recession or a downturn. The situation is grim. India is now in the midst of the worst-ever financial crisis. They are deflecting continuously public attention from the real issues,” he said.Congress veteran Jairam Ramesh alleged that the government had “raided” the RBI. “With details of the raid on RBI now available, it is clear that: 1. This is an one-time bonanza to cover-up fiscal deficit (sic) 2. RBI will have inadequate cash to deal with any financial crisis 3. No getting away from need to maintain buoyancy on tax collections without harassment,” he tweeted.The CPM politburo also expressed concern over the government’s “desperate” measure. “The RBI is the monitoring authority and lender of the last resort. Its financial stability is the insurance to protect our economy from monetary or financial instability or crisis generated globally,” the party said in a statement.
