‘Sant Ravidas unleashed frontal attack on untouchability, acted as catalyst in emergence of Dalit consciousness’

Avijit Ghosh is a associate editor with The Times of India. He is addicted to films, music, cricket and football—and not necessarily in that order. He is the author of Bandicoots in the Moonlight, Cinema Bhojpuri, 40 Retakes, and now, Up Campus, Down Campus, a novel set in 1980s JNU. He tweets from the handles @avijitghoshtoi and @cinemawaleghosh LESS ... MORE

In Delhi recently, thousands of Dalits gathered from different parts of north India to protest a Supreme Court mandated demolition of a temple dedicated to Guru Ravidas, which was located on government land. The protests ended in violence. Ronki Ram, professor of political science, Panjab University, contextualises the Ravidas phenomenon to Avijit Ghosh:

Who was Sant Ravidas?

He is one of the most prominent spiritual harbingers of the medieval northern India bhakti movement, popularly known as ‘Uttari Bharat ki Sant Parampara’. He is revered by the ‘lower castes’ as Guru Ravidas. Though there is no consensus over the exact place and time of his birth, it is believed that he was born around AD 1433 at Seer Goverdhanpur, near present day Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, in ‘a low caste’ as he himself mentioned in some of the couplets of his bani (sacred poetry). His firm faith in Nirguna (single, formless) God, dignity of manual labour and compassion for all made him very popular among the ‘low castes’ in the states of Punjab (as Guru Ravidas), Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan (as Guru Raidas). His sacred bani (included in Sri Guru Granth Sahib) reflects his serene vision of the social and spiritual needs of the downtrodden, and underlined the urgency of their empowerment.

In Delhi’s Tughlaqabad area, the demolition of a Sant Ravidas temple attracted strong Dalit protests. What is his social and political significance among Dalits?

Sant Ravidas unleashed a frontal attack on the long tradition of social oppression and untouchability. He, therefore, is regarded as a messiah of the downtrodden. They revere him as devoutly as Hindus revere their Gods and Goddesses, and Sikhs their Gurus. They build temples/ deras in his memory, worship his image, recite/ sing his hymns, celebrate his anniversaries as auspicious events, repose faith in his spiritual power and raise slogans such as Ravidas Shakti Amar Rahe (May the spiritual power of Guru Ravidas live forever).

Guru Ravidas and his socio-religious teachings have become a major rallying point for the unity and struggle of the so-called low caste people in Punjab. They became conscious of their rights, and increasingly resolute in their demands for social justice, just as the venerated Guru Ravidas had himself raised his voice in protest against the prevailing oppressive social structures of a time when even to dream of social justice and dignity for the ‘low castes’ was considered blasphemy. It is apparent that this newly acquired collective caste consciousness and pride would not tolerate any disgrace on the legacy of their revered Guru, since this legacy is the very lynchpin of their identity.

The demolition of Sri Guru Ravidas temple at Tughlaqabad and the quick and sharp reaction it triggered in Punjab needs to be understood in the larger perspective of the emerging contours of distinct Dalit identity. Such intermittent conflicts have served to further concretise the distinct identity of Dalits, and made them ever more conscious of their rights as well as the historical denial of those rights centuries, if not millennia.

Why and how has he become so integral to Dalit identity and assertion in recent years?

The adulation of Guru Ravidas by the so-called low castes, prompted the founders of the historic Ad Dharm movement in Punjab to adopt him as its icon figure. In fact, it was this movement that had sown the seeds of a distinct Ravidassia community in the state. The fact that Guru Ravidas came from one of the ‘lowest castes’ acted as a catalyst in the emergence of Dalit consciousness. Yet another important aspect of Guru Ravidas’s life that made him so integral to Dalit identity and assertion in recent years was his resolute belief in dignity, self-help and an egalitarian social order.

Although in the past the so-called low status of Guru Ravidas may have presented a problem, a newfound pride of both collective and individual identity, particularly among the Ravidassia community, has arisen. And many Dalits who have benefitted from greater upward social mobility owing to their achievements in education, government jobs, business ventures, and even legislative bodies, exhibit pride in flagging their caste titles publicly. For instance, one often finds in the Doaba region of Punjab motorcycles and cars with stickers proudly proclaiming: SC boys (Scheduled Caste boys).

Do you think that the protests over the demolition of the temple have become a platform for political competitiveness among Dalit parties?

Politics and caste are intertwined in India. Though the Supreme Court warned against politicising the issue, the ruling Congress party in Punjab extended support to protests in the name of keeping the agitation peaceful. BJP and SAD leaders had also addressed people at some protests. AAP blamed the Centre by saying that the Centre-controlled DDA razed the structure of the temple.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
