'Looting, Stealing': RBI's Payout to Centre Comes Under Opposition's Scanner

New Delhi: The Congress party upped its ante against the Union government a day after the Reserve Bank of India approved a record Rs 1.76 crore payout to it.

While some leaders tweeted to highlight the government’s inefficiency to manage a slackening economy, some likened the surplus reserve transfer to “looting” and “stealing” from the central bank. The party emphasised that in the absence of enough long-term policy measures, pressuring the RBI would only be futile.

“Rs. 1.76 lakh crore given to the government by the RBI is almost the exact same amount missing from Budget 2019 announcement. Where was that money spent? Why was it missing from the Budget? Looting the RBI like this only devastates our economy further and reduces the credit rating of the bank,” the party said.

Former president of the party, Rahul Gandhi, also took to Twitter to slam the Narendra Modi government. He said that the finance minister and prime minister have no clue how to solve their “self-created” economic disaster.

PM & FM are clueless about how to solve their self created economic disaster. Stealing from RBI won’t work – it’s like stealing a Band-Aid from the dispensary & sticking it on a gunshot wound. #RBILooted https://t.co/P7vEzWvTY3 — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) August 27, 2019

On Tuesday afternoon, at a press conference, former commerce and industries minister Anand Sharma attacked the government for pushing India into a situation of “economic emergency”.

“India is in a deep financial crisis. India’s GDP is continuously falling. Our index of industrial production is at 2% and manufacturing sector is at 1.2% of GDP. Rupee has lost 4% of its value and is currently Asia’s worst performing currency. Government is in loss, they have no money for investments, banks have no money to give loans. In such circumstances, the government has now decided to take RBI’s excess fund that is known as Contingency Risk Buffer (CRB). Nowhere in the world does a central bank give away its CRB to the government,” he said.

Sharma added that the RBI decided to transfer a substantial amount of CRB as per the Bimal Jalan’s committee but Jalan himself, a few weeks ago, had said if at all an amount from CRB has to be given to the government, it should be given in three or four instalments over multiple years.

“But what we see now is that the whole amount will be given to the government in one go. The measure itself shows the enormity of India’s deep economic and financial crisis. Most RBI governors, including Dr D. Subbarao and Dr. Y.V. Reddy, had opposed such a move.”

Also read: Goldman Sachs Sees More Pain in Store for the Indian Economy

He also pointed out that the Centre possibly pressured the RBI to cover its mistake in calculating India’s budget.

“This year’s budget, based on revised estimates, pegs revenue at 17.3 lakh crore while the economic survey says it is 15.6 lakh crore, the difference being 1.70 crore. Now the government has taken Rs 1.76 lakh crore to cover its losses. They miscalculated the budget. Now to cover up its losses, it pressured the RBI to transfer the CRB and pushed the country into an economic emergency,” he said.

A ‘ravaged’ RBI

Nothing that the credit rating of the RBI could take a hit after the move, Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala said that the Union government has converted the ‘R’ in RBI from ‘reserve to ravaged’.

“Contingency Reserve of RBI meant for extreme financial emergencies and war-like situations is being used by BJP Govt to bury its monumental mess on economic front,” he said, asking whether accepting the payout was “fiscal prudence or fiscal hara-kiri”.

Other leaders of the party too criticised the government for its over-dependence on the RBI.

Transfer of #RBISurplus to BJP Govt proves 3 things :

1. BJP is Bankrupt in terms of Financial Policy

2. RBI no longer an independent institution

3. BJP behaving like an addictive gambler now stealing from public reserves to fulfil its addiction of policy of policy blunders pic.twitter.com/Impg0CQcRr — Jaiveer Shergill (@JaiveerShergill) August 27, 2019

RBI’s stock of reserves accumulated over several previous governments is now handed over to this govt It is a raid on RBI’s reserves & autonomy, over which the former Governor & Deputy Governor had resigned in protest Yet another institution crumbles https://t.co/jlhWCF09A9 — Praveen Chakravarty (@pravchak) August 26, 2019

The RBI on August 26 decided to transfer a record high surplus to the government, which hopes it can boost India’s sagging economy without increasing the fiscal deficit burden. Currently, India’s fiscal deficit is at 3.3% of the GDP. Eminent advocate Prashant Bhushan pointed out that the previous two RBI governors, Raghuram Rajan and Urijit Patel, had refused to transfer the bank’s excess reserves, and that the government’s decision to appoint history graduate Shaktikanta Das as the RBI chief has now come to its rescue.

Also read: In Boost to Modi Govt, RBI Agrees to Make Record Rs 1.76 Lakh Crore Transfer

Whether the RBI should transfer such a substantial amount of its surplus to the government has been a topic of debate for the last one year. The Centre was considering using Section 7 of the RBI Act – a never-used provision that allows state-backed board of directors to exercise all powers of the central bank – to seek fiscal stimulus. This had prompted former RBI governor Viral Acharya to criticise the thought as “potentially catastrophic” to RBI’s independence – something that could trigger “a crisis of confidence in capital markets”.

The Rs 1.76 crore payout is incredibly larger than what the RBI had given to the government earlier. In 2009, during the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government, the RBI transferred Rs 25,000 crore to the Centre. The amount is also substantially larger than the Rs 68,000 crore the RBI gave to the Modi government last year.
