Delhi: Man beaten to death by shopkeepers for not buying headphones after trying them

Following the input provided, the police reached the spot and immediately rushed Ovaish to the nearest hospital. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The deceased's parents held a protest demanding the arrest of their son's alleged killers The incident happened near Old Delhi Railway Station on Monday Eye-witnesses claimed that Ovaish was beaten up for nearly half-hour

New Delhi: A man was brutally thrashed to death by a group of shopkeepers for allegedly protesting against the price of headphones. The incident took place near Old Delhi Railway Station on Monday. The deceased's parents held a protest demanding the arrest of their son's alleged killers.

Reportedly, the mob thrashed the victim for nearly half an hour until he fell unconscious. The deceased was identified as Mohammed Ovaish. Eye-witnesses claimed that Ovaish was beaten up while the police officials investigating the case claimed that there were no external injuries on the victim's body.

However, the body has been sent for an autopsy. He reportedly worked at a Madrasa in Noida and had come to Delhi on Saturday. He was supposed to travel to Shamli, Uttar Pradesh and his train was scheduled from Old Delhi Railway Station on Monday night.

According to a report, at around 10 pm Ovaish stopped at a road-side shop to check out headphone sets. When he inquired about the price, the shopkeeper told him a higher price which did not suit Ovaish and he left the shop saying that he did not want it. Meanwhile, the shopkeeper, who was identified as Ayub, followed him and forced him to buy the headphones claiming that he had tried it on. Constantly denying his offer, Ovaish protested, which irked Ayub and he called his friends to teach Ovaish a lesson. An eyewitness said that suddenly 8-10 men gathered around Ovaish and began thrashing him.

Meanwhile, the Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police, Harendra Singh said that the police received the information about the incident from a passerby. Following the input provided, the police reached the spot and immediately rushed Ovaish to the nearest hospital.

However, the police FIR in the matter is registered under culpable homicide. Meanwhile, the police officials are awaiting the autopsy report to take the investigation further. The body was handed over to the family for performing the final rites on Tuesday. Further probe in the case is still underway.




