Congress plea in SC to rebuild Ravidas temple

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, August 27

Two Congress leaders — Haryana Congress chief Ashok Tanwar and former MP Pradeep Jain Aditya — today moved the Supreme Court seeking reconstruction of Guru Ravidas Temple built on forest land in Delhi which was demolished earlier this month on the orders of the top court.

Maintaining that they were not seeking any property rights over the land, the two submitted that they were only “for enforcement and protection of their right to worship the pious land where Saint Guru Ravidas lived, and which was gifted to him by Sultan Sikander Lodhi in 1509”.

The petitioners have a fundamental right to worship the site as well as the temple/Guru Dham, they said, contending the demolition amounted to violation of their right to religion guaranteed under Article 25 of the Constitution.

Contending that the site had been worshiped for 500-600 years and was protected as per the provisions of the Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991, the petitioners claimed the “Guru Dham” and the adjoining structures had been there for centuries and prior to any master plans or modern English law system now prevalent in India.

“Hence, no violation can be caused by a historical structure, which has come under green zone under laws which are subsequent to structure. The above temple/Guru Dham was in Jahapanah City Forest, which is actually an urban park where people go for morning walks,”they submitted.

A mystic poet-saint and one of the stalwarts of Bhakti movement, Guru Ravidas (1450-1520) has a large number of followers, mostly Dalits, in Delhi, Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. After the demolition of the temple situated in Tughlaqabad area of Delhi his followers had been protesting against it.

Taking strong exception to protests against its recent order to demolish an old Guru Ravidas Temple built on forest land in Delhi, the Supreme Court had on August 19 directed governments of Punjab, Haryana and Delhi to ensure that no law and order problems were created over the issue.

“Everything cannot be political. Our orders can’t be given a political colour by anybody on the Earth,” a Bench headed by Justice Arun Mishra had said.
