Complaint filed against BJP MLA Sadhana Singh over her statement on BSP chief Mayawati

highlights BSP filed a complaint against Sadhana Singh over her statement on Mayawati.

Sadhana had said that BSP chief Mayawati is a "blot on womankind".

Akhilesh Yadav denounced the BJP MLA for using derogatory remarks.

New Delhi:

Bahujan Samaj Party’s Ram Chandra Gautam has lodged a complaint in Baburi police station against BJP MLA Sadhana Singh over her statement on BSP chief Mayawati. "SP & BSP workers protested against the statements made by BJP leader Sadhna Singh about BSP chief Mayawati, outside Superintendent of Police's office in Chandauli today. Police have asked for 2 days to register an FIR", Gautam said. However, on Sunday, Sadhana issued an apology, saying her remarks were only meant to remind Mayawati of the support BJP provided to her during the infamous guest house incident of 1995. “My intention was not to insult anyone. I only wanted to remind Mayawati ji of the support BJP provided to her after the unfortunate guest house incident on June 5, 1995. I apologise if my words have caused grief to anyone,” Singh said in her statement.

The Mughalsarai MLA, while addressing a rally said that BSP chief Mayawati is a "blot on womankind" and "worse than a transgender". While referring to the infamous incident when Mayawati was assaulted by Samajwadi Party workers in a Lucknow guest house in 1995, Sadhana said, "Former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Mayawati sold her dignity for power and joined hands with those who disrespected her... She is a blot on womankind. Cannot say if she can be counted among men or women, she is worse than a transgender person."

Chandauli: BSP's Ram Chandra Gautam has lodged a complaint in Baburi police station against BJP MLA Sadhna Singh over her statement on BSP chief Mayawati. pic.twitter.com/ahVatjGHuT — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) January 20, 2019

Condemning her remarks, Union minister and Republican Party of India president Ramdas Athawale told a presser in Lucknow on Sunday that such personal comments should not be made. Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) leader S C Misra said on Twitter BJP leaders have "lost their mental balance after the BSP-SP tie-up" which, he said, threatened to rock the ruling party's boat.

Also Read| Sadhana Singh, BJP's UP lawmaker, expresses regret over her controversial remarks against Mayawati

SP chief Akhilesh Yadav also denounced the BJP MLA for using derogatory remarks against Mayawati. "The remark smacks of desperation and nervousness among BJP leaders and is an affront to all women," he tweeted.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
