ED May Summon Accused, Celebrities Involved In QNET Case

ED May Book QNet Promoters And Directors

Enforcement Directorate to Investigate Trespassers

Cyberabad police have already submitted details of the case

Hyderabad: Cyberabad police have registered a slew of cases against multi-level marketing scam allegedly involving QNet, in several police stations under the Cyberabad Police Commissionerate. The Enforcement Directorate (ED) is set to launch a lawsuit in the case of a QNET company that has looted crores of rupees from innocent people, ED to start investigation into the allegations of money being transferred abroad under Prevention of Money Laundering Act ( (PMLA). The details of the case have already been handed over to Cyberabad Police. On the basis of this, the ED officials will be probing the case soon.

ED to look into various aspects related to the case like, how did the QNET company move billions of rupees from the victims and with whose help? How much money sent abroad? Did they buy any assets there? Have they accumulated assets in many parts of the country? 38 cases have been registered in several police stations under the Cyberabad Police Commissionerate in connection with the Qnet case and 70 people arrested. Lookout notices have already been issued to 12 of the key persons who are involved in this scam. ED officials will soon issue notices to several celebrities who are involved in the promotions of the scheme, it is learnt. However, an official says that they can't reveal any information related to the case at this stage.

Qnet has started illegal Business Five years ago

Vihaan Direct Selling Pvt. Ltd Company, which is related to QI Limited, is a Hong Kong-based multi-level marketing has looted t Rs 5,000 crores from the Innocent people, by targeting software employees, unemployed youth and housewives. Several cases have been registered in Karnataka, AP, Maharashtra, and Delhi and the first case has been registered on Qnet five years ago in Maharashtra.

Cyberabad Police Commissioner V.C Sajjanar said the central corporate affairs ministry has taken steps to shut down Vihan Direct Selling Pvt Ltd, a subsidiary of Qnet. Sajjanar advice people not to join in any of the Multilevel marketing companies. He also adviced that those who have already joined the Vihan company should stop paying money to the company. Sajjanar spoke to the media at Cyberabad Police Commissionerate's office on Tuesday to explain the actions taken by the Cyberabad Economic Offenses Wing and to alert the public to MLM frauds.

Sajjanar says that they have frozen 2.7 crores company money and Notices have been issued to celebrities Anil Kapoor, Shahrukh Khan, Boman Irani, Zaka Ashraf, Vivek Oberoi, Pooja Hegde, and Allu Sirish. Anil Kapoor, Shahrukh Khan, and Boman Irani have replied through their advocates, but they are still waiting for the response from the rest. "Notices have been issued to the first 500 promoters along with them. The South East Region Hyderabad RVC had earlier directed the Center to investigate the case with victims' complaints. Sajjanar said the Bangalore RVC had been ordered to close the company on the basis of the RVC report and look-up notices were issued on 12 affiliates of the company. He showed the copy to the media. Rohini Priyadarshani, Economic Offenses Wing officials of Cyberbad Crime Crimes has attended the press meet held by Sajjanar.

Also Read: Nation-Wide Hunt To Nab Main Accused Behind Multi-Crore Rupee QNet Scam

Also Read: ED Cannot Arrest Chidambaram Till Monday, But He Will Remain In CBI Custody: SC
