UP: Upset over cops' inaction, couple immolates self at police station in Mathura

Mathura SSP suspends sub-inspector Incharge of the police post | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Couple was upset after police failed to take action Couple immolated themselves at police station in Mathura Mathura SSP suspends sub-inspector Incharge of the police post

Mathura: There are stories galore of police apathy and inaction when it comes to addressing grievances of the common man. In a fresh case, a couple immolated themselves by pouring petrol at a police station in Mathura in Uttar Pradesh after cops failed to address their complaint against.

The couple-husband and wife-had approached police against local influential men, who had illegally occupied their house and were repeatedly threatening them.

Both the victims have been admitted to a hospital in critical condition. Joginder, a resident of Sudhir Kala village under Surir Police station of Mathura, attempted suicide by self-immolation along with his wife at the police station.

The couple took the drastic step after following the case for over a year with no action against the accused. Meanwhile, the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) has suspended the sub-inspector Incharge of the police post for inaction.

Also, a police team had been dispatched to arrest the accused who had threatened the couple.

Man immolates self to protest anti-encroachment drive

In a similar in July this year, a 40-year-old man in Rajasthan's Budha village near Jaipur immolated himself to register his protest against an anti-encroachment drive on the land where he built his home. Over 90 per cent of the victim's body had suffered burn injuries. He was later treated at a Jaipur hospital.

According to reports, Baburao Saini, along with his family, had been long living on a piece of land in Budha village near Jaipur which now falls under government property as per a new survey report, thus making his house an encroachment on public property. When local forest officials tried to carry out an anti-encroachment drive at the disputed land, Saini set himself on fire to register his protest.

The police confirmed that a forest ranger was leading the team of forest department during the drive when Baburao Saini set himself on fire and ran towards the forest officials. The officials ran away from the man on fire and did not provide any help to him. Reportedly, it was his family members who rushed to him and put out the fire on him.

The victim was immediately rushed to a nearby hospital where the doctors confirmed that he sustained burn injuries over 90 per cent of his body.
