UP Police takes to streets with loudspeakers to dispel rumours of child lifting that fuel mob lynching

Police officials in Meerut during awareness drives (Picture Courtesy: @igrangemeerut) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Instances of mob lynching have come to light from Bareilly, Bulandshahr, Shamli, Etah among others Two brothers were thrashed, one of whom was beaten to death in Sambhal UP government is yet to enact a statewide law to curb instances of mob lynching

Lucknow: Over the past three days, more than 20 cases of mob lynching fuelled by rumours of child lifting have come to light from the state of Uttar Pradesh. In most of these instances, locals primarily in rural pockets of India's most populous state, have been seen accusing people of kidnapping infants with no solid evidence to back their claim. These accused individuals are then surrounded and beaten to death by a blood-thirsty mob.

The most recent incident was reported from Sambhal where a man was beaten to death on the suspicion of being a child lifter by a mob on Tuesday. A preliminary probe has revealed that the victim was one of two brothers who were taking their nephew to a doctor for medical treatment. The second brother who was also assaulted by the mob is currently undergoing treatment at a local hospital.

Similar attacks have emerged from Shamli, Hapur, Bareilly, Bulandshahr and Lakhimpur Kheri among other districts of the state. Deputy General of Police OP Singh told media persons that patrolling has been intensified across the state of Uttar Pradesh to curb such instances of mob justice. He also said that law enforcement agencies are closely monitoring on social media platforms to keep a check on rumours of child lifting which have reportedly been fuelling these attacks.

Sudhir Kumar (SSP), Ghaziabad has said that strict action will be taken against anyone caught spreading rumours which prompt mob violence. Senior police officials in other parts of the state have also urged citizens not to resort to violence based on rumours. Probes conducted in past instances of mob lynching have revealed that a majority of these attacks are fueled by rumours of child lifting which are circulated either on social media or instant messaging application WhatsApp.

In fact, local law enforcement personnel in Meerut district are taking extensive measures to dispell such rumours. Meetings are being organised with local leaders and municipal officials across the city to spread awareness in this regard. Police officers are also taking to the streets with loudspeakers to make more and more people aware of the dangers of such rumours and the consequences of mob lynching.

Earlier this year, the Uttar Pradesh Law Commission sent a draft Bill to the Yogi Adityanath government in the state. The purpose of this bill was to enact a statewide law imposing stricter punishment on those found guilty of perpetrating mob violence. However, the state is yet to sign this law into effect.
