Congress protest call over Indira Canteen probe

Congress veteran P.C. Siddaramaiah, who launched the Indira Canteen network in 2017 when he was chief minister, has said he would hit the streets if the BJP government tried to dismantle the scheme.

The Opposition Congress in Karnataka has threatened to launch a mass agitation against the new BJP government’s move to start a probe into alleged corruption at the Indira Canteen chain, the subsidised food outlets that cater to the poor.

Chief minister B.S. Yediyurappa of the BJP had on Monday ordered an inquiry into alleged “misuse” of the subsidy the government provides to the contractors who supply food to the canteen network.

Since the BJP has never appreciated the project, especially because it is named after former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, the Congress is viewing the probe as an excuse to either shut down the canteens or rename the scheme.

“We will launch an agitation if they dare to touch the Indira Canteen scheme,” Congress Legislature Party leader Siddaramaiah warned. “This is a pro-poor scheme that caters to lakhs of people every day.”

Inaugurated by Rahul Gandhi on August 15, 2017, the canteens offer breakfast at Rs 5 and lunch and dinner at Rs 10 a meal through the network of more than 170 canteens in Bangalore. As per the most recent calculations, the canteens serve more than three lakh vegetarian meals a day.

The project is modelled after the hugely popular Amma Canteen in neighbouring Tamil Nadu, which had been launched by former chief minister Jayalalithaa.

Newly appointed deputy chief minister of Karnataka, C.N. Ashwath Narayan, on Wednesday played down the probe and claimed there was no plan to shut down the canteens.

“We have only launched an investigation into the suspected misuse of subsidy money, and to check the quality of food. We have not done anything to close down the Indira Canteen scheme,” he told reporters.

One of the three deputy chief ministers, Narayan questioned why the previous Congress-Janata Dal Secular government failed to fund the scheme properly. “Why didn’t the previous government release sufficient funds?”

But news from the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (the city corporation) does not augur well for the scheme, as the civic body has reported lack of funds to run the Indira Canteen scheme.

Civic commissioner N. Manjunath Prasad on Tuesday told corporators that it would not be possible to run the canteens without fresh infusion of funds.

“Neither the BBMP nor the state government has allocated funds to run the canteens. We might have to shut them down if the government or the BBMP fails to fund the project,” Prasad told the corporators.

The BBMP has not earmarked any money for the canteens for the year 2019-2020 since it is a state government project.

While the previous government had allocated Rs 145 crore for 2018-19, only Rs 115 crore was released. The BBMP had then pitched in with its own resources to run the network.

Prasad told the corporators that he had written thrice between January and February this year seeking funds from the government, but in vain.

The possibility of shuttering the Indira Canteen subsidised food scheme has rattled many like Lingappa, who drives an autorickshaw for a living.

“Before the Indira Canteens were opened, poor people like me used to eat unhygienic food at roadside eateries. But for the past three years or so, I have been having my meals at Indira Canteen where I get affordable food of decent quality,” said Lingappa, who has four mouths to feed a home.

The story is no different for Soosairaj, who too drives an auto. “Since I am always on the move, it is difficult to go home for lunch or even dinner. The Indira Canteens are so conveniently placed at BBMP properties across the city and I can have two meals for Rs 20,” he said.
