Mumbai: BEST employees sit on indefinite hunger strike, demand new wage settlement

For the next few days, the employees will continue their hunger strike. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Employees of BEST sat on strike after no breakthrough emerged in talks with the civic administration The protest is being staged outside Wadala Depot The employees were seen raising slogans against Shiv Sena

Mumbai: Employees of the Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport (BEST) are sitting on an indefinite hunger strike on Wednesday outside the Wadala Depot after no breakthrough emerged in talks with the civic administration over a new wage settlement of the employees.

Shashank Rao, the president of the BEST Sanyukt Kamgar Kruti Samiti (BSKKS), an umbrella body of major BEST unions, told news agency that for the next few days, the employees will continue with their hunger strike. And the future course of the protest will be decided later. Reportedly, the employees are demanding the merger of BEST budget with that of the BMC which will eventually give them a hike in salaries along with a Diwali bonus. Rao added that they have even conducted a poll of the employees and 98 per cent of them had votes in favour of an indefinite strike.

Mumbai: Brihanmumbai Electricity Supply and Transport (BEST) employees continue their indefinite hunger strike outside Wadala Depo, over their demands of fresh wage agreement among others. #Maharashtra pic.twitter.com/7E5Chbyn8p — ANI (@ANI) August 28, 2019

Reportedly, the employees were seen raising slogans against Shiv Sena, which holds power in the BMC and accused the party of misleading the BEST employees on pay hike. Rao further mentioned that Shiv Sena said that it would implement the 7th pay commission recommendations which will need an additional Rs 2,750 crore in the current budget.

Also, they reportedly spoke to BEST General Manager who said the transporter can give a maximum of Rs 789 crore. However, Rao accused Shiv Sena of lying to the BEST employees.

A similar strike by BEST employees was staged in January 2019 which lasted nearly a week, making it the longest bus strike ever in the maximum city. Reportedly, as many as 3,200 buses ply under BEST and more than 25 lakh passengers commute via these buses every day. The reason for the strike in January was the same, where the employees were demanding higher salaries, a merger of the BEST budget with the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation's budget.

The management then had initiated vindictive actions against the workers on strike, even after the workers gave a prior notice regarding the strike.
