[EXCLUSIVE] Rahul Gandhi's loyalists ousted after Sonia Gandhi takes over as interim Congress chief: Sources

Congress president Rahul Gandhi

Key Highlights Rahul gandhi resigned as Congress chief in July taking responsibility for the party's defeat in Lok Sabha elections In August, the CWC appointed Sonia Gandhi as the interim party president Sources said that Rahul Gandhi's appointees were being ousted from the party by the Congress old guard

New Delhi: Months after Rahul Gandhi officially resigned from the post of Congress president and Sonia Gandhi was appointed as the interim party chief; the old guard of the Congress has started showing the door to Gandhi’s personal appointees of the party.

Congress is reportedly hunting for a new social media head to lead the party’s communications on social media after its social media in-charge, Divya Spandana resigned from her post.

Spandana, who was a close aide of Rahul Gandhi, has been missing in action since the Lok Sabha elections fiasco. Following the party’s humiliating defeat, Spandana suspended her social media accounts and distanced herself from party work, sources said.

With Divya Spandana out of action, Congress’ social media team has been working on auto-pilot with her subordinates carrying on the work in order to ensure that party’s social media presence is not adversely affected till a new appointment is made, Times Now has learned.

According to sources, Congress' general secretary KC Venugopal has met a few party leaders for the appointment of a new social media head for the party.

Among the leaders whose names are reportedly being considered for the post is party spokesperson Pawan Khera, AICC national media coordinator Rohan Gupta, and Nikhil Alva, who manages Rahul Gandhi's Twitter account and helped improve his social media presence and following on Twitter.

Earlier, several senior party leaders had slammed Praveen Chakravarty, another appointee of Gandhi who was heading the data analytical department in the run-up to the Lok Sabha elections.

Many Congress leaders had claimed that Chakravarty's data analysis had misled the Congress president on the data and had perhaps proved more detrimental for the party, sources claimed.

Taking responsibility for the Lok Sabha election defeat, Rahul Gandhi had shared his resignation letter on Twitter on July 3. He had stated in his letter, "As President of the Congress party, I am responsible for the loss of the 2019 election. Accountability is critical for the future growth of our party. It is for this reason that I have resigned as Congress President."

His resignation had met with denial from several Congress leaders and workers, who kept advising Gandhi to withdraw his resignations weeks after he had shared his resignation letter.

However, with Rahul refusing to budge from his decision to quit as party chief, the Congress Working Committee appointed his mother and UPA Chairperson Sonia Gandhi as interim Congress chief earlier this month.
