Occupied Kashmir remains cut off from outside world

Srinagar, August 28, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, as the valleys of Kashmir, Chenab and Peer Panchal remained cut off from the rest of the world for the 24th consecutive day, today, people continued to face acute shortage of essential commodities including baby food and life-saving drugs with the region representing a humanitarian crisis.

Narendra Modi-led communal government in New Delhi has been keeping the occupied territory under strict lockdown since 5th August when it announced repeal of Article 370 of the Indian Constitution that granted special status to occupied Kashmir. Millions of Kashmiris continue to remain under strict siege enforced by hundreds of thousands of Indian troops deployed in every nook and corner of the valley, turning it into big jail for its inhabitants.

The entire Kashmir valley as well as Doda, Kishtwar, Poonch, Ramban and Rajouri areas of Jammu region are without internet and communication services and TV channels and the residents have no information about the happenings taking place around them. Local newspapers could not update their online editions while majority of them could also not be printed due to restrictions. Schools in the Kashmir valley continued to remain shut.

Almost all Hurriyat leaders including Syed Ali Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, have been put under house arrest or in jails. Over 10,000 Kashmiris including hundreds of political leaders and workers have been detained. The crackdown is so harsh that jails and police stations have no further space to accommodate the detainees, many of whom have been lodged in makeshift detention centres.

On the other hand, Hurriyat activists while hailing the courageous Kashmiri youth and sons of the soil for resisting India’s nefarious move of repealing the special status of the territory have appealed them to remain steadfast. The appeal has been made through posters and handbills issued in occupied Kashmir. The Hurriyat activists said that they were very thankful to everyone who stood for their rights including their Pakistani brothers and sisters who were all out in their support. They requested the Kashmiris to think about Karbala as the month of Muharram was approaching and consider themselves a force of Hazrat Imam Hussain (RA) and remain committed to their just cause.

In the face of communication blackout, the residents of occupied Kashmir are using posters as the new means of communication in occupied Kashmir. These posters on almost every pole call for civil disobedience. Meanwhile, complete shutdown was observed, today, in the entire Kargil district to protest against the BJP-led Indian government’s decision to scrap special status of Kashmir. Call for the two-day shutdown beginning from today was given by Joint Action Committee, Kargil, comprising all religious and political parties in the district after it held a meeting with Coordination Committee, Drass, yesterday.

In Brussels, Kashmir Council Europe organized a bicycle rally to express solidarity with the oppressed people of occupied Kashmir. Addressing on the occasion, the Chairman of the council, Ali Raza Syed, urged the world community to pressurize India to end its brutalities in occupied Kashmir and give the Kashmiris their right to self-determination.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
