Allahabad HCBA Goes On Strike Against Shifting Of Tribunals To Lucknow [Read Press Release]

The Allahabad High Court Bar Association (HCBA) has entered the third day of strike, protesting against shifting of various government offices and tribunals from the city to Lucknow. The protests essentially condemn the 'UP Education Service Tribunal Bill, 2019' which seeks to set up the Education Service Tribunal at Lucknow, having jurisdiction over all districts of the state. The Bill had...

The Allahabad High Court Bar Association (HCBA) has entered the third day of strike, protesting against shifting of various government offices and tribunals from the city to Lucknow.

The protests essentially condemn the 'UP Education Service Tribunal Bill, 2019' which seeks to set up the Education Service Tribunal at Lucknow, having jurisdiction over all districts of the state. The Bill had been passed in the Parliament and is pending Presidential assent.

The HCBA President Rakesh Pandey was reported saying that the bill would ultimately curtail the power of the Allahabad High Court's principal bench. He cited judgments of the Supreme Court wherefrom the norm of setting up of tribunals at places where principal benches of the high courts are located, emerged.

Press Release

The Joint Secretary of HCBA issued a press release yesterday stating that a general meeting of the Bar had been convened at the Bar Association Library in the presence of HCBA President Rakesh Pandey, General Secretary J. B. Singh and various advocates. During the meeting, the Association resolved to not enter the court premises and abstain from filing fresh matters until the protests abate. They also decided that the Photo Identification Centre will remain closed during the said period. It was clarified further that applications pertaining to anticipatory bail may be filed in the high court however arguments in those matters shall be advanced only after the strike concluded.

The members were also directed to congregate near the high court today to participate in a motor vehicle rally, starting from the high court till the office of District Magistrate where the Association will apprise the magistrate of their demands.

The Association has also planned to visit the Deputy Chief Minister, Keshav Prasad Maurya tomorrow, to personally abreast him of their grievance and seek his written support.

Action committee & Invigilation Committee

An Action committee and an Invigilation Committee have also been constituted. The Invigilation committee comprising 50 advocates will be responsible to ensure that all the members abide by the Association's decision. Further, in case any member of the Bar Association is found in violation of the decision, it will inform the Action Committee of the same which shall initiate disciplinary proceedings against the concerned member/s and suspend or terminate his/their membership from the Association and cancel his/their enrollment. The Action committee comprises of various Senior Advocates under the chairmanship of HCBA President.

Company Law Tribunal Bar Association of Allahabad Bench

In a separate resolution dated 28.8.2019, the Company Law Tribunal Bar Association of Allahabad Bench has decided to abstain from work today as a sign of protest against the proposal/demand of the Oudh Bar Association, Lucknow which seeks establishment and transfer of other tribunals as well to Lucknow.



Click Here To Download Press Release



[Read Press Release]
