Whole country will hold protest tomorrow to express solidarity with Kashmiris: Qureshi

Whole country will hold protest tomorrow to express solidarity with Kashmiris: Qureshi

Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi says whole country will hold protest tomorrow against the unilateral steps taken by India in Occupied Kashmir and to express solidarity with their Kashmiri brethren.

He was giving a briefing during a meeting of Parliamentary Committee on Kashmir chaired by Fakhar Imam in Islamabad today.

The Minister said protest will be held each Friday on 12 pm across Pakistan on the suggestion of the parliament.

He said two of the three parties on Kashmir have out rightly rejected the unilateral Indian steps in Occupied Kashmir. He said even in India there are clear gulfs on these steps.

Shah Mehmood Qureshi said Indian opposition parties were not allowed to witness the situation in Occupied Kashmir and were forcibly sent back to Delhi from Srinagar Airport.

Appreciating the joint session of the parliament and a unanimous resolution on Kashmir, the Foreign Minister said it showed all parties across the spectrum are united in opposing the illegal steps of India.

Referring to diplomatic efforts to internationalize the Kashmir situation, the Foreign Minister said he wrote letters on First, Sixth and then 13th of this month to the United Nations to apprise the world body of the aggravating human rights situation in the held territory.

He said discussion on Kashmir at the UN Security Council was a great achievement of Pakistan which was held despite India's hectic efforts to stop it.

He said large protest demonstrations were held in the US, UK, Paris, Berlin and many other European capitals. He said a large demonstration will be held in London on third of next month to draw world attention towards the plight of innocent Kashmiris.

He said services of world's best lawyers are being sought to devise a course of action that could strengthen our case in ICJ.

Kiani/ Ahsan
