India, Pakistan to resume talks on Kartarpur today

ISLAMABAD: Despite sharp escalation in tensions between India and Pakistan in the aftermath of the annexation of disputed territory of Kashmir by the former, technical teams from both sides would resume their talks on Friday (today) and the two also remain engaged on consular access for convicted Indian spy Kulbhushan Jadhav.

Speaking at a weekly media briefing, Foreign Office spokesman Dr Mohammad Faisal said: “The technical meeting on Kartarpur Sahib Corridor is being held on 30 August 2019 at Zero Point. Pakistan remains committed to completing and inaugurating the Kartarpur Sahib Corridor as announced by our prime minister and as planned.”

Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi had on Aug 8, a day after the National Security Committee chalked out the response strategy to Indian action, made it clear that Pakistan remained committed to completing and opening the Kartarpur corridor.

Mr Qureshi had on that occasion said that Pakistan would continue the project because it respected all religions and the Kartarpur corridor project was being undertaken on Pakistan’s initiative and in accordance with the decision of the National Security Committee that people-to-people contact would not be impeded.

FO spokesman says airspace closure to India is one of many options being considered

Pakistan and India had in November last year started the construction of the visa-free corridor. Islamabad had proposed the corridor to narrow trust deficit with New Delhi, which India readily accepted. Pakistan was to construct a four-kilometre-long corridor from the border to Gurdwara in Kartarpur Sahib, whereas India was to construct and develop the corridor from Dera Baba Nanak, in East Punjab’s Gurdaspur district, to the international border. The corridor is being constructed to coincide with the 550th birth anniversary of Baba Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, in November this year.

Pakistan and India were before the lowering of diplomatic ties, by expelling the high commissioners, negotiating the agreement governing the operation of the corridor and were believed to have made substantial progress.

Responding to a question about consular access for Indian spy Jadhav, who had been awarded death penalty, the FO spokesman said: “We remain engaged with the Indian government on this point.”

The International Court of Justice had last month in its verdict on a petition filed by India asked Pakistan to grant Jadhav consular access. The access could so far not be granted, despite Islamabad’s decision in principle to allow Indian consular officials to meet him.

When asked about Science and Technology Minister Fawad Chaud–hry’s claim about airspace being closed again for Indian jets, the FO spokesman clarified that the issue had been discussed at the highest level. “It is one of the many options that are being considered. We can exercise it at a time of our choosing. No decision has been taken yet,” he maintained.

The spokesman regretted that “inhuman and unilateral actions” by Indian authorities in held Kashmir were continuing without any respite, despite international condemnation and censure.

“Due to severe blockade, the residents are facing acute shortage of essential commodities, including baby food and life-saving medicines, and the valley represents a humanitarian crisis. All internet and communication services and TV channels are closed in the Jammu and Kashmir valley. Local newspapers could not update their online editions, while majority of them could not print due to restrictions,” he said while recalling the steps taken by Indian authorities to suppress protests against Kashmir’s annexation.

He said India should stop misleading the international community and accept the ground realities and aspirations of the people of Kashmir instead of continuing with its policy of obduracy in the territory.

Published in Dawn, August 30th, 2019
