Party workers seek to oust Shivajinagar MLA

As many as 31 members of BJP filed for nomination from the constituency, as also submitted a resolution against Vijay Kale being given candidature again



The discontent that has been festering among workers of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in Shivajinagar constituency imploded during the filing of nominations on Thursday, with as many as 31aspirants joining the race, most of them simply to spite sitting Member of Legislative Assembly (MLA) Vijay Kale.



While Kale seemed to be unfazed by the rallying of forces against him, the huge contingent for a single constituency clearly upstaged the interview process carried out by Ashish Shelar at the party office on Jangli Maharaj (JM) Road. All 31not only attended the interview but also submitted a resolution urging that Kale not be nominated this time.



Many were young party workers, who were also seen protesting against Kale when he released his performance report. “He hasn’t done anything for the constituency. He was focused on inducting new people, ignoring us old-timers. He did not even bother to talk to us the past five years. So, we came together to file nominations to counter him,” said Ashok Mundhe, a BJP party worker. “A meeting was held on Wednesday in which the decision to file these nominations was taken. We also formally submitted a resolution,” informed Nitin Kuwar, another party worker.



But not all were there only to mark their objection to Kale. The list included heavyweights like corporators Siddharth Shirole, Jyotsna Ekbote and Neelima Khade. But Kale shrugged away the episode calling it a demonstration of the democracy existing within the party. “Every person gets justice in our party. Given our open democratic structure, anyone can file a nomination. But only the person with merit will get candidature. I have filed my nomination and I am sure I will be given the opportunity to contest again,” he retorted, when asked about the opposition to him.



The bustle of interviews at the BJP office, however, seemed to be a mere formality, with Shelar spending barely an hour-and-a-half to interview 104 candidates for eight constituencies. Though he was scheduled to begin interviews at noon, Shelar arrived at the venue at 2 pm. While candidates were told that 30 minutes would be devoted to each constituency, Shelar’s delay hijacked this plan. Instead, aspirants for each constituency were called in en masse and their nominations collected simultaneously.



Needless to say, Shivajinagar clocked the most number of applicants. But the competition at Kasba Peth has also heated up, with several big names vying for candidacy. For Pune Cantonment, besides the sitting MLAs, an executive engineer from the irrigation department — Pandurang Shelar — has joined the race. Hadapsar got nine contenders including the sitting MLA Yogesh Tilekar. For Vadgaon Sheri, the incumbent candidate Jagdish Mulik will face competition from four others.



Though it has a minimal number of aspirants, Parvati will see stiff competition between Shrinath Bhimale, corporator Rajendra Shilimkar and senior leader Gopal Chintal. The battle for Kothrud, too, promised to be close, between Murlidhar Mohol, Sandip Khardekar, Sushil Mengade and Amol Balwadkar taking on incumbent Medha Kulkarni. There are 12 in the race for Khadakwasla, including sitting MLA Bhimrao Tapkir.



Summing up the process witnessed on Thurday, MLA Madhuri Misal said, “The interviews were in line with protocol. A decision on alliance will be taken by the leaders and the candidates will be picked based on the report of the interviews taken.”


