Telangana man confesses to killing 16-year-old Facebook friend after she refused his advances

The girl went missing from her home on August 27, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused and victim had been Facebook friends for over three months, said police On August 27, the girl's father reported her missing and a search was launched to locate her After confessing to the crime, the accused took police to the spot where he had abandoned her body

Hyderabad: Police in Telangana have uncovered a brutal crime involving a 16-year-old girl and a man in his late 20s. Shockingly, officers familiar with the investigation said that the accused met the victim on Facebook and the two had been talking for over three months before he managed to convince her to meet him in person. Identified as one Naveen Reddy, the accused has now been arrested and booked for the murder of the minor girl.

The matter came to light on August 27 when the girl's father reported her missing to local law enforcement. Considering her age, a case of kidnapping was registered and a lookout notice was issued by the police. Upon examining CCTV footage, investigators came across Reddy and took him in for questioning. Following intense grilling by officers, he broke down and confessed to murdering the girl after she refused his advances.

Reddy further told police personnel that he met the Class 10 girl on August 27. At this time, the two had been Facebook friends for a little over three months. According to a report, the duo then decided to go to an open field to speak. However, Reddy expressed his desire to engage in a sexual relationship with her in the car on the way to the field. When she refused to entertain his request, the two got into an argument. This is when the girl tried to jump out of the moving vehicle.

Police officers said Reddy then stopped the car, got down and charged at her with a stone which he used to hit her on the head. The child died on the spot and Reddy fled from the spot.

After confessing to the crime, Naveen took police to the spot where he had abandoned the girl's body. A forensic team was also sent to the spot for examination and collection of evidence. Meanwhile, the girl's body was sent to a local government hospital for autopsy. Reddy has now been booked under section 302 of the IPC for murder.

In the wake of the heinous crimes, groups of locals staged a protest outside the police station on Thursday. Their chants were about speedy justice for the victim and stringent punishment for the accused. The local Member of Legislative Assembly was also apprised of the incident and assured the victim's family members that concerned authorities will leave no stone unturned in punishing the accused in a befitting manner.
