By going nuclear over nukes, India is playing into Pakistan’s hands

A former associate editor with the Times of India, Jug Suraiya writes two regular columns for the print edition, Jugular Vein, which appears every Friday, and Second Opinion, which appears on Wednesdays. His blog takes a contrarian view of topical and timeless issues, political, social, economic and speculative. LESS ... MORE

Amid escalating tensions between the two countries over the abrogation of Article 370 in Kashmir and making the state a Union territory, Pakistan has started rattling its nuclear sabre, but in a tit-for-tat response. India shouldn’t follow suit.

India’s position has long been that Kashmir is an internal issue, and New Delhi has so far managed to foil Islamabad’s repeated attempts, at the UNSC and other fora, to internationalise the matter.

When US President Donald Trump offered to ‘mediate’ between the two countries on the Kashmir dispute, New Delhi politely but firmly told him that Indo-Pakistani relations were strictly a bilateral dynamic and required to third party intervention.

However, there is a back door, which Islamabad is opening, to allow for international involvement: Pakistan and India both have nuclear capability, and any nuclear exchange between the two countries could escalate into a global conflagration.

Knowing that a wary world is keeping an eye on a situation which could result in a nuclear confrontation, Islamabad is playing its nuke card. PM Imran Khan has warned the global community about a `fatal’ – ie nuclear war against India, and Islamabad has test-fired its Ghaznavi missile to underline the threat of a nuclear showdown, which would inevitably result in intervention by the US, and possibly by China, Pakistan’s staunchest ally.

Defence minister Rajnath Singh recently went on record to say that India might rethink its no first-strike nuclear policy. Earlier PM Modi had said that India’s nuclear weapons weren’t ‘Diwali fireworks’.

Such pronouncements only play into Pakistan’s hand, by focusing international attention on Indo-Pakistani tensions.

India shouldn’t fall into Pakistan’s trap of nuclear sabre-rattling.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
