People defy curfew, hold anti-India demos in IOK

Srinagar, August 29, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, hundreds of people defying curfew and other restrictions continued to hold demonstrations in Srinagar and other areas of the territory, today, against India’s latest onslaught to impose Hindu civilization on the territory.

People took to the streets in Srinagar and other parts of the territory including Central, South and North Kashmir and staged forceful demonstrations against the repeal of special status of the territory by the Indian government on 5th August. Indian troops and police personnel used brute force against the demonstrators, injuring many of them. More than 600 incidents of protests have occurred in the occupied territory so far since 5th August.

Hundreds of people have sustained injuries due to the firing of bullets, pellets and teargas shells on the protesters by Indian forces’ personnel during this period. Even passers-by were fired upon with pellets. Many such persons got injured by pellets were taken to hospitals. A senior government official told media that as many as 36 persons have received pellet injuries in the Kashmir valley since 5th August which have been reported only in Srinagar hospitals.

The Kashmir valley, which has been under unprecedented military siege for the past 25 days, has been turned into a big jail and a hell for its inhabitants. While people have been confined to their homes, the patients with critical ailments are not allowed to move to hospitals. The medical stores and pharmacies have run out of stocks.

The residents are facing immense hardships due to acute shortage of essential commodities like baby food. People are not being allowed to even participate in the funeral prayers of their dear ones who pass away. Markets and schools are shut while all internet and communication services including landline phone, mobile and TV channels are closed in the valley. Local newspapers are offline while most of them failed to bring out their print editions for the 25th day, today.

Due to severe blockade, the people of occupied Kashmir are unable to stock the essential commodities for winter season. It will cost huge number of deaths even if curfew is lifted in later part of summer. The Kashmir valley remains cut off from the rest of the world owing to closure of Srinagar-Jammu Highway due to snowfall during most part of winter.

Meanwhile, complete shutdown was observed in the entire Kargil district on the 2nd day, today, to protest against the Indian government’s decision to abrogate special status of Jammu and Kashmir and bifurcate it into two union territories. Call for the two-day shutdown was given by Joint Action Committee, Kargil, and Coordination Committee, Drass. The people of Kargil said that they want to remain with Jammu and Kashmir.

The Naxals in Konde area of Kanker district in Indian state of Chhattisgarh killed a former sarpanch associated with Rashtriya Swyamsevak Sangh to vent their anger against the BJP government’s move to scrape Article 370 of the Indian Constitution which gave special status to occupied Kashmir. Through pamphlets placed near the body of the slain sarpanch, they also announced full support to the people of occupied Kashmir in their struggle for freedom from Indian occupation.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
