Amid tussle over MP Congress chief post, Jyotiraditya Scindia's son shares cryptic post on Facebook

Jyotiraditya Scindia with his son @JM_Scindia | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: Hours after several supporters of Congress leader Jyotiraditya Scindia threatened to quit the party demanding that he be made the Madhya Pradesh party chief, the former Union minister’s son on Friday shared a cryptic post on Facebook.

Mahanaryaman Scindia shared a video on Facebook in which the Congress leader can be heard reciting a Hindi poem. “Aadhiyon ki zidd h jaha bijliya girane ki, humari bhi zidd hai wahi aashiyan banae ki. Usulon pe jaha aanch aae waha takrana jaruri hai, gar zinda ho fir zinda aana zaruri hai," Scindia says in the video.

The internal fissures in party’s Madhya Pradesh unit came out in open earlier today after Congress leader Ashok Dangi issued a statement, saying that he along with 500 members will resign from the party if Scindia is kept away from state politics.

"If Jyotiraditya Scindia is kept away from the politics of Madhya Pradesh then I along with 500 people will resign from the party," Dangi, working president of Congress in Datia district, said.

He further said that the top leadership of the party should not forget about the contribution made by Scindia in the formation of Congress government in the state.

"Some leaders are not able to digest the popularity and outreach of Jyotiraditya Scindia among the masses. That's why they are deliberately trying to keep him away from the politics of the state," the statement added.

"If Jyotiraditya Scindia is kept away from the state politics then I along with 500 party workers will march to Delhi to the Congress office at 10 Janpath for our demand. Even if after that our demands are not met then we all will collectively submit our resignations to Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi," Dangi further said, news agency ANI reported.

Meanwhile, several supporters Scindia also protested outside the state Congress chief office in Bhopal demanding the appointment of former Guna MP as state unit chief.

Scindia has reportedly given an ultimatum to the party to appoint him the president of the state Congress or he would have to look for other options.

Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath earlier today met interim Congress president and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi in New Delhi to discuss various party agendas. “I met Sonia Gandhi ji and discussed various subjects, including the party organisation in Madhya Pradesh. It was a very fruitful discussion like always,” Nath told media persons after the meeting.
