‘Kashmir Hour’ rallies condemn Indian atrocities in occupied valley

ISLAMABAD: On the call of Prime Minister Imran Khan, people from different walks of life, especially students and teachers of educational institutions, in the twin cities of Rawalpindi and Islamabad and nearby towns observed ‘Kashmir Hour’.

In the capital, the Higher Education Commission (HEC) and universities held separate events to observe the solidarity hour. Employees of Federal Directorate of Education (FDE) also participated in a rally held at D-Chowk.

National University of Sciences and Technology (Nust) held a walk from the main campus to Kashmir Highway.

The participants were holding placards inscribed with slogans in support of the Kashmiris and condemning the Indian government for the annexation of the disputed area and unleashing a fresh wave of atrocities on the people.

Quaid-i-Azam University (QAU) Vice Chancellor Prof Dr Mohammad Ali along with students, faculty and staff participated in the Kashmir Hour in front of Prime Minister Secretariat while National University of Modern Languages (Numl) observed the solidarity hour on the campus.

Similarly, academic and services staff of Allama Iqbal Open University (AIOU) took out a rally giving a message of solidarity to the Kashmiri people for getting freedom from India.

Meanwhile, International Islamic University Islamabad (IIUI) President Prof Dr Ahmed bin Yousif Al-Draiweesh delivered a Friday sermon at Faisal Mosque.

The sermon was attended by IIUI Rector Dr Masoom Yasinzai and a large number of people from the twin cities.

Later, a walk was also held in the Faisal Mosque campus to express solidarity with the people of Kashmir.

Writers and literary figures under the banner of the National Language Promotion Department also held a protest demonstration against Indian brutalities in Jammu and Kashmir.

Speaking on the occasion, NLDP Director General Iftikhar Arif said all literary figures wanted the world to resolve the Kashmir issue in accordance with the wishes of the people of Kashmir who were struggling to get their right to self-determination.

The writers and poets also demanded the UN to play its role and get the Kashmir dispute resolved in accordance with its resolutions.

Rawalpindi

The Kashmir Hour was observed in the garrison city by all government employees, students and teachers of educational institutions.

The main activities were held at Kutchery Chowk where Minister for Civil Aviation Ghulam Sarwar Khan, Commissioner Rawalpindi Saqib Zafar, Deputy Commissioner Mohammad Ali Ahmed Randhawa and other officers were present.

Traffic remained suspended at Kutchery Chowk for about an hour.

Addressing the participants, the minister said the Indian occupying forces had inflicted brutalities on the defenceless people of Kashmir but the latter were determined to get freedom.

Ghulam Sarwar Khan said Pakistan was standing with the people of occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

Addressing participants of the rally that started from PTI Public Secretariat, Rawalpindi, and culminated at the Deputy Commissioner’s Office, Mr Khan said Indian forces were committing atrocities on innocent Kashmiris and violating human rights, adding that the curfew had doubled their miseries.

Rawalpindi Cantonment Board (RCB) employees brought out a rally from RCB offices to Bank Road in Saddar which was led by Additional Cantonment Executive Officer Faisal Munir.

The workers of Wapda observed solidarity with the people of Kashmir under the aegis of All Pakistan Wapda Hydro Electric Workers Union.

Pir Merh Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University also organised a rally to express solidarity with the Kashmiris.

Fatima Jinnah Women University took out a walk from the campus to the DC office. At the end of the walk, a human chain was formed by the participants to show support to the people of Kashmir.

Rawalpindi Development Authority (RDA) and other departments also brought out rallies on main roads.

Attock

People from different walks of life, especially schoolchildren, attended walks and rallies in Attock, Taxila and Hassanabdal.

The biggest gathering was held at Wah Cantt where the Pakistan Ordnance Factories (POF) organised a rally on Quaid Avenue.

The Attock police observed the Kashmir Hour by holding a function at the police lines.

In Hassanabdal, a rally was taken out which was led by Assistant Commissioner Adnan Anjum Raja and ASP Hassanabdal Azhar Khan.

In Taxila, a seminar was held at the community centre which was chaired by MNA Mansoor Hayat Khan and attended by MPA Ammar Sadeeq Khan and others.

Gujar Khan

MPA Sajid Mahmood led a procession of students and locals in Daultala in connection with ‘Kashmir Hour’.

The participants condemned Indian oppression in Kashmir and called upon the UN to take notice of the atrocities being unleashed on the people of Kashmir.

Murree

A large number of people from different walks of life, including students, workers of political parties, traders, lawyers, city administration and Kashmiris living in Murree participated in the rallies taken out in various parts of the town.

The main rally was brought out from GPO Chowk which after passing through different areas ended at the starting point.

Speakers on the occasion said people of Pakistan were with the Kashmiri victims of aggression and atrocities by the Indian occupying forces.

Schoolchildren and teachers from St Danny’s, government high schools for girls and boys also observed the solidarity hour. – Also contributed by correspondents from Taxila, Gujar Khan & Murree Our Staff Reporter

Published in Dawn, August 31st, 2019
