Assam NRC and BJP's challenge: The votebank politics of NRC

With just a few hours left for the publication of the final National Register of Citizens (NRC), the BJP's Assam unit is increasingly anxious over speculation that a large number of illegal foreigners will be included in the final list and simultaneously, the names of many Hindus will be excluded.



Following a directive by the Supreme Court, the final NRC will be published on August 31.



The BJP leaders are stressed about the NRC to the extent that they are announcing that the government will do anything for the genuine Indian, if found that any Indian name was excluded from the final NRC list.



Assam state BJP president Ranjeet Kumar Dass went a step ahead to make it a moral responsibility of the Government of India and the Assam government to make sure that no genuine Indian citizen should be excluded from the final list.



"The government will do anything for the Indian citizen if found any Indian name to disappear in the list. Our demand is no wrongful NRC, no wrongful exclusion and no wrongful inclusion. We will arrange all by bringing law," Ranjeet Kumar Dass said.



While the Supreme Court has directed the NRC state coordinator Prateek Hajela not to disclose any NRC related data publically and the NRC state coordinator had submitted the detailed district-wise list of people whose names were excluded in the NRC in sealed cover before the Supreme Court, the Assam government had recently disclosed publically the data of the National Register of Citizens (NRC) - a detailed district-wise list of people whose names were excluded in the NRC in the Assam Legislative Assembly.



The state BJP and the state government have voiced their concerns over the exclusion data from the draft NRC.

According to the government data, every third person in Assam's Hojai district was excluded from the draft NRC.

A total of 3,36,780 applicants or 32.99 per cent in Hojai district were excluded from the draft NRC which was published on July 31 last year.

Assam Parliamentary Affairs Minister Chandra Mohan Patowary cited the data in the state Assembly to make a case for fresh verification of the people included in the NRC.

According to the data released by the Assam government, the total number of applicants was 3,29,91,385 and out of which 40,07,717 names or 12.15 per cent were excluded from the draft NRC.

The percentage of non-inclusion of names in Bangladesh-bordering districts of South Salmara was 7.22, for Dhubri, it was 8.26 and for Karimganj, the figure stood at 7.67.

The Assam minister said the rate of exclusion in the Bangladesh-bordering districts was less than the state average.

Patowary said that, while 12.15 per cent of the total applicants were excluded from the draft NRC, the non-inclusion figure for the bordering districts of South Salmara, Dhubri and Karimganj was 7.22 per cent, 8.26 per cent and 7.57 per cent respectively.

"However the exclusion rate in districts such as Karbi Anglong (14.31 per cent) and Tinsukia (13.25 per cent) is higher where as the indigenous people are living in these districts," the Assam minister said.

On the other hand, in the non-border districts, the percentage of the applicants not included in the draft NRC list was:

32.99 per cent in Hojai

30.90 per cent in Darrang

22.51 per cent in Bongaigaon

17.89 per cent in Kamrup (Metro)

16.71 per cent in Sonitpur

15.59 per cent in Baksa

15.47 per cent in West Karbi Anglong

15.04 per cent in Morigaon

14.74 per cent in Udalguri

14.31 per cent Karbi Anglong

14.12 per cent in Nagaon

13.40 per cent in Barpeta

13.25 per cent in Tinsukia

12.91 per cent in Cachar

11.64 per cent in Biswanath

10.34 per cent in Goalpara

9.74 per cent in Dhemaji

9.64 per cent in Lakhimpur

The lowest non-inclusion rate is in Majuli district with 1.62 per cent.



On the other hand, Assam BJP MLA Shiladitya Dev alleged that, several lakhs of illegal Bangladeshi Muslims name have been included in the draft NRC, which was published on July 31 last year.



The BJP MLA said that lakhs of illegal Bangladeshi Muslims' names appeared in the draft NRC, but genuine Indian citizens were not included in the list.



"For inclusion of our name in the NRC, we were required to show documents to prove our Indian citizenship. Hindus are born in India only. Hindus are not born in Jerusalem or America. Bangladesh or East Pakistan was born from India or Bharatvarsh," Shiladitya Dev said.

He also said, "The refugee Hindus do not have any documents, but the Bangladeshi Muslims, who entered India illegally, have collected all the required documents with help from the previous governments. Now, they are getting the Indian citizenship by showing these documents. Their names also appeared in the NRC. But, genuine Hindus name are not included in the NRC because of lack of documents."



The Assam BJP MLA said that the overall situation has become very dangerous. "We will not get 100 per cent correct NRC," Shiladitya Dev said.



While the BJP leaders are speaking publically against the NRC, the organisations associated with the party like ABVP, Hindu Jagaran Manch also held demonstrations across the state.



Last month, BJP-led Centre and the state government had moved applications in the Supreme Court seeking a re-verification of a sample of names included in the draft NRC - 20 per cent in border districts and 10 per cent elsewhere.



But the apex court dismissed the petition and said the NRC state coordinator Prateek Hajela has conveyed to Supreme Court that 27 per cent names were already re-verified.



Defending the government's demand for re-verification, Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal said in his Independence Day speech, "For a correct and error-free NRC, our government had appealed to the Supreme Court for re-verification of the NRC update process".



The stress is now on the votebank which had voted BJP to power out of which many are now left in the exclusion list adding new headache for the party till the next elections.

(With inputs from Hemanta Kumar Nath)
