PA witnesses split over Kashmir protest call

PESHAWAR: The opposition members of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly on Friday complained that the prime minister didn’t take the opposition parties into confidence before announcing the observance of ‘Kashmir Hour’ to express solidarity with the people of occupied valley.

Speaking on a point of order in the house, Pakistan Peoples Party MPA Nighat Yasmin Orakzai said Prime Minister Imran Khan didn’t take rival political leadership on board on the Kashmir issue.

“Kashmir is a national issue and therefore, the government should have taken the opposition on board before announcing any activity in this regard.

“The call for protest would have been much effective had the government invited the opposition to participate in it,” she said.

Speaker Mushtaq Ahmad Ghani, who chaired the sitting, had announced on Thursday that the treasury and opposition benches would take out a joint rally from the assembly premises in connection with the Kashmir Hour.

Opposition resents govt’s ‘solo flight’; treasury says doesn’t need opposition’s support to show solidarity with Kashmiris

He said the parliamentary leaders and members of the provincial assembly would march on the Khyber Road.

Awami National Party parliamentary leader Sardar Hussain Babak said the government and opposition had the same stand on the vital issue of Kashmir, so the prime minister should have taken the opposition leaders into confidence before giving the countrywide call for protest on the issue.

He said Prime Minister Imran Khan should have announced protest by taking the opposition leader and other parliamentary leaders along.

The ANP leader said the opposition would not take part in the government-led rallies.

Special assistant to the chief minister on science and technology Kamran Bangash said the government did not need the opposition’s support for showing solidarity with the people of Kashmir.

Speaker Mushtaq Ghani, however, urged both treasury and opposition to participate in the Kashmir Hour walk and make the world realise the severity of Kashmir issue and the human rights’ violation by Indian government and forces in the occupied territory.

Later, parliamentary leaders of the opposition parties told a joint news conference that the government sabotaged the national unity by taking a solo flight on Kashmir issue.

They alleged that prime minister had struck a deal on Kashmir issue during his recent visit to the US, so he bypassed the opposition.

Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz MPA Sardar Aurungzeb Nalotha said the government had arrested the party’s vice-president, Maryam Nawaz, when she announced a rally in Azad Jammu and Kashmir to show solidarity with the people of the India-held region.

He said the government was victimising the opposition by putting them behind bars.

The house also passed the KP Judicial Academy (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

Later, the speaker adjourned the session until 10:30am on Sept 16.

Published in Dawn, August 31st, 2019
