[GROUND REPORT] Mumbai residents protest cutting of 2702 tree in Aarey forest

Trees to be cut for construction of Metro's car shed project

Key Highlights Residents protest MBC Tree Authority decision to cut over 2700 trees Trees to be cut for construction of Metro's car shed project Residents said that BMC has backstabbed them

Mumbai: The citizens of Mumbai have spoken out against Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation's (BMC) decision to cut around 2700 trees in Aarey forest to make way for a car shed for Metro.

Earlier, Tree Authority approved Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation's (MMRC) request to cut trees for car shed which is part of Mumbai Metro project.

Earlier, an expert committee panel that was appointed by the High Court also criticized the BMC alleging that they were pressured to vote in favour felling so many trees. But the committee said it was not in favour of cutting the trees indiscriminately and that they had talked about the shoddy manner in which the site inspection was carried out.

After so many campaigns and protests, nothing seems to have come out. So what are the options for the citizens?

The only option before the citizens is to move the court. Meanwhile, more Mumbaikars have come out to protest the felling of trees. People have also come from far off places like Thane to register their protest.

"The experts who were nominated by the renowned NGOs. And these people are the real experts who carried out the site inspection. On August 13, they have opposed the felling of trees in writing. Despite that, the Tree Authority and BMC Commissioner Praveen Pardeshi said that these experts have confirmed the felling of trees which is a total lie. One of the Committee members Shashi Rekha Suresh Kumar, who resigned from the Tree Authority, said in her press release that the argument that all committee members have supported the tree felling was wrong. Right now Mumbai residents are feeling backstabbed," said a protester.

"At least 82,000 objections have been received from the residents. Tree Authority has organised several public hearings. Now just because of the public protest, members of Tree Authority are sliding back and forth and this is going on for the last five years. We are not opposing the metro but asking to relocate the metro shed and we are not heard in this regard. And now police are telling us that take the permission as you are not allowed to protest here otherwise you will face arrest," said another woman protester.

A tribal girl who also joined the protest said, "We are living in Aarey area and we know the value and importance of trees. Metro authorities are telling us that these trees are useless for us. And the other day Tree Authority members told us that any decision will be taken after consulting you."


