India wants me to die. I won't die that easy: Pak minister after being electrocuted at rally

While speaking at a press conference on Saturday, Pakistan Railway Minister Sheikh Rashid said, "India wants me to die. Let India know that I won't die that easy." (Photo: Facebook/sheikhrasheedahmed12)

A day after Pakistan Railway Minister Sheikh Rashid's shrieks on getting an electric shock went viral on social media, the minister accused India of electrocuting him and wanting him to die.

While speaking at a press conference on Saturday, Sheikh Rashid said, "India wants me to die. Let India know that I won't die that easy."

On Friday, Sheikh Rashid received an electric shock while holding the microphone as he spoke about Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi during a rally in Pakistan.

In a viral video posted by Pakistani journalist Naila Inayat on Twitter, Sheikh Rashid shrieks, "Ooi current lag gaya. Khair koi baat nahi. Mera khayal hai current aa gaya hai. (Ooi, I've got an electric shock. Anyway, it doesn't matter. I think the power is back.)"

Referring to the video that created ripples on social media, Sheikh Rashid said, "Yesterday, I got hit with a current and the whole Indian media was talking about it. When I'll die, India will open my coffin and confirm if I'm dead or not."

The railway minister also spoke on the National Register of Citizens (NRC), the final list of which was released on Saturday. The NRC is touted as the proof of Assamese identity. The final NRC list will identify the bonafide citizens of the state.

On the condition of Jammu and Kashmir, Sheikh Rashid said, "Pakistan Army and the nation hold the right to take the offensive on Kashmir because Kashmir has gone back to 1947 status."

He threatened India saying, "If India ever tries to move towards Lahore, then we have smart bombs that will hit those tanks and Indian soldiers who will attack Pakistan." "We have every kind of bullet. From small ones to big ones. We have everything. You [India] should come and see what happens," he said.

After talking of war and bombs, Sheikh Rashid shifted to peaceful overtones and suggested a "third way out" to ease the tensions between India and Pakistan pertaining to Jammu and Kashmir situation. He said, "Come to dialogues and solve the Kashmir issue. This is better for both countries."

Stirring up a new controversy, Sheikh Rashid said, "I will not open Samjhauta or Thar trains. I know these were being used for drug smuggling from both sides." Earlier, Pakistan had suspended Samjhauta Express and Thar Express services in the view of India's decision to abrogate Article 370 and bifurcate Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories.

On Pakistan closing the airspace, he said, "Closing airspace is cabinet's decision, not mine."
