Bollywood actress Urmila lambastes India over crackdown in occupied Kashmir

Urmila said that abrogation of Article 370 has been exercised in an inhuman manner.

MUMBAI (Dunya News) Bollywood former actress and Congress politician Urmila Matondkar lambasted the security crackdown by Indian troops in the occupied Kashmir due to which she could not communicate with her ailing in-laws.

Urmila took to the Twitter and expressed, “Govt.’s desperate attempts to show “rosy picture of normalcy” in JnK is beyond pathetic”. “With #370Scrapped and talks of bright future,till when is this torture of local people and leaders going to end? How is “sabka vishwas” ever possible like this?”, she added.

Govt.’s desperate attempts to show “rosy picture of normalcy”in JnK is beyond pathetic. With #370Scrapped and talks of bright future,till when is this torture of local people and leaders going to end? How is “sabka vishwas” ever possible like this??#KashmirStillUnderCurfew https://t.co/69AA8oJTst — Urmila Matondkar (@UrmilaMatondkar) August 24, 2019

Former actress expressed that owing to the commincations blackout in the occupied valley, her husband has been unable to contact his parents for last three weeks. She added that her in-laws are diabetic and high-blood pressure patients. "My father-in-law and mother-in-law stay there. Both are diabetic, have high blood pressure. Today is the 22nd day, neither me nor my husband have been able to speak to them. We have no clue if they have medicines available at home," said the actress.

The actress’ in-laws live in the IoK and are going through terrible conditions after the abrogation of Article 370, which revoked the valley’s special status.

Congress politican asserted that the abrogation of Article 370 has been exercised in an “inhuman manner”. The occupied Kashmir has been in severe lockdown since August 5 when India abrogated the Article 370 and 35-A to scrap the special status of the occupied Kashmir.

The occupation authorities have converted Kashmir valley into a military garrison by deploying hundreds of thousands of Indian troops and paramilitary personnel in every street, line and by-lane to stop people from staging demonstrations against the abrogation of the special status of the territory.

“It is easy to drape ourselves in our national flag and shout ‘Mera Bharat Mahaan’ and ‘Jai Ho’, but it is difficult to practice the values. Patriotism means what will bring the best out of every citizen,” she expressed.
