Development, environment can’t be mutually exclusive

Rahul Singh

Rahul Singh

The media here and abroad has been full of news and graphic pictures of raging fires in Brazil’s Amazon rainforests, labelled as "the lungs of the planet". These rainforests are equal to the size of our country, and produce 20 per cent of the entire world’s oxygen. Hence, their steady destruction is a matter of concern, not just for Brazil alone but for the world at large.

Brazil is led by an extreme right-wing, democratically-elected President, Jair Bolsonaro. He naturally feels what’s happening in his country is an internal matter, and like any leader of an independent, sovereign nation, resents foreign interference. The trouble is that issues like climate change, even threats of war between nations, have become of international concern. Massive deforestation due to unchecked fires in the Amazon affects the entire planet, and a possible conflict between India and Pakistan could easily escalate into a nuclear war, the fallout of which would be catastrophic not just to the two countries. President Bolsonaro has bristled at the criticism directed at him by the European Union, in particular by French President Emmanuel Macron who accused Bolsonaro of being "a liar". The allegation against Bolsonaro is that the fires have been lit up intentionally to clear forests for profitable ranching and raise more crops. Anyway, all this drew attention to one of the most vital debates of our time: The need to preserve our environment and its bio-diversity versus the demands of development.

I was recently at a discussion-cum-debate in Mumbai, organised by Bittu Sehgal’s wonderful magazine Sanctuary, which is devoted mainly to the preservation and well-being of our wildlife and all that goes with it. The subject of the debate was, ‘This house believes that India’s economic security is being undermined by biodiversity protection concerns’. Ranged on one side, for the motion, were three stalwarts of private industry: Entrepreneur Ajit Gulabchand, whose company built Mumbai’s iconic Sea Link, and senior executives from the Tata and Reliance groups, R. Mukundan and Rohit Bansal, respectively. On the other side, against the motion, were Sehgal himself, environmental activist Vandana Shiva and former United Nations Under-Secretary-General Nitin Desai.

Before the debate began, a show of hands from the audience demonstrated it was heavily in favour of the environmentalists. But when the vote was taken at the end, quite a few of the environmentalists had swung the other way. It got me thinking about the way the public mood has changed over the years. Not so long ago, almost everybody was for development at any cost. The environment lobby had yet to make its presence felt. There was little check on polluting industries, the utility of dams was not questioned, and deforestation was unchecked. Then came global warming, the rise in sea level threatening low-lying areas, air pollution, freak weather conditions, along with natural disasters. Remember Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the most destructive hurricane in recent times which devastated the US city of New Orleans, causing damage worth a mind-boggling $125 billion. The climate-change skeptics were silenced and environmentalists came into their own. The pendulum had swung the other way.

Middle ground

During the debate it became clear that the best way out is to have development, without which there cannot be progress, while taking environmental concerns into account. Ideally, one should not cancel out the other as had happened so often when development was given priority over the preservation of bio-diversity and ecology. Yet, I wonder what would have happened at the time of the Green Revolution in the 1960s, which ended famines in India and turned us from a country heavily dependent on the import of food grains from the US to a self-sufficient and food-exporting one. I suspect if the likes of Vandana Shiva had been around then, there would have been resistance to the path-breaking high-yielding varieties of rice, wheat and maize, which increased our food production multifold. Of course, the excessive use of fertilisers, pesticides and water have created its own set of problems. I am sure, though, that scientific advances will be able to take care of them in times to come.

Nevertheless, what the debate largely missed, and which was the elephant in the room, is the impact of population growth on the environment. I am convinced that it is the single most important factor destroying biodiversity and ecology. Somehow, the prominent environmentalists I have interacted with are in denial of this, even going to the extent of opposing modern methods of family planning that are widely accepted by the medical fraternity. The figures stare them in the face. The world’s population has now reached 7.7 billion. Though it has stopped growing at the rapid pace as before, it is still likely to be 11 billion by the end of the century. India’s population has more than tripled since its Independence. We still add around 20 million people (Australia’s population) every year, and they need to be fed and housed. More people means more land has to be cultivated to feed them, and levelled to house them. Hence the deforestation, which, in turn, takes a toll on wildlife and biodiversity. So, if you were to ask me what causes climate change and more carbon emissions, my answer has to be "more people", not just development.

The writer is a veteran journalist
