2 GNGC teachers suspended, college staff hold protest

Ludhiana: Two faculty members of Guru Nanak Girls College (GNGC), Model Town, have allegedly been served suspension orders on claims that they left the city to go to their homes in other cities without permission of the principal and college management. On Saturday afternoon, all the staff members of the college held a protest within the college premises in support of the two ‘suspended’ assistant professors — Neeraj Bansal (Physics) and Sonu Munjal (Commerce). These two teachers were reported to be commuting daily from Chandigarh and Phagwara, and as a result, they were not entitled to house rent allowance (HRA).

Besides these two, letters have been issued to 14 other teachers, as the subjects they teach will be discontinued from Panjab University this year. According to the reliable sources, it was revealed that the departments of History, Political Science, Sociology, and Punjabi would be discontinued shortly. The process for their discontinuation has already been initiated as per PU regulations. The reason stated for their discontinuation is the migration of students out of Punjab, resulting in low enrolments in the college.

Dawinderjeet Kaur, a teacher in the college, stated, “The management has cut the salaries of teachers by 40%, stating low enrolments in the college. We also have to look after our families, and it is unfair on their part to seek a 40% deduction in our salaries.”

Faculty members state the salaries of ad hoc staff have been reduced, and regular teaching staff are also not being paid their full salaries, as they refused to accept a proposal for reduction in their salaries. Some of the teachers have also revealed that the college planned to discontinue many departments, despite the fact that admissions in those departments have been fairly good. They allege that funds were being diverted to establish a new hospital on the campus, while the principal continues to be on extension for the past five years, and was pressing hard for another extension against the university rules.

Sonu Munjal said, “I declined to sign the letter mentioning reduction in the salary by 40%, after which I was served with suspension orders on allegations that I left the city to go home in Phagwara without permission from the authorities. I have been commuting daily from Phagwara, which is 45km away, for the past 19 years. Everyone in the college is aware about this, so why does this issue arise now?” Sonu had joined the college as an ad hoc teacher in 2000, and was regularised in 2004.

She added that according to a state government act, employees getting HRA are bound to live within 25km of the college vicinity. “When the college is not paying us HRA, then we are not bound to live within the city. I was not paid any HRA, and my commute has not affected my work. We tried contacting the president of the trust, but the principal is not allowing us to meet the authorities. Reduction of 40% salary punches a big hole in our pocket, and we will keep fighting against this injustice done to us.”

College president Gurbir Singh said, “The principal has suspended teachers under the Punjab Security Act, and the college management has initiated disciplinary proceedings against them. An inquiry was marked against two teachers who infringed various rules. The exact reason for their suspension will be given in the form of a chargesheet soon.”

According to the PU Act and Punjab government rules, whosoever lives out of station has to take permission of the principal before doing so, if they are taking HRA. College principal Charanjit Mahal said, “An inquiry committee will be formed, and if the teachers are found not to have flouted any rules, then they can be reinstated. However, their posts are not sanctioned by DPI, and the management pays for them from its pocket.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
