University College stabbing victim reveals this wasn't the first time SFI attacked him

University College stabbing victim reveals this wasn't the first time SFI attacked him

The stabbing victim, Akhil, said that he had complained about an earlier incident to the CPI(M), following which the SFI found reasons to fight with him.

news Crime

It’s been over a month since 20-year-old Akhil, a final-year undergraduate student at the Thiruvananthapuram University College was stabbed in the chest by members of the Student’s Federation of India (SFI), following which he had to undergo surgery. Still undergoing treatment, Akhil spoke to the media on Saturday for the first time following the incident on July 12.

“This is not the first time that the SFI unit members of the college attacked me,” says Akhil, who is also a member of the SFI, the student wing of the Communist Party of India (Marxist). Speaking to the media, Akhil said that the members of the unit had also attacked him during his second year at the Thiruvananthapuram University College following an argument.

“At the time, I had complained directly to the CPI(M) members about harassment from the unit members, much to the displeasure of the unit members. Following my complaint, they have always tried to find some or the other reason to fight with me,” Akhil added. He stated that there are several members of the SFI in college, but only unit members acted in an authoritarian manner.

The anger against the SFI unit of the college was visible on July 12 when the students of the college took out a protest march against the “dictatorial” rule of the unit in the campus following Akhil’s stabbing. Many students who had taken part in the protest were also members of the SFI.

The unit is led by Sivaranjith and Naseem, the main accused in the case. According to Akhil, they used to go on rounds around the campus and harass students for going against rules they set. “We are not allowed to sit on the desks. When we unknowingly do that, they will either come and abuse us or physically assault us. Even girls get abused,” says Akhil, who goes on to add that the CPI(M) has no idea about the acts committed by SFI on campus.
