‘There is only one way of solving Naxalism and that is ethical security and ethical governance’

Aarti Tikoo Singh has a Masters in International Affairs from New York’s Columbia University. Earlier, she worked as a news correspondent in the conflict-torn state of J&K for almost seven years. LESS ... MORE

In Chhattisgarh, security forces countering Maoists recently penetrated the hitherto inaccessible Abujhmad area. Aarti Tikoo Singh reached out to Chhattisgarh’s director general of police and chief of anti-Naxal operations, DM Awasthi, to understand the implications:

How did Maoism come to Chhattisgarh?

Naxalism started with Bengal and then went to Andhra Pradesh. That is why their whole leadership today is Telugu (speaking). When Chhattisgarh was part of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal was the capital and Bastar just a far off district, bordering Andhra and Odisha. This helped them geographically. Once there was pressure in Andhra, they started moving out and created MMC zone (Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh). Bastar was an easy and safe hideout for them. When they came there was no infrastructure to fight them. After the state was born in 2000 and we started putting pressure on them, they found a new zone – KKT (Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu). This is what happens when there are sustained operations.

Why is Naxalism such a strong force in Chhattisgarh?

In all our tribal areas, people are very poor and simple. They didn’t see government coming to their help. They saw government only as an exploiter, like a policeman or a forest officer hitting them, molesting their girls or looting their money. It all began with land reforms. Naxals promised revolution and protection. So it took root wherever there was no reach of the government and no help from the state for basic essentials of life – food, education, employment, healthcare, roads, etc. Naxals brainwashed the poor tribals, instilling a sense of insecurity and fear by projecting the government as evil out there to grab their resources. Nobody really wants to take up guns and fight in jungles. So if the government provides basics of life or even employment worth Rs 5,000, they will not go the Naxal way.

How difficult has it been to enter Abujhmad area?

It is believed that Abujhmad is a stronghold of Maoists and their top leaders. There is no police or any other state institution there, so it is a geographical haven and safe zone for them. As per our assessment, there are 200 cadres and 30 odd leaders, and the rest are tribals living under their control. Maoist terror activity happens in Sukma, Bijapur and Dantewada; Narayanpur and Abujhmad serve as their hideouts. Abujhmad is also where they train their cadre. There are two or three companies of their cadre for their own safety.

We had operated in all of their core areas no matter how difficult it was. But Abujhmad had been an exception until now. For the last three years, we had been trying to enter their deep core area and it is for the first time that we managed to conduct an operation. It was a training camp of company number 1, which is the first and the most important barricade of Maoists in Abujhmad. They have a four-tier security.

Currently, how strong are Maoists in Chhattisgarh?

In 2016, there were around 10,000 Maoists. As of today, around 1,000 cadre and 5,000 supporters. In 2019, we recovered 59 dead bodies, and perhaps killed more. Out of them, 38 were wanted leaders. But we do believe that Naxalism can’t be resolved only by killing. That is why we also insist on surrender and go for as many arrests as we can.

How soon will Chhattisgarh be free from Naxalism?

Insurgency cannot be time-framed. The government’s security approach is multi-pronged. With great conviction I can say that if we operate in a disciplined and decent manner, not engage in unlawful and illegal means, and if we continue and sustain these operations, the state will be free from Naxalism in a short time. But if at all anybody indulges in human rights violations, it will be difficult.

Salwa Judum (anti-Maoist militia) was a good strategy but it failed primarily because of human rights violations. Again, 2014, 2015 and 2016 were very bad too. But in the last three years, our record has improved drastically. With great difficulty, I stopped forces from indulging in nefarious activities such as exploitation – mostly molesting women and extrajudicial killings. That helped us; there has been not a single case of abuse this year so far.

The first thing the new government said was zero tolerance to human rights violations. The last government did not want rights abuse either but they overlooked it. This government is clear about it – which is good too. There is only one way of solving Naxalism and that is ethical security and ethical governance.

There is a view that only dialogue can solve conflict.

Our chief minister (Bhupesh Baghel) has said his government will talk to anyone. If Naxals really want peace, they should come forward. They want the poor to stay poor and be dependent on them.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
