Bank employees protest against decision of merger

Ludhiana: Bank employees have upped the ante to protest against the union government’s decision to merge ten nationalized banks including Punjab National Bank, Oriental Bank of Commerce and United Bank of India. The merger will leave 12 public sector banks in the country. Even as Union finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman has claimed that this step is for betterment of the banks and the staff, bank employees are an unconvinced lot.

Resisting the move, members of the United Forum of bank unions (UFBU) Ludhiana unit on Saturday protested against this decision. Naresh Gaur, convener of UFBU said, “We have been opposing merger of public sector banks as all the banks cannot work in the same way. Even after understanding the consequences the government wants to go ahead with the decision of merging big banks like Punjab National Bank, Oriental Bank of Commerce etc. This is not merger but cold blooded murder of these banks and their employees. In last fifty years, the nationalized banks have made a phenomenal contribution in building up a strong economy with a visible social orientation”

Gaur added, “About 8000 branches have become 90,000 bank branches today, out of which 40,000 branches are located in rural and semi-urban areas which were earlier neglected. Credit to priority sector has boosted our economy resulting in achievements like Green Revolution and White Revolution, Industrial Progress , Job generation, rural development. All of this is possible only due to public sector banks and the existence of these banks is now under danger due to this government which is downplaying the contribution of these banks, but we will not sit silent and oppose this move, yesterday’s protest was just a trailer we will do what it takes to make the government take back its decision”

Other prominent employee union leaders present on the occasion included Pawan Thakur, Ashok Arora, GS Mangat, JP Kalra, Iqbal Singh Malhi, Gurmeet Singh also expressed their anguish over the decision and said that at a time when India is facing a serious economic slowdown and downturn, the Public Sector Banks with their huge resources at their command can play a decisive role to revive the economy.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
