Delhi: Sikh community protests against forceful conversion of Sikh girl to Islam in Pakistan

Sikh community protesting in New Delhi | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Hundreds of members of Sikh community on Monday took to roads in New Delhi to protest against the forceful conversion of minorities in Pakistan. The protesting members are demanding the safety of Sikh families residing there. The protests have come in the wake of a case where a Sikh girl was allegedly abducted and converted to Islam in Pakistan.

The protesters have gathered outside the Pakistan High Commission in the national capital and calling out Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan to take action against the 'atrocities' being committed against the minorities in his country. They are protesting with black flags and slogans against the Pakistani government.

High drama outside the Pakistan High Commission in New Delhi. Black flags and slogans against @ImranKhanPTI raised by the Sikh protesters.



Details by TIMES NOW's Kangana. pic.twitter.com/lD6sNlrXlN — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) September 2, 2019

Earlier on Sunday, members of the Sikh community have submitted a memorandum to Prime Minister Narendra Modi requesting him to raise the issue of forceful conversion of Sikhs to Islam in Pakistan in the United Nations.

Last week, a video surfaced on social media where a 19-year-old Sikh girl was seen converting to Islam and marrying a Muslim man in Pakistan's Punjab province. The girl's family had claimed that she was abducted and forcefully converted to Islam, and demanded Imran Khan's intervention in the matter.

In the wake of it, Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh, Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) and Delhi MLA Manjinder Singh Sirsa have slammed the Pakistan Prime Minister for failing to address the issue.

According to latest reports, the girl has been sent to a shelter home in Lahore where Punjab Governor Chaudhary Muhammad Sarwar met her. Sarwar's requested her to return to her home but she refused, citing threat to her life.

The girl, who is the daughter of a Sikh priest, was on Friday sent to Darul Aman (shelter home) on a court order after she told the judge that she married Mohammad Hassan of her locality with her own free will.
