Over 4,500 booked under PSA in IOK since August 05

Srinagar, August 31, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, over 4,500 persons among total over 10,000 arrested have been booked under draconian law, Public Safety Act, since repeal of special status of the territory by the Indian government on 5th August. Those detained under PSA include Hurriyat leaders, political workers, traders, lawyers, social activists and youth. Principal Secretary of occupied Kashmir, Rohit Kansal, confirmed to media that over 4,500 people have been arrested under the PSA. The law allows the authorities to keep anyone under detention for up to two years without trial.

Some officials confirmed to media men that among those arrested under PSA are the All Parties Hurriyat Conference Chief Spokesman, Ghulam Ahmed Gulzar, High Court Bar Association President Mian Abdul Qayoom, trade leader Mubin Shah, and Indian Administrative Service officer-turned politician, Shah Faesal. The officials also said that many of those detained had been flown out of occupied Kashmir to various Indian jails because the prisons within the occupied territory had run out of capacity due to massive crackdown.

Meanwhile, the curfew and communication blackout continued in the valleys of Kashmir, Peer Panchal and Chenab on the 27th consecutive day, today. The Kashmir valley remains cut off from the rest of the world since August 05 due to continued blockade and suspension of internet, mobile and landline services and closure of TV channels. The printing of local newspapers remains suspended while schools shut. The people of the Kashmir valley are facing acute shortage of essential commodities including baby food and life-saving medicines.

A Delhi-based top cardiologist, Upendra Kaul, was summoned and interrogated by India’s infamous National Investigation Agency for his SMS exchanges with one of his patients and incarcerated Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front Chairman, Muhammad Yasin Malik, about blood test results, taking them amount of money. India’s Enforcement Directorate slapped Rs 62 lakh penalty on illegally detained Kashmiri businessman, Zahoor Ahmed Watali, in a false case registered against him.

In Birmingham, a large number of Kashmiris and their sympathizers expressed solidarity with the people of occupied Kashmir by participating in the ‘Free Kashmir March’ held outside Birmingham City Council House. Hundreds of people from all walks of life marched towards the Indian Consulate, Birmingham, raising slogans against the Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, and Indian forces’ personnel who are brutally killing innocent people in the occupied territory.

The members of Organisation of Kashmir Coalition, Professor Nazir Ahmed Shawl, Barrister Abdul Majeed Tramboo, Mohammed Saleem, Shaista Safi and Nazar Lodhi in a letter submitted to the office of British Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, drew his attention towards the Indian brutalities in occupied Kashmir. They urged that the Britain, as a permanent member of the UN Security Council, must impress upon India to end the blockade, withdraw troops and lift all restrictions on freedom of expression, assembly and right of association in the occupied territory.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
