NRC Lessons: The exercise led to more harassment than benefits and yet the result was an imperfect registry

Now that the final National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Assam has been published, three things need to be borne in mind. First, the exercise hasn’t been 100% perfect. In fact, hoping that it would be was silly in the first place. When you ask people to produce documents and legacy papers dating back 50 years, there are bound to discrepancies. So yes, many genuine citizens have been left out of the NRC for no fault of theirs. Stories have emerged of how half the members of the same family have made it to the NRC and the other half haven’t. The case of seven-year-old Somiara from Barpeta district exemplifies this point. She has been left out of the NRC while her own parents have made it. Similarly, AIUDF MLA Ananta Kumar Malo has been excluded from NRC while his daughter’s name has been included.

Second, Assamese groups and political parties are surprised about the overall small number of exclusions – 19 lakh. This number is likely to be pared further when appeals are filed in foreigners tribunals and anomalies are removed. A substantial number – around 4.4 lakh – didn’t even file claims after they were excluded from the draft NRC last year. This is most likely because a vast majority of them are poor people who had already gone through much financial pain to submit their proofs in the first round. Having exhausted their financial resources thereafter, they simply didn’t have the means to go through the process again. But that doesn’t mean they aren’t citizens.

The reason why Assamese groups are finding it difficult to digest the small number of exclusions is that they have been living in a cocoon. Over the years, they have vastly over-estimated the number of illegal migrants with all kinds of numbers being projected without any concrete proof. This is because the migration issue in Assam is at least a century old. Even around Independence in 1947, Assamese groups were protesting against the influx of Bengali migrants from what was then East Bengal. Over a period of time, concerns, memories and myths converged, leading to wild estimations and Bengali being conflated with Bangladeshi after 1971. But with the 1985 Assam Accord accepting 24th March 1971 as the cut-off date, all Bengali migrants from East Bengal and East Pakistan have to be accepted as citizens.

So Assamese groups would do well to rethink what they have believed for decades. Assam isn’t exclusively for Assamese. Bengalis are as much part of Assam’s society. Plus, Assamese groups are now trapped in their own rhetoric and split into two. One group still thinks all Bengalis in Assam are foreigners, while the other group thinks Bengali Muslims are the ones deserving of the foreigner tag. Both are wrong and unless Assamese groups realise that their assumptions have been off the mark, they will simply be going around in circles.

Lastly, consider the amount of resources that was devoted to the NRC exercise – one estimate puts it at Rs 12,000 crore. And what did we get at the end? An imperfect registry and lots of anxiety, fear and harassment. Is this the way Assam will prosper and realise its full potential? Will this further development in Assam? Will it boost the local economy? The answer is a big no. Worse, if this leads to social tension, Assam could again witness another round of turmoil and destruction. This must be avoided at all costs. It’s time to accept that NRC, given local circumstances and resources of the state, wasn’t a bright idea. The costs outweigh the benefits here. Assam has witnessed several periods of ethnic strife. It also saw a long period of Ulfa separatism. But the state slowly achieved normalcy in the previous decade and in the early part of this one. However, the NRC exercise threatens to shake things up once again. It must end here and all attention should be devoted to economic development of Assam with the aim of converting the state into a springboard for India’s Act East policy.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
