Brandishing guns, five robbers loot Rs 7 lakh from PNB branch

Police are now scanning CCTV footage of bank, nearby areas. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Five armed robbers loot Rs 7 lakh from PNB bank Robbers held staff and customers hostage at gunpoint Police are now scanning CCTV footage of bank, nearby areas

Punjab: In a brazen robbery carried out in broad daylight, five armed robbers looted Rs 7 lakh from a Punjab National Bank (PNB) branch in Phagwara town of Kapurthala district of Punjab.

The crime took place in PNB branch located at Hoshiyarpur Road on Tuesday. After entering the bank branch, the armed robbers threatened the staff and the customers at gunpoint and took away mobile phones of all the people present in the bank.

According to a report, the robbers then asked the bank employees to hand over all the cash. They also threatened the staff not to act smart or face dire consequences. Later, the robbers fled with the booty.

The robbers came in a white colour car. As the robbers left, the staff immediately called the police to inform about the robbery. Police are now scanning the CCTV footage of the bank and nearby areas.

Some other reports suggest that the robbers were not wearing masks when they barged into the bank.



Burglary takes place in Punjab National Bank in Trichy

In a similar incident in January this year, a burglary was reported from a Punjab National Bank's Trichy branch in Tamil Nadu. The robbers were successful in stealing items from five lockers amounting to crores of rupees. The branch, located at Samayapuram near the Chennai-Trichy highway, was closed over the weekend. The theft was discovered by bank staff on the next day when they returned from the Sunday holiday.

According to the police, the burglars entered the building by making a hole in one of the walls. The bank reportedly shares a wall with a private school. The burglars used a gas welding machine to make a hole in the wall and enter the premises.

Around 2,000 people have an account in the branch and nearly four kgs of gold and, cash was kept in the lockers. Only the branch manager and the assistant manager had the keys to the strongroom.

While the burglars disabled the alarm system with the help of a wire cutter, reportedly 500 sovereigns of gold along with cash have been stolen. It was also alleged that any employee may likely have had a hand in the robbery.
