Karnataka: Tension prevails in Ullal after activist’s arrest

MANGALURU: Tension prevailed on Monday in Ullal , after the Mangaluru city police denied permission to the Popular Front of India(PFI) from holding a protest against the arrest of activist Zakir Ullal.He was arrested on Sunday for sending hate messages on a social media group, said PS Harsha, city police commissioner, Mangaluru. He added that Zakir’s mobile phone was subjected to examination, and upon recovery of incriminating evidence, he was arrested. A case has been registered at the Ullal police station in this regard.According to police, the PFI were reportedly denied permission to hold the protest, as the region was celebrating Ganesh Chaturthi, and any protest could snowball into a law and order situation in the communally-sensitive area.When police denied permission to hold the protest, members of SDPI tried to continue the protest forcibly, and tension prevailed in the area. Police deployed additional forces to stop the protest from taking place.Ataullah Jokatte, district president, SDPI, who condemned the arrest of Zakir, said that he was dragged to jail like a criminal after being handcuffed, and alleged that there was a political conspiracy behind the arrest. “Police, who don’t take action against media outlets which spread communalism and terrorism, have reportedly booked a non-bailable case against Zakir, who criticised the Sangh Parivar on social media. Zakir was questioning atrocities happening in society. He was using his own social media account for the same. SDPI strongly condemns this action by the Mangaluru city police,” said Ataullah, in a press communique.Harsha clarified that the accused has confessed to the crime. “Police have recovered enough electronic evidence from him. There is no question of levelling allegations against the police in this regard. An investigation has revealed that the messages posted by the accused were inflammatory and communal in nature. We have booked him under IPC Section 153(A) (promoting enmity between different groups on the ground of religion, race, place of birth, residence and language), and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony. The police have seized enough evidence from Zakir’s phone in this regard.”
