DK Shivakumar arrest: ED takes Cong leader to Tughlak Road station, supporters pelt stones in Bengaluru

DK Shivakumar will be produced before a court in Delhi on Wednesday. (Photo: PTI)

Karnataka Congress leader DK Shivakumar has been arrested by Enforcement Directorate (ED) in New Delhi in connection with a money laundering case. The former cabinet minister and sitting MLA from Kanakapura seat appeared before the agency for the fourth time for questioning on Tuesday.

He was placed under arrest under provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), the officials said.

The Congress leader needs to be put through custodial interrogation and hence was arrested, they said.

Shivakumar will be produced before a court in Delhi on Wednesday by the Enforcement Directorate for seeking his custody, they said.

HERE ARE THE LATEST UPDATES ON DK SHIVAKUMAR'S ARREST:

11.20 pm: In absence of a lockup at the ED HQ, the probe agency will shift DK Shivkumar to Tughlak Road police station and will move him back to ED HQ in the morning.

11.17 pm: Congress workers protest against the arrest of DK Shivakumar by Enforcement Directorate (ED), near the Mahatma Gandhi statue in Bengaluru.

Karnataka: Congress workers protest against the arrest of DK Shivakumar by Enforcement Directorate (ED), near the Mahatma Gandhi statue in Bengaluru. pic.twitter.com/24oPHrlwTL ANI (@ANI) September 3, 2019

11.10 pm: Statement of AICC General Secretary KC Venugopal.

"The arrest of Shri DK Shivakumar is a clear case of political vendetta by the fascist BJP government at the centre. After Shri. Chidambaram, yet another leader facing vengeance for standing up against the horse-trading and petty politics of the BJP. By these actions, ED & CBI has proved to be the puppet agents of the Government at the Centre. A wrong trend has been set by the Modi Government to harass and hunt down the political opponents with fabricated allegations. Although there are well proved and explicit cases of black money transactions and money laundering during the political horse-trading in Karnataka by the BJP leaders, the central investigating agencies have not registered any cases against BJP leaders. D.K. Shivakumar, being the strong and obedient Congress leader in Karnataka, was always a target of the BJP. Although he unhesitatingly appeared for the questioning and cooperated with the investigations, the Enforcement Directorate is seemingly obeying the command from their masters. It is evident that the government is desperately trying to hide its outright failure in checking the economic slowdown and financial crisis with shameless harassment of political opponents. I strongly condemn this politics of vengeance and harassment."

10.55 pm: Shashi Tharoor says DK Shivakumar arrested for resisting BJP.

Can it be an accident that @DKShivakumar was the bulwark of tireless resistance to theBJP’s efforts to destabilise the Congress-led coalition government in Karnataka? While those politicians facing similar charges were not proceeded against once they joined theBJP? #SaveDemocracy https://t.co/YYAhQKEge5 Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) September 3, 2019

10.53 pm: Protests spread across Karnataka.

Congress protests at Gandhi statue, Maurya circle, Bengaluru

Protests in Ramanagara. Bengaluru Mysuru highway traffic blocked.

Protest in Kanakpura. Protestors damage 4 buses.

10.52 pm: DK Shivakumar likely to be kept at Lok Nayak Bhawan ED office overnight.

10.50 pm: Another bus damaged after supporters pelt stones in Kanakapura

10.49 pm: "We shall not be cowed down," says KPCC president Dinesh Gundu Rao.

With an intention to defame, blackmail and threaten, the Modi govt has launched this politically motivated attack on their opponents.



We stand with @DKShivakumar and will fight this Hitler raj of BJP with all our might.



We shall not be cowed down.#DKShivakumararrested Dinesh Gundu Rao / (@dineshgrao) September 3, 2019

10.48 pm: One Malavalli depot bus's front glass broken by protestors. Another vehicle damaged.

10.47 pm: DK Shivakumar supporters create ruckus in Bengaluru. Congress protesting at Gandhi statue, Maurya circle, Bengaluru.

10.43 pm: Randeep Surjewala terms DK Shivakumar's arrest a diversionary tactic.

GDP falls to 5%

=

Arrest Chidambaram!



Sensex & Crash

=

Arrest D.K.Shivakumar



English rulers- Divide and rule!

BJP’s Mantra - Mislead and Misrule! Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) September 3, 2019

10.40 pm: Karnataka Congress has called a statewide protest tomorrow, against the arrest of party leader DK Shivakumar.

10.38 pm: Protests in Karnataka's Ramanagara district over DK Shivakumar's arrest.

10:36 pm: DK Shivakumar will be questioned by the ED tonight. The questioning will take place at ED headquarters, Lok Nayak Bhawan in New Delhi. He was placed under arrest at 8:38 pm. He will be produced before the court for police custody tomorrow afternoon.

10:30 pm: Massive protest to take place in Bengaluru tomorrow at 11 am against BJP's central and state government for 'misusing IT, CBI, ED departments and unethically arresting Congress leader DK Shivakumar. The protest will be attended by all Congress, JD-S leaders and Shivakumar supporters.

10:22 pm: DK Shivakumar supporter cries and tears off his clothes outside RML Hospital where the leader has been taken for a medical test. Watch:

#WATCH Delhi: A supporter of Congress leader DK Shivakumar cries and tears off his clothes outside RML Hospital where the leader has been taken for medical tests. DK Shivakumar has been arrested by Enforcement Directorate under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA). pic.twitter.com/BHvgr8hNSF ANI (@ANI) September 3, 2019

10:17 pm: Deputy CM G Parameshwara tweets, "We have witnessed an absolute exploitation of power with the arrest of DK Shivakumar. DK Shivakumar has been arrested despite full co-operation from him for days. He is a victim of 'political vendetta'. We trust our judiciary and I am sure justice will be served."

We have witnessed an absolute exploitation of power with the arrest of @DKShivakumar.



Shri @DKShivakumar has been arrested despite full co-operation from him for days. He is a victim of 'political vendetta'.



We trust our judiciary and I am sure justice will be served. Dr. G Parameshwara (@DrParameshwara) September 3, 2019

10:13 pm: Karnataka CM Siddaramaiah tweets, "Opposition leaders are being targeted each and every day using central government agencies. It is just an attempt to divert the attention from structural failures of BJP government and also to prevent the voices of dissent. DK Shivakumar is also a victim of their vindictive politics. (sic)"

"DK Shivakumar will definitely come out clean and the whole country will understand the ulterior motives of BJP. We are all with him in these difficult times and shall provide him with full support (sic)," Siddaramaiah said in another tweet.

.@DKShivakumar will definitely come out clean & the whole country will understand the ulterior motives of @BJP4India. We are all with him in this difficult times & shall provide him with full support.



2/2 Siddaramaiah (@siddaramaiah) September 3, 2019

9.25 pm: DK Shivakumar has been taken for a medical test to Delhi's Ram Manohar Lohia hospital.

9.22 pm: "Yet another leader facing vengeance," says Congress leader KC Venugopal.

The arrest of @DKShivakumar is a clear case of political vendetta by the fascist government at the centre. After Shri.Chidambaram, yet another leader facing vengeance for standing up against the horse trading and petty politics of the @BJP4India. K C Venugopal (@kcvenugopalmp) September 3, 2019

9.20 pm: DK SHIVAKUMAR'S FIRST REACTION TO BEING ARRESTED.

"I congratulate my BJP friends for finally being successful in their mission of arresting me. The IT and ED cases against me are politically motivated and I am a victim of BJP's politics of vengeance and vendetta," DK Shivakumar wrote on Twitter.

I congratulate my BJP friends for finally being successful in their mission of arresting me.



The IT and ED cases against me are politically motivated and I am a victim of BJP's politics of vengeance and vendetta. DK Shivakumar (@DKShivakumar) September 3, 2019

9.15 pm: Ruckus outside the Enforcement Directorate (ED) office as supporters of Congress leader DK Shivakumar gather in large numbers.

Delhi: Ruckus outside the Enforcement Directorate (ED) office as supporters of Congress leader DK Shivakumar gather in large numbers. He has been arrested by the agency, under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA). pic.twitter.com/v7Kg7dm2IG ANI (@ANI) September 3, 2019

9.11 pm: DK Shivakumar's lawyers will move for bail tomorrow.

9.10 pm: Congress workers throng ED office.

Delhi: Supporters of Congress leader DK Shivakumar gather outside the Enforcement Directorate (ED) office. He has been arrested by the agency, under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA). pic.twitter.com/78k8ZyhrqH ANI (@ANI) September 3, 2019

9.07 pm: Senior Congress leader Veerappa Moily has issued a statement on DK Shivakumar's arrest. "Tax terrorism which led to [Cafe Coffee Day owner] VG Siddharth's death is happening again. DK is being treated as a criminal," he said.

9.05 pm: "We strongly condemn the high-handed tactics & vendetta politics," says Congress.

We strongly condemn the high-handed tactics & vendetta politics being deployed against Congress leaders. The arrest of Shri @DKShivakumar is yet another attempt by the govt to distract the public from their failed policies & the sorry state of the economy.#BJPVendettaPolitics Congress (@INCIndia) September 3, 2019

9.02 pm: Vindictive politics, claims HD Kumaraswamy. "Vindictive politics has become the order of the day. Opposition leaders are easy victims of power misuse. In public life, we need to be strong to face baseless allegations and conspiracies. I am sure DK Shivakumar is strong enough to face this vindictive agenda against him," he said.

Vindictive politics has become the order of the day. Opposition leaders are easy victims of power misuse. In public life, we need to be strong to face baseless allegations and conspiracies. I am sure Mr @DKShivakumar is strong enough to face this vindictive agenda against him. H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) September 2, 2019

9.00 pm: Many Congress leaders have reached the ED office. Those present include:

Bangalore Rural MP DK Suresh

Ex-Mandya JDS MP

Kunigal Congress MLA

Former Bangalore mayor

Congress MLA HK Patil

8.45 pm: Reacting on the arrest, Karti Chidambaram claimed that the ED was harassing Congress leaders.

"Gestapo at work! What else can the ED director do other than harassing Congress leaders!" Karti said in his tweet. Karti's father and former UPA minister P Chidambaram was arrested by the CBI on August 21 in INX Media case.

The ED had in September last year registered the money laundering case against Shivakumar, Haumanthaiah, an employee at Karnataka Bhavan in New Delhi, and others.

It was based on a charge sheet (prosecution complaint) filed by the Income-Tax Department against Shivakumar last year before a special court in Bengaluru on charges of alleged tax evasion and hawala transactions worth crores.

The I-T department has accused Shivakumar and his associate SK Sharma of transporting a huge amount of unaccounted cash on a regular basis through 'hawala' channels with help of three other accused.

(inputs from Nagarjun Dwarkanath, Nolan Pinto in Bengaluru; Munish Chandra Pandey in New Delhi)
