DK Shivakumar arrest: Congress blames BJP, says using agencies to target Opposition

Karnataka Congress leader DK Shivakumar has been arrested on Tuesday by the Enforcement Directorate (ED) in New Delhi in connection with a money laundering case.

DK Shivakumar is the former cabinet minister and sitting MLA from Kanakapura. He will be produced before a court in New Delhi on Wednesday by the Enforcement Directorate for seeking his custody, the officials said.

While the supporters of DK Shivakumar created ruckus outside the ED office, the Congress leaders have blamed the Bharatiya Janata Party for Shivakumar's arrest.

The Congress, on its Twitter handle, condemned the "vendetta politcs" against its party leaders. The tweet said, "We strongly condemn the high-handed tactics & vendetta politics being deployed against Congress leaders. The arrest of Shri @ DKShivakumar is yet another attempt by the govt to distract the public from their failed policies & the sorry state of the economy."

We strongly condemn the high-handed tactics & vendetta politics being deployed against Congress leaders. The arrest of Shri @DKShivakumar is yet another attempt by the govt to distract the public from their failed policies & the sorry state of the economy.#BJPVendettaPolitics Congress (@INCIndia) September 3, 2019

The ED's move to arrest DK Shivakumar came days after former Finance Minister P Chidambaram was arrested in connection with alleged money laundering in INX Media case.

Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala also tweeted on the arrest of DK Shivakumar. In his tweet, he presented an analogy between the British rule and the BJP's alleged course of action. He said that the BJP’s mantra is 'Mislead and Misrule!'.

GDP falls to 5%

=

Arrest Chidambaram!



Sensex & Crash

=

Arrest D.K.Shivakumar



English rulers- Divide and rule!

BJP’s Mantra - Mislead and Misrule! Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) September 3, 2019

Congress leader KC Venugopal, in a tweet, called Shivakumar's arrest "a clear case of political vendetta by the fascist government at the Centre."

"After Shri.Chidambaram, yet another leader facing vengeance for standing up against the horse trading and petty politics of the @BJP4India," KC Venugopal tweeted.

The arrest of @DKShivakumar is a clear case of political vendetta by the fascist government at the centre. After Shri.Chidambaram, yet another leader facing vengeance for standing up against the horse trading and petty politics of the @BJP4India. K C Venugopal (@kcvenugopalmp) September 3, 2019

Blaming the BJP for using investigation agencies for its own interest, Former Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy tweeted, "After days of interrogation, without allowing even a day's break for the festival, ED now cites non-cooperation to arrest @DKShivakumar. The ruling govt is using investigation agencies to oppress those opposition leaders who they think are a threat to their interests."

After days of interrogation, without allowing even a day's break for the festival, ED now cites non-cooperation to arrest @DKShivakumar. The ruling govt is using investigation agencies to oppress those opposition leaders who they think are a threat to their interests. H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) September 3, 2019

HD Kumaraswamy also claimed the politics today as "vindictive". "Vindictive politics has become the order of the day. Opposition leaders are easy victims of power misuse. In public life, we need to be strong to face baseless allegations and conspiracies. I am sure DK Shivakumar is strong enough to face this vindictive agenda against him," he said.

Vindictive politics has become the order of the day. Opposition leaders are easy victims of power misuse. In public life, we need to be strong to face baseless allegations and conspiracies. I am sure Mr @DKShivakumar is strong enough to face this vindictive agenda against him. H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) September 2, 2019

Reacting on the arrest, Karti Chidambaram accused the ED of harassing the Congress leaders. "Gestapo at work! What else can the ED director do other than harassing Congress leaders!" Karti said in his tweet.

Senior Congress leader Veerappa Moily also issued a statement on DK Shivakumar's arrest saying, "Tax terrorism which led to [Cafe Coffee Day owner] VG Siddharth's death is happening again. DK is being treated as a criminal."

While speaking to India Today TV, Congress spokesperson Brijesh Kalappa said, "Today, we are living in a police state... we can all be arrested by the BJP government."

Congress spokesperson @brijeshkalappa cries foul over the arrest of #DKShivakumar, says today we are living in a police state... we can all be arrested by the BJP govt.#NewsToday

Live https://t.co/4fqxBWbTYl pic.twitter.com/dcJHLm3kO5 India Today (@IndiaToday) September 3, 2019

Congress leader Shashi Tharoor said that DK Shivakumar was resistance to "the BJP’s efforts to destabilise the Congress-led coalition government in Karnataka."

Tharoor tweeted, "Can it be an accident that @ DKShivakumar was the bulwark of tireless resistance to the BJP’s efforts to destabilise the Congress-led coalition government in Karnataka? While those politicians facing similar charges were not proceeded against once they joined theBJP? # SaveDemocracy."

Can it be an accident that @DKShivakumar was the bulwark of tireless resistance to theBJP’s efforts to destabilise the Congress-led coalition government in Karnataka? While those politicians facing similar charges were not proceeded against once they joined theBJP? #SaveDemocracy https://t.co/YYAhQKEge5 Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) September 3, 2019

President of Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee Dinesh Gundu Rao called DK Shivakumar's arrest a BJP's attack to 'defame, blackmail and threaten' its opponent.

In a tweet, Dinesh Gundu Rao said, "With an intention to defame, blackmail and threaten, the Modi govt has launched this politically motivated attack on their opponents. We stand with @ DKShivakumar and will fight this Hitler raj of BJP with all our might. We shall not be cowed down. # DKShivakumararrested."

With an intention to defame, blackmail and threaten, the Modi govt has launched this politically motivated attack on their opponents.



We stand with @DKShivakumar and will fight this Hitler raj of BJP with all our might.



We shall not be cowed down.#DKShivakumararrested Dinesh Gundu Rao / (@dineshgrao) September 3, 2019

Many Congress leaders including Bangalore Rural MP DK Suresh, Ex-Mandya JDS MP, Kunigal Congress MLA, Former Bangalore mayor and Congress MLA HK Patil have reached the ED office.

Delhi: Supporters of Congress leader DK Shivakumar gather outside the Enforcement Directorate (ED) office. He has been arrested by the agency, under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA). pic.twitter.com/78k8ZyhrqH ANI (@ANI) September 3, 2019

The ED had in September last year registered the money laundering case against Shivakumar, Haumanthaiah, an employee at Karnataka Bhavan in New Delhi, and others.

It was based on a charge sheet (prosecution complaint) filed by the Income-Tax Department against Shivakumar last year before a special court in Bengaluru on charges of alleged tax evasion and hawala transactions worth crores.
