Another setback to Congress, DK Shivakumar arrested by Enforcement Directorate

Congress

DK Shivakumar

Enforcement Directorate

money laundering

ED

Karnataka

I congratulate my BJP friends for finally being successful in their mission of arresting me. The IT and ED cases… https://t.co/h64c1tq4CW — DK Shivakumar (@DKShivakumar) 1567525518000

I appeal to my party cadre, supporters and well-wishers to not be disheartened as I have done nothing illegal. I… https://t.co/2bCrUIAEeU — DK Shivakumar (@DKShivakumar) 1567525660000

Income Tax

Despite full cooperation in investigation @DKShivakumar is arrested by ED. This is political vendetta & High hande… https://t.co/nM9fK5e7ut — Karnataka Congress (@INCKarnataka) 1567526268000

P Chidambaram

In a major setback to theparty,was arrested by theon Tuesday evening in connection with acase.The development comes after he appeared before the Enforcement Directorate () for the fourth time. Last week, theHigh Court dismissed his petition challenging the December 2018 summons issued to him.Minutes after his arrest, he stated in a tweet, "I congratulate my BJP friends for finally being successful in their mission of arresting me. The IT and ED cases against me are politically motivated and I am a victim of BJP's politics of vengeance and vendetta."The leader said that he has done nothing "illegal" and that he will emerge victorious both legally and politically."I appeal to my party cadre, supporters and well-wishers to not be disheartened as I have done nothing illegal. I have full faith in God & in our country's Judiciary and am very confident that I will emerge victorious both legally and politically against this vendetta politics," he said in another tweet.The 57-year-old leader first appeared before the ED on August 30, August 31 and then on September 2 and September 3.Shivakumar was arrested on charges of money laundering. According to reports, he was evasive and non-cooperative during questioning by the agency.Shivakumar has been on the radar of theDepartment and the ED since demonetisation in 2016. The Congress leader is likely to be produced before the court on Wednesday by the ED for seeking his custody.Reacting to the development, Karnataka Pradesh Mahila Congress (KPCC) said that the arrest of Shivakumar shows the desperation of Shah and Modi. "When he has been cooperating with the investigation for the last four days why arrest him now ? Vendetta politics by the BJP. All of us in the Congress party stand by #DKShivkumar," KPCC tweeted.Earlier, Shivakumar had said that he has not done anything wrong and will fully cooperate with the investigating agency, and that IT raid on him was politically motivated for hosting Gujarat Congress MLAs.Several Congress workers on Tuesday gathered in large numbers outside the Enforcement Directorate's (ED) office after the agency arrested Shivakumar. The supporters created ruckus outside the office and raised slogans. They also detested the officials to take away the leader. The police, however, dispersed the crowd and gave way to the car with Shivakumar inside it.Shivakumar is the second Congress leader to be taken into custody after former Finance MinisterOn Monday, in a veiled attack against the government, former Karnataka chief minister HD Kumaraswamy said that DK Shivakumar is strong enough to face this vindictive agenda against him.Randeep Singh Surjewala has also hit out at the Centre and called the investigation a 'highhanded tactics and illegal processes.'In 2017, the tax sleuths had conducted raids on the premises of Shivakumar in Bengaluru, Kanakapura and New Delhi which reportedly led to the seizure of unaccounted cash worth Rs 8.59 crore.
