Environmental activist writes to PM Modi seeking intervention to save Aarey forest

An environmental activist and advocate Godfrey Pimenta of the Watchdog Foundation has written a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi seeking intervention to save the Aarey forest in Mumbai.

The letter read, "Keeping in mind the vision of Hon'ble Prime Minister 'Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas' we take this liberty of approaching your good self in a hope that some amicable workable solution to safeguard Aarey Milk Colony, Mumbai, would be taken in the national interest."

After the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) cleared the proposal for felling of over 2,000 trees in Aarey jungles, the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Limited (MMRCL) has the necessary clearance to make the car shed for the Mumbai Metro 4 project.

Talking to India Today TV Godfrey Pimenta said, "Majority of Mumbaikars are against this move of cutting down trees. Now even prominent citizens have also started airing their views. This is going to be a big election issue and whichever party ignores this issue will pay the price for playing with the environment."

The environmental activist further wrote, "The Aarey's beauty and serenity has no parallels amongst the nature lovers. The fact that many unknown species of reptiles, inspects and birds have found their home in Aarey speaks volumes of its precious flora and fauna. The Aarey milk colony is home to the first ground-dwelling gecko discovered in the last 130 years in India, according to a recent research. The species has been named Cyrtodactylus Varadgirii to honour the contributions of taxonomist Dr Varad B Giri, post-doctoral fellow from the National Centre for Biological Sciences (NCBS), Bangalore."

When India Today asked him that the MMRCL had already committed to plant thrice the number of trees uprooted, he said that the MMRCL have no expertise in planting trees and that many trees planted by MMRCL are in dying condition.

In the letter he further wrote, "Under Article 48A of the Directive Principles of State Policy, the state shall endeavor to protect and improve the environment and safeguard the forests and wild life of the country. In addition, under 51A (g) of the Fundamental Duties of India it shall be the duty of every citizen to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures."

"Out of 36 districts in the state, Mumbai has dismal record of tree plantation target as well as achievement. The already existing tree cover in Sanjay Gandhi National Park, Aarey Milk Colony and Mangrove areas are under severe threat from indiscriminate development, Metro car shed, cable car project, rail corridor, East-West road connectivity through SGNP and cases of destruction of mangroves. For the said projects many trees have already been cut or are in the process of being cut. As such, the need of the hour for the city of Mumbai is to plant more and more trees under the state government's target of 50 crore plantation program intended to increase the forest cover in the state from the current 20 per cent to the nationally mandated 33 per cent of Maharashtra's land area," it said.

The letter also said, "Aarey Colony which is home to a rich biodiversity, has been proposed to also accommodate a Metro car shed, theme park, zoo and R&R of displaced adivasis of Sanjay Gandhi National Park. Environmentalists, resident associations and many others have voiced their serious objections to the proposal to allow the above developments in Aarey. The RDDP had dropped the opening up of Aarey land for institutional use and other developmental uses that were recommended by EDDP in search of new growth centers. The Metro car shed proposed within Aarey (34.41 Ha) was retained with an alternate site at Royal Palms (89.32 Ha), kept reserved for Metro car shed?"

"The Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) reservation was meant to rehabilitate the adivasipadas from Sanjay Gandhi National Park. Specific suggestions were received from NGOs and members of the public for changing the zone of Aarey from NDZ to NA, by reasoning that Aarey serves as lungs for the city and it also serves as buffer zone for the Sanjay Gandhi National Park and therefore must be kept free from any human intervention. The recent notification from Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC), u/no. S.O. 3645(E) dated 5th December 2016 has notified an area to an extent of 100 meters to four kilometers from the boundary of Sanjay Gandhi National Park as the Sanjay Gandhi National Park Eco-Sensitive Zone," it added.

The activist also asserted that the various political parties that voted against the proposal are now realising the public mood and hence changing their stance. He also maintains that the activists will continue their protests to save the green cover of Mumbai.

He said the public opinion matters and we will continue this effort for Mumbai.
