Merger of Andhra Bank evokes widespread resentment

Political masters should not erase the hallowed name: Centre for Policy Studies Director

The merger of Andhra Bank with the Union Bank of India has evoked widespread resentment among people of both the Telugu-speaking States.

Even as the bank officials are tight-lipped on the development as it could be viewed as going against the government, others have made no secret of their displeasure over the proposed dissolution of the 97-year-old bank, which has become synonymous with Telugu identity.

“Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, former president of the Indian National Congress, founded Andhra Bank, the first commercial bank in Andhra Desa, in 1923, overcoming the stiff opposition from the Imperial Bank managers— Mr. Gordon at the local level and Mr. Lamb at the headquarters in Madras,” says A. Prasanna Kumar, Director of the Centre for Policy Studies.

Rich history

For Pattabhi, it was also a part of the freedom struggle as a separate bank for the Andhras would be an epitome of economic independence. Such was Pattabhi’s dynamism that he set up an Andhra Bank counter at the historic Congress session at Cocanada (Kakinada) in 1923. A Congress leader sarcastically asked Pattabhi the reason for putting up an Andhra Bank counter at the Congress session.

“To protect leaders like you from pick pockets. Keep your money in the bank and it will be in safe custody” replied the founder of the bank.

The Andhra Bank made rapid strides and in less than three years and declared a dividend of 12%, thanks to the business acumen of its founder.

“The roots of Andhra Bank lie in the history and in the Andhra spirit of service and sacrifice which had captivated Mahatma Gandhi. Corporate market culture cannot corrode it and political masters should not erase the hallowed name,” avers Prof. Prasanna Kumar.

‘A blow to Telugu people’

Meanwhile, the CPI (M) activists staged protests across the district against the merger of Andhra Bank. Party’s district secretary K. Lokanadham described the move as ‘a blow to the self-respect of Telugu people.’
