ED arrests Karnataka leader DK Shivakumar, Congress protests; agency to present him in court today

DK Shivakumar was arrested after he appeared before tED for questioning for the fourth time on Tuesday. (PTI file photo)

The Enforcement Directorate has arrested Congress leader DK Shivakumar in an alleged money laundering case.

The former cabinet minister and sitting MLA from Kanakapura seat was arrested after he appeared before the central probe agency for questioning for the fourth time on Tuesday at its headquarters in Khan Market.

Sources in the investigating agency told India Today TV that the former Karnataka minister was not cooperating with the investigation which led to his arrest under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act.

The arrest of Shivakumar is a huge setback for the Congress especially with the former finance minister P Chidambaram also in CBI custody.

The ED is expected to produce DK Shivakumar before the designated court at around 3 pm on Wednesday.

DK Shivakumar is presently at the Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital in New Delhi where he is being attened to by doctors who are trying to control his blood pressure and sugar levels.

Earlier, sources had indicated that he will have to spend the night inside the lock-up at the Tughlak Road police station. Sources had said since the ED doesn’t have its own lock-up, the Congress leader will have to spend the night in police lock-up.

After being arrested by the ED, the Congress troubleshooter was taken to the RML hospital for his medical check-up which is mandatory before producing before the court.

READ | DK Shivakumar arrest: Congress blames BJP, says using agencies to target Opposition

DK Shivakumar will be brought to ED Headquarter at Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market in New Delhi on Wednesday morning for further questioning.

On being asked on what prompted the arrested, a senior official of ED told India Today that, DK Shivakumar was not cooperating with the investigation and at 8:38 pm, we placed him under arrest.

Congress protests in Delhi, Bengaluru

Hundreds of supporters of DK Shivakumar gathered outside the ED office at Lok Nayak Bhawan in Khan Market against the arrest made by the financial probe agency.

The protestors also made their way to the RML hospital.

Meanwhile, in Karnataka, Congress workers protested in several places -- from the Mahatma Gandhi statue at Bengaluru's Maurya Circle to Shivakumar's constituency Ramangara.

Karnataka: Congress workers protest against the arrest of DK Shivakumar by Enforcement Directorate (ED), near the Mahatma Gandhi statue in Bengaluru. pic.twitter.com/24oPHrlwTL ANI (@ANI) September 3, 2019

Protests escalated in Kanakapura as the agitators pelted stones and damaged many state buses.

The Karnataka Congress has called a state-wide protest on Wednesday.

Shivakumar congratulates BJP on arrest

Soon after his arrest, tweets put out from his handle termed the cases against him as politically motivated as they took a dig at "BJP friends" for being "successful in their mission of arresting" him.

"I congratulate my BJP friends for finally being successful in their mission of arresting me. The IT and ED cases against me are politically motivated and I am a victim of BJP's politics of vengeance and vendetta," the tweets said.

I congratulate my BJP friends for finally being successful in their mission of arresting me.



The IT and ED cases against me are politically motivated and I am a victim of BJP's politics of vengeance and vendetta. DK Shivakumar (@DKShivakumar) September 3, 2019

Shivakumar also told his party supporters to remain calm and not get disheartened.

Congress calls arrest vendetta politics

The arrest of senior Congress leader DK Shivakumar by the ED came in for condemnation from opposition leaders in Karnataka on Tuesday with former chief

ministers Siddaramaiah and HD Kumaraswamy and accusing the BJP of using central agencies to "oppress voices of dissent".

Congress leaders accused the government of "fabricating its political opponents in false cases to divert people's attention from its massive failures" and said it had resorted to "high-handed tactics" in arresting party leader DK Shivakumar in a money laundering case.

READ | DK Shivakumar congratulates BJP for arresting him, alleges vendetta politics

Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala also slammed the BJP government and described the arrest of party leader as a "diversionary tactic" from the real issues.

An economic emergency is prevailing in the country.



In an attempt to draw away attention from their own misdeeds, the BJP Govt is taking false actions against @INCIndia leaders.



Illegal arrest of Shri D.K. Shivakumar is one more such instance.#BJPVendettaPolitics pic.twitter.com/DYOrESOTub Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) September 3, 2019

"India's economy is in the doldrums. The rupee has become the worst-performing currency. The grievous economic emergency is prevailing in this country," he said.

Karti Chidambaram said that Congress leaders who are critical to the structure of the party are being targeted by the government through central agencies.

Case against DK Shivakumar

Shivakumar was being interrogated by the ED for the past four days at their Delhi headquarters.

Before joining the investigation, the Karnataka leader told the media that he is a law-abiding citizen and that he was unaware of why he was summoned by the agency.

He further said, I have not done anything wrong. I will answer them.

The probe agency maintained that DK Shivakumar was summoned on January 2019 and was again asked to join the investigation on February 2019.

In August, when he was again summoned to appear before the agency, Shivakumar moved the Karnataka High Court. However, when no relief was granted, he joined the investigation on August 30.

The financial probe agency started its investigation last year in September based on a chargesheet filed by Income Tax department against DK Shivakumar, Haumanthaiah, who is a close associate and employee at Karnataka Bhavan in New Delhi, and others.

According to sources, the Income Tax department during their investigation came across cross-border hawala transaction along with a network of people and premises across Delhi and Bengaluru to transport and utilise unaccounted cash.

It has been also alleged that DK Shivakumar and his daughter had travelled to Singapore for financial investment in July 2017. The IT department claimed that during the investigation, they had detected unaccounted wealth of Rs 429 crore linked to the Congress troubleshooter.

DK Shivakumar was raided by the Income Tax department in 2017. According to investigative agencies, unaccounted cash of Rs 8.5 crore was found and seized during raids in four premises of Delhi which are directly linked to Shivakumar. The IT department also came across three flats purchased in Safdarjung Enclave allegedly associated with Shivakumar.

(with inputs from Nolan Pinto and Nagarjun Dwarkanath in Bengaluru)
