India protests: Protests at India Commission in London - why are people protesting?

G7: Issues between India and Pakistan are bilateral says Modi

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Thousands of protesters descended on the India high Commission today as they demonstrated against the Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Protesters started from Parliament Square to the building in Aldwych, expressing solidarity with the people of India-occupied Kashmir. More than 5,000 people turned out as the Indian-imposed lockdown of Kashmir enters its 30th day.

Why are people protesting at the India High Commission? Protesters at the rally turned out against the decision of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi to impose a crippling lockdown on India-occupied Kashmir. The Indian government erased the special status of Kashmir in August and has effectively kept the Muslim-majority region under house arrest since then. Nearly four million people were left without freedom of movement and left in a communications battle, leading many people to claim this is a direct infringement of their human rights. READ MORE: Narendra Modi vs Imran Khan: What will happen to Kashmir?

India protests: Protests break out at India Commission in London - why are people protesting?

India-administered Kashmir was formerly semi-autonomous with its special status, as no law enacted in the Parliament of India would extend to the region. With the exception of foreign policy, defence and communication, any laws would require separate ratification from the state legislature of Jammu and Kashmir. Mr Modi’s decision to revoke Article 370 of the Constitution of India means the state is now under the control of the Indian government. The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act - passed by the Parliament of India - will come into effect on October 31, and divide Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories. READ MORE: Pakistan-India CRISIS: Imran Khan rules out talks with Modi

Protesters in Aldwych

Under the new act, the Indian government would create the new union territories of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh. According to Narendra Modi, the new territories would become a “big inspiration for India’s growth journey, comfort, progress and peace.” The Prime Minister said: We do not believe in creating problems or prolonging them. “In less than 70 days of the new government, Article 370 has become history.” READ MORE: India vs Pakistan: Warning ‘world is in danger’ over nuclear weapons

Protesters face off with police at the India High Commission

“And in both houses of parliament, two-thirds of the members supported this step. “Jammu-Kashmir and Ladakh will become a big inspiration for India’s growth journey, comfort, progress and peace.” Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan has asked for international intervention for the Muslim community in Jammu and Kashmir. He said: ”I want to warn the international community if it allows this to happen, it will have severe repercussions and reactions in the Muslim world setting off radicalisation and cycles of violence.”

Jammu and Kashmir could be split into two separate territories

Labour MP Liam Byrne who led the march yesterday said: “You can try and silence a Parliament but you cannot try and silence a people. “We will continue to protest on the streets of our cities and at the UN until we have delivered justice for the people of Kashmir. “This idea this is a bilateral negotiation is now dead. “It is time for a multilateral solution now.”
