News Nation Morning Wrap: Chandrayaan 2 Gets Closer, PM In Russia & Other Big Stories Today

New Delhi:

India's Chandrayaan-2 mission has moved one step closer to the moon with another successful manoeuvre. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has arrived in Russia for a two-day visit. Here's a look at these and all other big stories of Wednesday, Septermber 4.

Second De-Orbit Manoeuvre For Vikram Lander Of Chandrayaan-2 Completed

Indian Space Research Organization’s (ISRO) ambitious Chandrayaan-2 mission is one step closer to the moon. The second de-orbiting manoeuvre for spacecraft's lunar lander 'Vikram' was successfully performed Wednesday early morning. Chandrayaan-2 spacecraft was launched on July 22, 2019 from Satish Dhawan Space Centre at Sriharikota. It is expected to land on the lunar surface on Sepetember 7. READ MORE...

PM Modi Arrives In Russia, To Meet President Putin Today

Prime Minister Narendra Modi arrived in Russia on Wednesday on a two-day visit. He will hold summit talks with President Vladimir Putin and attend the Eastern Economic Forum there. His visit to the Russian Far East Region is the first by an Indian prime minister. He will attend the 5th Eastern Economic Forum as the chief guest at the invitation of President Putin. He will also hold the 20th India-Russia Annual Summit with Putin. READ MORE...

Congress Leader DK Shivakumar Arrested, Protest In Karnataka Today

The Enforcement Directorate (ED) on Tuesday arrested Karnataka Congress leader DK Shivakumar in connection with a money laundering case. Earlier in the day, he was questioned by the agency for the fifth straight day in Delhi. Shivakumar has been placed under arrest under provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA). Karnataka Congress has called a statewide protest on Wednesday, against the arrest of party leader DK Shivakumar by Enforcement Directorate. READ MORE...

Communication Restrictions In Kashmir To Be Lifted In 15 Days: Amit Shah

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Tuesday told a delegation from Jammu and Kashmir that the communication clampdown in the Valley will be lifted in 15 days. Shah also announced Rs 2 lakh insurance for all panchs and sarpanchs. Shah and its working president JP Nadda also met former Jammu and Kashmir governor Jagmohan as part of the party's outreach to leading members of the society over the Centre's move to revoke provisions of Article 370. READ MORE...

Boris Johnson Loses Major Vote On Brexit, 'Threatens' Snap Elections

British Prime Minister Boris Johnson on Tuesday lost his first major vote in Parliament on Brexit as rebel MPs from his own Conservative Party sided with the Opposition to take control of the House of Commons business, which could delay Brexit and force snap elections. In a vote that went against Johnson 328 votes to 301, the Commons got through a crucial motion that demands a debate on seeking a further extension from the European Union (EU) to the October 31 Brexit deadline if no withdrawal agreement is in place by mid-October. READ MORE...

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
