UK: Pak-backed protestors vandalise Indian High Commission; New Delhi to call on London

The Pakistani diaspora along with Khalistanis launched a massive protest outside the Indian High Commission in London on Tuesday and broke a window pane drawing widespread condemnation.

The Indian mission in a tweet said, "Another violent protest outside the Indian High Commission in London today, 3 September 2019. Damage caused to the premises."

London Mayor Sadiq Khan reacted to the incident. He said, "I utterly condemn this unacceptable behaviour and have raised this incident with Metropolitan Police to take action."

I utterly condemn this unacceptable behaviour and have raised this incident with @metpoliceuk to take action. — Sadiq Khan (@SadiqKhan) September 3, 2019

New Delhi is expected to take up the matter with London, which was announced by Pakistani Foreign Minister SM Qureshi from the National Assembly. The demonstrators were protesting the revocation of special status for the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K).

This is the second major incident of protest outside the Indian mission in less than a month. The Pakistani diaspora had launched a violent protest on August 15, the Independence Day in India, outside the mission leaving many members of Indian community stranded inside. Four people were arrested by the Metropolitan Police Service (MPS) at the time.

The second incident came on the day when British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab "deplored" the violent protest on 15th August.

"Any violence is deplorable. It should not be conducted in this country or anywhere else for that matter. What we now need to do is to reduce those tensions, also on positive sides build-up, confidence-building measures to allow proper between not only communities in Kashmir but also India and Pakistan", Raab said in the British Parliament in response to a question.

Last week, ahead of the meet on the sidelines of the G7 summit, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi had spoken to British Prime Minister Boris Johnson and raised the issue of violent protests that took place outside the Indian Mission.

An Indian government readout said that Prime Minister Modi "drew attention to the challenges posed by vested interests pursuing their motivated agenda, including by violent means."

Adding, "In this context, he referred to the violence and vandalism perpetrated by a large mob against the High Commission of India in London on the last Independence Day of India."

The British Prime Minister has regretted the incident and assured the safety of the Indian mission.

The readout said, Prime Minister Johnson "assured that all necessary steps would be taken to ensure safety and security of the High Commission, its personnel and visitors."

India had taken up with the United Kingdom the violent protests which took place outside the Indian high commission on Independence day and conveyed its concerns on how the security of the mission was undermined.
