Take the bull by its horns, Tajpur Rd traders ask MC

Ludhiana: Fed up of stray cattle menace, Tajpur Road Market Association started an indefinite hunger strike on Tuesday to draw attention to the rampant problem.As two traders sat on relay hunger strike on Day One, the association said the protest would continue till the city was rid of the menace.The authorities were blind to the issue even as motorists were dying due to strays, said Jagdeep Singh, one of the traders on fast. “The problem is more pronounced in our area as owners of dairy complexes let loose their cattle on roads. The authorities should find a permanent solution to the problem,” the Tajpur Road resident added.Another resident Rakesh Kumar said, “The menace has caused many an accident, including fatal ones. Our protest aims at spurring authorities into action.”SAD leader Balwinder Singh, whose wife is ward 17 councillor, said, “Recently, MLA (East) Sanjay Talwar had claimed that the management of a cowshed on Tibba Road had been roped in to lift stray cattle from roads. But till date, it has lifted not a single stray.”Offering to chip in, he added, “If the municipal corporation agrees to give us 2,000 to 3,000 square yards of land on lease, we are ready to construct and maintain a cowshed there and clear all roads of cattle.”MLA Talwar said Tibba Road cowshed would start lifting cattle in a day or two.MC commissioner KP Brar said, “Hunger strike is not a solution to this problem. We have prepared a proposal to construct a cowshed with funds collected through cow cess. Work will start on it once the finance and contracts committee approves the plan.”Even as the authorities swung into action and started lifting cattle in the evening, the protesters refused to end the stir till the MC stemmed the tide of the problem.MC senior veterinary officer Dr YP Singh said, “There are many cowsheds in the city, but we have signed an agreement with one (Govind Godham). It has started lifting cattle from roads.”Later in the day, MLA Sanjay Talwar reached the spot and assured action in East constituency Wednesday onwards. “Residents have agreed to end the protest,” the MLA said.Threat to commutersAugust 19: A 25-year-old man died after a bull hit his bike at Guru Arjun Dev NagarAugust 15: A fight between two bulls left many commuters injured at a flyover near KarabaraAugust 11: A youngster lost his life after his bike collided with a cow on Tajpur RoadApril 28: A mini truck ferrying 20 pilgrims turned turtle near Sherpur while trying to save a stray dogRoad safety expert Navdeep Asija said, “Stray cattle caused at least 30 accidents in Ludhiana over three years. Of these 29 were fatal.”Dist lacks professional squadThe MC officials said it was tough to rein in the menace as the district lacked a stray cattle catching squad. “In Punjab, only Patiala animal husbandry department has such a squad. To control bulls, we need tranquilizer guns. But as we have none, it is a struggle to catch them,” said an MC official.TIMES VIEWIt appears that the stray cattle problem has become nobody’s baby. Despite the deaths and injuries caused by rampaging cattle on city roads, the civic authorities continue to look the other way. The problem worsens in the rainy reason when the animals come on to the roads to avoid wet surfaces and to look for food. If the civic authorities are unable to sort out the problem, they should collaborate with trader bodies and other citizen groups to work out a viable solution. The people are already paying a cow cess for the bovines’ upkeep, so funds should not be a problem.
