Karnataka Bandh: Violence reported in parts of state, Shivakumar’s arrest example of vendetta politics unleashed by govt, says Rahul Gandhi

Bandh in Karnataka Today: Shivakumar’s assembly constituency Kanakpura also witnessed violent protests. Incidents of stone pelting at government buses were reported in the area.

Karnataka Bandh Today Live Updates: The day-long bandh called by the Congress in Karnataka on Wednesday in protest against the arrest of senior leader DK Shivakumar by the Enforcement Directorate (ED) in New Delhi witnessed sporadic protests in Bengaluru and several parts of the state. Protesters burnt KSRTC buses in Ramanagara and Kanakpura areas. There were reports of stone pelting at buses too. Meanwhile, Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa has said he was not happy with the arrest of Shivakumar. Yediyurappa said he will pray to God for the Congress leader’s early release.

Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi described DK Shivakumar’s arrest as vendetta politics by the government. “The arrest of DK Shivakumar is another example of the vendetta politics unleashed by the Govt, using agencies like the ED/CBI & a pliant media to selectively target individuals,” Rahul Gandhi tweeted.

A team of Congress leaders headed by party General Secretary KC Venugopal was stopped from meeting DK Shivakumar at the Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital in New Delhi.

Congress supporters also tried to block roads by burning tires in several parts of capital city Bengaluru. Shivakumar’s assembly constituency Kanakpura also witnessed violent protests. Incidents of stone pelting at government buses were reported in the area.

The local administration has directed school and colleges to remain close in the wake of the bandh.

Shivakumar, who is considered as the Congress’ troubleshooter in Karnataka, was arrested late on Tuesday by the ED in connection with a Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) case. He had appeared before the central agency for the fourth time of Tuesday for questioning following he was taken into custody.
