Pakistan Supporters 'Attack' Indian High Commission In London As Kashmir Protest Turns Ugly

highlights Protesters smashed some windows and threw eggs and shoes at the premises.

London Mayor Sadiq Khan condemned the incident and urged the police to take action.

Pakistani supporters had led similar protests on August 15.

New Delhi:

A mob of Pakistan supporters targetted the Indian High Commission in London during a protest over the Kashmir issue. The crowd smashed some windows and threw eggs and shoes at the premises. They also raised slogans against New Delhi over decision to abrogate provisions on Article 370 and divide Jammu and Kashmir state into two UTs- J&K and Ladakh. This the second time Indian High Commission in London has seen such protests this month. India had raised concern over protests outside the Indian High Commission on August 15.

According to reports, these protesters marched from the Parliament Square to the High Commission building with the flag of Pakistan-occupied Kashmir, carrying anti-India placards that called for the Kashmir's separation from India and the immediate removal of curfew in the region.

The official handle of the Indian High Commission shared a footage of the acts of vandalism on Twitter.

"Another violent protest outside the Indian High Commission in London today, 3 September 2019. Damage caused to the premises," it said.

Soon after, London Mayor Sadiq Khan condemned the incident and urged the police to act. "I utterly condemn this unacceptable behaviour and have raised this incident with @metpoliceuk to take action," he replied.

I utterly condemn this unacceptable behaviour and have raised this incident with @metpoliceuk to take action. — Sadiq Khan (@SadiqKhan) September 3, 2019

The incident took place after UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson had assured Prime Minister Narendra Modi that all necessary steps would be taken to ensure safety and security of the High Commission, its personnel and visitors.

Pakistani supporters had led protests on August 15 and attacked people celebrating India's independence day with eggs, potatoes and water bottles.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
