"Deplorable": UK Foreign Secretary On Violence Outside Indian Embassy

British Foreign Secretary addressed the British parliament on violence outside the Indian embassy.

Highlights British Pakistani groups led a protest outside Indian embassy in London

The protest was against scrapping of Jammu and Kashmir's special status

UK Foreign Secretary condemned the violence during the protest

Two people have been arrested after violent protests led by British Pakistani groups outside the Indian High Commission in London on Tuesday. British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has condemned the violence, calling it "deplorable".

"It is absolutely right that any violence is deplorable. It shouldn't be conducted in this country, or anywhere else for that matter, at any individual communities. What we now need to do is try and reduce those tensions but also, on a positive side, build up confidence building measures to allow proper dialogue between the communities in Kashmir and also between India and Pakistan," Mr Raab told the British parliament yesterday.

Hundreds of protesters led by British Pakistani groups gathered outside the Indian High Commission on Tuesday to protest the ending of special status for Jammu and Kashmir.

"Another violent protest outside the Indian High Commission in London today, 3 September 2019. Damage caused to the premises," High Commission tweeted on Tuesday. The embassy also tweeted a picture of a cracked window pane in the building.

"Two people were arrested for criminal damage and remain in custody," a Metropolitan Police spokesperson said.

The incident was raised in the British parliament on Tuesday by Shailesh Vara, the MP for North West Cambridgeshire, who said, "The violence and abuse targeted towards the British Indian community on this occasion is completely unacceptable as it would be to any community on the streets of UK."

Violence against British Indians or any other community in the UK is "deplorable" says Foreign Secretary.@foreignoffice@HCI_Londonpic.twitter.com/BJAZBPjhEL — Shailesh Vara MP (@ShaileshVara) September 3, 2019

In response to queries on anti-India demonstrations and consequent vandalism of the property of the High Commission of India in London, the official spokesperson said, "We are deeply concerned by the reports of unruly demonstration by Pakistan incited elements and consequent organised vandalism of the property of the High Commission of India in London."

"This is the second time in a less than a month that such an incident has taken place affecting the security and the normal functioning of our Mission. We consider these incidents to be unacceptable and have strongly urged the Government of UK to take action against those involved, and take necessary steps to ensure the normal functioning of our Mission and the safety and security of our personnel," the spokesperson added.

Tuesday's was second violent incident within a month after India raised concerns over protests outside the Indian High Commission on August 15.

The Independence Day celebrations outside the Indian High Commission's building were hit by similar protests when Pakistan-backed protestors and pro-Khalistani elements threw stones and eggs at Indians gathered outside the embassy building.

Responding to the tweet by the Indian Mission in the UK, London Mayor Sadiq Khan also condemned the violent protests, saying it was "unacceptable". "I utterly condemn this unacceptable behaviour and have raised this incident with @metpoliceuk to take action," he tweeted.

The incidents of violence have spiked after India scrapped Jammu and Kashmir's decades-old special status under Article 370 and split it into two union territories.

(With Inputs From ANI and PTI)
