Kashmir protests get ugly again in London, Indian High Commission targeted

A window at the Indian High Commission in London, damaged in missile thrown by protesters comprising mainly of British Pakistani citizens Twitter

This is the second time in less than a month that the Indian mission in London has been targeted by unruly protesters

About 10,000 British Pakistanis from across the UK descended in London on Tuesday and proceeded to smash windows of the Indian High Commission and cause chaos on the streets of the British capital for the second time in weeks.

Members of the Indian diaspora did not hold a counter-protest, reports The Times of India.

The 'Kashmir Freedom March,' organised by a plethora of British Kashmiri groups, went from Parliament Square past Downing Street to the High Commission building led by some UK Labour MPs.

Protesters carried Pakistan-Occupied Kashmir(POK) and Khalistan flags and placards saying, 'Stop shelling in Kashmir' and they shouted "We want freedom" and "Azadi."

"You can try and silence a Parliament but you cannot try and silence a people. We will continue to protest on the streets of our cities and at the UN until we have delivered justice for the people of Kashmir.

This idea this is a bilateral negotiation is now dead. It is time for a multilateral solution now," Birmingham Hodge Hill British Labour MP Liam Byrne, who led the march, said.

Sir, i think now days you are also posting some useless posting, trying to find a specific one which portrays bad about INDIA. you have proved yet another a Congi. they have rights to eat what they want. Why no word about https://t.co/oijW0KiwUv — Muthukumar Srinivasa (@YourMuthukumar) September 4, 2019

Byrne is gathering names on a petition he plans to hand into the House of Commons calling on the UK Government to make urgent representations to the Indian government through the Commonwealth and through the UN "to seek restoration of Kashmir's special status; to ensure demilitarization, restoration of communications and to immediately allow full access to human rights observers."

The protesters, who were mainly British Pakistanis ad British people with roots in PoK, but who included pro-Khalistan Sikhs, said they were there to mark 30 days since the lockdown in Kashmir that commenced following abrogation of Article 370.

A PoK flag was placed into the hands of the statue of Mahatma Gandhi at Parliament Square, Westminster before the march started.

Barricades were erected preventing the group from reaching the mission building in Aldwych.

As there were no people to target, the crowd hurled hundreds of eggs, tomatoes, shoes, stones, smoke bombs and bottles at the building and smashed several of its windows.

The High Commission of India tweeted photos of several broken windows. The tweet said: "Another violent protest outside the Indian High Commission in London today, 3 September 2019. Damage caused to the premises."

A Metropolitan Police spokeswoman said there were two arrests, both were for criminal damage.

London mayor, Pakistani-origin Sadiq Khan tweeted: "I utterly condemn this unacceptable behavior."

This is the second time in less than a month that the Indian mission in London has been targeted by unruly protesters.

On August 15, protesters carrying Khalistani and Kashmiri flags tried to push forward across police lines and threw objects, targeting members of the Indian diaspora who were peacefully celebrating Independence Day at the high commission.

Hundreds of thugs and hooligans were among the protesters, made up predominantly of British Pakistanis, Pakistani Kashmiris and pro-Khalistan Sikhs.

They threw eggs, glass bottles, shoes, plastic bottles and other objects at the crowd who had gathered for the Independence Day event and at the mission building.

The High Commission of India lodged a criminal complaint shortly afterwards with the police over a broken window and damage to the walls.

Many, including women and children, had to take refuge in the building till riot police arrived and provided them with safe passage.
