UK Must Act Against 'Pakistan-Incited Elements' for Damage to High Commission: India

New Delhi: India has raised the issue with the United Kingdom about damage to the premises of the Indian high commission in London by “Pakistan-incited elements” following fresh protests over Kashmir.

On Tuesday, there were large crowds in front of the high commission for the second round of rallies against changes to the constitutional status of Jammu and Kashmir and reports of alleged human rights violations.

Today thousands of people marched from Downing Street to the Indian High Commission to send a clear message to Mr Modi – you cannot silence the people of Kashmir. Sign my petition to the House of Commons here: https://t.co/CXMFGtToMd#1MonthOfKashmirShutdown #Kashmir pic.twitter.com/6c3AtRFw6b — Liam Byrne (@LiamByrneMP) September 3, 2019

The Indian high commission posted a tweet showing a damaged window, blaming the “violent protests”. London Mayor Sadiq Khan replied on Twitter that this was “unacceptable behaviour and [I] have raised this incident with Metropolitan Police to take action”.

There was a strong reaction in Delhi, with Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar pointing out that this was the “second time in less than a month that such an incident has taken place affecting the security and normal functioning of our Mission”.

The Indian spokesperson also blamed the incident on Pakistan. “We are deeply concerned by the reports of unruly demonstration by Pakistan-incited elements and consequent organised vandalism of the property of the High Commission of India in London.”

He added that India considers these incidents “unacceptable and have strongly urged the Government of UK to take action against those involved, and take necessary steps to ensure the normal functioning of our Mission and the safety and security of our personnel”.

Earlier, on India’s Independence Day August 15, there had been protests and counter-protests held outside the high commission. There were photographs of pro-India rallyists being pelted with eggs by the other protestors.

Watch: What Will Reading Down Article 370 Mean for India’s Foreign Policy?

During their phone call on August 20, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi had raised the matter of “violence and vandalism perpetrated by a large mob against the High Commission of India in London on the last Independence Day of India” with his new UK counterpart Boris Johnson.

According to the Indian readout, Johnson had “regretted the incident and assured that all necessary steps would be taken to ensure safety and security of the High Commission, its personnel and visitor”.

Earlier on Tuesday, the UK house of commons saw the Kashmir issue featuring during the Oral Questions session. As per a PTI report, there were questions raised by MPs about the communication clampdown in Kashmir, but also about the “violent clashes” in London.

“All and any allegations of human rights violations are deeply concerning. They must be investigated thoroughly, promptly and transparently,” sad UK foreign secretary Dominic Raab.

He said that the issue of human rights was not just a “bilateral issue”, but an “international issue as we expect internationally recognised human rights to be complied with and respected”.

Raab also said that he had raised the matter of “detentions, potential mistreatment and also the communications blackouts” in his conversation with Indian external affairs minister S. Jaishankar. “The Indian government has made clear that they are only temporaneous, as strictly required. And of course, we would want to hold them to that undertaking,” he added.
