DKS arrest a boost for Congress in Old Mysore region?

State party leaders put up united show against BJP

The arrest of senior Congress leader D.K. Shivakumar, popularly known as the ‘troubleshooter’ in political circles, by the Enforcement Directorate (ED) in an alleged money-laundering case has provided a cause and a platform for the State Congress leaders to put up a united show against the BJP governments both in the State and at the Centre.

In a perception battle, despite troubles in the short term, the widespread protests particularly in the dominant Vokkaliga community belt in Old Mysore region has recast Mr. Shivakumar as a “political hero” of the community. It may cause harm to the saffron party in the region, which had made inroads during the 2019 elections.

Sympathy factor

The seven-time MLA and four-time Minister’s arrest in the national capital, after denying him permission to participate in the Ganesha festival celebrations at his home, is expected to create a sympathy wave for the leader. Supporters have rallied around Mr. Shivakumar by shutting down shops, blocking roads, and burning effigies of BJP president Amit Shah. The arrest has provided a space for the party leaders and workers to unite and protest against the Union government and the State BJP, which was in an upbeat mood after formation of the B.S. Yediyurappa government. The Vokkaliga community had apparently seen dethroning of the Kumaraswamy government as a deliberate attempt to marginalise the community politically. The community leaders and seers are expected to draw political narratives around this issue during the next elections and rally around Mr. Shivakumar. This is also expected to counter the leadership of former Chief Minister Siddaramaiah, who had the backing of the backward classes.

Mr. Shivakumar, who demonstrated his ability to ensure victory of candidates on several occasions, might just emerge stronger in Old Mysore region where the JD(S) leaders have been slowly losing their hold and this was seen in the 2019 general elections.

Go-to man

They believed that Mr. Shivakumar was targeted because in 2017, he hosted 44 legislators from Gujarat at a resort near Bidadi on the outskirts of the city ahead of the Rajya Sabha elections as a number of party MLAs had defected to the BJP. This ensured victory of Congress party strategist Ahmed Patel in the Rajya Sabha elections. After the 2018 State Assembly elections, it was once again Mr. Shivakumar who moved the party legislators to a resort to prevent them from being poached by the BJP. In July 2019, he again rushed to Mumbai to bring back the party rebel MLAs though he did not succeed in the move.

It would be interesting to watch how the State Congress keeps up the tempo in the coming days to corner the ruling dispensation in the State and how the latter counters it.
