BJP targetting Shivakumar because he refused to join them, says Siddaramaiah

‘Centre curbing DKS’s rights as a Hindu’

MYSURU: Former chief minister and leader of the Congress legislature party Siddaramaiah was at the vanguard of the protest held on Wednesday by the party’s workers to oppose the arrest of senior leader and former minister DK Shivakumar by officials of the Enforcement Directorate (ED) in New Delhi.Charging the BJP with attempting to blackmail Shivakumar, widely regarded as the Congress’ ablest troubleshooter, Siddaramaih said, “The BJP is trying to get Shivakumar to join their party. The Congress will fight this both on the legal and political fronts.”Siddaramaiah, who arrived in Mysuru on Wednesday morning, was originally scheduled to head to Ponnampet in neighbouring Kodagu district, decided to participate in the demonstration that the Congress held at Gandhi Square in the heart of the city. “The BJP offered to drop all pending cases against him if Shivakumar joined the saffron party. They started targeting him when he refused to respond to their overtures. Shivakumar had, in fact, told me that the BJP started targeting him after the Rajya Sabha polls in Gujarat,” Siddaramaiah, questioning Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa ’s silence on the controversy.JD(S) state president HK Kumaraswamy too has thrown the weight of the JD(S) behind Shivakumar. “The BJP is going after him because Shivakumar tried to prevent the saffron party from coming to power in Karnataka. The Centre is misusing investigation agencies to muzzle opposition parties,” said Kumaraswamy in Hassan.Meanwhile, Congress workers tried to force their way into a hall where the BJP Karnataka president Nalin Kumar Kateel was chairing a meeting with activists of the party in Hassan. However, the cops thwarted the attempt.Protests were held in various locations across the Old Mysore Region, and consequently, traffic on the Bengaluru-Mysuru Road was badly affected. A bandh was observed in Halgur, Mandya district, while vehicular movement was stopped entirely on the Kanakapura-Malavalli highway.On the other hand, Chikkamagluru-Udupi MP and BJP leader Shobha Karandlaje dismissed charges of the central government misusing the CBI and ED to intimidate opposition leaders. “That is what the Congress does,” said Shobha, lashing out at Congress leaders who have placed the blame for Shivakumar’s arrest at the feet of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union home minister Amit Shah . “The CBI and ED have arrested political leaders and VIPs when the Congress was in power as well. Were all those arrests politically motivated?” asked Shobha.Slamming the BJP-led central government for detaining DK Shivakumar on Ganesha Chaturthi, former Union minister and senior Congress leader CM Ibrahim charged the saffron party with curtailing the Congress leader’s rights as a Hindu citizen. “The saffron party argues that it is the protector of Hindus, but why did it prevent Shivakumar from celebrating the festival?” Ibrahim asked.
