Light Utility Helicopter (LUH), indigenously developed by HAL, ‘successfully completes high altitude tests’

HAL-developed Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights HAL said that Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) has successfully completed high altitude tests The LUH has been designed and developed by state-owned HAL The LUH are being developed with an aim to replace older Chetak and Cheetah helicopters

New Delhi: The indigenously designed and developed Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) has successfully completed high altitude tests, state-run Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) said on Thursday.

In a statement, the state-owned aerospace and defence company said that the Light Utility Helicopter, which has been designed and developed by the HAL, has demonstrated high altitude capability in hot and high weather conditions in Himalayas.

HAL added in its statement that the trials for the LUH were conducted by the test pilots from HAL, Indian Air Force and the Indian Army from August 24 to September 2.

Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), Spox: HAL designed& developed Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) successfully demonstrated high altitude capability in hot&high weather conditions in Himalayas. Trials were carried out by the test pilots from HAL, IAF &Army from Aug 24 to Sept 2. pic.twitter.com/xdVxEyrdaT — ANI (@ANI) September 5, 2019

The LUH has complied with all the requirements placed before it by the users, R Madhavan, Chairman and Managing Director of HAL said.

The statement further added, "All planned tests were successfully demonstrated. A comprehensive test plan was executed at Leh (3,300 metres) in temperatures up to Internationa Standard Atmosphere (ISA) +32 degrees celsius which included envelope expansion, performance and flying qualities."

"The LUH then lifted off from Leh and demonstrated its hot and high hover performance at Daulat Beg Oldie (DBO) Advanced Landing Ground (ALG) at 5,000 metres followed by another forward helipad (5,500 m at ISA +27°C).”

The chopper completed a 3,000-kilometer journey from Bengaluru to Leh over a duration of three days, which according to HAL, revealed the LUH's "high reliability without any service support."

The LUH is being developed by the HAL to replace the older Cheetah and Chetaks helicopters which have been used by the army and the air force for several years.

The LUH is a three-ton, single-engined helicopter, which completed hot weather trials in Nagpur in 2018. It had completed sea level trials at Chennai last year as well as in Puducherry in 2019.
