Teachers protest on the day they should celebrate

Teacher’s Day

Maharashtra Permanent Unaided Kruti Samiti

lathi-charge

downpour

festive season

School Principals’ Association

Unaided school teachers have been on a dharna since August 5

Onyesterday, over 200 teachers from unaided schools and junior colleges dressed in black to mark a month of protest at Azad Maidan over promise of 100% grant.Dressed in all black, over 200 teachers from unaided schools and junior colleges marked one month of their dharna at Azad Maidan on Teacher’s Day, September 5. Demanding salaries on par with teachers from aided schools, the group, under the banner ofhas been protesting against the government’s failure to approve 100 per cent grants to their institutes.In this past month, they have braved, stood their ground in heavyand sacrificed family celebrations during. They said they will continue their agitation until their demands are met.Around 4,500 teachers from the city and over 6,500 from across the state have been demanding 100 per cent aid for their schools and junior colleges, as per a government resolution passed in 2012. Spokesperson of the, Prashant Redij told Mirror that the grant was to increase by 20 per cent each year from 2012, reaching 100 per cent by 2016. “However, no further aid was approved after the initial 20 per cent,” Redji said, adding that the education department cited financial constraints for not being able to fulfil their promise.Teachers said they get half the salary in comparison to their counterparts in aided institutions, even though they do the same job. On August 28, state education minister Ashish Shelar announced 20 per cent aid (Rs 304 crore) for 65,000 teaching and non-teaching staff of unaided institutions in Maharashtra, but the teachers said it’s not enough and called it “eyewash” and “false promises”. “What’s the point of celebrating Teacher’s Day if the government does not respect our profession,” a protesting teacher said.“Although the government announced some form of aid, no government resolution has been issued so far. Such announcements are made regularly before the elections, but they are not followed up,” Redij said. He alleged that the announcement this year has also been made keeping in mind the upcoming state assembly elections.Ganesh Gori, a city-based teacher protesting at Azad Maidan, said, “Teachers shape the future of the country. However, they get no support from the government.” Gori and several teachers from his school said teachers whose jobs have been jeopardised because of lack of aid should be declared surplus and accommodated in other schools. “Is it a crime to ask for our rights? They say teachers should teach students the right path, but what about the government that is ignoring its assurance given to us?” asked another teacher, Vinayak Patil.Sanjay Davre, another protesting teacher, said, “We are not fools to come to Azad Maidan every day. We are helpless and hence forced to come here.” He said all teachers feel bad that students are suffering because of their protest. “But it is also a matter of our survival,” he added.Members of Kruti Samiti said teachers from across the state are conducting parallel protests in Nagpur, Pune, Aurangabad, and Nashik. In Nagpur, to register their protest against state apathy, they turned up for work on Teacher’s Day with black bands on their arms. “We plan to rope in parents as well. If our schools get aid, it will directly reduce the fees. Parents are not aware of this,” Gori said.
