Sabarimala row: Indian airlines issue travel advisory after protests in Kerala

Sabarimala row: Indian airlines issue travel advisory after protests in Kerala

Advisories issued for passengers travelling from Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram and Kozhikode.

By Web Report Published: Thu 3 Jan 2019, 8:21 AM Last updated: Thu 3 Jan 2019, 2:05 PM

A dawn-to-dusk 12-hour shutdown began on Thursday morning in protest against the entry of two women of the below 50 age into the Sabarimala temple.

The strike, which began at 6 am, has been called by Sabarimala Karma Samithi spearheading protests against the Supreme Court's September 28 verdict, and Antarrashtriya Hindu Parishad (AHP).

As per initial reports, the shutdown seems to have turned violent at several places in Thiruvanathapuram, Calicut, Malappuram and others. Stones have been pelted at Kerala State Road Transport Corporation buses in Kottathala area of Kollam district in Kerala, Mathrubhumi reports. A Kerala bus was also vandalised in Thrissur.

Kerala State Road Transport Corporation authorities have also said that buses remain off roads due to the strike.

In wake of the shutdown call, Air India, Jet Airways, Indigo and Vistara have asked the passengers travelling to various parts of Kerala to schedule their travel programs in lieu of the protests.

#FlyAI : #AirIndia #advisory

Protests at several locations in Kerala may affect passengers travelling from #Kochi, #Thiruvananthapuram, #Kozhikode. Passengers are requested to schedule their travel plans to/from airports accordingly.

- Air India (@airindiain) January 2, 2019 #9Wupdate #Kerala pic.twitter.com/bjLyQFYxzR

- Jet Airways (@jetairways) January 2, 2019 #6ETravelAdvisory: Due to protest in various parts of #Kerala tomorrow, 03rd Jan'19, passengers traveling from #Kochi #Thiruvananthapuram #Kozhikode may face congestion on their way to the airport. Please plan your travel accordingly to avoid last minute hassle.

- IndiGo (@IndiGo6E) January 2, 2019 #TravelUpdate Due to massive protest in various parts of Kerala, local transport may be disrupted today (03rd Jan'19). Customers travelling from Kochi are advised to allow more time for their journey to the airport.

- Vistara (@airvistara) January 3, 2019
