Angry Mumbaikars take to streets against slashing of Aarey forest trees

/events/mumbai/angry-mumbaikars-take-to-streets-against-slashing-of-aarey-forest-trees/eventshow/71024683.cms

01

Hundreds of Mumbaikars gathered to protest against slashing trees of Aarey forest at Marine Drive on September 07, 2019 - Photogallery

Hundreds of Mumbaikars gathered to protest against slashing trees of Aarey forest at Marine Drive on September 07, 2019. The protest was against BMC’s (Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation) approval to chop off around 2,700 trees of Aarey forest for Mumbai car shed project for the metro. The angry protesters, who also included younger children, held aloft banners and shouted slogans and then formed a human chain. The proposal to cut trees was made by Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation in order to construct a Mumbai Metro car shed. The approval was granted to the BMC for removing 2,702 trees of which 2,238 were proposed to be cut and the rest were to be transplanted. Soon after the decision, Mumbaikars, politicians and Bollywood celebrities began a campaign to save Aarey. However, chief minister Devendra Fadnavis supported the decision of axing the trees to build the Metro car shed. During an interaction with students at an event, he said, “This matter had gone up to the Supreme Court and the apex court too has said that what the state government doing is right. The land where the trees are being cut is not a forest land. With the underground Metro project, we will be able to mitigate carbon footprint to an extent that we would have needed 2 crore full grown trees otherwise.” “Of the 2700 trees, some 500 trees will be replanted and a few trees will be cut against which we will plant 3,000 full grown trees. The state is trying to strike a balance between development and environment. It is a misconception the government is destroying forest and trees are getting chopped. Even I am an environmentalist and felling every single tree pains me,” he added.

(BCCL/Prashant Jadhav)
