Why saving Aarey forest is important for Mumbai and its future

Multiple reports have suggested that air pollution in the country is high | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The Supreme Court has ordered the government to stop cutting down trees in Aarey The next hearing of the case is scheduled for October 21 Protests were being held across Mumbai to stop the felling of trees in Aarey

Mumbai: A group of law students urged the Supreme Court to determine the fate of Mumbai's Aarey on Sunday. Taking suo moto cognizance, the apex court directed the government to stop axing trees until October 21. An environment bench of the Supreme Court will be hearing the case on October 21.

Hundreds of people in Mumbai have been staging protests to show their disapproval of cutting down of around 2,700 trees in the Aarey forests. More protests followed after Devendra Fadnavis, the chief minister of Maharashtra tried to justify the move.

The approval for cutting down the trees was given by the Tree Authority. The Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation (MMRC) had approached the Tree Authority to seek permission for felling the trees to make way for a car shed which is a part of the Mumbai Metro project.

As soon as the move was announced, it caught the attention of aware citizens and environmentalists who decided to stand together against it. The decision was taken at a time when efforts are being made by governments of many countries to battle climate change. This move shows clear apathy towards the environment and is evidence of the fact that the government and civic bodies do not believe in sustainable development.

Cutting down these trees is not just an issue of the present, it will cast its shadow on the future of Mumbai. With the rate of pollution increasing throughout the country, trees and plants serve as a safety blanket for the people. Cutting them down will have an impact on both the present and future generations that will live in the city.

A report by the World Health Organisation (WHO) suggested that air pollution is capable of affecting the health of people. While air purifiers cannot reach every household, the oxygen given by trees does. Aarey forests are known as the 'lungs' of Mumbai. Hence, cutting down these trees only means depriving Mumbai of a vital organ that has been shielding it from increasing air pollution.

It cannot be ignored that the Aarey forest is a habitat of its own. It is home to many animals and in a way is a vital part of the ecosystem. Felling down these trees will deprive many animals of their shelter.

Another repercussion of the cutting of these trees is a probable increase in man-animal conflict. If the animals living in Aarey forest are deprived of their homes, they will eventually enter the areas that are inhabited by humans, which will put the lives of locals in fatal danger.

This is not the first time that the authorities in Mumbai have taken a step that is indifferent towards the environment and the residents. A few months earlier, protests were held in Mumbai to criticise the exploitation of wetlands and felling down of mangroves for ambitious construction schemes.

Green crusaders and residents have been protesting against deforestation across Mumbai. Even as their voices are rising with every passing day, the government seems to have turned a deaf ear towards them.
