Delhi: Two scrap dealers beaten up in Hauz Qazi on suspicion of child-lifting

Similar cases of attacks fulled by rumours of child- lifting have been reported from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Victims were reportedly held for around 30 minutes before a police team intervened The cops interrogated the victims and let them off They were also taken for a medical examination by the cops

New Delhi: In another incident where an attack was fuelled by rumours of child-lifting was reported in the national capital. Two men were beaten up by locals in the Hauz Qazi area, accusing the victims of kidnapping children. The duo had come from Punjab's Bathinda district and were collecting scrap from the area. They were reportedly held for around 30 minutes by the locals before a police team intervened.

The cops interrogated the victims and let them off, they are now trying to identify those who had begun the rumour. According to a report, the rumour began on Friday evening, when the locals at Kucha Pandit in central Delhi area spotted the two victims moving around suspiciously. They were reportedly pointing out at children and conversing in a hushed tone and the rumour immediately spread that men were a part of a child-kidnapping gang.

Meanwhile, a crowd gathered and the two men were made to sit at a shop while they were being questioned about their intentions. The cops were informed around 30 minutes later about the incident and they arrived to rescue the men. The victims were identified as Samarajeet and Karan who told Police during interrogation that they came to buy scrap machinery from a shop in the Farsh Khana area. They had reportedly lost their way and reached Kucha Pandit area instead of their destination. Reportedly, the victims showed their identity cards and proofs of their purpose for the visit. They were also taken for a medical examination and let off after it.

However, the police have not filed any FIR in the matter. Police are now looking for accused who had initially spread the rumour about men being child-lifters. Cops have also asked to issue an advisory asking locals to not believe in such rumours and inform police if any such thing comes up.

Similar cases of attacks fulled by rumours of child- lifting have been reported from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The number of such instances have been on a constant rise from last few months. To curb such instances, Uttar Pradesh police is taking extensive measures to dispell such rumours. Meetings are being organised with local leaders and municipal officials across the city to spread awareness in this regard.

Police officers are also taking to the streets with loudspeakers to make people aware of the dangers of such rumours and the consequences of mob lynching.
