‘Dubious reasons behind student protest at Samras’

SURAT: In an interesting twist to the ongoing protest by over 250 students at Samras hostel , admissions of 59 students have been put on hold by the authorities concerned for having submitted forged mark sheet copies for gaining admission in the hostel. They had increased their marks to secure berth in the hostel where admission is given to students belonging to deprived classes on the basis of merit.The hostel has been admitting students for the last three years. The hostel administration was recently tipped off about a few students with less marks having secured admission in the hostel. The officials upon scrutiny found 10 mark sheet copies to be dubious and hence they sent some more for verification to Veer Narmad South Gujarat University (VNSGU).“We found 10 dubious mark sheet. This made us to send more mark sheet copies to VNSGU for verification. I have been informed that around 59 of them are forged. Hence, we put admissions of these students on hold after which this protest started,” said Anju Kambad, social welfare officer and in-charge of Samras hostel for girls and boys.“I am waiting for VNSGU’s report and meanwhile had asked the students to show their original mark sheet. They are not bringing their original mark sheet. They have been offered provisional admissions and not given identity cards. Therefore, they cannot stay in the hostel,” she added.Girls and boys blocks in Samras hostel are separately located on VNSGU campus and each can accommodate 1,000 students. Tribal students get annual scholarship of Rs11,500 out of which Rs4,500 is deducted towards hostel fees. Samras hostel is managed by social welfare department of Government of Gujarat.“It is baseless allegation by the officials. The protest is by those students who currently are living in the hostel. Not a single person whose admission has been put on hold took part in the protest,” said Vishal Valvi, an LLM student, whose admission has been cancelled over staging the protest.
