Madras HC Lawyers to Strike on Tuesday to Protest Justice Tahilramani's Transfer

New Delhi: The Madras High Court Advocates’ Association has said that the group’s 1,800 members will not be appearing in any cases on Tuesday (September 10) to protest against the transfer of Madras high court Chief Justice Vijaya Kamlesh Tahilramani.

“The manner in which her transfer was decided and announced was very undemocratic. This will affect the independence of judges and their power to individually decide on cases,” president of the association, G. Mohanakrishnan, told The News Minute.

He added that the judge had been “unfairly demoted”. “No reason has been given for her transfer. And for the Chief Justice of Madras High Court to be sent to a smaller court like Meghalaya is like making a principal of a school, a teacher for kindergarten students. We will be abstaining from going to court in protest.”

On August 28, the Supreme Court collegium headed by Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi had recommended Justice Tahilramani’s transfer to the Meghalaya high court. She requested the collegium to reconsider the transfer recommendation, but the collegium rejected her appeal, saying it had “carefully gone through the aforesaid representation and taken into consideration all relevant factors. On reconsideration, the collegium is of the considered view that it is not possible to accede to her request.”

The judge sent her resignation to President Ram Nath Kovind and the CJI when they did not comply. Justice Tahilramani stated that she was due to retire in October 2020, and was upset by her transfer order to a much smaller high court and had decided to step down.

A section of lawyers at the Madras high court had earlier written to the Supreme Court stating that “arbitrary transfers whittle away the independence of the judiciary and the confidence of judges”.

Communist Party of India (Marxist) leader Brinda Karat has also spoken up in support of Justice Tahilramani, and said that her transfer cannot be considered routine. “As it is there are such few women judges at this level and the treatment meted out to her is insulting and humiliating not just to her but to women in general,” Karat said.
