Auto gang targets 40-year-old woman in Ghaziabad; loots mobile phone, cash

Woman had boarded an auto to reach Noida for treatment. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Woman had boarded an auto to reach Noida for treatment Three persons posing as passengers pushed woman out of the auto Police file FIR against unidentified persons

Ghaziabad: An auto-rickshaw driver and his accomplices posing as passengers targeted a woman in Ghaziabad and robbed her of her cash and mobile phone. The crime took place in Sihani Gate area of the city on Saturday.

The incident took place in broad daylight when the woman boarded a shared auto from Old Bus station in Ghaziabad. The 40-year-old woman, a resident of Nehru Nagar, was going to Noida for some treatment.

According to a report, the woman told the police that the auto had a driver and three other persons posing as passengers in the rear seat. As the auto moved, a person sitting beside the auto-driver asked him to stop the vehicle, saying he wanted to sit at the rear side.

The auto driver agreed and stopped the auto saying the 'passenger' should sit in the rear seat as he could face a fine. The woman said she protested saying there was no space as three passengers were already sitting in the rear seat.

As this conversation was on, the woman said a 'passenger' sitting beside her opened her purse. And when the victim asked the auto-driver to stop and let her go, she was pushed outside the auto.

The woman has sustained injuries on her body after she was pushed out of speeding autorickshaw.

The victim said nobody came to her rescue despite her screaming for help. The woman said that she was dragged for some distance as she caught hold of the auto. However, she let go of the auto as the driver increased the speed.

The victim said that when she checked her purse, there was no trace of the cash or her mobile phone. Sihani Gate police station has registered an FIR against unidentified persons.

Four men molest and rob teenager in autorickshaw

In a similar incident in March this year, a college student was allegedly molested and robbed in an autorickshaw. The victim was going to her residence in Indirapuram from the Electronic City metro station when the incident happened. The 18-year-old victim was returning from her college when the incident took place.

The teenager was allegedly robbed and molested in the vehicle by three people who were taking the same autorickshaw. The victim had alleged that when she questioned the driver about the route he was taking, three men sitting in the autorickshaw started assaulting her. The accused allegedly slapped the victim and tied her hands and legs. She added that the accused even checked her body for jewellery. When the accused did not find anything but Rs 200 in her bag, they allegedly abused the victim. Before abandoning her on Viswakarma Road, the accused warned the victim against telling her family about the incident.
