Rs 32,000 Cr Bank Frauds Surfaced In 3 Months, Modi's Message To End Use Of Single-Use Plastic And More News

A total of 2,480 cases of fraud involving a huge sum of Rs 31,898.63 crore have rattled 18 public sector banks in between April and June this year.

This saga of banking frauds is dominated by the country's largest lender State Bank of India (SBI) which remained the biggest prey to frauds with 38 per cent share. Neemuch-based activist Chandrashekhar Gaur had filed the RTI in this regard and the responses have been furnished to him by an official of the RBI. Read more

Time Has Come For The World To Say Good-Bye To Single-Use Plastic, Says PM Modi As India Eyes Restoring Degraded Lands

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has urged the global community to join hands in this massive movement to protect the environment by bidding “goodbye” to the non-biodegradable single-use plastic bags that are used in large numbers on a daily basis.

Speaking at the 14th Conference of Parties (COP14) to United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) in Greater Noida, the prime minister reiterated India’s commitment to curbing single-use plastic that is causing widespread degradation of the environment. Read more

In 10 Years India Can Set Up Base On Moon And Start Extraction Of Helium-3, Says Ex-DRDO Scientist Who Led BrahMos

A former top scientist of the Defence Research and Development Organisation has said India will be able to set up a base on the moon in 10 years to extract helium-3.

"In space program, we are one of the four countries that completed mastery over technology," former DRDO scientist A Sivathanu Pillai told DD News. Read more

Campaign To Save Aarey Forest Gets More Support, Supriya Sule, Aditya Thackeray Join In

The ongoing campaign by environmentalists and citizens of Mumbai to save the trees in Aarey Forest in the city is gaining support from various corners. The latest to extend her support to the protest is Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leader Supriya Sule.

On Sunday Sule joined in with the locals at Aarey Colony who are protesting against Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation Tree Authority's decision to slash 2,700 trees in the locality. Read more

Madhya Pradesh Allows People To Adopt Cows For Lifetime For Rs 3 Lakh Only

Following in the footsteps of states like Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, and Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh has become the latest state to allow people to adopt cows.

The Kamal Nath government in MP has proposed various options for people wanting to adopt cows. This includes adopting a cow for a minimum of 15 days to the animal’s lifetime. Read more

90 Dogs Found 'Dead' With Their Legs & Muzzles Tied In Maharashtra

At least 90 stray dogs have been found killed with their muzzles and legs tied with strings in Maharashtra's Buldhana district. The police have confirmed the case.

Buldhana district is located about 500 kms from the bustling metropolis of Mumbai, the capital of the state. Read more
