Mumbai: Yari Road locals call for protest meet to highlight their plights

Up in arms over the lackadaisical attitude of authorities as well as elected representatives who have been ignoring several key issues plaguing new Yari Road at Andheri (West), vigilant residents from the area have called for a massive protest meeting where they will not only discuss future course of action but also decide key factors on the basis of which they would vote in the upcoming elections.

The meeting will witness intense discussion over several issues — be it mangrove destruction, encroachment, rash driving or even drug abuse on streets. "While we have been taking up several of these issues over the years none have been resolved. Tired of staying silent we have decided to raise our voices by asking local residents to join in large numbers," said Shashi Ranjan, President of New Yari Road Residents Association informing that they have called for the meeting on January 27 and are expecting a good turn out.

Drawing attention to the incessant encroachments inside the mangrove area behind Yari Road, Vijay Ullal another resident said that despite bringing it to notice of concerned authorities, encroachment activities have continue unabated. "Apart from the mangrove issue, we also want several civic issues resolved like getting the 120 feet DP road, removal of garages blocking the walking path and roads as well as getting good roads and footpaths,"said Ullal sharing that during the protest meet many issues like these will be detailed out and opinions of residents will be taken into account and an overall strategy will be formulated for getting these resolved.

The citizens are upset over being ignored time and again, said Ranjan. "During this meeting we will also put forth a plan to ensure that there is 100 per cent voting from our area along with that as a group we will discuss on what basis and factors should we choose to vote for candidates," said Ranjan adding that residents of Lokhandwala have extended their support and have assured to join the meeting.

LOKHANDWALA JOINS THEM

In the protest meeting, the locals will not only discuss future course of action but also decide key factors on the basis of which they would vote in the upcoming elections. They will also receiving support from residents of Lokhandwala who will joining the meeting.
