BJP State chief says his party is more democratic than the Congress

Criticising the hegemony of the Nehru-Gandhi family over the Congress, Nalin Kumar Kateel, State president of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), said that his party was more democratic in its functioning and leadership than the Congress.

“In 2004, Sonia Gandhi was president of the Congress. Today also, she is practically the president of the Congress. When I joined the BJP around the same time, Venkaiah Naidu was my party’s president. After that Rajnath Singh, Nitin Gadkari and Amit Shah became party presidents. Now, J.P. Nadda is the working president. This is how democracy is practised in our party,” Mr. Kateel said.

He was addressing a special meeting of party workers at the Veerashiva Kalyan Mantap here on Monday.

He justified his words by taking Prime Minister Narendra Modi and himself as examples.

“I was an ordinary worker of the RSS [Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh]. The RSS asked me to work as a BJP activist whereas I wanted to become a Bajrang Dal activist. I was told that I must do what was assigned to me and not what I wished. I began working as a BJP worker, fought politically Congress leaders, including Janardhan Pujari, and have now became the State president of my party. Prime Minister Narendra Modi was an ordinary tea seller in a Gujarat railway station and he could become the Prime Minister of the country. Ordinary workers who stick posters and tie banners for the party can become leaders in my party. It is not possible in the Congress or any other party,” he said.

Article 370

Pointing at Article 370 of the Constitution that had given special status to Jammu and Kashmir and its subsequent change, Mr. Kateel said that the historic move was a realisation of the dream of his party’s founder Syama Prasad Mukerjee.

“Mr. Mukerjee was a Minister in Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru’s Cabinet and he quit the Ministry in protest against Nehru’s policy. He had always argued that India was one and there should be one Constitution applicable to entire India and one Prime Minster for the entire nation. He launched Jan Sangh, the mother party of the BJP, and started campaigning for his ideas. Seventy years after his demise, his dream of actual unification of India has been realised by Mr. Modi by repealing Article 370 of the Constitution,” he said.

Hailing India’s rich cultural heritage, Mr. Kateel called upon the party workers not to compare India with the United States or any other country in terms of economy or military size, but to compare it in terms of cultural heritage.

“Under Mr. Modi, India is in its golden age. India is Vishwa Guru and the entire world is looking at us. Mr. Modi is the force behind space missions such as Chandrayaan,” he said.

Criticising all those who term the BJP as a communal force for chanting the name of Sri Ram, Mr. Kateel questioned whether one could call Mahatma Gandhi as communal as he too had always wished to make India a Ram Rajya.
