No grudges against dist admn, says Batala blast victim’s kin

Ludhiana: A day after registration of an FIR against Ludhiana MLA Simarjit Singh Bains in a case related to misbehaviour with Gurdaspur DC Vipul Ujjwal, a new video has gone viral on the social media in which the family of Batala blast victim is seen saying that the district administration has helped them.

In the video a person, who is said to be a relative of one of the deceased, is also heard saying in Punjabi that, “Sanu koi shikwa nahi haiga, sanu sadi body mil gai hai. Hospital staff walon cooperate keeta gaya, changi tarah deal keeta gaya sade naal” (We do not have any grudge against anyone as we have got the body. The hospital staff cooperated with us and they dealt with us in a nice way.”

On September 5, Bains had gone to Batala to meet the families of victims who had died in a blast in a cracker factory there. During his visit to the civil hospital, Bains had entered into an altercation with Gurdaspur DC Vipul Ujjwal and even used remarks like “eh tere baap da office nahi hai” (This is not your father’s office). The MLA also accused the DC of misbehaving with the families of blast victims and asking them to get out of his room, the charge which Ujjwal had denied.

Meanwhile, the DC office employees union, Ludhiana, on Monday staged a massive protest against this incident and the incident in Zira, where an SDM was kidnapped by some persons, who also threatened to throw the officer into a canal. The employees also remained on strike on Monday and threatened to observe a strike in the coming days.

According to Vikas Juneja, president of the union, Ludhiana said, “The incidents at Gurdaspur and Zira are shocking. If officials like the DC and SDM are not safe then what about the common man. We were forced to go on strike today to get our voice heard and ensure justice. If no strict action is taken against the accused in both cases, we will not sit silent and intensify our agitation. We are already planning to remain on strike for the next two days and a decision in this regard will be taken by our state body.”

Meanwhile, supporters of Bains and workers of Lok Insaaf Party (LIP) have criticised the state government for getting an FIR registered against Bains. The LIP workers are also going to organize a solidarity march in support of Bains and will also burn an effigy of chief minister Amarinder Singh on Tuesday at the mini-secretariat here.

Bains attacks CM , dares to get him arrested

Meanwhile Bains on Monday again launched an attack chief minister Captain Amrinder Singh and said, "Regardless of tactics like getting FIR against me on frivolous grounds I will not bow down and continue my fight in the court against city centre scam in which CM and his relatives are involved. If needed I will go upto Supreme Court as well and get Captain and his family members punished for their misdeeds"

Bains also alleged that CM's son in law was involved in the Simbholi sugar mill case in which 5,762 farmers were cheated of Rs. 110 crores. “I will take up this case as well and if needed will go upto the Supreme Court and get him punished," he said.

Bains also claimed that he was not afraid of police. “I dare CM to get me arrested, I am sitting in my office and doing public work as usual," he said.

Box – DC office employees’ union demands Bains’ arrest

The Punjab State DC Office Employees Union, on whose call the strike has been called, issued a statement which said that, “In order to gain popularity on social media, MLA Simarjit Singh Bains is indulging in illegal acts and is also trying to instil fear among the government employees. We request the government to strip him of his assembly membership and declare him ineligible to contest any kind of elections in the future. The state government should immediately get him arrested and take action against him as per law. If no action is taken against him and the accused in Zira SDM case, then we will be forced to intensify our agitation and the state government will be responsible for the outcome.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
