DK Shivakumar's supporters to hold protest in Bengaluru against his arrest today; Congress leader thanks them

Congress leader DK Shivakumar | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Congress' DK Shivakumar was arrested by ED last week in a money laundering case Shivakumar appealed to his supporters to maintain law and order situation After arrest, he called himself a “victim of BJP's politics of vengeance and vendetta"

Bengaluru: Supporters of Karnataka Congress leader DK Shivakumar, who is in Enforcement Directorate’s custody in a money laundering case, will be holding protest in Bengaluru on Wednesday against his arrest.

Shivakumar, who was arrested last week, appealed to his supporters to maintain law and order situation during the protest and also thanked them for organising a “massive protest” to show solidarity with him.

"I wholeheartedly thank leaders, supporters, well-wishers and friends who have organised a massive protest in my support tomorrow in Bengaluru. I humbly request that the protest be peaceful and doesn't cause any inconvenience to citizens. Please ensure the public property isn't harmed," Shivakumar said in a tweet.

I would like to reiterate that I have done nothing wrong & am a target of vendetta politics.



With the support and blessings that I am receiving from all of you, and my belief in god and our judiciary, I have full faith that I will emerge victorious both legally and politically. — DK Shivakumar (@DKShivakumar) September 10, 2019

The Congress leader also reiterated that he was being framed while asserting that he will emerge victorious in the case registered by the ED against him.

"I would like to reiterate that I have done nothing wrong and am a target of vendetta politics. With the support and blessings that I am receiving from all of you and my belief in God and our judiciary, I have full faith that I will emerge victorious both legally and politically," he said in another tweet.

Earlier today, the ED issued a summon to Shivakumar's daughter Aishwarya for questioning in connection with the case. The agency has asked Aishwarya to appear before it on September 12. The ED is likely to quiz her on certain transactions, sources told news agency ANI.

Shivakumar was arrested by the ED on September 3 after interrogation for five consecutive days. He was sent to the agency's custody for ten days by a Delhi court.

After his arrest, Shivakumar vented out his ire against the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in a series of tweets and called himself a “victim of BJP's politics of vengeance and vendetta”.

“I congratulate my BJP friends for finally being successful in their mission of arresting me. The IT and ED cases against me are politically motivated and I am a victim of BJP's politics of vengeance and vendetta,” he said in a tweet.

The Congress also issued a statement to condemn Shivakumar's arrest and called it a clear case of political vendetta by the “fascist BJP government” at the Centre.

"After Shri Chidambaram, he is yet another leader facing vengeance for standing up against the horse-trading and petty politics of the BJP. By these actions, the ED and the CBI have proved to be the puppet agents of the government at the Centre. A wrong trend has been set by the Modi government to harass and hunt down the political opponents with fabricated allegations," AICC General Secretary KC Venugopal said in the statement.

In September last year, the ED had registered the money laundering case against Shivakumar and others on the basis of charge sheet (prosecution complaint) filed by the Income Tax Department in a court for their alleged role in tax evasion and hawala transactions worth crores.
