You can't control us by arresting: Chandrababu Naidu warns Jagan Reddy government over house arrest

TDP chief Chandrababu Naidu | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights TDP MLA Tangirala Sowmya and several party leaders have also been put under preventive detention Naidu, who will sit on a hunger strike till 8 pm today, is not being allowed to meet media TDP leaders and workers who tried to go to Naidu's residence were stopped by the police and taken into preventive custody

Hyderabad: Telugu Desam Party (TDP) chief and former Andhra Pradesh chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu, who has been put under house arrest on Wednesday, was stopped by the police after he tried to leave for Atmakuru to participate in the protest rally 'Chalo Atmakur’ called against Jagan Mohan Reddy-led YSR Congress Party government.

The police locked the main gate of Naidu's residence in Guntur district, where he has been placed under preventive detention since morning.

"Chandrababu Naidu was taken into preventive custody as his actions were increasing tensions and creating disturbances to law and order in Palnadu, Guntur. Police didn’t take him into preventive custody for fighting against the policies of state government," Andhra Pradesh DGP, G Sawang said.

Naidu, who will sit on hunger strike till 8 pm today, told media that Reddy government was violating human rights and fundamental rights.

"I am warning the government. I am warning the police also. You cannot play this type of politics. You cannot control us by arresting. Whenever they allow me, I'll continue 'Chalo Atmakur'," he told reporters outside his residence.

TDP chief's son, Nara Lokesh, who was also placed under preventive detention slammed the YSRCP government for stopping them in an "undemocratic way".

"This is a dictatorship, we are being stopped in an undemocratic way. TDP leaders and workers are being harassed. YSRCP MLAs are openly threatening us, saying police is with them," Lokesh was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

"The ruling party is trying to strangulate our party across Andhra Pradesh. We were doing our activities in a democratic manner but our entire leadership was put under house arrest. This is the murder of democracy," he added.

Telugu Desam Party (TDP) leader Nara Lokesh to ANI: The ruling party is trying to strangulate our party across Andhra Pradesh. We were doing our activities in a democratic manner but our entire leadership was put under house arrest. This is the murder of democracy. https://t.co/xq2zKUYKIu — ANI (@ANI) September 11, 2019

Besides the father-son duo, former MLA and TDP leader Tangirala Sowmya and several party leaders have also been put under preventive detention at lawmaker's residence in Krishna district ahead of their planned ‘Chalo Atmakur’ rally in Atmakuru district, against alleged "political violence" by the ruling YSRCP in the state.

Andhra Pradesh: Telugu Desam Party (TDP) leader Nara Lokesh, son of TDP Chief Chandrababu Naidu, argues with police. He was later put under house arrest. pic.twitter.com/Slv3LPeBRD — ANI (@ANI) September 11, 2019

TDP leaders and workers who tried to go to Naidu's residence were stopped by the police and taken into preventive custody.

TDP MLC YVB Rajendra Prasad was also put under house arrest at his residence in Vuyyuru town while former minister and TDP leader Bhuma Akhila Priya was put under detention at Novotel hotel in Vijayawada, news agency ANI reported.

According to police, the TDP has not sought permission for holding the rally. Meanwhile, Section 144 has been imposed in Narasaraopeta, Sattenapalle, Palnadu and Gurajala.

Reddy and Naidu have been at loggerheads ever since the YSRCP came to power in the state by dethroning the TDP in the Assembly elections. The YSRCP had registered a thumping victory by winning 149 Assembly seats out of the total 175 seats while the TDP bagged just 25 seats.

Naidu-led TDP had yesterday said that they will launch 'Chalo Atmakur' on September 11 for saving democracy and safeguarding human rights in the region. It also accused the YSRCP of indulging in political violence after coming to power in May and alleged that the cadres of the ruling party have killed as many as eight TDP workers and attacked many more.

Earlier, Andhra Pradesh Home Minister M Sucharita said that the opposition party has not taken any permission for launching the rally.

The ruling YSRCP has been harsh on Naidu-led TDP ever since it formed the government in the state.

Earlier, the Andhra Pradesh government had ordered the demolition of public grievance cell –‘Praja Vedika’ that was built when Naidu was the CM. The chief minister called the structure, built on the banks of the Krishna river ‘an illegal building’ that violated environmental norms. It had also stripped the former Andhra Pradesh chief minister of his ‘Z’ security cover.

Further, the Reddy government shut down TDP's flagship Anna Canteens across Andhra Pradesh.
