Not afraid: Nitin Gadkari on protests against him over Motor Vehicles Act

Nitin Gadkari also said that it was the responsibility of everyone to save people's lives. (Photo: PTI)

Union Transport Minister Nitin Gadkari on Wednesday said he was not afraid of protests and agitation against him, while adding, "My responsibility is to save the life of 1.20 lakh people dying on road in accidents."

In an interview with AajTak, Nitin Gadkari said, "I don't think that Haryana or Gujarat is implementing or hesitating out of fear."

States which are yet to implement the Motor Vehicles Act include West Bengal, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana. When asked about them, Nitin Gadkari said that the Act was implemented in public interest.

Nitin Gadkari also said, "You people are focussing on selective scooty/bike challans, but don't highlight the reason of that challan."

Nitin Gadkari also said that it was the responsibility of everyone to save people's lives. "It is the responsibility of the state as well."

"I will not allege that there is vote bank politics behind it," Nitin Gadkari added.

It comes after Youth Congress workers staged a dramatic protest outside Nitin Gadkari's official residence in New Delhi against the new traffic fines under the Motor Vehicle Act.

The Congress workers, who termed the new traffic law 'murder of democracy', tried to throw scooter at cops across a barricade put up to control protestors.

Protestors, who India Today TV spoke to, accused the government of penalising the common man while turning away from its own responsibility of strengthening the infrastructure.

Earlier, Nitin Gadkari had said that he could not force state governments to "enforce hefty traffic fines" after fines under Motor Vehicles Act were reduced in Gujarat.

Nitin Gadkari said, "I can’t force state governments to enforce hefty traffic fines...It’s for them to realise that it’s for the welfare of people."

Nitin Gadkari said, "Transport is in concurrent list. If Gujarat is reducing challans, let them (other states) do the experiment as well. We can't force the states."
