Pakistan Sikh girl ‘conversion’ case: FIR against Muslim man quashed

File picture: National Akali Dal workers stage a demonstration to protest against forceful conversion of a Sikh girl in Pakistan in New Delhi on Aug 30, 2019 | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights 19-year-old Jagjit Kaur is the daughter of a Sikh priest at Gurudwara Tambu Sahib The Sikh girl was allegedly abducted and forced to convert to Islam in Pakistan The news had triggered concerns not only in Pakistan but also in India

Lahore: The Pakistan Police have quashed an FIR against a Muslim man and others for purportedly kidnapping a Sikh teenage girl and converting her to Islam.

The FIR was quashed after both families inked a written agreement, said a senior police officer of the Punjab Police on Wednesday.

19-year-old Jagjit Kaur, the daughter of a Sikh priest at Gurudwara Tambu Sahib, was allegedly kidnapped by Mohammad Hassan, who resides in her locality in Nankana Sahib, in August. Reports suggested that he married Kaur later.

"The families of Kaur and Hassan have signed a written document agreeing to resolve the matter between them. Kaur's family has withdrawn all charges against Hassan and his family members and friends, thereby, the FIR against them stands quashed," the police officer said.

In the wake of the agreement, Hassan and his other family members have also withdrawn their protective bails, added the officer.

A video had gone viral showing one of the girl's family members claiming that a group of men barged into their house, abducted Kaur, forcibly converted her to Islam and made her marry Hassan.

The news had triggered concerns not only in Pakistan but also in India.

The Pakistan Police, on August 29, filed an FIR against six people for purported kidnapping and forcibly converting Kaur to Islam.

Police later arrested Hassan’s friend Arsalan.

Kaur was sent to Lahore's Darul Aman (shelter home) as per the court order after the 19-year-old told the judge that she married Hassan as per her own will.

In order to water down the anger of the Sikh community, Punjab Chief Minister Usman Buzdar and Governor Chaudhry Sarwar were made to intervene in the matter.

"In the agreement, it has been decided that Hassan will not force Kaur to stay with him and will divorce her if she asks for it. Kaur's family has also pledged that it will not harm the girl by any means on her return to the home," said the official.

The cop alleged that the girl is still in the shelter home as she is not "mentally prepared" to return to her parents' residence.

"It has also been agreed that Kaur will not see Hassan or vice-a-versa even he doesn't divorce her," the official said.

India had expressed its concern with Pakistan over the issue of Jagjit Kaur’s forced conversion to Islam and called for "immediate remedial action". Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh had even offered help to the Sikh girl to come and settle in India.
