Paper Wastage And Littering Takes Place In DUSU Elections Even When Printed Paper Campaigns Are Prohibited According To DU Code Of Conduct

Delhi University Student Union elections will take place on September 12 and the entire city knows that. Not only the campuses of colleges are covered in posters and their premises littered with pamphlets and cards, metro station walls, and areas quite far from colleges suffer the same fate.

The massive and blind wastage of paper for printed campaigning and the subsequent littering is an annual affair. These pamphlets and cards are forcefully shoved down the throats of students coming out of metro stations, going to their colleges in classes or simply standing with their friends. What’s funny is that, ABVP and NSUI volunteers hand these out even to people who are not students of the university.

IndiaTimes

In a time when the Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan is one of the leading campaigns of the ruling party, and when we are actively talking about deforestation and its effects, wastage of paper like this is the capital of the country really does not set a good example.

You know what is the most surprising bit about all this, use of printed campaign is actually prohibited in DUSU elections.

According to Delhi university code of conduct for DUSU elections 2019-2020, no candidate is permitted to make use of printed posters, printed pamphlet, or any other printed material for the purpose of canvassing. They are only allowing to utilize handmade posters for this purpose in accordance to NGT order.

IndiaTimes

In July 2016, National Green Tribunal passed an application directing that use of printed paper campaigning/canvassing to stop in DU elections and eco-friendly alternatives be found for campaigning.

The University paid no heed or effort in implementing this and the next year the Tribunal issued a notice to DU strongly objecting to the blatant use of paper in the DUSU elections in violation of its order restraining the students' body from using pamphlets and splattering the walls of the varsity campus with posters.

And the notice is being issued every year since, but to no avail. The authorities either have not made any efforts to implement eco-friendly ways of election campaigning or they have failed in their efforts. Why?

IndiaTimes

When we talked to an Associate Professor in DU, Debraj Mokerjee, he said he could not understand why a free lease is given when DUSU elections are conducted with their blatant violations of rules. It is just seen as something to get over with.





It will come as a greater surprise to you, to know that according to the code of conduct candidates are only allowed to put up only handmade posters and that too, only two in number! Even the defacing of college and university property is prohibited, but no authority seems to look after the fact whether these codes of conduct are actually being followed. If the elections were conducted according to the rules and guidelines none of the candidates might qualify.

IndiaTimes

In trying to gauge the scope of wastage that takes place we went to a small printing press in New Chandraval, where most of the DUSU campaign pamphlets are printed. There we got to know that a small press prints about 3-4 lakh pamphlets and there are at least 50 such printing press in that area. If we take an estimate, there are 15 lakhs pamphlets printed only in the North Campus itself. The current undergrad DU population? Almost 1,30,000. And this estimate does not even include the cards, posters and the huge bill board hoardings that are printed.

IndiaTimes

Environment is a big issue today, it is actually becoming a political issue. People are actively protesting against the deforestation of Aarey in Mumbai, but what about the trees that have already been chopped down for the printing of the DUSU election cards, pamphlets, posters which is not allowed in the first place?

If environment is indeed as concerning an issue to the government as it is made out to be, then changes on the ground level need to be made. Starting from ensuring a total ban on the wastage of paper that takes place in DUSU elections.

If the sensitisation towards the environment does not happen at the student level, how do we expect them to take it seriously further in life?
