Uttarakhand relaxes strict penalties in Motor Vehicles Act, reduces traffic fines

In case someone is found driving with expired licence, the Centre's fine is Rs 10,000, however, the Uttarakhand government has brought it down to Rs 5,000. (Representational Image)

After Gujarat and Karnataka, Uttarakhand has now reduced the penalties for traffic violations under the amended Motor Vehicles Act.

Reducing the amount of hefty traffic fines imposed by the Centre under the new Motor Vehicles Act, the BJP-led government in the Uttarkhand said the Centre's fine of Rs 5,000 for driving without licence has been slashed to Rs 2,500 in the state.

In case someone is found driving with expired licence, the Centre's fine is Rs 10,000, however, the Uttarakhand government has brought it down to Rs 5,000.

The decision was made after Uttarakhand Chief Minister Trivendra Singh Rawat on Wednesday convened a meeting of his cabinet to discuss various issues concerning the state including the amended Motor Vehicles (MV) Act.

Uttarakhand's urban development minister and government spokesperson Madan Kaushik, later briefing reporters, said 16 proposals were presented before the state cabinet.

The state government has decided to slightly amend the MV Act and relax certain rules.

The government, however, did not make any changes to Section 177 of the Act. Riding without helmet, triple riding, black window panes on vehicles and not carrying the requisite documents come under this section. Penalties for these offences have been kept intact with central rules.

While sale of unauthorised vehicles attract a penalty of Rs 1,00,000 under the amended Motor Vehicles Act, however, the state government has fixed it to Rs 50,000.

Modification to the vehicle and wrong number plate would be fined with Rs 5,000 in Uttarakhand; while speeding and dangerous driving would cost the driver Rs 2,000.

Uttarakhand is the third BJP-ruled state after Karnataka and Gujarat to reduce strict penalties under the amended Motot Vehicles Act.

Meanwhile, West Bengal has refused to enforce the revised penalties citing inconvenience to people.

Many parties have also demanded that the fines be brought down since they are too steep.

On Wednesday, Youth Congress members protested outside the residence of Union transport minister Nitin Gadkari in New Delhi.
