‘Stop stealing our future’ say Indian students after education provider shuts down

The New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) claims it is working tirelessly to protect the interests of the international students affected by the closure of the Kiwi Institute of Training and Education (KITE) that went into liquidation last month.

“NZQA is working with the Public Trust and Immigration New Zealand (INZ) to provide as much support as possible to the students of the Kiwi Institute of Training and Education (KITE).

“Several students have already received their qualifications since KITE went into liquidation. NZQA can also confirm that the process for reimbursing the majority of students who are eligible for a refund was initiated last week,” the NZQA said in a statement to SBS Punjabi.

But the affected students, many of them from India, claim they have been scrambling to navigate the system, which expects them to apply for a special visa, procure assessment transcripts and transfer credits to finish their outstanding courses with another education provider, all within a matter of days.

“Just imagine our plight,” said Karambir Singh, a former KITE student who is leading a group of affected students who have been plunged into an unexpected crisis.

“First, our institute went bust, then we were asked to apply and pay more money for newer visas, then we were asked to enrol with a new institute which is yet another complication altogether.

“We have been running to NZQA, INZ and immigration lawyers to get out of the mess that isn’t our doing. And on top, there is a deadline looming on our heads,” said Mr Singh.

Supplied

The students claim that in order for them to finish their outstanding courses, NZQA must process their results before October 14th, in time for the next intake.

“If NZQA does not declare our results before October second week, students will have to wait until February 2020 or later for a course that in normal circumstances would have finished this year,” added Mr Singh.

Acknowledging their situation, the NZQA has said that they have engaged another education provider to verify the assessment of the KITE students.

“We have been advised by this provider that additional resources are being committed to accomplishing this task as quickly as possible and they estimate that all marking will be completed before the end of September.”

‘Do I look like I am made of money?’

Some students are, however, not satisfied with NZQA's efforts and claim they have lost faith in the country’s education and immigration system.

“I am done with New Zealand. Do I look like I am made of money? I can’t waste more time or effort or my parents' hard-earned money to transfer to another college and then not even get a degree at the end,” said a student who doesn’t wish to be named.

Auckland-based Immigration Advisor Jasmine Bath, who’s looking out for the stranded students, said the problem is that students are being “misguided” by authorities on many levels.

“Everyone is giving free advice. But nobody is telling them what they should actually be doing to resolve the crisis.

“The best recourse they have is to apply for a U16 visa which would allow them to stay in the country legally, continue their studies with another institution and also work for 20 hours,” said Ms Bath.

Supplied

In line with Ms Bath's comments, immigration lawyer Arunjeev Singh said experiences like these are bringing a bad name to the country’s education sector.

“I agree that KITE went into liquidation, but what were the regulatory authorities doing? Why were the students not informed in time? Such incidents are only going to dissuade overseas students from applying for study in New Zealand.

“NZQA and INZ must come together to address their predicament to ensure this never ever happens again,” said Mr Singh.

Meanwhile, responding to SBS Punjabi's inquiry, the Indian High Commission in Wellington said, "We have already taken up the matter with NZQA, asking them to provide an update."

Listen to SBS Punjabi Monday to Friday at 9 pm. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
