What has Iran done to protect Kashmir?

Therein, the great Shirazi described all humankind as one body. If one part of the body is in pain, the whole body is uncomfortable. This poem hangs on the entrance of the UN Headquarters in the US. However, it seems that neither Americans nor any expansionists have ever read it. If they have read it, they haven’t grasped or cared to follow it. Otherwise, humanity would not have suffered so much bloodshed.

Yet, it seems that the words of Saadi Shirazi continue to echo and reverberate in the hearts and minds of the people of Iran. The following steps taken by Iran since Modi’s incredibly inhumane actions against the people of Jammu and Kashmir fully justify my claim. The Indian prime minister, who has been termed by some international observers as the most dangerous politicians in present times, revoked India’s constitution that allowed Jammu and Kashmir a special status. He turned the whole occupied state into a prison, where people were given no access to markets, hospitals, schools and any type of communication network.

Iran was the first country to show decisiveness to Modi’s declaration, despite its close relations with India. This is called principle and morality

As soon as Modi made an unlawful declaration and ordered curfew in Jammu and Kashmir, Iran was the first country to show decisiveness, despite its close relations with India. This is called principle and morality. The first step was taken by the spiritual leader of Iran, Ayatollah Khamenei, who urged India to protect the Muslims of Kashmir. This followed several demonstrations in main Iranian cities, such as Tehran, Mashad and Shiraz. I was present in two such demonstrations in Mashad on August 15, just 10 days after India had declared a curfew in Kashmir. A local member of the National Majlis or Parliament, Nasrollah Pezmanfar, represented the Iranian government. On Tuesday, August 13, Iran’s Foreign Office Spokesman, Abbas Mousavi, issued a statement expressing Iran’s grave concern over Jammu and Kashmir.

This followed a resolution presented by Dr Ali Mathari in the Iranian parliament, calling on all Muslim countries to stand up for the protection of the Muslims of Jammu and Kashmir. As reported by the Tehran Times on August 24, the Office for Strengthening Unity (OSU) wrote a letter to the Secretary-General of the UN. The OSU demanded a condemnation of the Indian behaviour in Jammu and Kashmir; asking for necessary steps to protect the Kashmiri Muslims. The OSU is an association whose purpose is to strengthen the coordination between universities and theological seminaries. It was set up in 1979 by Ayatollah Mohammad Beheshti, a top confidant of Iran’s supreme leader, Ruhollah Khomeini. The Grand Ayatollah Lotfollah Safi also issued a strong condemnation on India’s inhumane actions in Kashmir and demanded an “immediate halt to Indian violence.”

Hojjatoleslam Kazem Seddiqi, the interim Friday prayer leader of Tehran, described Kashmir as one of the tragedies of the Muslim world. He added that the Indian government’s behaviour was contrary to human conscience, fairness and even domestic laws.

The Iranian media has also played a commendable role highlighting Indian atrocities and the reaction against it.

What is most important is the fact that no lobby was made in Iran by or on behalf of the people of Jammu and Kashmir. The Iranian government, leadership and people were instigated by their sense of humanity and fairness. This will never be forgotten and should not be forgotten by the victimised people of Jammu and Kashmir!

The writer is from Iran
