India hoping to retain support at UNHRC till Sept 19

NEW DELHI: India hopes to keep its support intact at the UN Human Rights Council ( UNHRC ) till September 19 by when Pakistan needs to make moves to influence the authority to pass a resolution or launch a statement on Kashmir Pakistan is trying hard to either move an Urgent Debate and a subsequent resolution or a UNHRC Presidential Statement or a joint statement on its Kashmir narrative, ET has learnt. Islamabad has so far been unsuccessful in securing the necessary support in the 47-member council to fructify any of these moves. New Delhi, however, stays cautious and is observing Islamabad’s every move closely. The government is hoping to blunt moves by Pakistan in Geneva to bring Kashmir to the UN General Assembly agenda if it fails to pass a resolution in the UNHRC session, ET has learnt.India is in touch with its partners in the council and hopes that their support to its arguments would remain intact. On Tuesday, Pakistan’s three attempts — a statement by its foreign minister, an appeal to the OIC and an appeal on behalf of 58 countries — failed. The claim on behalf of 58 countries did not have any basis, ET has learnt.“The decision was taken by our Parliament. These were sovereign decisions… (and) India’s internal matter. Basic services are being eased gradually. My government is taking affirmative action by adopting progressive policies,” said MEA (East) secretary Vijay Thakur Singh, who led the Indian delegation to Geneva.“Progressive policies will now be fully applicable to Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. These will end gender discrimination, better protect juvenile rights and make applicable rights to education, information and work,” she said. “No country can expect interference in its internal affairs and certainly not India.”In a desperate move, Prime Minister Imran Khan on Wednesday announced that he would hold a rally in Muzaffarabad on Friday. At least 22 people were arrested at a pro-independence protest in PoK after clashes broke out between authorities and demonstrators near the village of Tatrinote, about 80km south of the in Pakistanoccupied Kashmir (PoK) capital, and close to the Line of Control.
