India lodges protest with Pakistan over diplomat harassment,...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





India lodges protest with Pakistan over diplomat harassment, terrorism speech

22 Jan 2019

Days after a Delhi woman lodged a complaint against a Pakistan High Commission staffer for allegedly touching her inappropriately, India has accused Pakistan of taking retaliatory action against two staff members of its High Commission.

Reportedly, the Indian High Commission has sent a "note verbale" to Pakistan regarding the alleged harassment that took place in Pakistan's capital, Islamabad.

Here are the details.

On January 13, a Pakistan diplomat allegedly harassed a woman

First incident

The entire episode began on January 13 when a Pakistan High Commission staffer was taken to the Sarojini Nagar police station after a woman alleged that the man had touched her inappropriately at a market place.

Reportedly, the staffer apologized and after the issue was resolved he was allowed to leave by the Delhi Police.

Pakistan allegedly retaliated by harassing Indian diplomats

Retaliation

Now, it appears that Pakistan had taken retaliatory action against Indian High Commission staff.

Reportedly, two Indian High Commission staff members were intercepted by Pakistani security agency personnel inside the high-security diplomatic enclave in Islamabad on January 15, presumably as retaliation against the detention of its own diplomat by the Delhi Police.

The Indian two staff members were also threatened with retaliatory action.

What India told Pakistan in the note verbale

Fact

"On January 15, at 10 am, while going from the High Commission to the World Mart market in Diplomatic enclave, two of the staff members of this mission, were intercepted by Pakistani agency personnel and questioned them about the alleged incident with a Pakistan High Commission official in India," read India's note verbale.

A speech advocating terrorism against India was also given recently

Terrorism speech

However, the incident involving diplomats isn't the only thing India is miffed about.

India has also raised objections to a speech given by Ansar
