Won't be able to shut Bengal's mouth: Didi leads protest march against NRC

West Bengal Chief Minister and Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee on Thursday led a protest march against the National Register of Citizens (NRC).

While speaking at the rally, Mamata Banerjee said that the BJP-led government cannot shut Bengal's mouth like they were able to do in Assam. She also said that she did not agree with the NRC for the sake of religion.

State BJP president, Dilip Ghosh had said that the NRC cannot be implemented under Trinamool Congress regime. However, Ghosh said that the NRC will be taken up in the state and illegal immigrants will be identified and driven out just the way it was done in Assam.

"You won't be able to shut Bengal's mouth as you did in Assam by using your police. Suddenly, you are teaching us religion as if we don't celebrate Eid, Durga Puja, Muharram and Chhath Puja," Mamata Banerjee slammed the BJP's claims on bringing NRC to Bengal.

She also said that if BJP leaders wished to come to see how Bengalis celebrated Durga puja, they were welcome. "They can come for khichidi, payesh as Prasad," she said.

Both the Trinamool Congress and the BJP are engaged in competitive politics over celebration of Durga Puja in the state.

Mamata Banerjee said, "For the sake of religion, for the sake of Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs and Christians, I don't agree with the NRC." She also said that they did not need lessons on religion from the BJP.

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister and Trinamool Congress Chief Mamata Banerjee leads a protest march against National Register of Citizens(NRC) pic.twitter.com/5gmHbjTd9a ANI (@ANI) September 12, 2019

"We will not accept the NRC on the basis of religion and ethnicity," Mamata Banerjee said, while adding, "They are trying to destroy the culture of Bengal".

Mamata Banerjee also talked about the Assam NRC and said, "Around 19 lakh people are left out in the final list, including Hindus, Muslims and Buddhists."

Mamata Banerjee questioned why the people had to give proof of citizenship even after so many years of Independence. "It's been 76 years since India attained independence and still we've to give proof of our identity. Why?" Mamata Banerjee asked.

West Bengal CM & TMC Chief Mamata Banerjee at a protest march in Kolkata, against National Register of Citizens (NRC): 19 lakh people are left out in the final list, including Hindus, Muslims&Buddhists. It's 76 yrs of independence, still we've to give proof of our identity. Why? pic.twitter.com/eL6hhe4AN8 ANI (@ANI) September 12, 2019

Even though the protest march was over NRC, Mamata Banerjee touched upon issues like the economic downturn, the fall on interest rate and disinvestment policy, which are hitting people hard.

Mamata Banerjee also referred to the economic crisis across the country and said, "I had said in advance that you all would get to know what happens to your funds when this government comes to power. Now, you now. There is a economic landslide across the nation."

Mamata Banerjee said, "Small business have no money...Industries are shutting down. Air India employees are not getting salary. Ordinance factory...they want to privatise...Banks are being merged."

"They will take everything away," Mamata Banerjee added.

Mamata Banerjee also doled out a warning to the government not to divide Bengal. "Let me alarm them...Do not try to divide Bengal again!" she said.

"If today, they say Hindi speakers should leave Maharashtra or Bengalis should leave UP...Will that work?" Mamata Banerjee asked.

"Don't play with fire. We are all prepared to protect the nation," Mamata Banerjee said.

(Inputs from Romita Datta)
