SC Collegium breaks silence over transfer of Madras HC Chief Justice to Meghalaya HC

Supreme Court of India. | File image | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Protesting lawyers had pointed out that Justice Tahilramani has been transferred from an HC with a sanctioned strength of 75 judges to an HC with three judges The Madras HC lawyers argue that such a transfer amounts to demotion, punishment and humiliation

New Delhi: The SC Collegium comprising of Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and four senior-most judges has just now broken the silence over the massive row over the transfer of Madras High Court Chief Justice Vijaya Tahilramani to Meghalaya High Court - following which she resigned in protest.

Without naming Justice Tahilramani, a statement issued by apex court’s Secretary-General on behalf of the Collegium said each of the recommendations for transfer was made for cogent reasons after complying with the required procedure in the interest of better administration of justice.

Questions were also raised regarding some other transfers of Chief Justices and Judges by the Collegium but Justice Tahilramani’s was the most controversial one.

Madras High Court lawyers held a very vocal protest for two days – Monday and Tuesday outside the High Court after which they passed a resolution urging the Chief Justice to intervene and withdraw the transfer order.

Protesting lawyers had pointed out that Justice Tahilramani has been transferred from an HC with a sanctioned strength of 75 judges to an HC with three judges and that it amounted to demotion, punishment and humiliation.

They were also angry that no reason had been given for the transfer and questioned lack of transparency

Just now, in a clarification statement issued through the Court’s Secretary-General Sanjeev Kalgaonkar, the Collegium without naming Justice Tahilramani said: “Certain reports relating to the recommendations recently made by the Collegium regarding the transfer of chief justices/judges of the High Court have appeared in the media”

“It is stated that each of the recommendations for transfer was made for cogent reasons after complying with the required procedure in the interest of better administration of justice,” it said.

It would not be in the interest of the institution to disclose the reasons for transfer but if found necessary, the Collegium will not have any hesitation in disclosing the same,” it added.

Further, each of the recommendations was made after full and complete deliberation and the same was unanimously agreed upon by the Collegium,” said the statement.

Justice Tahilramani had on September 7 resigned in protest against the Collegium’s decision.

Till her resignation is accepted by the President, she has proceeded on leave.

The resolution passed by the lawyers says that normally a Chief Justice of such a big High Court is not transferred to such a small High Court as it is considered a demotion, punishment and humiliation. They also alleged a lack of transparency They say: “Such kind of arbitrary transfer whittles away the independence of the judiciary and confidence of the judges”.

Justice Tahilramani is one of the senior-most high court judges in the country and is among the only two women judges who are heading high courts at the moment. The other being Justice Geeta Mittal of J&K High Court.

Unlike the Madras High Court which has a sanctioned strength of 75 judges and is one of the oldest and bigger high courts in the country, the Meghalaya High Court is the smallest HC, having been established only on March 23, 2013. Like the Sikkim High Court, the Meghalaya High Court also has only three judges.

Elevation of HC Chief Justices to the apex court and their transfer has been a sticky issue for the Collegium for quite some time.
