After Gujarat, Karnataka Announces Slashes to Motor Vehicles Act Penalties

New Delhi: The governments of 10 states — five of them run by the Bharatiya Janata Party — have either announced drastic cuts to the steeps penalties for traffic violations brought by the Centre, or disagreed with the move and promised amendments.

A day after the Gujarat government announced a massive cut in the penalties for traffic violations under the amended Motor Vehicles (MV) Act, Karnataka chief minister B.S. Yediyurappa on Wednesday said the same will be implemented in his state also. The Uttarakhand cabinet, headed by BJP man Trivendra Singh Rawat, has also cleared a proposal to reduce some of the penalties revised by the Centre for traffic rule violations under the amended Act.

Meanwhile, BJP-ruled Goa has said it will aim to first repair and reconstruct bad roads before charging the hefty fines. State transport minister Mauvin Godinho pegged the implementation of the new rules no earlier than January 2020. Higher traffic penalties have come into effect in most states across the country from September 1.

The transport minister of Maharashtra, yet another BJP-ruled state, Diwakar Raote wrote to Union transport minister Nitin Gadkari about the exorbitant increase, reported Scroll.in.

The Centre has struggled to justify the fines in the face of steady opposition from several quarters.

Also read: Not All States Convinced By High New Traffic Violation Penalties

In some cases, the reduction in Gujarat is as steep as Rs 1,000 from Rs 10,000. Announcing the cut in penalties in Gujarat, chief minister Vijay Rupani had said that the fine amount for different violations proposed under the Central law is the upper limit.

“Regarding the cut in the penalties for violation of traffic rules under the Motor Vehicle Act, we will get the orders of the Gujarat government. I have instructed our officials that we will follow that order here also. Mostly in about two-three days like in Gujarat, here also we will try to cut the penalties that are high,” Yediyurappa said.

In Uttarakhand, the penalties for several offences under the revised act are being reduced by half but fines for driving without wearing helmets, speeding or tripling on two wheelers will not be reduced, state government spokesman Madan Kaushik told reporters.

The reduced penalties will come into effect after the state government issues a notification in this regard, Kaushik, who is also the state’s Urban Development Minister, said. Citing instances of the reduced penalties, Kaushik said the fine for driving by an unauthorised person or a minor earlier was Rs 1000 which was revised to Rs 5000 by the Centre recently which is being reduced to Rs 2,500.The fine for driving while talking on a mobile handset is also being halved from Rs 5000 to Rs 2500 in the state, he said.

Rajasthan transport minister Pratap Singh Khachariyawas said the Congress-led state government would not accept the amended Act in toto and would be looking to reduce the fines, especially on motorcycles.

Also read: Why India Needs a Vehicle Crash Investigation Agency

Both the Aam Aadmi Party government in Delhi and the Congress government in Madhya Pradesh have opted for widespread awareness measures and consultations before implementing the fines, reported The Quint.

West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee has also been one to rally against the steep fines, as has, surprisingly, the Biju Janata Dal government in Odisha, which frequently falls in line with the BJP. Widespread protests against the implementation of the Act could have led to the Naveen Patnaik government delaying it by three months. The capital of Bhubaneswar even saw clashes between those who were charged fines and law enforcement, reported News18.

On July 31, Parliament passed the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2019, which seeks to tighten road traffic regulations such as the issuance of driving licence and imposes stricter penalties for violations in an attempt to improve road safety.

(With PTI inputs)
