West Bengal: 1000s of Left protestors ask for jobs, police respond with tear gas, lathicharge

DYFI has claimed that its activists will reach Nabanna to submit thousands of applications signed by unemployed youth seeking jobs from West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee. (Photo: Twitter/MayukhDuke)

The streets of Howrah turned red, not with blood, but with young-blooded students who came out to protest against the growing job crisis in West Bengal.

Twelve Left youth and students' wings have undertaken a two-day "Nabanna Chalo" (march to the Bengal secretariat) campaign on Thursday. The march is being conducted by the Students' Federation of India (SFI) and Democratic Youth Federation of India (DYFI).

The rally began from Singur in Hooghly district on Thursday and is scheduled to move towards Bengal secretariat Nabanna in the Howrah district.

As protestors made their way towards Nabanna, they were met by police barricades and lathicharges.

SFI and DYFI members began the march from Singur, the venue of abandoned Tata Nano car plant as a symbolic gesture. The march has been called to demand jobs for the youth in Bengal.

DYFI has claimed that its activists will reach Nabanna to submit thousands of applications signed by unemployed youth seeking answers and jobs from West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee today.

Security has been tightened in Howrah and police have erected barricades at Howrah Maidan area, about 4 km away from state secretariat Nabanna to stop the protesters.

CLASHES BREAK OUT

Clashes broke out in Howrah on Friday between the police and the Left Front activists, who were marching towards the state secretariat, demanding employment for the youth.

#WATCH Howrah: Youth wing and student wing of Communist Party of India (Marxist), stage a protest alleging unemployment in the state. Water-cannons used by the police against the protesters. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/c4qNDIPCBm ANI (@ANI) September 13, 2019

Several people on the two sides suffered injuries in the clash.

According to sources, police lobbed tear gas shell and resorted to baton charge after activists of the CPI(M)'s student and youth wings pelted stones at them.
