India's actions in Kashmir will push 20 crore Indian Muslims towards extremism: Pakistan PM Imran Khan

Pakistan PM Imran Khan said that he will take a stand for Kashmir like no one has ever done before. (Photo: Reuters)

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Friday held a rally in Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan-occupied Kashmir to show solidarity with the people in Kashmir.

Imran Khan warned that India's actions in Kashmir will make the Indian Muslims believe that they do not belong in the country and drive them towards extremism.

While addressing the people gathered for the rally, Pakistan PM Imran Khan said that he will take a stand for Kashmir like no one has ever done before.

"I will take a stand for Kashmir in a way that no one else has ever stood for the issue," Imran Khan said.

He reiterated his statement that he has decided to be Kashmir's ambassador in the world.

"I decided to be Kashmir's ambassador to the world. I am a Pakistani, a Muslim and a human being. The issue of kashmir is an issue of human rights," Imran Khan said.

Referring to communication blockout in Kashmir, Imran Khan said, "For 40 days, our brothers, sisters, children are under curfew."

Imran Khan also said that he was going to address the United Nations General Assembly next week. "And I will not disappoint the people of Kashmir," Imran Khan said.

Imran Khan also said that the "the brutality of the Indian forces...will flare extremism".

"When brutality cross its limits, then every person decides to die instead of facing oppression," Imran Khan said.

He also said, "The way India has locked up the people in Kashmiri, I want to tell them that you are pushing these people towards extremism. India's action in Kashmir is telling the Muslims in the country that they have no place in India."

"What India is doing against Muslims will promote extremism in the Muslim countries also. And they will stand up," Imran Khan said.

Imran Khan also referred to people trying to move to the Line of Control (LoC) and said, "Don't go to the LoC. Let me go to UNSC first and let the world the know about Kashmir."
