Residents pay 'flashlight tribute' to Pune Police for facilitating smooth Ganpati festival

There were 1,752 registered Ganesh pandals in Pune city (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Ganeshotsav commenced on September 2 and ended on Thursday More than 8,000 police personnel were deployed in Pune for the festival There were 1,752 registered Ganesh pandals in Pune city

Pune: On September 12, thousands of devotees thronged the streets of Mumbai and Pune among other cities to bid farewell to Hindu god Ganesha. Thursday was the final day of the Ganesh Chaturthi celebrations which commenced on September 2. The last day is usually when devotees immerse an idol of Lord Ganesha into a water body.

Supervising immersion processions in cities such as Pune is a mammoth task and requires absolute vigilance. This year around, Pune Police made elaborate arrangements to ensure that the Ganeshotsav takes place without any untoward incident. Traffic diversions, road closures, restrictions and pickets were set up across the city in Maharashtra to facilitate smooth functioning of immersion processions which attracted crowds in the thousands.

Additional staff was also deployed in the city apart from local police for this purpose. In fact, the entire staff of the traffic control branch was deployed at various points across the city to ensure fluid traffic conditions. In addition, Home Guard and citizen volunteers were also called in to aid city police with the task at hand. The entire operation was led by Police Commissioner Dr K Venkatesham and Joint Commissioner of Police Ravindra Shisve along with four additional commissioners, 12 deputy commissioners and at least 29 sub-commissioners.

Not an EDM night, nor a concert venue. This is the Love & Support of #Punekars, which motivates us to serve you MORE every passing day.



THANK YOU! #DoingMORE #PunePolice #GaneshVisarjan https://t.co/ZtS5mKx3eI — CP Pune City (@CPPuneCity) September 13, 2019

In order to effectively supervise over 1,752 registered Ganesh mandals, Quick Response Teams and Riot Control Vehicles were also kept on standby along with Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad teams. Reports suggest that a little over 8,000 police personnel were deployed on the streets of Pune to ensure the safety of citizens and devotees.

Reciprocating their appreciation in exchange for the elaborate security arrangements, citizens of Pune paid a tribute to the city police. According to a report, members of various Ganesh mandals used the flashlights on their mobile phones to applaud the sentinels for ensure smooth functioning of the city and the immersion processions. Police Commissioner Dr K Venkatesham took to micro-blogging website Twitter and thanked the citizens for the heart-warming tribute. He wrote, "Not an EDM night, nor a concert venue. This is the Love & Support of #Punekars, which motivates us to serve you MORE every passing day. THANK YOU."

Earlier this month, the residents of Pune were showered with praise after a video showing a Ganpati immersion procession making way for an ambulance went viral on social media. The video was recorded in the city's Lakshmi Road area.
