Armed gangsters loot coal from WCL Penganga mine

Nagpur: In a bizarre incident, gangsters of a suspected coal mafia looted truckloads of coal from Western Coalfields Limited’s (WCL) Penganga open cast mine in Chandrapur district after threatening employees and security men, including an armed guard of Maharashtra State Security Corporation.

Coal employees union, INTUC, has blamed the WCL administration for inadequate security measures which led to the gangsters barging into the mine that is considered a sensitive area.

WCL mine manager, Jitendra Kumar Yashwant Charde, has lodged a complaint with Gadchandur police, who have registered an offence against unidentified persons under sections 379, 34, 395 of Indian Penal Code read with Section 425 of Arms Act.

PI Sunil Singh Pawar told TOI that initially the WCL official lodged a complaint informing about loot of coal. “During investigations, we recorded the statements of WCL employees and security guards. They informed us that the gangsters were carrying weapons and also threatened to use them. Therefore, we have invoked relevant sections of the Arms Act,” he said.

As per Gadchandur police and WCL sources, a gang of around 40 persons, wearing masks, entered the coal stock area with six trucks (tippers) at around 2.40am on January 19. They threatened WCL employees and private operator of JCB. One of the gang members operated the JCB and loaded coal into the trucks. The gang also threatened a security guard and armed jawan of Maharashtra State Security Corporation at the check post while leaving.

As it takes around 10 minutes to load a truck with a capacity of 20 tonne, it is estimated that the gangsters must be there for at least an hour as they had arrived in six trucks.

Pawar said WCL official has provided numbers of only two trucks (MH-29-T-458 and MH-29-T-1542). “Security guards informed us they could note down numbers of only two trucks. Even security guards too said coal was loaded in two trucks and remaining were empty. The registration numbers will help us in tracking down the accused,” he said.

WCL spokesperson said security will be increased at the mines following the incident. “It is an unfortunate incident. There is no lapse or improper management on behalf of the WCL as security personnel of Maharashtra State Security Corporation have been deployed at the mines,” he said.

INTUC leader SQ Zama said WCL should re-deploy CISF personnel immediately. “WCL used to engage CISF personnel at mines, but the practice has been stopped. I had received complaints of theft of explosives (used for blasting coal benches inside mines) from WCL mines which is again a very sensitive issue. Armed gangsters also loot iron material from WCL mines. Yet, the administration is not taking it seriously. It is a threat to WCL employees,” he said.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
