Shiv Sena, AAP spar over Metro car shed

The civic body has also mandated the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation (MMRC) to plant 13,110 trees as compensatory plantation.

Even as citizen's groups continue to protest against the proposed Metro car shed at Aarey colony, the politics over the issue is also heating up.

Mumbai: Even as citizen's groups continue to protest against the proposed Metro car shed at Aarey colony, the politics over the issue is also heating up.

Shiv Sena leader Aditya Thackeray, who is at the forefront opposing the car shed, was at the receiving end on Saturday after his political opponents and even some activists accused him of indulging in lip service on the issue.

Aam Admi Party leader Preeti Sharma Menon called Aaditya the “new Pappu”. However, the Sena hit back, asking her to worry about the future of the Delhi chief minister.

Lashing out at the Yuva Sena president, an activist tweeted, “While Mumbaikars and children protest every day to save Aarey against a Defiant Maharashtra CM For no more destruction in Aarey. Why ShivSena (Partner in GOM) and it's army of sainiks and not on the streets. Aaditya Thackeray has lost its roar (sic)." In support of the tweet, Preeti Sharma Menon responded, "Aaditya Thackeray is the new Pappu. His words and actions have no correlation. #SaveAarey #PappuThackeray (sic).”

Responding to the rhetoric on Aaditya, Shiv Sena spokesperson Manisha Kayande said, “Instead of making remarks at Aaditya Thackeray, AAP should worry about its future in Delhi and of the leader Arvind Kejriwal. Aditya Thackeray's leadership is now known all over the country. From a very young age, he has not only established himself in Shiv Sena but has also established his identity among the major political leaders in the state and in the country. On the contrary, what is your identity, rather than calling Aditya Pappu, what has your Pappu of Delhi done?”

Some citizens and political rivals have pointed out that Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC), majorly run by the Shiv Sena, has granted approval to cut 2,185 trees and transplant 461 trees in Aarey Colony for construction of car depot for Metro-3 corridor. The civic body has also mandated the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation (MMRC) to plant 13,110 trees as compensatory plantation.
