RSS agenda in Amit Shah’s Hindi stand: Kerala CM

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM/ CHENNAI: Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Sunday came down heavily on Union home minister Amit Shah for trying to make Hindi the national language, which, he said, was a Sangh Parivar agenda.“This is a declaration of war against human hearts loving their mother tongue as their own mother,” the CM said, adding that it was nothing but an agenda of the Sangh Parivar and now the BJP government at the Centre was bringing up this issue to cover up its failures.He added that even after there was countrywide protest against the attempt to make Hindi the national language, the Centre was not ready to back out, which was condemnable. “India is a nation that recognises different languages. The Sangh Parivar should withdraw the move of disrupting them,” Pinarayi said. Congress also lashed out at the Centre. “The attempt of BJP is to divide the people in the name of language,” said Kerala opposition leader Ramesh Chennithala of Congress.“After their attempt to spread communal hatred in society, now they are targeting the people to fight each other in the name of language,” said Chennithala. “All languages are given equal importance in a country like India and no particular language can be called supreme. Hence, there is no need for making any particular language the national language. The unity in diversity is what makes India proud in the world,” he said.In Tamil Nadu too, the home minister came under severe attack. The 111th anniversary of DMK founder C N Annadurai on Sunday became an occasion for Centre-bashing on the Hindi issue. Former finance minister Yashwant Sinha, who took part in the event objected to Shah’s statement on the need for making Hindi the national language. “I hail from a Hindi-speaking state. But, I don’t accept what Shah said.”The former BJP leader said the NDA government did not know the culture of the country. “It is not possible to have a single culture and single language,” he said.Calling for opposition parties to forge a united front, DMK president M K Stalin said, “The Centre is being autocratic in imposing Hindi. It is time for unity in opposition ranks to take forward a strong protest against the government on such issues.” The mood at the MDMK conference was belligerent, like that in the 1960s when the DMK made anti-Brahminism, anti-Hindi and Periyarism as its main plank.
