Horamavu residents take things into own hands

potholes

Bengaluru

BBMP

Bangalore

.

Tired of the unresponsiveness of elected representatives, residents of East Horamavu take to the streets to repair theon weekend. Members of the association self-fund entire projectFeed of inaction on the part of BruhatMahanagara Palike () and elected representatives, the residents of East Horamavu took to roads to repair the potholes themselves. They self-funded the entire project and fixed one km stretch of the road on Sunday.The residents say they have been facing raising concerns about damaged roads for over two years. The roads have been dug for various reasons such as Cauvery pipelines, UGD connection or drainage work. The members of the resident association Sri Kanakagiri Nivasigalu Sangha collected Rs 25,000 and fixed the road of almost one kilometre stretch in Kanakagiri and East Horamavu. V Padmanabhaiah, general secretary of the association, says, “The roads were dug up and then badly patched.So badly, that they would get washed away in one rain. The road was non-motorable. TheWater Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) and BBMP would give us false commitment of fixing the roads soon, but no action had been initiated. This area has many schools and pre-schools and around 6,000 families reside here. The roads are extremely unsafe.”Satish Chandra, the president of the association adds that he spent all his saving to build his ‘dream house’ and now, he’s unable to step out due to the condition of the road. “The traffic gets so bad We are law-abiding, tax-paying citizens who suffer the wrath of inefficiency. Many young techies of the area have taken time out to help with these civic woes. They spend their weekend trying to fix the issues than spend time with their families and kids,” he says.The members of the association, which is a registered and a recognised organisation, say they are never invited to the ward committee meetings. “The corporator of our ward does not respond to our calls. We were not even aware that the ward committee meetings have been happening in our ward,” he says. The residents had also organised a human chain in Horamavu last month to highlight the civic and social issues but we have not received any response from any of the official.Sasthri SD, a resident says, “We have put all our money and bought properties here. But we are denied water, proper garbage disposal system and proper roads. We have to take things in our hands and do it on our own. There are no footpaths or parks for us here. We have somehow managed to get a play area for children.”Accidents are also a common feature in the area. “Our vehicles get damaged. We find it difficult to ride two-wheelers, especially when it rains. One of the woman fell and hurt herself while riding on these roads. Her child was riding pillion. This is extremely unsafe,” says Satish.
