On R-Day, 50 boys in Uttar Pradesh's Hathras to auction themselves to protest drinking water crisis

Reports assert that the water crisis has affected close to three lakh people in Uttar Pradesh's Hathras district (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Agra: On India's 70th Republic Day, a number of youngsters from the Hathras district in Uttar Pradesh have decided to auction themselves as a mark of protest. Speaking to media outlets, the boys said that they will use the money acquired through the auction to supply drinking water to all houses that are located in the Maho area.

To be held at Nagla Maya village, the auction will feature 50 young boys who will auction themselves to protest against the government's apathy towards potable water shortage in the region. According to a report by Times of India, as many as three lakh people in the district are reeling under acute drinking water scarcity.

Rama Shankar Maurya, District Magistrate Hathras: A letter has been sent to the government in order to resolve this problem, appropriate action will be taken. If someone is doing such a thing, action will also be taken against them. (25-1-19) pic.twitter.com/5i8PKBc93O — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) January 25, 2019

Members of the group which is organising this auction under the banner of the Yuva Jan Kalyan Samiti claim that they wrote letters to several top officials including the President of India narrating their plight, however, they received no response. We have zeroed in on 'Sabhi Kharidar Amantrit Hain' as the tagline for this auction, added the boys.

In fact, the boys also told media personnel that they will sit on a hunger fast on the same day as the auction. Responding to the allegations, Hathras district magistrate Ramashankar Maurya was quoted as saying that proposals in this regard have already been sent to the state government. Two separate proposals have been sent to the higher-ups, one covering Mahasinghpur, Nagla Maya and Rajnagar villages and the other covering 61 villages of the region.

Must Read: Cooks on strike across Bihar, mid-day meals cut off to 70,000 schools
