'Will not give permission for Uranium mining in Nallamala forest': Telangana CM KCR

'Will not give permission for Uranium mining in Nallamala forest': Telangana CM KCR

"It also made it clear that even if uranium reserves are found, mining will not be allowed," KCR told the Assembly.

news Environment

Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao on Sunday said that his state government would not accord permission for uranium mining in the Nallamalla forest. Addressing the Legislative Assembly on Sunday, KCR said that neither the state government has given the permission for uranium mining, nor it has any proposal to do so in future. Allaying apprehensions among people, KCR said that his government will not allow destruction of the Nallamalla forests at any cost.

This came amidst protests in the state over the decision of the Department of Atomic Energy to survey the possibility of uranium mining in the Nallamala forest. Earlier in May, the Forest Advisory Committee under Union Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEFCC) had given an 'in-principal' approval for the same.

"As far as uranium mining is concerned, following the formation of the Telangana state, no permission was given to anyone, and there is no such plan to give it in the future as well. No one needs to fear about it as at any cost, we will not allow the destruction of Nallamala," KCR said.

KCR said that uranium mining could contaminate key water projects like Srisailam, Nagarjuna Sagar and Pulichintala across Krishna river and destroy its delta area. This could also impact water supply to Hyderabad, he said.

KCR announced that a resolution would also be passed in the Assembly on Monday and the same would be sent to the Centre.

"It also made it clear that even if uranium reserves are found, mining will not be allowed," he said.

The Amrabad region in the Nallamala forest, has been witnessing protests and tension for over a month, as locals and rights groups had stepped up protests against Uranium mining.

Last week, several celebrities including film actors also expressed their concern on the issue and took part in a 'Save Nallamala' campaign.

Earlier on Sunday, Municipal Industry Minister KT Rama Rao told the Legislative Council that the government will not allow uranium mining. He clarified that no permission was given for mining.

Read: India’s rush for nuclear power may destroy Nallamala forest ecosystem
