If you remember Manipuri women only for nude protest against Army, think again

Far away from the national media glare and the political manoeuvring in the run-up to the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, women in Manipur lead the battle against drug menace, human rights violation, corruption, Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act (AFSPA) and now the Citizenship Bill in the northeastern state.



The women in Manipur have always been at the forefront of leading campaigns on political or social issues. They have made obvious strides and have a strong foothold in the state and often act as powerful influencers in the state.

This time, the women activists in Manipur are hitting the streets to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

They have been asking the Biren Singh government in Manipur to clear the air on the controversial bill in Assam that seeks to provide Indian citizenship to Hindus, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Parsis from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after six years of residence in India. They believe that the Citizenship Bill is a threat to the balance of the indigenous people in the region. They said the influx would disturb the original settlers in Manipur, Assam and the Northeastern states.

On Sunday (January 19, 2019), the women vendors of the Ima Keithel Khwairamband Bazaar staged a sit-in to protest against the Citizenship Bill. For all the uninitiated, Khwairamband Bazaar is a prominent market in Imphal where women vendors numbering around 4,000 lead the show. It is a market that is run by only women. Last year, the Manipur government banned male vendors in the bazaar.

The Ima Keithel Khwairamband Bazaar that is exclusively for women (Photo: Reuters)

The women vendors, besides doing business also play a crucial role in taking political stands. They have not shied away from taking part in demonstrations and often been called torch-bearers for leading drives against any political or societal issues.

However, the protests may not have been so intense like the iconic nude protest but it definitely got their CM clearing the air about the bill. Biren Singh said the Manipur government opposes the Citizenship Bill in its present form. He said the Manipur government will oppose the bill unless there was a clause to protect the indigenous people in the region.

The last time Manipur received undivided attention was on July 15, 2004 when dramatic scenes were witnessed at the Kangla Fort in the Imphal valley. Twelve Manipuri women stripped naked in front of the Kangla fort and held a banner that said 'Indian Amry Rape Us'. Standing outside the fort with their bare body and hair let loose, the women held placards that read "Indian Army rape us...we all are Manorama's mothers" and "Kill us. Rape us. Flesh us."

The nude protests of the "Mothers of Manipur" was against the brutal rape and murder of 32-year-old Thangjam Manorama by the 17th Assam Rifles. Manorama was picked up from her home on the pretext of interrogation by the Assam Rifles under AFSPA over being suspected of being a militant. Her body was found the next day with 16 bullets, her genitals destroyed and several marks in her thigh.

"We all felt like we are mothers of the hapless girl who was gangraped and murdered. The women of Manipur have been the worst victims of insurgency. Both the militant groups and a section of security forces torture women as we are soft targets. Our mode of protest then came from within," 66-year-old Gyaneshori, who was one of the women to lead the naked protest, told news agency PTI in November, 2017.

The incident forced Assam Rifles to vacate the Kangla Fort, and the AFSPA removed from seven Assembly segments in Imphal. However, the AFSPA continued to remain in the rest of Manipur.

Manipur has had a long-standing fight to repeal AFSPA, the rule under which the Army men can fire upon, use force, arrest or even cause death at their will merely on the pretext of a suspicion.

Irom Sharmila, also known as the Iron Lady, was on a seven-year hunger strike against scrapping AFSPA in the state. Sharmila started her hunger strike on November 5, 2000 and went on to continue it till August 9, 2016. During her fight of seven years, Sharmila was arrested by the police and charged with an "attempt to commit suicide". She was also force-fed on many occasions to keep her alive. She maintained that she would call off the strike only if the act was unreservedly removed from the state.

Since colonial period, Nupi Lan (women's agitation) movements have been evident in the state. The first two movements that set the base for the women agitation in the state was in 1904 and in 1939. Rani Gaidinliu was a local hero back then when she played a significant role in driving out the Britishers. Also in 1925 and 1932, the women led a water tax movement against the king.

In 1969, when the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was addressing a rally in Imphal, the women staged a black-flag vigil demanding statehood.

The women in Manipur have defied the patriarchal norms of the Indian society. Often than not, the women in Manipur have played a role that could be compared to a revolutionary without being exaggerated.

As Karl Marx said, "Anybody who knows anything of history knows great social changes are impossible without the feminine ferment."
