M T Vasudevan Nair terms as ‘autocratic’ Amit Shah’s call for ‘one nation-one language’

Thiruvananthapuram, September 16 : Litterateur M T Vasudevan Nair has taken strong exception to union home minister Amit Shah’s call for ‘one nation-one language’, terming it ‘autocratic’.

Writing in a column published by vernacular daily ‘Malayala Manorama’ on Monday, Mr. Nair opined that he could never agree to the union home minister’s suggestion of Hindi as a common language for all Indians.

There are several languages in India including Hindi. All languages must exist. Calls for one language, one nation must be resisted, he writes.

Suggesting that any move to impose Hindi would divide the nation, he cited the example of Kazhakstan leaving the Soviet Union owing to the decision to impose Russian in the USSR.

Hindi is a very popular language but there are myriad regional languages in India that are also popular and writers who write in those languages, the article says.

“Writers like Premchand have captured the lives and culture of villages in north India. The rustic life, ecology, custom, and social structure of Kerala are some of the things that have influenced our (Malayalam writers) writing,” Vasudevan Nair adds.

Mr. Nair also dismissed as meaningless the union minister’s assertion that only Hindi can unite the country. “In our country now there are universities founded on the basis of language. In this backdrop, it is meaningless to suggest that only Hindi can foster unity among the people of India when our regional languages and local cultures have become so developed” he writes.

Amit Shah’s ‘one nation-one language’ call has kicked up a huge storm in the country with opposition parties and even some NDA allies coming out in protest.

The protests were most pronounced in south India. Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan termed Amit Shah’s statement as a bid to trigger polarisation in the country in the name of language to divert attention from the real issues.

In Tamil Nadu, leaders of the AIADMK, an NDA ally, also registered their protest against the union home minister’s remarks, saying they would resist any bid to impose Hindi.

Congress leader and rajya sabha MP Jairam Ramesh said that one nation, one language was not possible.
