As Hindi imposition row rages, Kiren Rijiju tweets old video of Chidambaram on Hindi as common language

MoS Kiren Rijiju on Monday shared an old video in which Congress leader P Chidambaram is heard saying that he hopes efforts to make Hindi as the country's language would continue (File photos)

Home minister Amit Shah's comments, in which he pitched for making Hindi a common language in the country, has re-ignited the debate on 'Hindi imposition' with political leaders, particularly those from the south, warning the government against any move to make Hindi a common language in the country.

As a political slugfest erupted over the matter, Minister of State Kiren Rijiju took to Twitter to share an old video in which Congress leader P Chidambaram is heard saying that he hopes efforts to make Hindi as the country's language would continue.

Rijiju's tweet came a day after the Congress reacted to Amit Shah's statement by warning the government against stirring up controversies over "emotive and sensitive issues" and against tinkering with the three-language formula.

ROW ERUPTS

Meanwhile, voices of dissent came in from the Bharatiya Janata Party itself with Karnataka chief minister BS Yediyurappa tweeting that for his state "Kannada is the principal language". "We will never compromise its importance and are committed to promote Kannada and our state's culture," Yediyurappa also said.

All official languages in our country are equal. However, as far as Karnataka is concerned, #Kannada is the principal language. We will never compromise its importance and are committed to promote Kannada and our state's culture. September 16, 2019

Another leader from the south, the DMK's MK Stalin accused the Centre of "autocratic imposition of Hindi" and underscored the need for unity in opposition ranks to take forward protest against the government on such issues.

Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM) founder Kamal Haasan also opposed any attempts to "impose" Hindi saying it was a promise made to the country decades back which "no Shah, Sultan or Samrat must renege on."

The unity in diversity is a promise that we made when we made India into a Republic. Now, no Shah, Sultan or Samrat must renege on that promise. We respect all languages, but our mother language will always be Tamil," Haasan said in a video.

The Left too attacked Amit Shah for his comments from Saturday. Shah's statement that "Hindi should be treated as the national language runs contrary to the spirit of the Indian Constitution and our country's linguistic diversity," the CPIM said.

WHAT AMIT SHAH SAID

On Saturday, Home Minister Amit Shah pitched for Hindi as a common language for the country. Amit Shah was addressing an event on Hindi Divas where he said that while diversity in languages is India's strength, a national language is needed so that foreign languages and cultures do not overpower the country's own.

"I want to appeal to people to promote their native languages but also use Hindi to make the dream of Bapu (Mahatma Gandhi) and Sardar (Vallabhbhai) Patel of one language come true," Amit Shah also tweeted.

In his tweets, Amit Shah said, "India has many languages and every language has its importance. But it is absolutely necessary that the entire country should have one language that becomes India's identity globally."

He said if any language can unite the country, it is Hindi as it is spoken the most.

(With inputs from PTI)
