SC refers plea for rebuilding of Ravidas Temple to Bench that ordered demolition

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, September 16

The Supreme Court on Monday referred a petition filed by Congress leaders Ashok Tanwar and Pradeep Jain Aditya seeking reconstruction of Guru Ravidas Temple in Delhi to Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi to have the latter place it before the Bench that had ordered the demolition last month.

On behalf of Tanwar and Jain, senior counsel Vikas Singh and Salman Khurshid told a Bench headed by Justice R Banumathi that it was a historic temple having cultural significance for followers of Guru Ravidas. The demolition of the temple violated their fundamental right to religion guaranteed under Article 25 of the Constitution, they submitted.

“Unwittingly the said temple came to be demolished while complying with the Order passed by this Court on August 8, 2019 where the Court was dealing with the issue of unauthorised constructions,” Singh submitted.

The Bench ordered that the petition be placed before the CJI for issuing appropriate orders for placing it before the Bench that had ordered demolition of the temple.

A Bench headed by Justice Arun Mishra had on April 2 ordered that the premises build on forest land had to be vacated and peaceful possession handed over to the DDA. However, it was not done and on August 2, a false statement was allegedly made on behalf of office bearers of Guru Ravidas Jayanti Samaroh Samiti that the premises had been vacated.

After being told about it, the top court on August 9 directed the DDA to remove the structure by August 10 and accordingly the temple located at Jahapanah forest area in national capital was razed, evoking violent protests from the Dalit community.

A mystic poet-saint and one of the stalwarts of Bhakti movement, Guru Ravidas (1450-1520) has a large number of followers, mostly Dalits, in Delhi, Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. After the demolition of the temple situated in Tughlaqabad area of Delhi his followers had been protesting against it.

Former Haryana Congress chief Ashok Tanwar and former Member of Parliament Pradeep Jain Aditya had on August 27 moved the Supreme Court seeking reconstruction of Guru Ravidas Temple.

Maintaining that they were not seeking any property rights over the land, the two Congress leaders submitted that they were only “for enforcement and protection of their right to worship the pious land where Saint Guru Ravidas lived, and which was gifted to him by Sultan Sikander Lodhi in 1509”.

Contending that that the pious site has been worshipped for 500-600 years and was protected as per the provisions of the Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991, the petitioners claimed that the “Guru Dham” and the adjoining structures had been there for centuries and prior to any master plans or modern English law system now prevalent in India.

“Hence, no violation can be caused by a historical structure, which has come under green zone under laws which are subsequent to structure. The above temple/Guru Dham was in Jahapanah City Forest, which is actually an urban park where people go for morning walks," they submitted.

Taking strong exception to protests against its order to demolish an old Guru Ravidas Temple built on forest land in Delhi, the Supreme Court had on August 19 directed governments of Punjab, Haryana and Delhi to ensure that no law and order problems were created over the issue. "Everything cannot be political. Our orders can't be given a political colour by anybody on the Earth," Justice Arun Mishra had said.
