Tamil pride, three-language formula, Hindi imposition: Opposition unites after Amit Shah’s ‘raj bhasha’ pitch

Union Home Minister Amit Shah | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Union Minister Amit Shah pitched Hindi as official language for national unity on Hindi Day on September 14 Congress warned Centre not to tinker with three-language formula as it might lead to strife DMK to launch agitation in Tamil Nadu in order to 'nip in bud Centre's attempt to impose Hindi in state'

New Delhi: Union Home Minister Amit Shah stirred up a hornet’s nest with his comments pitching Hindi as a unifying factor to unite the country, on the occasion of ‘Hindu Divas’ on September 14. Several opposition leaders, especially from the southern states, including BJP allies such as the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK), issued statements opposing Shah’s views.

A political storm ensued as politicians from different hues and factions issued statements slamming the Home Minister for envisioning Hindi as a ‘Raj Bhasha’ or national language. The comments also came under immense criticism from non-Hindi speaking states.

“Diversity of languages and dialects is the strength of our nation. But there is a need for our nation to have one language so that foreign languages don’t find a place. This is why our freedom fighters envisioned Hindi as Raj Bhasha,” Shah said during his speech in New Delhi raising a storm.

Do not tinker with three-language formula, warns Congress

Hours after Shah made the comments, Congress said the three-language formula should not be tinkered with and controversies should not be raked up on “emotive” issues which have long been settled by Constitution-makers. The opposition warned that any attempt to tinker with ‘three-language formula’ can create strife and unrest in the country.

The three-language formula pertains to usage of Hindi, English and the state’s respective regional language of the state.

Alleging that Centre’s ‘Hindi imposition’ on non-Hindi speaking states, Tamil Nadu’s Dravida Munnetra Khazhgam (DMK) president MK Stalin announced state-wide protests on September 20. Stalin made the announcement on Monday after a high-level meeting of the party.

MK Stalin, DMK President, in Chennai: DMK to protest in all Tamil Nadu district capitals on September 20 at 10 am against central government's decision on imposition of Hindi language. The decision was taken at the party's high level committee meeting. pic.twitter.com/m9B8Y3GtKn — ANI (@ANI) September 16, 2019

A resolution adopted by the party said the agitation was aimed at nipping in the bud the "adverse effects" of "Hindi imposition on "mother Tamil" and the mother tongues of people of other (non-Hindi speaking) states".

Southern political parties unanimously condemn Shah's comments

The Left parties in Kerala also condemned Shah’s comments alleging it a bid for imposing the north Indian language upon other states.

Actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan on Monday warned the Centre against ‘one nation, one language’ push, saying India became a republic in the year 1950 with a promise of 'Unity in Diversity'.

K Haasan, Makkal Needhi Maiam chief: Yrs ago we said it&would like to reiterate Tamil is our pride,we won't give it up. This was a promise made,when it become a republic,regarding preserving it. We're ready to accept numerous languages but imposing this(Hindi)is the one we oppose pic.twitter.com/wiumfIgEmv — ANI (@ANI) September 16, 2019

"No Shah, Sultan or Samrat should renege on that promise. We respect all languages but our mother language will always be Tamil."

As per the Official Languages Act, 1963, Hindi and English are the official languages for the Union government and Parliament. The Eight Schedule of the Constitution recognises a total of 22 languages of the country.
