Hindi imposition row: South stands united as conflicting views emerge within BJP

Home Minister Amit Shah appealed to people to accept Hindi as the national language to get connected. (Photo: PTI)

The row over Hindi as the official language took an acrimonious turn on Monday with more reaction from top leaders from across the country pouring in. Home minister Amit Shah's comments on making Hindi a common language in the country has heightened a tiff between different political parties, within parties and between South and North.

Bharatiya Janata Party leader and Minister of State Kiren Rijiju took to Twitter on Monday to share an old video of Congress leader P Chidambaram in which he is heard saying that he hopes efforts to make Hindi as the country's language would continue.

The purported video came in contradiction to the Congress' statement the previous day. The opposition party had said that no indication should be given of a rethink on the "three-language formula" as it will create strife and unrest in the country.

The three languages formula is commonly understood to comprise Hindi, English and the regional language of the respective states.

Congress' opposing reaction

The Congress on Saturday had said that the three-language formula should not be tinkered with and controversies must not be stirred up on "emotive" issues settled by Constitution-makers.

Congress spokesperson Anand Sharma had said, "Let me make it very clear, if that is true then the Home Minister of India should know that Hindi has been declared as the official language long back. The Constitution clearly respects India's diversity as it recognises 22 languages spoken by a large number of people."

Meanwhile, Congress leader Jairam Ramesh questioned even the slightest possibility of Hindi being the common Indian language on Saturday.

"We may have one nation-one tax, but one nation-one language will never be a reality...we are one nation- we are many languages, we are one nation- many countries," Jairam Ramesh said on Saturday.

Former Congress chief Rahul Gandhi argued that India's diverse languages are not its weakness.

Oriya Marathi

Kannada Hindi Tamil

English Gujarati

Bengali Urdu Punjabi Konkani Malayalam

Telugu Assamese

Bodo Dogri Maithili Nepali Sanskrit

Kashmiri Sindhi

Santhali Manipuri...



India’s many languages are not her weakness. Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) September 16, 2019

South stands united against Hindi pitch

The DMK said that it will stage protests on September 20 against Amit Shah's Hindi pitch. A high-level DMK meet on Monday announced protest demonstrations across Tamil Nadu on September 20 to condemn Home Minister Amit Shah's Hindi pitch.

The Dravidian party condemned Amit Shah's views favouring a common language status for Hindi. The party in the meet labelled the proposed agitations as a "massive" bid to condemn the Home Minister and said it would be held in all the districts.

DMK president MK Stalin on Sunday had accused the Centre of "autocratic imposition of Hindi" and underscored the need for unity in opposition ranks to take forward protest against the government on such issues.

Kerala Chief Minister and CPI(M) leader Pinarayi Vijayan slammed Amit Shah's Hindi agenda push saying that the perception that only Hindi language can unite the country is completely wrong. He said the people in the South and Northeast don't speak Hindi.

Pinarayi Vijayan called Amit Shah's Hindi pitch to make it their primary language an attempt to disown their mother tongue.

Pinarayi Vijayan said that the Sangh Parivar's signs to launch a new battlefield in the name of the language and that "people will understand that such moves are for trying to shift their focus from important issues."

Going against Amit Shah's comment, actor-turned-politician Kamal Hasan released a video in which he is seen standing next to the Ashoka pillar and the Preamble. In the video, he said that India became a republic in 1950 with a promise to the people that their language and culture will be protected.

Now you are constrained to prove to us that India will continue to be a free country.



You must consult the people before you make a new law or a new scheme. pic.twitter.com/u0De38bzk0 Kamal Haasan (@ikamalhaasan) September 16, 2019

Leader of AIADMK, which is part of the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance, and Tamil Culture Minister K Pandiarajan on Sunday had warned of adverse reaction from other states as well.

Pandiarajan said that If the Centre ever imposes Hindi unilaterally, then there will only be an (adverse) reaction and no support, not only in Tamil Nadu but also in states like Bengal, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.

War cry among BJP leaders

Conflicting views erupted within the party too with former Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah saying, "We will never compromise its importance and are committed to promote Kannada and our state's culture."

Siddaramaiah accused Amit Shah of being a "wicked insider in a joint family who finds ways to break the unity."

All official languages in our country are equal. However, as far as Karnataka is concerned, #Kannada is the principal language. We will never compromise its importance and are committed to promote Kannada and our state's culture. CM of Karnataka (@CMofKarnataka) September 16, 2019

Siddaramaiah said that India has a rich history and diverse geography and there is a need to embrace the country's diversity to remain united.

Backing Amit Shah on his statement, Tripura Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb claimed that those who are opposing Hindi as the 'rashtra bhasha' (national language) do not love the country.

"The people who are opposing Hindi as the national language are those who have no love for the country.... I am supporting Hindi as the national language as most of the people of our country speak Hindi," the chief minister said.

Some of the party factions remain ambiguous on their stand.

The West Bengal BJP is in a fix over party president Amit Shah pitching for Hindi and was unable to openly support the statement.

The state BJP unit is apprehensive that the issue might snowball into a major political issue as Trinamool Congress went hammer and tongs on Shah's Hindi Divas tweet accusing the saffron party of pushing its policy of imposing Hindi, sources in state party said.

The row

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Saturday had pitched for Hindi as a common language for the country.

Speaking as chief guest at a function to commemorate Hindi Divas, Amit Shah on Saturday had said that while unity in diversity is India's defining trait, a common language is needed as a culturally unifying factor.

Amit Shah also appealed to people to accept Hindi as the national language to get connected. He asserted that the growth of Hindi will never be at the cost of any other language and added that Hindi is the language of coexistence.
