Surgical strikes, airstrikes brought joy to people, made world notice India, says Amit Shah

Home Minister Amit Shah has said forces conducting surgical strikes and airstrikes bring great joy and happiness to people but they require extreme courage.

Speaking at an event of the All India Management Association (AIMA), Amit Shah said on Monday, "Although events like surgical strike or airstrikes give pleasure and happiness to the people but before taking any such decision, it requires immense courage as any mistake or miscalculation can have grave repercussions."

Amit Shah also hit out at the previous UPA governments and said that they wouldn't be able to name even five big decisions.

"The governments worked for 30 years and they still can't name 5 big decisions while the Modi government has worked for 5 years and has 50 big decisions to talk about," said Shah.

The Home Minister then went on to mention the surgical strikes on Pakistan and insolvency bill as the big achievement of Modi government.

He also added that the BJP-led NDA government has never taken any decision to appease the people and did only what was good for the people.

Amit Shah further said, "We have taken tough decisions like surgical strikes and airstrikes. Those were tough decisions. We won't compromise with one inch of land. Airstrike and surgical strike have changed the way the world looks at us. We had no internal security policy. No defence policy. A lot of people told me the surgical strikes were a fluke. But after the airstrike they said it is the policy and even if one soldier dies, it is a big loss for us."

Speaking on the abrogation of Article 370, Amit Shah said, "People always wondered about how can this be done. On August 5, PM took the decision. Since August 5 till September 17, not a single bullet has been fired in Kashmir."

Shah added, "Abrogation of Article 370 was not just about BJP. Several leaders from other parties shared the same view and today we can say with satisfaction that between August 5 to September 17, we have maintained peace there without any single bullet fire or a single death."
