PSB merger fallout: Bankers to stage dharna at Jantar Mantar on September 20

Bankers have been protesting against the government's recently announced PSB mergers. (Photo: PTI/Image for representation)

Bank officers and employee unions have decided to hold a protest at Delhi's Jantar Mantar on September 20 against mergers announced by the Finance Ministry.

Bank officers and clerical employees from all over the country will gather in the national capital to protest against the recently announced merger citing large-scale layoffs.

All nine bank officers and employee unions will participate in the day-long dharna, which will set the stage for the two-day strike call, given by the All India Bank Officer's Confederation (AIBOC), the largest union of the bank officers.

AIBOC has given a call for an all India strike on September 26 and 27.

AIBOC national joint general secretary Ravinder Gupta told India Today TV that the umbrella body of all Public Sector Bank officers and employees union, the United Forum of Bank Unions (UFBU) has given a call for a one-day protest at Jantar Mantar on September 20.

"We are expecting our colleagues to travel from all corners of the country for a massive protest in the capital so that our voice reaches the Government," he said.

"The main agenda of the protest is mobilisation of unions for the two-day strike slated for later this month," he added.

Working president of the AIBOC's Delhi unit Pankaj Kapoor said the government's decision of mergers will hit the officers and employees despite all the claims against it.

"Mergers are bound to lead to large-scale layoffs, promotions of officers of merged entities will be hit and also employees of such banks will be treated as second-grade staff as they will be kept out of prime postings," he added.

"Following our strike call, the government has moved swiftly to call a meeting of IBA to address our issues and also there is a Chief Labour Commissioner meeting with bank unions on September 19, but we are not too hopeful about the outcomes from these meetings," he added.

Over three lakh bank officers of AIBOC and 70,000 officers from three other unions will be part of the strike, which is likely to cripple banking activity towards the end of September.

Since the two-day strike is followed by weekend holidays, the effective days for which there will be little banking activity will extend to four days. This is likely to hit cheque clearances, cash deposits/withdrawals and any other services availed at bank branches and ATMs.




