There have been human rights violations in Balochistan: Pakistani journalist

ANI file photo of Baloch Human Rights Council holding protest in front of the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland

Pakistani senior journalist Mona Alam said that there have been human rights violation under dictatorial regimes in the Pakistan province of Balochistan.

However, Mona Alam in an exclusive interview to India Today said that "Pakistan in its constitution gives full safety to minorities".

"It will be totally wrong to say that our government has turned a blind eye to the human rights of minorities in Pakistan. Around 50 people have been booked for in different human rights violations cases. Pakistan in its constitution gives full safety to minorities.

"Balochistan situation is a little more complex. There indeed have been some human rights violation. I agree that there have been some serious human rights violations in Balochistan during some dictatorial regimes," Mona Alam said.

I agree that there has been some serious human rights violations in Balochistan during some dictatorial regimes, says @MonaAlamm, Journalist, Pakistan

Watch #IndiaFirst live: https://t.co/4fqxBVUizL pic.twitter.com/hXGSSeYADy India Today (@IndiaToday) September 17, 2019

In Balochistan and Sindh provinces of Pakistan, Right activists have sought Prime Minister Narendra Modi's help in raising Pakistan's human rights violations at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA).

Several activists exposed Pakistan Army's atrocities seeking India's counsel in raising their voices globally. Balochistan activists protested against Pakistan Army's atrocities. "Murdabad, murdabad, Pakistan murdabad," protestors in Geneva, Swtizerland chanted the slogan in front of UN.

In the province of Balochistan, the clamour against the Pakistan atrocities is rising as people are up in arms.

Head of Human Rights Council of Balochistan in Geneva, Switzerland said, "International human rights bodies and the United Nations should visit Balochistan and investigate the situation. They should stop Pakistan armed forces from committing such war crimes against humanity."

Baloch activist Qambar Malik said, "The Islamic radicalisation in Balochistan is being used by the Pakistani authorities."

Baloch leader Mehran Marri, calling the Pakistan Army "coward" said, "This army has to be held accountable. Be it [Qamar Javed] Bajwa or [Pervez] Musharraf or be it other dictators."
