Bandra school seeks parents’ support in Aarey stir

St Stanislaus School

Metro-3 car shed

Aarey Milk Colony

International Union of Conservation of Nature

IUCN

BMC Tree Authority

Students have distributed the letters in housing societies to raise awareness about the environment and garner support

Photos: Save Aarey protesters gather on Sunday despite heavy rain 1 5 Another day of protests The Tree Authority of the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) on Thursday (August 29) gave its nod to cut over 2,700 trees for a Metro car shed in the leafy Aarey Colony area. Mirror also reported Metro authorities are seeking another 30,000 sq ft of land in Aarey Colony for the sixth line. Since that day, residents have come out on the streets to protest against the decision and save Aarey's green cover.

Peaceful protesters gathered again on Sunday (September 8) and remained undeterred despite the heavy rains. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL 'Save Aarey, Save our future' Protesters have been protesting since the decision of axing 2,700 trees in Aarey was announced. Residents are coming out with many different creative ways to protest for the cause. They have been trying songs, slogans, human chain and many more ways to make the protest interesting and yet meaningful. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Bollywood celebs joining the protests Bollywood celebrities have joined in on social causes such as these. Earlier, Shraddha Kapoor joined protesters who gathered to form a human chain on Sunday (September 1) to voice her opposition to the BMC's decision of slashing 2700 trees. Actor Ishan Khattar also joined the protest. While, many other celebs including Dia Mirza, Lata Mangeshkar, Randeep Hooda, etc have voiced their opinion against the decision through social media. Photo: PTI 2700 trees caught between government, BMC and politics As the widespread protests by civil society continue against the government's nod for felling around 2700 trees in Aarey, Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis on Friday said the cutting of trees pains him but still defended the BMC decision. "I am an environmentalist. Every tree that is cut pains me. But we have to strike a balance," Fadnavis said, interacting with school and college students at an event. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Young kids to older residents, all join the human chain Kids along with their parents were seen holding placards and chanting slogans of 'save Aarey, save our future' at the protest in heavy rain. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL

has asked parents to sign a letter to register their protest against the felling of trees for theSt Stanislaus School on Hill Road in Bandra (West) have sent a letter to the parents of the students seeking their support in the movement against the hacking of nearly 2,700 trees in Aarey for the Metro-3 car shed.The letter, handed over to the students, objects to the construction of the car shed, Metro Bhavan and the casting yard inin Goregaon (east) at the cost of trees.It read: “Mumbai is reeling under the effects of overpopulation and reducing green cover. Aarey Milk Colony is Mumbai’s second largest green cover after Sanjay Gandhi National Park (SGNP). It is also an active buffer for the protected areas of SGNP. Aside from these two, the city does not have any forest in the true sense. These are, therefore, the only lungs of the city.”The letter also stated that Aarey colony is home to a wide variety of flora and fauna.It draws attention to the five species of wildlife, including leopards, which are on the red list of threatened species of the).It also underlines the fact that under Article 48A of the directive principles of state policy, the state shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country.In addition, under 51A (g) of the fundamental duties of India, it shall be the duty of every citizen to protect and improve the natural environment including, forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures, the letter said.The note also stated that for the last two years, citizens have been protesting against the plan of Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation (MMRC) to build a car shed in Aarey. Even though alternate sites have been proposed, the, without paying heed to public demand, has given a go-ahead for the axing of trees.The parents are requested to sign the letter which concludes, “I am not against the Metro project but I am for the protection of the forests and green areas of my city, the destruction of which will have a huge negative impact on the environment and on living beings, including the flooding of adjoining areas. I hereby protest and submit my opposition to the cutting of trees in Aarey for the Metro project. Kindly note and register my protest.”Anna Correa, principal of St Stanislaus High School, said the letter was drafted in St Peter’s Church and later distributed among the students. “We have asked parents to sign it if they are interested. We have given students badges to wear,” she said. Correa also said that her students have distributed the letters in their housing societies to raise awareness and garner support. It is part of an initiative to sensitive students and others about the issues plaguing the environment, she said.
