Tension at demolition drive as ‘temple wall’ collapses

Ludhiana: Tempers flared during a demolition drive conducted by the Greater Ludhiana Area Development Authority (GLADA) against illegal shops constructed at Jamalpur Chowk, Chandigarh Road, on Tuesday. Mistakenly, a boundary wall of a small temple in the lane also got damaged, raising hackles of Shiv Sena Hind, which staged a protest against the authorities.

The protesters blocked one side of the road for almost half-an-hour because of which the vehicular traffic had to be diverted. The other side of the road (for vehicles coming from Chandigarh side and going towards Samrala Chowk) was already blocked by the cops due to the demolition drive and vehicles were diverted from Metro Road towards Vardhman Chowk.

Shiv Sena Hind members raised slogans against the authorities and alleged that in the wall collapse, an idol of Lord Shiva was damaged. The GLADA officials, meanwhile, kept explaining that they did not damage the wall intentionally. Cops had to intervene to resolve the matter.

Area shopkeepers, who accused the GLADA officials of taking ownership of the land that belonged to the Waqf Board, also joined the Shiv Sena Hind’s protest. They said they had taken the property on lease from the Waqf Board, but GLADA authorities were terming it to be their property and harassing them.

They ended their protest along with the Shiv Sena Hind leaders.

A GLADA official said they razed 10 shops and one was demolished half because of the temple row. He said it would now be dismantled manually. “Five shopkeepers had shown stay orders from the court, so their shops were not touched,” he added.

GLADA had served notices on 85 shops and last week they had demolished 32 structures while rest were taken up on Tuesday. After the notices were served on the shopkeepers, devotees from Sri Guru Ravidas Gurdwara had also raised a hue and cry over the decision. GLADA officials claimed shops constructed outside the gurdwara were included in the list, but later it was found that those were on the Waqf Board land.

GLADA estate officer (regulatory) Sonam Chaudhary said, “No harm was done to the boundary wall of the temple. In fact, the temple had no separate boundary wall. We showed the protesters that the temple was intact and told them that the nearby wall was not damaged intentionally. We have removed 10 structures. Waqf board claimed ownership of land where rest of the shops are constructed. We will take up the issue with the government as according to our records, the land belonged to GLADA.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
