Tribesmen rally support for Kashmiris in held Valley

MUZAFFARABAD: Participants of the rally chant slogans.—Dawn

MUZAFFARABAD: Hundreds of tribesmen from the border districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa held a rally on Tuesday to send a message of support to the besieged Kashmiris in India-held Kashmir.

“Down with India, down with [Narendra] Modi,” chanted the young and old tribesmen as they paraded through the main thoroughfare, from the press club to the UN Military Observers Mission near Domel, while holding flags of Pakistan and Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK).

They were led by MNA Gul Zafar Khan, MPA Engr Ajmal Khan from the ruling Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI) and other tribal leaders from North and South Waziristan, Kurram, Bajaur, Orakzai and Mohmand districts.

Earlier, representatives of all tribal districts addressed a press conference, where they condemned the lockdown and atrocities in held Kashmir, which they said had “badly disturbed everyone” in their areas.

Almost all of them declared that they were ready to wage a war against India [to liberate held Kashmir], pending a signal [to this effect] from the country’s armed forces.

“We are bound by the laws of our country and we await just one order of our valiant commander,” said MNA Gul Zafar Khan, in a reference to Pakistan army chief. “Before we are left with no choice but to take up arms against India, it should quit Kashmir on its own,” he said and added: “Otherwise, we will mete out the same treatment to India that we meted out to the former Soviet Union.”

MPA Ajmal Khan maintained that history was a testament to the fact that the tribesmen were with the Kashmiris. “Our forefathers were with you, we are with you and our children will be with you,” he said.

In October 1947, tribesmen from the-then North Western Frontier Province had invaded the erstwhile princely state of Jammu and Kashmir, which many in the region believe had laid the basis for its division.

However, some also cherish their arrival as a source of strength for the locals who had revolted against the then Dogra ruler. After that episode India took the issue to the United Nations, and a ceasefire was effected in the disputed region.

“We will repeat the history of 1947. And let it be known to India that once we enter Kashmir, we will not listen to the UN to return,” said Malik Khan Bahadur from Mohmand district.

Nawabzada Wahab from Tank said: “We are not here [in AJK] for picnicking. We call upon our army to allow us [to launch an attack on India]. Our contingent will be at the forefront.”

PTI MLA Abdul Majid Khan, who was present during the press conference, said his grandfather Khan Abdul Qayyum Khan had sent the tribesmen to help Kashmiris in 1947 and it was an honour for him to be their host in 2019.

Published in Dawn, September 18th, 2019
