Gujarat govt delays implementation of new laws for helmet, PUC for a month

Two days after introducing new laws under Motor Vehicle Act(Amendment) 2019, the Gujarat government Wednesday postponed the enforcement of new fines in cases related to no helmets and PUC. The state government also announced that for the next 15 days, two-wheeler dealers will compulsorily have to give the customers helmet at the time of purchase of vehicles.

New fines for traffic rules violations, for not wearing helmets or not having the PUC certificates, will now be implemented from October 15, said Gujarat transport minister R C Faldu, adding that till then the penalties of the old law will be applicable.

The decision to postpone the implementation of the Act comes after reports about not having enough pollution under control centers, black marketing of helmets and heavy rush for getting or renewing driving licence.

“There were so many complaints about inconvenience in getting PUC certificates, helmets and other things. Considering the rush and inconvenience caused to the public, the Gujarat government has decided to delay implementation of the new provisions of Motor Vehicle Act(Amendment) 2019 by a month,” said Faldu.

On the efforts being made by the state government to implement the law, the minister said 999 new PUC centers will be opened to handle the rush and efforts would be made to streamline working of the transport department.

On September 10, chief minister Vijay Rupani had announced reduction in penalties for 18 compoundable offences, which were enforced from September 16. Gujarat was the first state in India to revise the fines for offences such as driving without helmet or not wearing seat belt except for drunk driving and over speeding.

After Gujarat, the Uttarakhand government also announced revision in penalties for compoundable offences (for which on-spot challan can be issued). Several state governments such as Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh have announced they won’t implement the new law citing very high penalties.

The Gujarat Congress had started a campaign against implementation of the MV. “The new law is nothing but another way to harass common people and Congress will protest against it. We have launched a ‘missed call’ campaign wherein people can give a ‘missed call’ on the given number and lodge their protest,’’ said Amit Chavda, President of Gujarat Pradesh Congress Committee.
