Never asked to impose Hindi over regional languages, clarifies Amit Shah; DMK calls off Sept 20 protest

Amid controversy over his call to culturally unify India with Hindi as its national language, Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Wednesday issued a clarification stating he had only requested people to learn it as their second language and not to impose it over any regional one.

"I never asked for imposing Hindi over other regional languages and had only requested for learning Hindi as the second language after one's mother tongue. I myself come from a non-Hindi state of Gujarat. If some people want to do politics, it is their choice," Shah told reporters in New Delhi.

Earlier, Shah's call to culturally unify India with Hindi as it's national language had triggered a massive row with several opposition leaders training their guns at him asking him to reconsider his appeal as it "poses a danger to national unity". Leaders from southern state, including BJP's Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa, spoke against the call for a national language.

"All official languages in our country are equal. However, as far as Karnataka is concerned, #Kannada is the principal language. We will never compromise its importance and are committed to promote Kannada and our state's culture," Yediyurappa said on Monday.

Shah's comments drew sharp reactions from DMK, CPI (Marxist) and other opposition parties, especially from the southern region. Congress leader Siddaramaiah and MNM chief and actor-turned-politician Kamal Hasan too had criticised the Union Home Minister for his comments.

Speaking as chief guest at a function to grace Hindi Divas, Shah had said that while unity in diversity is India's defining trait, a common language is needed as a culturally unifying factor.

"While diversity in languages is the strength of our nation, a national language is needed so that foreign languages and cultures do not overpower our own," he said proclaiming that next year, the Hindi Divas event would be a public programme, as Hindi belongs to the people.

He said that the government would take Hindi Divas outside Delhi, and would celebrate a Hindi Saptah across the country. He called Hindi the heart and soul of the freedom struggle.

DMK withdraws protest call

The DMK had announced to hold a state-wide protest on Septemeber 20 against Shah's remarks. The call was, however, withdrawn on Wednesday after Shah's clarification.

"Our statewide protest against the imposition of Hindi has been postponed after Union Minister Amit Shah has given his clarification on the matter. DMK will, however, continue to oppose Hindi imposition," Dravida Munnetra Kazagham (DMK) chief MK Stalin said in Chennai.

(With ANI inputs)
