Lawyers say Indian asylum seekers on hunger strike 'will die' if not released soon

Gurjant Singh and Ajay Kumar left India over a year ago seeking of a better life and to escape persecution and threats to their lives from political factions, their lawyers say.

Now, they are in Immigration Customs and Enforcement custody where they have continued a hunger strike while in pursuit of seeking asylum, putting their bodies and lives in peril. Their lawyers say it has been 72 days since the two began their strike.

The men have pains in their stomachs, backs and chest and their teeth are loosening, according to their lawyers. Their hair is falling out.

They haven't walked in weeks and use wheelchairs, they added.

Want more coverage on issues that matter to you? Consider supporting local journalism with a subscription to the El Paso Times.

They've lost dozens of pounds and are nearing an early death due to complications from the hunger strike and because the federal government won't release them, their lawyers and advocates say.

The pair have spent their more than a year in immigration custody and have only seen outside a detention facility in El Paso from a bed in an acute care hospital in El Paso, their lawyers said.

"I really am pleading with ICE to show some compassion here," Margaret Brown Vega of Advocate Visitors with Immigrants in Detention said at a news conference Wednesday at Las Americas Immigrant Advocacy Center. "If they do not release these men soon, they will die. That is certain. That's not the way they should be gaining their freedom. Through death."

More:Indian asylum seekers on hunger strike transferred to El Paso ICE Detention Facility

Attorneys Linda Corchado of Las Americas, Jessica Miles of Miles Immigration Law, Chris Benoit of the of the Coyle Law Firm joined AVID members attended the conference.

The two men were transferred from the Otero County Processing Center to the El Paso ICE Processing Center in mid-July along with two other men from India. The other two men who have not been identified were deported earlier this year, according to immigration attorneys and the AVID organization.

The men began their hunger strike in the Southern New Mexico processing center adding to a long list of recorded complaints and strikes within the center dating between 2015 and 2018.

Earlier this year, two other men from India were force-fed during a 74-day hunger strike in the El Paso facility.

More:El Paso man arrested after knife confrontation with police responding to gunshots call

ICE officials said in a statement that the organization is doing their best to help those on the hunger strike.

"U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) fully respects the rights of all people to voice their opinion without interference," officials said in the statement. "ICE does not retaliate in any way against hunger strikers. ICE explains the negative health effects of not eating to our detainees. For their health and safety, ICE closely monitors the food and water intake of those detainees identified as being on a hunger strike."

Officials said the organization spends more than $269 million on healthcare services for detainees.

"ICE is committed to ensuring that those in our custody reside in safe, secure and humane environments and under appropriate conditions of confinement."

The AVID organization said 100 hunger strikes have started inside the Otero Processing Center and members Margaret Brown and Nathan Craig authored a report with over 200 complaints of abuse from migrants between 2015 and 2018.

While in ICE's custody in El Paso, the men were force fed through a nasal tube with approval from a federal court. The men's lawyers described a scene where the asylum seekers were held down by ICE staff while the tubes were inserted into their bodies.

Benoit added that the men may only be visited twice a day by a physician and without translators or reports on their medical condition.

A review by Parveen Parmar, a physician practicing in the Los Angeles County and University of California Emergency Department, said she had reviewed 471 pages of records on Kumar and transcripts of ICE's physician's testimony in federal court.

More:ACLU demands end to 'inhumane' force feeding at El Paso ICE processing center

She concluded that "the care Mr. Kumar is receiving in ICE custody is markedly below standard of care, and putting his life at risk."

Corchado mentioned that her clients, or any Indian asylum seekers in ICE custody, do not have access to religious material pertaining to their faith. And, her client Kumar, had made those concerns known as far as Washington D.C. to no change.

While in custody, he learned that his father had died at the hands of his persecutors in India and decided that he had no other choice but to fight for his liberty.

Corchado said it has been difficult for her client because while in custody, his request for asylum was denied. But Corchado contends that the immigration judge overseeing his case had made an unfair decision and she plans on appealing.

"When my asylum application was denied and I was ordered to go back or deported, I was under heavy stress because it confirmed that if I go back I will be tortured to death," a letter from Kumar read. "I thought it was better to die here. So, I stopped eating on July 9th."

Miles said she was shocked the first time she saw her client, Singh's condition from weight loss. His condition was worse than hunger strikers who were at the El Paso facility earlier this year, she added.

She said that Singh wants a fair day in court and also plans on appealing a denial of his asylum application.

Aaron Montes may be reached at 915-546-6137; amontes@elpasotimes.com; @aaronmontes91 on Twitter.
