Two Bandra restaurants offer 25% ‘Save Aarey’ discount

Bhaijaanz Restaurant

Café Bandra

Bollywood

Aarey Colony

NRAI

Save Aarey movement

Customers who support the environmental cause and sign an online petition will get big waivers.Two Bandra (West) restaurants are offering a 25 per cent discount to diners who support the ‘Save Aarey’ movement and sign an online petition. The offer atandis valid till Sunday.Bhaijaanz is a Salman Khanthemed restaurant. Situated off Carter Road in Bandra, where thehit-maker has lived all his life, it is run by a group of people who went to the same school as Khan, popularly called Bhaijan by his millions of fans.“We are doing this as our contribution to save the environment,” said Khurshid Khan, one of those who runs Bhaijaanz. “This is an issue that will affect us all.”Café Bandra co-owner Altaf Shaikh said he announced the discount after watching hundreds of citizens protest every Sunday to save the city’s green cover. “I read that ifis destroyed, the Mithi River will flood and even the international airport could get waterlogged. This is the city’s only green lung and it must be protected. We are just doing our bit to save the trees,” Shaikh said.“I hope people will avail the discount and support the movement to save the trees at Aarey Colony. We have seen so many people protesting every weekend.”Rahul Kanal, a member of the Maharashtra Restaurant and Employees Association, urged the National Restaurant Association of India () to ask all member restaurants to offer discounts.Aarey is a cause that the entire city is supporting, he said, adding restaurants should do their bit too. “I urge the NRAI to support theand offer discounts. This is a symbolic discount, but it will go a long way in boosting the morale of the activists and protestors,” Kanal said.The past few weeks have seen huge protests against the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation’s (MMRCL) plan to cut 2,703 trees at Aarey to build a Metro car shed. Apart from Aarey Colony, protests have taken place at several locations such as Azad Maidan and August Kranti Maidan. Last Sunday, former city Congress chief Sanjay Nirupam organised a wruksha pooja at Aarey Colony, while activists have also asked British adventurer Bear Grylls and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to step in.On Tuesday, the Bombay High Court said no trees will be cut till September 30. The court will hear a petition challenging the proposed felling of trees from September 30, said a division bench of Chief Justice Pradeep Nandrajog and Justice Bharati Dangre. Activist Zoru Bathena has filed a petition challenging the approval granted by the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation’s Tree Authority on August 29 to cut the trees.Three more petitions have been filed on the issue.
