"Pulled By Hair": Babul Supriyo Alleges Heckling At Jadavpur University

Babul Supriyo alleged being heckled by the students who also "pulled him by his hair".

Highlights Babul Supriyo was shown black flags by some students at the university

He was visiting the varsity to address a seminar organised by ABVP

It is necessary to listen to differences patiently, he posted on Twitter

Union Minister Babul Supriyo was shown black flags and allegedly heckled by some students at Kolkata's Jadavpur University today. West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar, the Chancellor of the university, reached the spot and took Mr Supriyo out of the varsity campus in his car.

Mr Supriyo was held up in the campus with protesting students blocking the way to his car, news agency Press Trust of India reported.

The BJP leader alleged that he was manhandled by the students. "I did not come here to do politics. But I am saddened by the behaviour of some of the students of the university, the way they have heckled me. They pulled me by my hair and pushed me," he was quoted as saying by PTI.

Mr Supriyo also claimed that the protesting students tried to provoke him by "openly calling themselves Naxals".

Kolkata: West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar took Union Minister Babul Supriyo in his car from Jadhavpur University campus. Supriyo had gone there to attend an event organised by ABVP where he faced protest by SFI & AISA members who were opposing his visit. pic.twitter.com/r2gS1gm9Vs — ANI (@ANI) September 19, 2019

Mr Supriyo was visiting the university to address a seminar organised by the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad, or ABVP, the students' wing of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, the ideological mentor of the BJP.

He was initially stopped from entering the campus. Students affiliated to the Students Federation of India -- the student's wing of the CPM -- and the Left-leaning Arts Faculty Students' Union (AFSU) raised "Babul Supriyo Go Back" slogans.

AFSU leader Debraj Debnath, who participated in the protest, said "fascist forces" will not be allowed on the campus.

The Asansol MP faced protests again on his way out, around 5 pm.

According to PTI, Jadavpur University Vice Chancellor Suranjan Das tried to talk with the protesting students, who refused to move from the main entrance of the university.

"Whatever they may try to do, they cannot provoke me. The role of the opposition in keeping democracy alive is as important as that of the ruling party, and it is also necessary to listen to the differences patiently," he posted on Twitter, condemning the "stampede-like situation".

Governor Dhankhar has taken a "very serious view" of the incident, his press secretary told reporters.

"The Governor takes the incident very seriously as it involves unlawful detention of a Union minister and this is a very serious reflection on the law and order of the state and on the conduct of the law enforcing agencies," Raj Bhavan said in a statement.

Chief secretary Malay De said the city police commissioner have been directed to look into the matter.

(With inputs from PTI, ANI and IANS)
