Babul Supriyo ‘gheraoed’ at Jadavpur University: WB Governor rushes in, gets blocked by students

West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankar (file image) | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Union Minister Babul Surpriyo was gheraoed and heckled by a section of students at Jadavpur University in Kolkata on Thursday Supriyo was prevented from attending an ABVP-organised event at the University West Bengal governor Jagdeep Dhankar termed the heckling of the Union Minister as a "very serious" issue.

Kolkata: High drama was witnessed at the Jadavpur University in Kolkata after students blocked the way of West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankar at the university campus, where Union Minister Babul Supriyo had been stopped from attending an event earlier today.

On Thursday evening, a section of students of the university heckled Union Minister Babul Supriyo and prevented him from attending an event organised by the RSS-affiliated Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP).

Hours after Supriyo faced the protests by the students, Governor Dhankar rushed to the campus to the BJP leader’s aid.

However, students demonstrated before the Governor and blocked his car as he tried to leave with Supriyo.

The students ended their agitation after the police and the university teachers persuaded them to do so. Following this, the Governor was able to leave the spot with the Union Minister.

The Union Minister was stopped from entering the campus for nearly one-and-a-half hours as members of two Left backed organisations, namely Arts Faculty Students' Union (AFSU) and Students Federation of India (SFI), raised slogans of 'Babul Supriyo, Go Back'.

Supriyo was purportedly gheraoed by the students who raised black flags and allegedly pushed and shoved Supriyo around. As per reports, the students protested against the Union Minister in the aftermath of the abrogation of Article 370 that granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

Speaking to reporters, Supriyo claimed that a few students pulled him by his hair and pushed him.

He reportedly said, “I did not come here to do politics. But I am saddened by the behaviour of some of the students of the university, the way they have heckled me. They pulled me by my hair and pushed me.”

“They cannot provoke me. I have come here to say that if there will be no opposition in a democratic country, with whom will you contest? I am your opposition. If one will not go to the ground, how will the match take place? If they want to be a part of politics, they should also have the courage to listen to the opposition,” he was further quoted as saying.

Meanwhile, Governor Dhankar reportedly asked West Bengal Chief Secretary Malay De to take prompt action in the case of Babul Supriyo getting gheraoed by Jadavpur University students.

The Governor said, "The incident of gherao of Union Minister Babul Supriyo and others by a section of the students in Jadavpur University is a very serious matter. It shows an adverse reflection on the law and force agency in the state."

Reportedly, Malay De assured the Governor that immediate action would be taken in the matter.

Meanwhile, Jadavpur University Vice-Chancellor Dr Suranjan Das and Pro VC Dr PK Ghosh were both admitted to AMRI Hospitals in Dhakuria today evening. A statement by the hospital said that the two had complained of headache, vertigo, palpitation, and nausea.
