In yet another unilateral diplomatic manoeuvre, Pakistan shuns India at SCO cultural event in Russia

Days ago, Pakistan decided to boycott the SCO Military Medicine conference in New Delhi | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Earlier this week, Pakistan denied airspace to PM Modi's scheduled flight to USA Pakistan's attempts to seek international support on Kashmir has received cold response from key global players

New Delhi: Continuing its 'unilateral' diplomatic manoeuvres against India over the Kashmir matter, Pakistan, on Thursday shunned the Indian contingent at a cultural programme on the sidelines of a Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) exercise in Russia. Pakistan's move is in violation of diplomatic norms at the SCO.

"In the ongoing Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) exercise in Russia, today was the Cultural Day programme of Pakistan. In violation of existing diplomatic norms and in contravention of SCO norms, Indian contingent was not invited by them," news agency ANI cited Indian Army as saying.

The action comes days ahead of Pakistan PM Imran Khan's decision to 'forcefully' raise the Kashmir issue at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) on September 27. In fact, days ago, Pakistan had also decided to not attend the SCO Military Medicine Conference in New Delhi. The decision was later revised and Islamabad sent a doctor and an embassy official to attend the event on day 2.

This is also the latest move by Pakistan amid ongoing tensions between the two countries over New Delhi's decision to abrogate Article 370 in Kashmir. While Pakistan's efforts to internationalise the Kashmir matter has received a cold response from key global powers, the world community has, on numerous occasions, endorsed New Delhi's stance on Kashmir.

Meanwhile, earlier this week, Islamabad also denied airspace for PM Narendra Modi's flight to the US to attend UNGA. In response, India's Ministry of External Affairs expressed regret over Pakistan's action and urged that country to 'reconsider' its unilateral diplomatic manoeuvres.
