Is BJP scared of onions, asks Pawar in dig at PM’s rally

NCP chief criticises govt. of anti-farmer policies, slowdown

Targeting Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s rally in Nashik, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar on Thursday accused the government of apathy towards Nashik’s onion farmers and said it feared the ire of these farmers.

“Two days before the Prime Minister’s rally, authorities stopped farmers from bringing onions to the market as they were scared that irate farmers might throw the onions during the PM’s address. Is the BJP government now afraid of onions?” the NCP chief asked, while addressing his party workers in Nanded district.

The NCP patriarch is on a State-wide tour to revive his party cadre in view of a string of high-profile desertions ahead of the Assembly polls.

Targeting Mr. Modi, Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and the Bharatiya Janata Party’s (BJP) Mahajanadesh Yatra in Nashik, Mr. Pawar criticised the BJP government’s ‘anti-farmer’ policies and its alleged policy of importing onions from Pakistan and other countries while refusing to give a fair price to the farmers in Nashik.

“The Nashik Police Commissioner had issued a notice ahead of the PM’s rally that activists of all opposition political parties should stay put else they would be taken into preventive custody. Farmers were prevented from selling their produce in the market, the largest wholesale market for onions in the country, ahead of today’s rally … This government talks big against Pakistan, but scrambles to import onions from them, causing losses to Maharashtra’s farmers and forcing them to commit suicide,” Mr. Pawar said.

He said when he was the Union agriculture minister, BJP leaders had protested outside Parliament about rising onion prices by wearing ‘onion garlands’. “At the time, I told the Speaker that if they [the BJP] are getting angry about rising prices of onions, I don’t care as the price rise was essential for farmers’ livelihood. I told those BJP leaders how much does it cost you all to pay a little more for onions?” the NCP chief said.

‘Companies shut’

Accusing the government of being indifferent to the soaring unemployment, he claimed that 54 companies in Nashik had shut down in the past month alone, while 16,000 workers had been laid off. “Besides Nashik, manufacturing companies and small industries are shutting down in Pimpri-Chinchwad, Thane and other parts of the State with rampant lay-offs everywhere … this government has done nothing but contribute to tremendous recession in every sector, be it agriculture or industry,” Mr. Pawar said, alleging that the ruling government was only interested in giving subsidies to industrialists.

The NCP chief said there was no climate for investment in Maharashtra today, and accused Mr. Fadnavis of presenting misleading figures during the the Mahajanadesh Yatra.

“[Fadnavis] can go on claiming as to which companies have invested in Maharashtra … I urge him to forget these companies and give us instead the true figures of the number of firms that have shut down in the past few months. But as the Chief Minister dare not give these in the face of unprecedented unemployment, he has now taken out this yatra to deceive the public,” Mr. Pawar said.

He said Mumbai used to be the textile hub with 120 factories employing four lakh workers at one time. “Today, 110 of these have shut down with barely 10-11,000 workers still working. The factories have been replaced by high-rises,” hesaid.
