5 protestors climb water tank, seeking recruitment by Punjab government

PATIALA: Five people, including three women, climbed a water tank in Hassanpur village at Sirhind Road in Punjab in protest against the state government not meeting their "demands from a long time".The protestors have been demanding recruitment claiming to have been appointed on the basis of incentives under the water and sanitation department of the Punjab government on Friday.They claimed they were appointed in December 2015 on the basis of incentives for six months at the posts of motivators and master motivators. They added that the required qualifications for the post of motivator were class 12 pass whereas for the post of the master motivator it was graduation.The protestors claimed that they were assigned the jobs to create awareness among the villagers against open defecation, construction and usage of toilets properly. Besides this the motivators were supposed to motivate the masses about water saving and not to leave taps open leading to water wastage.“There are a total of 581 motivators and master motivators across the state. The motivators were assigned six villages and were supposed to get Rs 6,000 per village in a period of six months. Similarly, the master-motivators were assigned from 18 to 20 villages for creating awareness and were paid Rs 8,000 per village in six months duration. Later, the government officials continuously took work from us but did not pay us a single penny. Since then, they have neither been paying us for work, nor are we recruited as their employees. We have staged numerous protests in the last three years, but intensified protest from Lok Sabha elections 2019. In March this year, we launched indefinite strike at Ratuala village of Malerkotla and then at Bhogiwal village on June 27. Later, we protested in Malerkotla town and then gheraoed the house of Razia Sultana who assured us that a sub-committee was formed to decide our fate but all in vain,” said Sandeep Kaur protestor who had climbed the water tank.She added, “My qualifications include BCA, B.Ed, ITI, Web designing and also cleared IELTS. Like me, most of the employees were highly qualified but were working with the department without being paid as we know the rate of unemployment and the government had failed on all fronts including in giving jobs.”
