Man held for spreading fake news about CM Vijay Rupani's official car

The Ahmedabad Crime Branch has nabbed a man from Surat in connection with a photograph and news that went viral claiming that the car in which Chief Minister Vijay Rupani travelled did not have insurance.

The cops arrested Afraz Raza Sheikh from Surat on Friday after compliant was registered by an employee of the Road Transport Department.

Police said that the accused had made viral a picture of the Scorpio car in which the CM travels. He then circulated bogus details of the vehicle GJ 18- G 9085 which showed that it had expired insurance and also did not have a fitness certificate. The cops nabbed the accused within 24 hours post receiving the complaint. Sheikh runs a news website called News Network.

The vehicle is registered in the name of the Director General of Police and is part of the convoy in which the CM travels. Earlier, the Transport Minister RC Faldu at the time of announcing an extension for helmet and Pollution Under Control (PUC) rules, had also pointed out that the viral message was not incorrect.

Faldu had at that time clarified that the said vehicle had valid insurance and it was valid up to December 31, 2019, and that its fitness certificate is valid for several more years. At that time Faldu had said that they would be taking action against those responsible for generating fake news.

Meanwhile, the government announced that the Road Transport Offices in the state will be functioning this Sunday. The state said that this was being done to accommodate the rush of citizens at such offices to access various facilities.

Since the amended Motor Vehicles Act came into effect, RTOs in the state has been witnessing long queues of citizens eager to get their documents in place.

The state however clarified that all facilities associated with driving licences including getting learner's licence, renewal and tests will not be available on Sunday.

The National Students' Union of India (NSUI) meanwhile protested outside the RTO in the city to highlight the woeful lack of facilities for the citizens.
