News Nation Morning Wrap: EC To Announce Assembly Poll Dates, Trump To Meet Modi On Sep 24 & Other Top Stories

New Delhi:

Election Commission To Announce Dates Of Maharashtra, Haryana Assembly Polls At Noon

All eyes will be on the crucial press conference of the Election Commission today at around 12 noon. The Election Commission is likely to announce the dates for Haryana and Maharashtra Assembly polls today. The schedule for Jharkhand may also be announced at the press conference. The Model Code of Conduct will come into force after the announcement of the poll dates. In case the announcement is made today, it will be mean that the polls will be conducted in October next month. Back in 2014, the Election Commission had announced the dates for both Maharashtra and Haryana on September 12. The voting had taken place on October 15 and results were out by October 19. Read more…

Madras High Court Chief Justice VK Tahilramani's Resignation Accepted, Says Govt Notification

Madras High Court Chief Justice VK Tahilramani’s resignation was formally accepted on Saturday. The development was confirmed by after the government released an official notification. President Ram Nath Kovind accepted her resignation, the notification said. The Madras High Court Chief had resigned from her post on September 6 in protest against her transfer to Meghalaya High Court. On August 28, the Supreme Court Collegium had recommended the swapping of Chief Justices of Tamil Nadu and Meghalaya. According to the Collegium, Justice AK Mittal of Meghalaya High Court was to be appointed as Madras High Court Chief Justice. Read more…

1,500 UP Farmers Begin Their March From Noida Sector-69 To Delhi's Kisan Ghat Over Loan Waiver

Over 1,500 farmers from western Uttar Pradesh began their protest march from Noida’s Sector 69 on Saturday. They will try to reach Kisan Ghat in Delhi. These farmers, mostly of them from areas in and around the sugarcane belt of Saharanpur, are protesting against the government over nonfulfillment of their demands. The farmers are demanding payment of sugarcane crop dues, full loan waiver and making electricity used in farming free. The farmers decided to hold the protest march after talks between Bhartiya Kisan Sanghatan and the Agriculture Ministry failed in Noida on Friday. Read more…

Only Pulwama-Like Incident Can Change Mood Of People In Maharashtra, Says Sharad Pawar

NCP chief Sharad Pawar on Friday said there is a lot of resentment against the BJP-led government in Maharashtra, and only a Pulwama-like incident can change this sentiment ahead of the elections. "There was anger against the Narendra Modi government before 2019 Lok Sabha polls. But Pulwama attack changed the entire situation," Pawar said while addressing a press conference after attending a party workers' meet. Read more…

Donald Trump To Meet Pakistan PM Imran Khan On September 23, PM Modi A Day Later

US President Donald Trump will meet Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on September 23 and will hold a meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi in New York on September 24. This will be Trump’s second meeting with PM Modi after he joins the prime minister for the mega “Howdy Modi” event in Houston tomorrow. Both the meetings with the leaders of India and Pakistan would be held in New York on the side lines of the 74th session of the UN General Assembly. Read more…

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
