48th day of curfew: India continues to violate human rights in occupied Kashmir

Forcefully tightening its grip on the Himalayan region, India has been violating basic human rights.

SRINAGAR (Dunya News) – Indian occupied Kashmir remains under strict military siege on the 48th consecutive day with more than 10 million people cut off from the entire world under Modi regime, which had on Aug. 5 unilaterally abrogated articles 370 and 35A of the Indian constitution via a rushed presidential decree, stripping Kashmiris of their special rights.

According to Kashmir Media Service, Indian troops went berserk in Panzgam area of Kupwara district and subjected Kashmiris to torture. The troops barged into the residential houses, thrashed inmates and vandalised household goods.

Indian police arrested two men namely Suhail Ahmed Dar, a truck owner, and Bashir Ahmed Lone in Pulwama on false charges.

The humanitarian crisis has worsened as Pakistan awaits resolution of Kashmir dispute with India under United Nations Security Council (UNSC) resolutions.

Forcefully tightening its grip on the Himalayan region, India has been violating basic human rights and freedom of speech and expression, including curbs on religious rituals and activities, fearing that these gatherings could turn into anti-India demonstrations.

India has restricted Muslims from offering Juma prayers at Srinagar’s historic Jamia Masjid and other big mosques of the valley.

Indian troops have been using pellet guns, canes and teargas shells on the rallies, injuring dozens of protesters so far.

Communications’ blackout, internet and mobile services’ suspension, closure of TV channels and stringent curfew have brought life to a standstill with all markets closed and public transport off the roads since August 5.

Around 50,000 public transport vehicles are grounded while train service is suspended for more than a month.

Over 10,000 Kashmiris and hundreds of political leaders and workers, including Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai continue to remain under house arrest or jails.

Trump to meet PM Imran on Monday, Modi on Tuesday

United States President Donald Trump will meet Prime Minister Imran Khan on Monday (September 23) and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday (September 24) in New York on the sidelines of the 74th session of the UN General Assembly.

“The president is scheduled to meet with the following leaders. Prime Minister Khan of Pakistan, President (Andrzej Sebastian) Duda of Poland, Prime Minister (Jacinda) Arden of New Zealand, Prime Minister Lee (Hsien Loong) from Singapore, President al Sisi of Egypt and President Moon of S Korea,” said the official who spoke on a condition of anonymity.

On September 24, Trump will deliver an address to the UN General Assembly. After that, he will hold a number of bilateral meetings.

PM Khan to keynote UNGA on Sept 27

PM Khan will deliver a keynote address to the UN General Assembly on September 27 and share Pakistan’s perspective and position on the Jammu and Kashmir dispute and its current human rights and related dimensions.

During the week-long visit, the premier will also avail the opportunity to articulate Pakistan’s perspective on some key contemporary issues including the centrality of the Jammu and Kashmir dispute through myriad engagements.

He will hold several bilateral meetings with his counterparts from various regions and participate in high-level UN summits on climate change, sustainable development, universal health coverage and financing for development.

The Prime Minister will also attend and speak at high-level side events co-hosted by Pakistan and Turkey on countering hate speech and on environmental protection and poverty alleviation, co-hosted by Malaysia and Pakistan.

A trilateral summit meeting of Pakistan, Malaysia and Turkey will also be held on the General Assembly sidelines.

Apart from these engagements, the Prime Minister will interact with cross-section of international media outlets including meetings with editorial boards.

Khan’s engagements with leading think-tanks and meetings with heads of major international human rights organisations are also envisaged.

The Prime Minister’s visit will further reinforce Pakistan’s abiding commitment to the UN Charter, the International Law and cooperative multilateralism, with the UN at its core.

Kashmiris, Khalistanis to protest against Modi in U.S.

Kashmiris, Khalistanis and their sympathisers will hold a massive anti-India demonstration in Houston, Texas upon Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit.

Kashmiri and Khalistani activists have already made their presence felt with a dress-rehearsal march of tractor-trailer trucks decorated with flags and protest signs.

The march which started from Sikh National Centre in Houston culminated at the NRG Centre, the venue of the Indian Prime Minister’s public gathering.
