Ex-TDP MP Naramalli Sivaprasad, who protested by donning unique get-ups, passes away

Ex-TDP MP Naramalli Sivaprasad, who protested by donning unique get-ups, passes away

The politician used to come dressed as famous personalities like MGR, NTR, Chhatrapati Shivaji, Alluri Sitarama Raju etc. in Parliament demanding Special Status for AP.

news

Former TDP MP from Andhra Pradesh Dr Naramalli Sivaprasad passed away in Chennai on Saturday. The senior politician, aged 68, was undergoing treatment at the Apollo Hospital for a kidney ailment. He was hospitalised for a week in Chittoor but brought to Apollo in Chennai on Friday.

The politician was repeatedly in the news over the last five years, during the previous term of the Lok Sabha, for his antics. He was known for his unique protests demanding Special Category Status (SCS) for Andhra Pradesh, donning different costumes to the Parliament. He has dressed as famous personalities like MGR, NTR, Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj and Alluri Sitarama Raju. He has also gone to the parliament dressed as a washerman, magician, schoolboy, woman etc. He once even went dressed as Adolf Hitler and his various avatars grabbed the attention of the media.

RIP. Former Chittoor MP of #TDP #ShivaPrasad died due to illness at Apollo hospital in #Chennai. Actor turned politician earned fame during #APSpecialProtest at parliament with he attending the session in different getup every day. #AndhraPradesh https://t.co/4xo7kABq50 — Aashish (@Ashi_IndiaToday) September 21, 2019

Dr Naramalli Sivaprasad was born in Pultipalli village in Chittoor district in 1951. He was an MBBS doctor who completed his education in S.V. Medical College, Tirupati.

However, he also loved theatre and was keen on entering politics. He was first elected as an MLA in 1999, and worked as the Minister of Information & Culture under Chandrababu Naidu. In 2009, he contested and won the Chittoor Parliament seat and served as a member on the Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment. He was elected again from the same constituency in 2014.

The former minister had acted in several Telugu movies like Pilla Zamindar, Aatadista, Jai Chiranjeeva and Danger among others. For his performance in Danger, he was given the state government's Nandi award for 'Best Villain' in 2005.

TDP General Secretary Nara Lokesh expressed his grief over the loss, and conveyed condolences to family members. Acknowledging his contribution towards strengthening the TDP, Lokesh also recalled Sivaprasad's efforts in the Parliament demanding Special Category Status for Andhra.

Former CM and TDP chief Chandrababu Naidu tweeted his condolences, saying, "He struggled for Special Category Status and promises made during state reorganisation. His death is a terrible loss not just for Chittoor district but for the entire state of Andhra Pradesh."

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Jagan Mohan Reddy also expressed his condolences.

Sivaprasad is survived by his wife Ralavijaylakshmi, and has two daughters.

Read: From a tantric to Santa Claus: The many avatars donned by TDP MP Siva Prasad
