Dacoits kill senior citizen, loot house

HUBBALLI: A gang of five to six armed dacoits wearing masks struck at the house of a pharmacy owner and murdered him and assaulted his wife before fleeing with cash and valuables in the early hours of Tuesday.After killing Venkanna Banavi , 72, the dacoits decamped with cash and valuables worth Rs 11.15 lakh. The incident has sent shock waves among citizens as it took place in Raj Nagar , one of the upmarket areas in Hubballi and is also being seen as an indication of violent crime raising its ugly face in the city. The gang allegedly spent about 90 minutes in the house and even ate bananas from the kitchen after ransacking the entire house.Ashok Nagar Inspector Jagadish Hanchinal told TOI, “According to a complaint lodged by the victim’s wife Vanamala Banavi, 65, three to four men barged into their house while two of them stood guard outside.”“The dacoits questioned Vanamala about withdrawal of Rs 10 lakh from the bank. She suspects that a neighbour might have withdrawn the cash and the dacoits targeted their house thinking it’s them. However, we are verifying all facts and investigating the case from all angles,” he said. They were speaking in Hindi, Vanamala has told police When asked if police had found any CCTV footage of the dacoits, Hanchinal refused to divulge any details. “The dacoits got into the house by breaking open the southern window of the house and sneaked into the bedroom where the couple was asleep. They woke them up and then bound and gagged them,” he added.“When Venkanna resisted, they assaulted him with a rod, after which he collapsed and died instantly. As per the complaint, the dacoits allegedly fled with two diamond bangles worth Rs four lakh, four diamond rings worth Rs one lakh, five gold necklaces worth Rs one lakh, strings of two gold Rudraksha beads worth Rs 40,000, a diamond necklace worth Rs 2.5 lakh, a pair of diamond ear rings worth Rs 1 lakh, four pairs of gold ear rings worth Rs 1 lakh and Rs 25,000,” he said.After the dacoits fled, Vanamala managed to untie herself and sought help from a neighbour. She approached Ashok Nagar police in the morning.Police commissioner M N Nagaraj, DCP Ravindra Gadadi and other police officials and Navalgund MLA Shankar Patil Munenakoppa visited the spot.Venkanna ran a medical shop on Station Road and stayed with his wife in a big two-storey house. His son and daughter are in the United States while another son is working as a software engineer in Bengaluru.Police have formed teams headed by the Hubballi North ACP to investigate the case. A case has been registered at Ashok Nagar police station.
