Greta Thunberg receives rock star reception in New York

Advertisement

'We showed that we are united and that we, young people, are unstoppable,' said Swedish 16-year-old activist Greta Thunberg, who started the climate strike movement with her lone protest in front of her country's parliament about a year and a half ago

Fresh off the climate strike that took hundreds of thousands of young people out of classrooms and into the streets globally, youth leaders gathered at the United Nations today to demand radical moves to fight climate change.

'We showed that we are united and that we, young people, are unstoppable,' said Swedish 16-year-old activist Greta Thunberg, who started the climate strike movement with her lone protest in front of her country's parliament about a year and a half ago.

More than 700 young activists attended the first ever Youth Climate Summit.

Friday's strike across six continents and Saturday's youth conference come before a full-on climate conference next week at the UN General Assembly, which has placed the issue of climate change at front and centre as world leaders gather for the annual meeting.

Activists at today's gathering demanded money for a fund to help poorer nations adapt to a warming world and provide greener energy. They also insisted that the world should wean itself quickly from coal, oil and gas that cause climate change.

'Stop the criminal contaminant behavior of big corporations,' said Argentine climate activist Bruno Rodriguez. 'Enough is enough. We don't want fossil fuels anymore.'

Jayathma Wickramanayake, the UN Secretary-General's youth envoy, called climate change 'the defining issue of our time. Millions of young people all over the world are already being affected by it.'

During Thunberg's short lifetime, for example, the Earth has already warmed 0.6F (0.34C).

Fiji climate activist Komal Karishma Kumar said global warming is not just taking a toll on the planet but on her generation, especially people from vulnerable places like her Pacific island nation.

Greta Thunberg speaks as United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and other young climate activists listen at the start of the United Nations Youth Climate Summit

'Young people from different parts of the world are living in constant fear and climate anxiety, fearing the future, the uncertainty of a healthy life or a life for their children at all,' Kumar said.

She added: 'I do not want our future generations to submerge with our sinking islands.'

After listening to Thunberg and other youth climate activists, a tie-less Secretary-General Antonio Guterres credited young people with transforming him from a pessimist to an optimist in the fight against global warming.

Guterres said he sees 'a change in momentum' going into Monday's Climate Action Summit taking place ahead of the UN General Assembly gathering of world leaders that starts Tuesday, telling the youths 'you have started this movement.'

'I encourage you to keep your initiative. Keep your mobilisation and more and more to hold my generation accountable,' Guterres said. 'My generation has largely failed until now to preserve both justice in the world and to preserve the planet.'

The Youth Climate Summit is taking place in advance of the General Debate of the General Assembly of the United Nations at United Nations Headquarters in New York

Secretary-General of the United Nations Antonio Guterres shakes hands with Swedish environmental activist Greta Thunberg

Kumar told Guterres that 'we will hold you accountable and if you do not, remember we will mobilize to vote you out.'

The youth activists brainstormed about what they could do to change the trajectory of an ever-warming planet and how they can help the world adapt to climate's changes. There was talk of hashtags, entrepreneurial ideas and climate art and poetry.

'Be that hummingbird that puts out the forest fire by fetching water with its small beak as all the other animals, including the elephant, told her it was impossible,' said Kenyan activist Wanjuhi.

The Youth Climate Summit came just hours after teenage climate change activist Greta Thunberg received a rock star reception from thousands of followers as she led a major march through New York City.

The 16-year-old Swede said she was overwhelmed by the success of yesterday's protests - with mass demonstrations being held across the globe.

However, she criticised US President Donald Trump's response to the global climate crisis.

The 16-year-old Swede said she was overwhelmed by the success of yesterday's protests - with mass demonstrations being held across the globe

Teenage activist Greta Thunberg was one of thousands of young people seen taking to the streets of New York as part of a worldwide rally calling for action on climate change

Ms Thunberg addressed thousands of New Yorkers as 1.1 million school children were told they could attend the demonstration if they had their parent's permission

Ms Thunberg, pictured, announced that climate change deniers were 'sad' and declared the demonstration a major success

Singer and daughter of actor Will Smith, Willow Smith performs at the Youth Climate Strike in Battery Park in New York

Willow Smith preforms during Greta Thunberg's Youth Climate Strike in an effort to promote awareness and change to current global environmental policies

'I'm joining youth and millions of people around the world to demand climate justice for all', Smith said

Willow Smith is seen at the rally. An estimated quarter of a million people marched in New York to protest government inaction on the climate crisis

Swedish environmental activist Greta Thunberg appears at the Youth Climate Summit at United Nations HQ

UN Secretary-General speaks next to the youth climate activists at the event, (L-R) Komal Karishma Kumar, Wanjuhi Njoroge, Greta Thunberg and Bruno Rodriguez

Jaden Smith also preformed during Greta Thunberg's Youth Climate Strike in an effort to promote awareness and change

The brother-sister singer-songwriter duo Jaden and Willow Smith took to the stage for performances and brief motivational speeches, leading the crowd in chants

'We are missing lessons to teach you one': A student held up a powerful placard in New York on Friday as public school students were exempt from classes in order to hit the streets for a protest

The sheer scale of New York's climate rally could be seen from the air, as demonstrators flooded roads in Manhattan's bustling downtown

Indigenous Amazonian youth leader Artemisa Xakriba speaks during activist Greta Thunberg's Youth Climate Strike

Protesters are seen in Battery park as activist Greta Thunberg leads the Youth Climate Strike in an effort to promote awareness and change

Annie Leibovitz is seen in lower Manhattan as activist Greta Thunberg leads the Youth Climate Strike

Protesters are seen in Battery park as activist Greta Thunberg leads the Youth Climate Strike

Demonstrators are seen in lower Manhattan as activist Greta Thunberg leads the Youth Climate Strike

The protests are anchored in a series of demands for radical action to mitigate the very worst impacts of the climate crisis

The message of the march was that adults in general, and certainly the adults with their hands on the levers of power right now, don't fully grasp this or don't really care about climate change

The Global Climate Strike was created by Swedish vegan climate activist Greta Thunberg, who has taken the world by storm with her message about taking climate change seriously

In the U.S., where more than 800 marches were planned, thousands of young people were absent from classrooms so they can carry signs, march and shout slogans calling for a new approach to energy and emissions

The protesters marched to demand that government and businesses commit to a goal of net-zero carbon emissions by 2030.

The Global Climate Strike drew scores of protesters around the world Friday, as young people answered a call from activist Greta Thunberg to demand action on climate change

Protesters march during a Fridays for Future rally against climate change in downtown Manhattan

The protests began in the U.S. hours after massive rallies kicked off in many European countries, from Denmark and Poland to France and the U.K.

The protests come ahead of the U.N. Climate Action Summit that begins Monday in New York

The global movement has taken root in many countries, as young people reflect on the current condition of the world — and how their lives might be shaped by the consequences of allowing global average temperatures to keep rising

Demonstrators are seen in lower Manhattan as they file past City Hall

Speaking to reporters during the march, Ms Thunberg said: 'It's just such a victory. I would never have predicted or believed that this was going to happen someday. And so fast, only in 15 months. I can't wait to see the official numbers come in. It will be magnificent.

'I think if enough people get together and stand up for this then that can have a huge difference, to put pressure on the people in power, to actually hold them accountable and to say you need to do something now.'

Ms Thunberg admitted some countries were responding with greater urgency to the impending crisis.

Thousands of people took to New York City streets Friday to help fight climate change, joining worldwide demonstrations ahead of a U.N. summit

Public schools throughout the city even let kids skip class to join the cause

Many protesters brought home-made signs, some which read 'The Earth is hotter than my imaginary boyfriend'

Climate activists, took over the streets, assembling at Foley Square to march to Battery Park for a rally

The flood of people marching in New York City, holding signs as they chanted, mirrored similar rallies across the globe

Activists are calling for immediate action from the world's governments to halt global warming, reduce fossil fuel consumption and avert environmental catastrophe

Thunberg says that rather than listen to her and other young activists, lawmakers should invite scientists to the Capitol to listen to their expertise on ways to slow a rise in global temperatures

As many as 1.1 million New York City school kids were eligible for an excused absence to participate in the strike

The protest comes just ahead of the U.N General Assembly session in New York City, which starts Monday

In New York City, thousands of students walked out of class, gathered in Foley Square and marched to Battery Park, where they heard from speakers about the concerns over climate change.

Students in New York City gathered in Foley Square at Noon and marched to Battery Park, where they were treated to a performance by Jaden Smith and a speech from climate change activist Greta Thunberg

In New York, where public schools excused students with parental permission, tens of thousands of mostly young people marched through lower Manhattan, briefly shutting down some streets

Tens of thousands of people marched through lower Manhattan on Friday to demand action on climate change ahead of next week's summit at the United Nations

Many of the protesters were students. With a parent's approval, city students won't get into any trouble for attending. The Department of Education is excused them from school for the rallies

Thunberg says world leaders need to listen to scientific reports that include data on rising sea temperatures, which will increase the intensity of hurricanes, like the one that most recently destroyed parts of the Bahamas

Huge crowds formed a sea of people, gathered to march from Foley Square more than a mile down Broadway to Battery Park

She claimed: 'It's a bit worse than in other countries. The arguments for continuing to not do anything and the empty words and promises and lies are the same. Some countries are more extreme than others but it's not much different.'

Ms Thunberg dismissed climate change deniers as 'sad'. She said: 'You just have to ignore them because they are just desperately trying to remove the focus from the climate crisis to make it something about me as an individual rather than the crisis itself. When they do that, they don't have any arguments left.'

World leaders are meeting in New York to discuss the climate change emergency.

Sixteen year-old Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg speaks to a large crowd of demonstrators at the Global Climate Strike in lower Manhattan. World leaders will fly into New York next week in order to discuss the climate change crisis

Youngsters and adults alike chanted slogans and waved placards in demonstrations that started in Asia and the Pacific, spread across Africa, Europe and Latin America, before culminating in the United States where Thunberg rallied.

She told a rally in New York: 'Change is coming whether they like it or not. Why should we study for a future that is being taken away from us? We demand a safe future. Is that really too much to ask?'

In New York, the city's Department of Education said all its 1.1 million schoolchildren were free to skip class to participate in the strike if they had parental consent - without any fear of punishment as Ms Thunberg, who has been nominated for a Nobel prize for her climate activism, spearheaded a rally at the United Nations headquarters.

The brother-sister singer-songwriter duo Jaden and Willow Smith took to the stage for performances and brief motivational speeches, leading the crowd in chants.

'This is the most incredible thing I have ever seen,' said Jaden Smith as he took the stage. 'As I've been getting older, I feel like the summers are getting warmer and warmer and warmer.' The pair then launched into his song 'Summertime in Paris.'

Led by climate activist Greta Thunberg (centre), young activists and their supporters rally for action on climate change in New York City today

Students and activists march to the US Capitol during the global climate strike march in Washington DC today

Thousands of environmentalist gather during a demonstration to draw attention to global warming and climate change in Brussels, Belgium

Students take part in a demonstration part of the Fridays for Future global climate strike, in Wageningen, The Netherlands

Bali: People display placards during a rally as part of a global climate change campaign at Sanur beach on Indonesia's resort island

Young people hold up banners as they take part in a march, part of the global Climate Walk 2019, against climate change in Wakiso, Uganda

Kenyan environment activists dressed in plactic waste attire join hundreds of youths and students during a protest against climate change in the streets of Nairobi, Kenya

Greek students and activists of environmental take part in a Global Climate Strike rally of the movement Fridays for Future in Athens, Greece

Schoolchildren protest with banners outside parliament in London, Friday, September 20

Young people gather for a protest against climate change at the Old Town Square in Prague, Czech Republic

Young demonstrators take part in the Global Climate Strike protest in Bangkok on Friday morning

Protesters gather during a global climate strike demonstration in Paris, France

People hold placards and chant slogans as they take part in a climate strike rally in Hong Kong's Central district

Advocates for environmental protection hold signs during a rally in solidarity with the Global Climate Strike at the University of the Philippines in Quezon City

Indonesian activists carry placards as they rally as part of a global climate change campaign in Jakarta

The majority of protesters are young people or children who walked out of school to take part in the demonstrations, inspired by activist Greta Thunberg. Pictured are demonstrators in Cyprus

Thousands of Turkish students, holding banners and posters, take part in demonstrations against climate change in Ankara

A young woman holds a poster as she takes part in a strike to protest against governmental inaction towards climate change in New Delhi, India - one of the most polluted countries anywhere in the world

Activists take part in Global Strike 4 Climate Change protests in Lodz, the manufacturing hub of Poland, on Friday

Tens of thousands of people also took to the streets in Berlin, while other German cities including Frankfurt and Munich also saw their own demonstrations take place

Protesters take to the streets of Sydney on Friday morning as the largest climate demonstration in history, which is due to take place in 150 countries, got underway

It appears that many took heed of the relaxed school attendance laws, as the streets of Manhattan overflowed with thousands of young protesters on Friday afternoon.

Incredible aerial footage showed roads from Foley Square completely shut down, as police blocked off an exit from the Brooklyn Bridge as the crowds swelled.

Young people held up signs with important messages such as 'don't burn my future' and 'we are missing lessons to teach you one', in what was expected to be the biggest protest ever against the threat posed to the planet by climate change.

Several protesters brandished placards that took aim at the current Republican administration, with one seen sporting a sign with an outline of President Trump's profile accompanied by the words 'Fossil Fool'.

Incredible aerial footage showed roads from Foley Square completely shut down, as police blocked off an exit from the Brooklyn Bridge as the crowds swelled

Several protesters brandished placards that took aim at the current Republican administration, with one seen sporting a sign with an image of President Trump's head accompanied by the words 'Fossil Fool'

'I've seen better cabinets at IKEA': In New York, a sign mocked politicians by referencing the Swedish home store

She said: 'We must hope, but we must also be prepared for that nothing comes out of it. And then we need to continue no matter what. Giving up cannot be an option. Indeed, this is a great opportunity to do something and they (leaders) should take that. Otherwise they should feel ashamed.'

Some four million people filled city streets around the world, organisers said, in what was billed as the biggest ever protest against the threat posed to the planet by rising temperatures.

Students walk out of school to take part in a march to demand action on the global climate crisis on September 20, 2019 in New York Cit

Many older New Yorkers, including famed photographer Annie Leibovitz, 69, were seen pounding the pavement to raise the alarm about the environment

The Vanity Fair snapper wore a gray boiler suit as she marched along Manhattan's streets

On the other side of the country, hundreds of Amazon workers also walked off the job - putting pressure on bosses to meet new environmental obligations

Meanwhile, a separate sign mocked politicians by referencing a Swedish home store: 'I've seen better cabinets at IKEA'.

More humour appeared in a sign that seemed to be a message for President Donald Trump. A child said: 'You can't comb over climate change.'

The protests are part of a snowballing movement sparked by school strikes outside the Swedish parliament.

The summit in New York convened by UN secretary general Antonio Guterres to urge countries to up their climate efforts.

In New York young men were seen holding up a sign, quoting Bill Nye. It read: 'The planet's f**king on fire.'

However, it wasn't just youngsters who turned out to raise awareness of climate change.

Many older New Yorkers, including famed photographer Annie Leibovitz, 69, were seen pounding the pavement to raise the alarm about the environment.

The Vanity Fair snapper wore a gray boiler suit as she marched along Manhattan's streets.

On the other side of the country, hundreds of Amazon workers also walked off the job - putting pressure on bosses to meet new environmental obligations.

The employees walked out of their Seattle offices to urge the online retail giant to stop dealing with oil and gas companies, among other requests

Amazon, which ships more than 10 billion items a year, vowed Thursday to cut its use of fossil fuels as hundreds walked off the job

The rainy weather wasn't enough to deter Amazon workers from walking out of the office brandishing placards

The employees walked out of their Seattle offices to urge the online retail giant to stop dealing with oil and gas companies, among other requests.

Amazon, which ships more than 10 billion items a year, vowed Thursday to cut its use of fossil fuels.

Meanwhile, several hours south, protesters turned out in Washington DC, chanting and marching toward the Capitol.

Several students seemed enthusiastic about putting Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's environmental proposals into practice, by unfurling a large banner which read: 'GREEN NEW DEAL'.

Also on the east coast, Boston saw thousands of its residents skip school and work in order to petition politicians and lawmakers to urgently address the issue of climate change.

Sseveral hours south, protesters turned out in Washington DC, chanting and marching toward the Capitol

Young environmentalists unfurled a banner which read 'Green New Deal' in front of the Capitol Building

Young people were seen sounding the alarm as they sat in front of one of Washington's most famous buildings

In Austin, one marcher dressed up as a dinosaur carrying a hand-written which read 'Ya'll about to go extinct - like me!'

Young people demonstrate with signs during a youth climate strike week action outside City Hall in Omaha, Nebraska

Haley Williams, left, and Amiya Cox hold a sign together and chant while participating in at the Experiential School of Greensboro in Greensboro, N.C

Boston City Hall Plaza in Boston was blocked by huge crowds that wanted to see human change not climate change

A young girl wears a banner that reads 'We Deserve A Future' while participating in the Global Climate Strike rally at Boston City Hall Plaza in Boston, Massachusetts

Mothers and their children with Moms Clean Air Force walk to meet up with other protesters for the Global Climate Strike protests on September 20, 2019 in Washington, DC

Taeko Carroll listens to speakers during a youth climate strike week action in Omaha

School children pose for a photo on a statue in front of City Hall in Omaha, Neb., during a youth demonstration against climate change

A young demonstrator carries a big sign during a youth climate strike week action in Omaha

Young people demonstrate with signs during a youth climate strike week action outside City Hall in Omaha

Emily Hill and her daughter Josephine Hill, 6, of Bellevue, Neb.,listen to speakers during a youth climate strike week action in Omaha

A student holds a sign while participating in a 'Global Climate Strike' at the Experiential School of Greensboro in Greensboro, N.C. Across the globe hundreds of thousands of young people took the streets Friday to demand that leaders tackle climate change in the run-up to a U.N. summit.

People gather and march during the Global Climate Strike march in Washington, DC on September 20, 2019. - Crowds of children skipped school to join a global strike against climate change

People gather and march during the Global Climate Strike march in Washington, DC on September 20, 2019, heeding the rallying cry of teen activist Greta Thunberg and demanding adults act to stop environmental disaster

People gather and march during the Global Climate Strike march in Washington, DC on September 20

'Open your eyes': In Washington, DC a woman pushed her child, who also held a placard, as crowds surrounded them

The large crowd is seen from across the water in Washington, DC on Friday

'Save the humans': In Washington, DC a sign showed a polar bear feeling bad for the future of the human race

People gather and march during the Global Climate Strike march in Washington, DC, showing a range of colorful signs

In Washington, DC the crowd got creative with a pictured of ExxonMobil CEO Darren Woods labelled a 'climate villain'

In Washington, DC, the crowd of young people urged spectators to 'act now' and one person asked: 'My world's on fire, how 'bout yours'?

Signs are seen blocking the view of the Capitol building in Washington, DC on Friday

'There is no planet B': In Washington, DC more signs read 'no more denial' and 'fire is catching'

NYC: A woman joins students as they walk out of school to take part in a march to demand action on the global climate crisis

Students walk out of school to take part in a march to demand action on the global climate crisis on September 20, 2019 in New York City

Students walk out of school to take part in a march to demand action on the global climate crisis on September 20, 2019 in New York City

Students walk out of school to take part in a march to demand action on the global climate crisis on September 20, 2019 in New York City

Students walk out of school to take part in a march to demand action on the global climate crisis on September 20, 2019 in New York City

Students walk out of school to take part in a march to demand action on the global climate crisis on September 20, 2019 in New York City

Students hold up signs during the Global Climate Strike march at Foley Square in New York on September 20, 2019

Students walk out of school to take part in a march to demand action on the global climate crisis on September 20, 2019 in New York City

Students walk out of school to take part in a march to demand action on the global climate crisis on September 20, 2019 in New York City

Students walk out of school to take part in a march to demand action on the global climate crisis on September 20, 2019 in New York City

'The planet's f**king on fire': In New York young men were seen holding up this direct sign, quoting Bill Nye

New York: Signs included 'I missed bio for this,' human change not climate change' and 'protect our home'

Mother nature: A protester in New York used face paint to write 'protect our mom' and illustrated planet Earth

Massage for Trump? A child held a sign in New York saying: 'You can't comb over climate change'

Boston, Massachusetts: Millions of people around the world are taking part in protests demanding action on climate issues

Boston City Hall Plaza in Boston was a colorful sight as people used artwork to say 'time is running out'

Children joined in the action at Boston City Hall Plaza in Boston on Friday while adults marched around them

There were many 'architects for change' but at Boston City Hall Plaza signs got very creative too

'Stop trying to make COAL happen' a sign with Mean Girls character Regina read at Boston City Hall Plaza in Boston

'Protect our future': Protesters hold signs during a climate change protest at the Statehouse, Friday, Sept. 20, 2019, in Indianapolis

In Indianapolis, one person pointed out 'it's getting hot' and another's sign said: 'I'm a grandma so I want the earth to be safe'

Robin Mohr takes a photo during a climate change protest at the Statehouse in Indianapolis while holding a skeleton with the sign 'fossil fuels'
