City’s Lavani groups to boycott yearly meet

Over 70 per cent of groups from Pune will not perform at the Tamasha Mahotsav that is being held at Wagholi next month; say the folk art is being neglected by government



Akhil Bharatiya Tamasha Parishad, the nodal body of all Tamasha and Lavani troups in Maharashtra has decided to boycott the upcoming state government’s ‘Tamasha Mahotsav’, the largest Tamasha and Lavani competition in the state which will be held in Wagholi next month. They are demanding that the government fulfil their various incomplete demands, including free police protection, during their individual shows at different places.



Over 70 per cent of the Tamasha groups from the Pune district will be taking part in this boycott.



The Parishad claimed that their primary demand is free police protection during the shows in remote villages. They said that their troupes are forced to hire paid police to avoid incidents like eve-teasing with women artists or scuffles during the event, which is putting additional financial burden on them.



Talking to Pune Mirror, Mohit Narayangaonkar, vice-president of the Parishad, said, “Lavani and Tamasha are a traditions of the state, but are under the threat due to several issues faced by the troupe owners. The cultural minister had assured to resolve our issues, but no relief has been provided yet. Our old demands, like monitory aid to troupes older than 10 years, and pension to older artists, are yet to be fulfilled.”



“We had no option but to choose this mega event to raise our demands. We are facing apathy from all the sections of the state government,” he added.



Raghuveer Khedkar, another Lavani troupe owner, said, “The state’s Tamasha Mahotsav is a grand opportunity to show our performances. But it is unfortunate that the cultural department is not addressing our issues. The state’s folk art is dying. Many troupes are under the burden of private money lenders. The aid from government is our only for to survival.”



Reshma Paritekar, who runs the Reshma-Varsha Paritekar Lavani group from Pune, said, “The earning season for Tamasha troupes is just of four months in a year. Because of television and music orchestras, we are already facing extinction. Any help from government will help in keeping this folk art alive.”



When asked, Vinod Tawde, the minister of cultural affairs, said, “We have called a meeting of all these troupes to address their various issues. We appeal to them not to boycott the event as it will not help them. The issue of police protection doesn’t fall under my ministry. We have conveyed their demands to the chief minister and are hopeful to resolve all other issues as soon as possible.”


