Fact Check: Photoshopped image of Arabs protesting against PM Modi goes viral

An image of a few Arabs protesting with shoes in hands and purportedly holding placards of PM Modi has gone viral on Facebook.

Did people in Saudi Arabia protest against Prime Minister Narendra Modi by showing shoes? An image of a few Arabs protesting with shoes in hands and purportedly holding placards of PM Modi has gone viral on Facebook.

Facebook page Rubi Khatun had posted this image on February 25, 2018, which people are still sharing on social media.

The page claimed in Hindi and Urdu that people in Saudi Arabia protested against Modi because of atrocities against Muslims in India. It also claimed that they were protesting against the violation of Sharia by banning triple talaq in India.

Till the filing of this story, the post was already shared more than 13,000 times. The archived version of the post can be seen here.

The truth

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found this claim to be false. No such protest took place against PM Modi in Saudi Arabia and the viral image is photoshopped.

The original photo is of 2016 during a protest in front of the Russian embassy in Kuwait against the Vladimir Putin government in Russia.

Photoshopped image

By using reverse image search, we found a tweet posted by @AhmdAlmaimoni on December 14, 2016, where similar pictures can be seen. The literal translation of the post from Arabic says, Kuwaiti people raise shoes to Russia in front of the Russian Embassy in Kuwait.

This incident was also covered by several other international websites. The original photograph of the protest can be seen in a Syrian news website called Enabbaladi.

In 2018, online news portal Arabtimes fact-checked the viral image and found the original picture. Comparing the viral image with the original one, it becomes clear that Modi’s image has been superimposed over Putin’s.

Viral image

Original image

Conclusion

Narendra Modi had visited Saudi Arabia in 2016. He was given a grand welcome by the Riyadh government as can be seen here

No such protest against PM Modi in Saudi Arabia was reported by any media.

The viral image is photoshopped. The original image is of a protest against Russian President Vladimir Putin. According to Arab media, on December 14, 2016, there was a protest in front of the Russian embassy in Kuwait against Putin and Bashar al-Assad against their actions in Syria.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Image of Arabs protesting against PM Narendra Modi. Conclusion Viral image is photoshopped. The original protest was against Russian President Vladimir Putin. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
