Green court putshalt on Chikhali STP

National Green Tribunal (NGT) has ordered the Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) to stop the ongoing work of sewage treatment plant (STP) in Chikhali. The Federation of River Residency Co-operative Housing Society had approached the authority, claiming that the construction of the plant has been violating the blue line norms. The work is now paused until the final disposal of the case.



On May 22, 2019, NGT formulated a three-member joint committee, comprising members of the Pune irrigation division and the municipal corporation under the chairmanship of the regional office of Maharashtra Pollution Control Board (MPCB). The committee was formed to investigate the allegations made by the River Residency Cooperative Housing Society, Chikhali, concerning encroachment beyond the flood line.



NGT’s principal bench of Justice SP Wangdi, Justice K Ramakrisjhnana and judicial member Dr Nagin Nanda took on records the findings of the committee appointed by NGT.



The bench passed the orders restraining further construction of offending construction. Mansi Joshi, learned counsel of MPCB stated that the board had already issued a stop order to PCMC, to prevent it from carrying out further work. The counsel also highlighted that the work has not been completely stopped by the local body. The bench, then considering the facts and observations of all the stakeholders, directed that the construction shall not resume until disposal of this case. The matter will be heard on November 14.



“The committee’s study found that the construction of the STP — of a capacity 12 mld — violates the blue line norms. The site of this facility is perched on the river bank, thus encroaching on the prohibited zone. This will be a great inconvenience to several thousand residents of the society,” said one of the members of Federation of River Residency Co-operative Housing Society, on the condition of anonymity.



PCMC’s water department head and joint city engineer, MD Nikam, however, said that the civic body is proceeding in an “ethical manner” and the site was already reserved for STP.



“The NGT bench has considered the things that were put in front of them by the coordination committee, which was being looked over by MPCB. They put forth points that were stated by the irrigation department.



However, PCMC’s views were not plated. Now, NGT has given us three weeks to file our say and we will present our side,” said Nikam, adding, “As per the 2007 city development plan, the civic body had reserved the site for this particular plant and we are following it. There are clear directions of the state government, saying that similar plants can come up within the blue line.”


