ANDREW ROBERTS on how the PM will have to defy the 'Benn Act' to leave the EU without a deal

It has become increasingly clear that to fulfil his promise to leave the European Union, Boris Johnson will have to break the law – and, specifically, the new ‘Benn Act’.

This, of course, is the Bill forced through Parliament by Remain MPs – led by Labour’s Hilary Benn – to stop us leaving the EU without a deal. It obliges Boris to apply for an extension to our membership of the EU if he has not struck a deal by October 19.

Breaking the law is a serious matter, it is true.

But there is plenty of excellent historical precedent should the Prime Minister decide to do this in pursuit of national sovereignty and independence.

Indeed, when leaders represent the will of the people – and the laws they are breaking are illegitimate or undemocratic – violating them is nearly always justified in retrospect.

As it would be in this case. The Benn Act became law earlier this month because of the connivance of the unconstitutionally partial Speaker, John Bercow. When he allowed the Opposition to pass legislation in Government time against the will of the PM and his Cabinet, 300 years of constitutional precedent was overturned.

It has become increasingly clear fulfil his promise to leave the European Union, Boris Johnson will have to break the law – and, specifically, the new ‘Benn Act

The Benn Act was a very English form of coup d’etat, orchestrated by an anti-Brexit faction in Parliament to subvert the clearly expressed will of the people. It is, therefore, necessary for Boris to break it to restore the proper constitutional relationship between Government, Parliament and people.

If he has the courage to do so, he will be following a distinguished path. In 1635, the MP John Hampden refused to pay the Ship Money tax – a levy collected by Charles I for outfitting his Navy – because it had not been agreed by Parliament and was unlawful. The row led to a revolt that overthrew the Stuart monarchy.

ON December 16, 1773, the Sons of Liberty – a group opposed to colonial rule in America – broke into ships owned by Britain’s East India Company to destroy a shipment of tea by throwing it into Boston harbour.

They were protesting against a British levy on tea because they believed there should be no taxation without representation. Their actions led directly to the rebellion that overthrew the colonial government in America.

Both Hampden and the Sons of Liberty were ultimately successful because their law-breaking was supported by the will of the people.

In 1930, Mahatma Gandhi broke the law by leading a march that ended with him picking up a small amount of salt from marshes on the India coast in contravention of Britain’s Salt Act, which prohibited Indians from collecting or selling salt. The protest was a turning point in the fortunes of Indian nationalists. Seventeen years later they won independence from the Empire. There, too, the will of the people was behind Gandhi.

Speaker John Bercow allowed the Opposition to pass legislation in Government time against the will of the PM and his Cabinet

The leaders of the African patriotic front movements of the 1950s and 1960s, such as Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, and Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya, all broke British imperial law at different stages, but had the moral right to do so since they represented their people, as did Nelson Mandela in South Africa.

Of course, you might think there is a huge difference between the British Empire of the 1950s and the EU today, but consider EU Brexit negotiator Guy Verhofstadt’s speech at the Liberal Democrat Conference a week ago, which won rapturous applause.

‘The world of tomorrow is not a world order based on nation states or countries,’ he thundered. ‘It is a world order that is based on empires. China is not a nation, it’s a civilisation. India is not a nation. The US is also an empire, more than a nation. And then, finally, the Russian federation. The world of tomorrow is a world of empires in which we Europeans, and you British, can only defend your interests, your way of life, by doing it together, in a European framework and in the European Union.’

Conference delegates, who would normally boo any mention of the Empire, rose as one to cheer Verhofstadt’s vision, expressed openly. They also laughed approvingly at his hope that one day the USA would speak Spanish instead of English.

Mahatma Gandhi used non-violent resistance to lead India's independence from British rule

The historical figures I referred to earlier were all essentially breaking the law to free themselves from the yoke of imperialism. Mr Verhofstadt clearly sees the EU as a 21st century empire. It might not be conquering and subjecting people in the same brutal manner as historical empires, but it does, nevertheless, seek to shackle and subjugate its members.

The Liberals Democrats’ decision not to have a referendum to overturn the 2016 Brexit vote, but to just do it if they formed a Government, proves once and for all that they are neither liberal nor democrats.

Similarly, when you hear former Justice Secretary and arch-Remainer David Gauke on Radio 4’s Today programme bleating about how Boris must ‘respect parliamentary convention’, do recall that it was Mr Gauke and 20 other Tory rebels who ripped up the central convention that the Executive proposes legislation in this country. Which is to say the Government and not MPs.

And seeing as the Government has been asked to deliver secret documents and communications over the suspension of Parliament for campaigner Gina Miller’s appeal against the High Court’s decision to throw out a challenge to prorogation, why shouldn’t Remainer rebels such as Philip Hammond be forced to tell us the extent of their communications with Jean-Claude Juncker and Michel Barnier?

With the new powers that Remain MPs have arrogated to themselves, there should come new responsibilities. It is highly likely that the Remain liberal commentariat will denounce Boris when he breaks the Benn Act.

But remember they are often exactly the same people who applaud law breaking by the suffragettes fighting for votes for women, the Kinder Scout mass trespass in 1932 over public access to private land, Martin Luther King’s protests again segregation laws in 1960s America and the break-ins at the Greenham Common nuclear weapons base by women protesters in the 1980s.

Breaking the law of the day led to its change in the first three of those instances. Because the last was not supported by the people, it didn’t. To fetishise the law simply because it is the law is to fail to appreciate the power of breaking bad, undemocratic laws, such as the Benn Act.

Remember, too, when Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn inevitably denounces Boris on the morning of October 20 for breaking the law, that this is a man who has supported illegal secondary picketers, violent anti-nuclear protests, and the IRA, Hamas and Hizbollah terrorist movements, amongst many others.

There is no doubt that the pro-democracy protesters in Hong Kong have been breaking the law, but they are justified because the vast numbers involved show they represent the will of the people.

Equally courageously, the Movement for Democratic Change in Zimbabwe engaged in protests illegal under law against the murderous tyranny of the late Robert Mugabe.

In neither place is the voice of the people heeded, but at least it would be if Boris were to break the law, which would take none of the physical courage required in Hong Kong or Zimbabwe, just moral courage.

There are sometimes – thankfully not many – moments in the history of a country when bad law must be broken to get something vital done.

Next month will be one of them.
