Farmers block NH-9 for 5 hours, rush-hour traffic to Delhi crawls

(With inputs from Somreet Bhattacharya)

GHAZIABAD: Commuters taking NH-9 to Delhi had a harrowing time reaching office as more than 300 farmers blocked the highway for almost five hours after being denied entry to Delhi.The snarls started early in the morning at Sector 69 as farmers began their march. The situation turned worse after the protesters, who had come on tractors and foot, were stopped at UP GateSaloni Gupta, who had an important meeting at 11.30am in her office in Delhi, was stuck at UP Gate with just 10 minutes to go for the session. She later told TOI she could reach her office only around 1pm.Traffic was stalled on one side of the elevated road at Raj Nagar Extension until the protest got over. Those coming from Mohan Nagar and Vaishali had to go to Anand Vihar to reach Delhi.SP (traffic) SN Singh said people coming from Indirapuram, Lal Kuan and Noida Extension took the Dabur junction from NH-9 to travel towards Delhi.Sources, however, said there was lack of coordination between the traffic police in Ghaziabad and Noida, which helped the snarl assume such massive proportion. While officers in Noida police said they had informed their counterparts well in advance, Ghaziabad police said they got intimation about the protest only on Saturday morning.SP (city) Shlok Kumar said that around 7am, he received information from Noida police that farmers would march to Delhi via UP gate.“I was continuously talking to Noida police on the route the farmers would take. I was told that the protesters would take the DND, which is why we did not make any diversion. But after getting proper information, we made arrangements accordingly,” he added.Police said over 250 personnel from eight police stations were deployed at specific locations to control the marching protesters. The protest was lifted after a team of farmers met representatives of the Centre.Apart from stopping the protesters, a joint team of Delhi and Ghaziabad police diverted traffic heading to UP Gate through a single lane on NH-9. They also manned multiple layers of barricades. In Delhi, police teams were deployed around Jantar Mantar, Rajpath, Lok Kalyan Marg and Vijay Chowk.
