‘Vayu Shakti’ to roar in Rajasthan sky on Feb 16

On February 16, the Indian Air Force will make the world realise its strength in the Thar desert. There is a possibility that representatives of more than 50 countries from around the world, including the President and Prime Minister of India, are expected to arrive to see the IAF’s biggest war exercise drill ‘Vayu Shakti-2019’ or ‘Iron Feast’, which is to be held in the Chandhan area of the Pokhran Field Firing Range of Jaisalmer.

Comprehensive preparations for the upcoming IAF event have already begun. In this demonstration of firepower in the day, evening and night program, best of the Indian fighter planes, fighter helicopters, cargo ships, many missiles, as well as Indian fighter aircraft Tejas are going to showcase their capabilities. The full dress rehearsal of the event will be held on February 13.

In this firepower demonstration, MiG-21, Bisan, MiG-27, MiG-29, Mirage 2000 and Sukhoi MKI fighter planes along with fighter helicopters Jaguar and Apache, L.C.H. and Mi-17 will collapse the imaginary posts of the enemy with bombs and missiles. The main focus in this ‘Iron Feast’ exercise will be on Make-in-India and Early Warning System.

The light combat aircraft Tejas of India will also demonstrate its war skills. The first meeting regarding the preparations of the event was also held in which District Collector Namit Mehta gave directions to the concerned department officials to complete the work and responsibilities in connection with this important program in the assigned time frame.

Speaking about ‘Iron Feast’, Police Superintendent Kiran Kang Sindhu said that along with keeping strict vigilance on the Indo-Pak border, coordination with the Border Security Force is being extended to increase police patrol of BSF in the border area. Moreover, a door to door survey will be started with the Indian Air Force in the village areas settled around the Chandhan area, and proper verification of the village residents will also be done. At the same time, all the villages will be given instructions to immediately inform the police on getting any information about the presence of any outsider in the region.

Heavy machines

In this firepower demonstration, MiG-21, Bisan, MiG-27, MiG-29, Mirage 2000 and Sukhoi MKI fighter planes along with fighter helicopters Jaguar and Apache, L.C.H. and Mi-17 will collapse the imaginary posts of enemy with bombs & missiles.

The presence

There is a possibility that representatives of more than 50 countries, including the President and PM of India, are expected to arrive to see the IAF’s biggest war exercise drill ‘Vayu Shakti-2019’ or ‘Iron Feast’, which is to be held in the Chandhan area of the Pokhran Field Firing Range of Jaisalmer.
