Rashbehari Avenue shuts down as bus drivers protest ‘slap’ by sergeant over fine

KOLKATA: A long stretch of Rashbehari Avenue virtually shut down around Tuesday afternoon, when 80 drivers and conductors of 3C/1 route, plying between Nagarbazar and Anandapur , staged a demonstration and parked 20 buses along the road, alleging that a sergeant from the southeast traffic guard had slapped one of them. The protest left scores of commuters towards Kasba and Ruby stranded.The sergeant reportedly stopped the driver at Deshapriya Park and told him he had 20 traffic-violation cases against him. The police reportedly insisted that the driver should settle the entire fine amount, which came to around Rs 2,000. The sergeant apparently wanted the driver to pay the fine under the second phase of the one-time traffic fine waiver scheme, under which, an offender has to pay only 50% of the amount. The first phase, which ended on January 13, offered a 65% discount. When the 3C/1 driver agreed to settle only 10 of the 20 cases, the sergeant, alleged the driver and some passengers, forced him down from his seat and slapped him.This comes a month after members of three major bus organizations approached transport minister Suvendu Adhikari to challenge the way the one-time traffic fine waiver scheme was being implemented by the police, who allegedly forced them to pay up on the spot.Allegedly slapped by the police, the bus driver alerted other drivers and conductors and 80 of them gathered on Rashbehari Avenue. Twenty of them parked their vehicles between Deshapriya Park and Triangular Park, protesting against police high-handedness. They also blocked the road briefly. “Initially, I thought the sergeant was issuing a challan. But I saw the sergeant talk to the driver, who then got down. The cop slapped him. How can someone arbitrarily slap someone? said Kasba resident Smritikona Ganguly, a passenger.This is the fourth protest by public transporters against alleged forceful settlement of fines, and second in the southeast traffic guard area.Fearing the issue might snowball into a confrontation in what has otherwise been a successful initiative, the police top brass stepped in and the road block was cleared in 15 minutes. Cops held a meeting with the route secretary and the bus owners. The buses on Rashbehari Avenue were cleared two hours later.The police said it had launched a drive under which sergeants were told to feed bus numbers on their hand-held devices, where they could check the pending cases. “When we find a bus with many cases against it, we ask the driver to pay up. In this case, the driver misbehaved with the sergeant but there was no question of him hitting the driver. The driver and conductor were too near him, and he pushed them away. This is not the same as hitting someone,” said a Lalbazar officer.Tapan Bandyopadhyay, president of Joint Council of Bus Syndicate, said they wanted a talk with cops.“They send cases without evidence. The challans are often hand drawn. Minibus Operators’ Coordination Committee, Inter-Region Bus Owners’ Association and West Bengal Contract Carriage Owners’ Association agree with us,” he said.
