We need more ‘Yakshis’ at our airports

It all began with the search for the sculpture of a soldier that Yusuf Arakkal did for Kozhikode corporation a few decades ago. The sculpture, when it was finally traced three years after the artist’s death, was in a totally neglected condition inside Ansari Park at Mananchira, like an orphan who had lost his way inside a jungle. When he was alive, Arakkal had even thought of removing it as a mark of protest against the authorities but eventually decided – with much regret, of course — to leave the sculpture to its fate. “When you commission a work of art, you have the basic responsibility to make sure it is preserved but I felt sad when I heard about the fate of that sculpture,” says his wife and gallerist Sara Arakkal.

The first image of public art that crops up in our mind is that of the ‘Yakshi’ at Malampuzha. One of the biggest nude female sculptures in the country, which turns 50 next year, it is still enthuses art aficionados and is a tourist marvel. But sculptor Kanayi Kunhiraman, who created this gigantic piece of public art, is not at all happy when it comes to most public art in Kerala. “It was with my sculpture that Malampuzha literally turned into a tourist destination. Though it is well preserved, the sad thing is that in many places, including Kannur, my public sculptures are literally ignored and I feel we are yet to properly respect public art,” he laments. He is right. If you go in search of his sculpture Mother and Child at Payyambalam in Kannur you may fail to see it completely.

The apathy towards public art is not restricted to Kerala alone, says veteran sculptor Balan Nambiar. “I had done a sculpture in mild steel in a major traffic island in Bengaluru, which was placed on a granite pedestal, but in 2004 it vanished and I would say my creation met with ‘custodial death’ at the hands of Bengaluru police,” he says.

When there are bureaucrats and politicians who have not seen original works of art, you cannot expect the conservation of public art, Nambiar adds. “I am totally opposed to public art now, and prefer outdoor sculptures in secure compounds, because there is no law in India to preserve it and if you work on a public sculpture or mural you will feel humiliated when such things happen,” he explains.

Though there is a lot of public art in Kerala, we are far behind when it comes to conservation and quality, according to artist and critic Ajayakumar. “I would say tourism has affected our art scene, because in many places local bodies commission mediocre art in the name of public art,” he points out. Added to this is the condition of so-called art on the walls of schools. “I would say walls of schools have turned out be one of the worst spaces for art; this would only distort the artistic sensibilities of the children,” he says.

When you look at Santiniketan you will get a broader picture as to how its founders respected public art, feels artist and sculptor KS Radhakrishnan. “When Tagore asked Ramkinkar Baij to fill the space with works of art, he did it using least expensive materials that changed the face of the institution, but here in Kerala we are yet to come to that level, barring the monumental works of Kanayi and a few others,” he says. Though Lalithakala Akademi had a plan to start a project for wayside sculptures, it did not take off, apparently because the artists were also not very keen about it. “I did a couple of bronze sculptures at Kozhikode and Kottayam a few years ago without considering the monetary aspect, because I wanted to do it,” reveals Radhakrishnan.

Likewise, at most major airports across India, there would be some representation of contemporary Indian art but in Kerala there is hardly any. Ironically, the big theyyam painting inside Kannur airport became controversial after a Chennai-based artist claimed that it was copied from a 3D artwork he did, and that too without his permission! Though the issue was solved, it throws a question about originality and merit of a work that adorns the walls of a huge public facility.

If public art in Kerala has to thrive, we should stop seeing art as something that has to be commissioned like a PWD contract work, and a mere piece of decoration, says artist Murali Nagapuzha. “When you enter the duty-free hall of Doha’s Hamad International Airport, what welcomes you is the gigantic bronze sculpture, ‘Untitled Lamp Bear’, by Swiss artist Urs Fischer, and when you take a round of the city, you will be astounded to see works like the gigantic foetus sculpture by Damien Hirst in front of a hospital. But when you look at what they claim to be art in the airports of Kerala, you will get to know how mediocre we are in our approach towards public art,” he argues.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
