KCR acting against the interests of the downtrodden: Manda Krishna

Questions non-representation of SCs on Telangana Cabinet

The State government headed by TRS president K. Chandrasekhar Rao was acting against the interests of the downtrodden and socially backward classes in Telangana, alleged Madiga Reservation Porata Samithi (MRPS) leader Manda Krishna Madiga.

Addressing a gathering at the Kakatiya Degree College grounds here on Sunday, where he undertook a day-long ‘Maha Deeksha’ protest demonstration, he said his protest was against the denial of Cabinet berth to Madiga community. “No Madiga candidate has been given a chance in the Cabinet reshuffle. It means KCR is against the interests of the community,” he said.

The Sri Krishna Committee and subsequent comprehensive survey ordered by KCR revealed that 90 per cent of Telangana population is downtrodden. But no initiative was taken by the government to improve their lot and it is acting against the ideals of B R Ambedkar. It was not the fight of KCR alone, but the effort of all communities and Sakalajanula Samme that yielded the separate Telangana State. Hence, all communities should get their due share in all fields in the new State. “Only upper caste people got a major chunk in the Cabinet while the SCs and STs remain deprived and discriminated,” Mr. Krishna Madiga said.

The government headed Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy in Andhra Pradesh had appointed five deputy chief ministers, drawing members from all castes while KCR failed to do so in Telangana. “We demand that the Madiga community should be given Cabinet berths in Telangana State,” the MRPS leader said.

Congress working president and former MP Ponnam Prabhakar and former MLA A Sampath, leaders of Left Parties expressed their solidarity with the MRPS leader at the Maha Deeksha.

The MRPS will organise similar mass demonstrations at Hyderabad in the second week of October on this demand. Mr. Ponnam Prabhakar said his party would support and take part in the protests launched by the MRPS against the KCR government.
