Important factors that are required for immigration to Canada

You're thinking of taking your career to the next level, and now you are thinking to move to a country which offers you the best opportunities to expand and polish your skills. Only one country pops in your mind keeping these essential needs of your's in consideration, that is Canada! Well, congratulations as you've chosen the one country that most of the citizen's dream of moving to. Canada is a beautiful country with better opportunities as compared to other countries in the world. Be it education, healthcare or any other sector you are needed to rely on, Canada provides you with the best facilities in each sector. Also, with such easy to understand immigration processes that this country offers, moving to Canada is simpler than moving to any other country. We shall discuss the most famous immigration system and requirements through this article.

(*)At the end of this article, you will learn about

(a) Express Entry Immigration System.

(b) The eligibility criteria to migrate to Canada.

(c) Where to start the process.

(d) What is the Express Entry Immigration System

The Government of Canada executed the Express Entry Immigration System under the Economic Class including the Federal skilled worker program. Under this program, Federal Skilled Workers who serve minimum entry criteria, have to submit an expression of interest profile to the Express Entry Pool. The profiles of candidates within the pool are graded under a Comprehensive Ranking System. The candidates with the highest rank will be invited to apply for permanent residence. Federal Skilled Workers are equipped with suitable education, work experience, age and language abilities under one of Canada's official languages. To successfully qualify for admission criteria to the Express Entry Pool as a Federal Skilled.

(*) Worker, applicants need to meet the following conditions

One-year of full-time work experience or part-time continuous employment in one of 347 eligible occupations listed inside the applicable National Occupational Classification system. The work experience must be within Managerial Occupations, Professional Occupations, or Technical Occupations and Skilled Trades, within the meaning of the National Occupational Classification system. Should score sufficient points under the skilled worker point grid comprising of six factors. The current pass mark is 67 points. Undergo a language proficiency test from a recognized third party and demonstrate skills in English or French corresponding to the Canadian Language Benchmark of 7. Possess suitable funding. Security background and medical examination.

Qualified candidates are assessed against six factors to decide their eligibility for immigration to Canada. It is required to score a total of 67 points for a candidate to qualify. The selection factors are:

(a) Education.

(b) Language.

(c) Employment experience.

(d) Age.

Arranged employment.

Adaptability.

The program selects candidates with the highest probability of economic settlement success and contribution to Canada.

(a)Education: Maximum of 25 points

The maximum points awarded to applicants with a doctoral degree. Foreign credentials will be evaluated by an appointed third party to calculate their Canadian equivalent and points will be awarded based on that equivalence.

(b)Language: Minimum 16 points, maximum of 28 points

Applicants capable of demonstrating proficiency in one of Canada's official languages, English or French, will be considered.

(c)Employment Experience: Minimum 9 points, a maximum of 15 points

This program asks for a minimum experience of 1-year to qualify and the maximum consideration is 6-years.

(d)Age: Maximum of 12 points.

Up to 12 points will be granted to applicants between the ages of 18 and 35 years.

(e)Arranged Employment: 0 or 10 points

Points are allotted to applicants with a validated offer of employment in Canada. The Arranged Employment Opinion process is replaced with the Labour Market Opinion (LMO) employment validation process which is generally used in processing applications for Canadian work permits.

(*)Adaptability: Maximum of 10 points

Candidates with at least 1 year of full-time work experience in a professional space or skilled trade occupation will be awarded maximum points. These are the basic requirements for migration to Canada. All you need is 67 marks on your scorecard to qualify for the immigration process to Canada. To start your immigration process you need to check all these requirements, and if you're failing in some of the categories, then you need expert guidance so that your application does not get rejected.
