Why politics over our national icons peaks during election time

It is only in the time of elections , that we seem to remember our heroes. And more importantly do political parties .So as time reckoning in politics or voting time gets nearer, greatness of the hero is recalled and even a demand is made to bestow rare honour like Bharat Ratna on the icon .

Well that is what happened recently when Shiv Sena supremo Uddhav Thackeray demanded that Bharat Ratna be conferred on renowned freedom fighter and icon of Hindutva Veer Vinayak Damodar Savarkar. He also opined that Pakistan would not have come into existence if Savarkar had been India’s first PM. Launching a book on Savarkar , Thackeray sparked a face-off in social media with his observation that if only India’s first PM Jawaharlal Nehru had “survived in jail for 14 minutes like Savarkar who stayed in Andaman Cellular jail for 11 years “, he would have also called him ” veer”( brave).

The Congress naturally did not let such jibe on its icon pass without a counter . Party’s official twitter handle dug up a text to show case it on twitter how Savrkar, the Hindu Mahasabha chief — had backed Pakistani founder Jinnah’s idea of Partition with his comment Hindus and Muslims are two nations . If this wasn’t enough , the Grand Old Party also went on to belittle gruelling conditions of Savarkar’s imprisonment in cellular jail by pointing how Savarkar and his brother were among the 3 inmates at the cellular jail who wrote apology letters to the British to escape confinement . As for their own icon Nehru, it took pride in his prison records and showcased it twitter . It declared how Nehru had spent 9 years and had come out with “ flying colours “ – for he had never written any apology to the British.

However , the problem with latest clash over our icons by present day Congress and Sena leaders is that while they are drawing red lines here and now , and trying to find fault with Nehru and Savarkar , not very long ago those backing Savarkar used to cite how Indira Gandhi as PM in May 1980 had in a letter to Swantantrayaveer Savarkar Rashtriya Smarak had praised Savarkar’s “daring defiance of the British Government “. She had said it “ has its own place in the annals of our freedom movement.”

In fact it was this letter of Indira Gandhi that was cited by Mohan Rawale, then a Shiv Sena MP, in his communication to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in August 2004, soon after Mani Shankar Aiyar as new Petroleum Minister in UPA I had removed Savarkar quotes from a commemorative plaque or “ swantratya jyot” put up in Andaman Cellular Jail. The plaque was commissioned by his predecessor in the ministry, veteran BJP leader Ram Naik in May 2003. However, by the time plaque was ready for installation the NDA Government had been voted out

In his letter to Dr Singh, Rawale pointed how Indira Gandhi had not only lavished praise on Savarkar , she had also made a personal donation by cheque of Rs 11,000 to Swantantrya Veer Savarkar Smarak at Shivaji Park in Mumbai. “ On May 27, 1970 a postal stamp was released in the name of Veer Savarkar. Indira Gandhi had asked Prem Vaidya of Films Division to produce a “laghu pat”(short film) on Savarkar, “ wrote Rawale . In Mahatma Gandhi assassination case, Savarkar was found innocent and released with full honour, Rawale added pointing out that the judgement given by Justice Atma Charan was so clear that the Government did not go in for appeal in the Punjab High Court. “Even Dr B.R.Ambedkar had criticised Government of Hindustan for involving Savarkar in this case .”

When Savarkar’s name was removed from the commemorative plaque in Andaman , BJP veteran Ram Naik noted that the Congress seems to be “ taking pride in insulting this great son of India”. “ It had demonstrated the same attitude when Savarkar’s portrait was installed in Central Hall of Parliament in February/ March 2003.” It had led a Opposition boycott of unveiling of the portrait by the President of India in Central Hall of Parliament .

So in this backdrop of polarised politics, does it surprise anyone that Savarkar’s grandnephew Ranjit and Indira’s grandson Rahul should now be engaged in a legal pow-vow over defamatory comments made by Gandhi scion on our national icon some three years ago. Hardly.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
