Exclusive: Student who heckled Babul Supriyo says he doesn't regret resistance against fascism

Debanjan Ballav, the student who shot to limelight after a picture of him pulling Union minister and BJP MP Babul Supriyo by the hair went viral, has said he doesn't regret his act of protest.

Speaking to India Today TV, the second year Sanskrit College student has said it was an "act of resistance against fascism" and he does not repent pulling Babul Supriyo by his hair.

That day we simply went to question Babul Supriyo about contemporary issues like NRC and Demonetization. We did ask him but he refused to answer and abused us in return. He even tried to hit me. At that moment I reacted the way any conscious student would react and I do not regret it. It was my self-defense, Ballav said.

A member of the ultra left-wing student group United Students’ Democratic Front (USDF), Ballav who is studying linguistics added that he would repeat his act again if situation demands. I don’t repent it at all. If they attack us, we will pay them back. I don’t mind them taking any action against me, he said. Ballav says he is not scared of a crackdown but is apprehensive that he may be targeted.

Recently a video of his mother making a fervent plea to the central minister to not destroy her son's career went viral on the internet. Even Babul Supriyo himself tweeted it and asked the mother to not worry as he would not act against her son.

In his tweet, Supriyo also said that he has not lodged any complaint against the student nor did he let anyone else do so. Talking about a clip, Debanjan alleged that ABVP activists had shot the video by emotionally torturing his mother and have used it with help from BJP IT cell as part of its propaganda.

Last Thursday Babul Supriyo was faced with stiff protests by students of Jadavpur University when he went there to attend an ABVP event. He was shown black flags and was asked to leave the campus. The tussle between Babul Supriyo and Jadavpur student turned violent and went out of control when ABVP activists vandalised JU premises following the heckling of the BJP minister.

Babul Supriyo was allegedly harassed by the students who were protesting against him and was later escorted out of the university by West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar who is also the JU Chancellor. The vandalism also led to some of the Jadavpur University students being injured in clashes.

(An earlier version of this story misidentified Debanjan Ballav as a student of Jadavpur University)
