Bengaluru's Kaggadasapura Lake has illegal developments

Kaggadasapura Lake

Bengaluru

BBMP

UDD

Dr G Parameshwara

Bangalore

The volunteers of Saveare demanding the BruhatMahanagara Palike () and the Urban Development Department () take stringent action against the people involved in illegal developmental work at the lake.Rashmita Jena, one of the volunteers of Save Kaggadasapura Lake, says, “We demand the authorities to develop the lake as per the detailed project report (DPR). We also want them to make efforts to get back Rs 8.50 crore that was allocated for the rejuvenation of the lake, but was later cancelled by the BS Yediyurappa-led government.’’The volunteers wanted the authorities concerned to take measures to save the lake by clearing all the illegal developmental work on the lake bund. They said that the BBMP had allocated the rejuvenation work to a contractor and the proposal was sent to the UDD a few weeks ago. Anand Vasudevan, another volunteer of Save Kaggadasapura Lake, says, “We have been opposing the developments that were taken up without the authorities’ permission. The construction of unscientific pathways was done without a work order. We want the BBMP authorities to rejuvenate the lake as early as possible.”According to them, the last survey says the original lake was 50 acres. It has now been shrunk to 38 acres due to the rampant encroachments. They said the Save Kaggadasapura Lake initiative was started to protect the lake from further encroachments. The volunteers clean the lake during the weekends as a sign of protest against the authorities for neglecting the lake.“The persistent efforts and commitment of Save Kaggadasapura Lake, prompted the then Deputy Chief Ministerto visit the lake on June 11, 2018. He promised to set up a sewage treatment plant (STP) to prevent the lake getting polluted further. TheWater Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) authorities have floated a tender inviting bids for establishing the STP,’’ said a volunteer on condition of anonymity.The volunteers also demanded that the authorities stop building a park on the lake bund. They said that developing a park, play area or a gym on the lake bund is against the report submitted by Justice NK Patil Committee in 2010. A volunteer said, “A 30-feet wide pathway was constructed on the lake bund in 2017 instead of three-metre wide pathway. It is against the norms. The contractor used construction debris, instead of silt removed from the lake, for the construction of the pathway.”When contacted, T Jagannatha Rao, deputy conservator of forest (lakes), BBMP, said that he has received a complaint from the volunteers against the illegal developments at Kaggadasapura Lake. “I wrote a letter to the chief engineer of the BBMP directing him not to take up any developmental work at Kaggadasapura Lake.We do not want other departments to take up the developmental work since the lakes department can develop Kaggadasapura Lake on its own,’’ said Jagannatha Rao.
