Coal miners strike hit production in Telangana's Singareni

Hyderabad, Sep 24 : Coal production in Telangana's Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) was affected on Tuesday as the miners went on a day-long strike called by various unions to protest against the Centre's decision to allow 100 per cent Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in coal mining.

The coal production in almost all the mines spread across six districts of Telangana was hit as majority of the over 50,000 employees joined the strike.

The production in all underground mines in Bhadradri Kothagudem district also came to a halt while operations in open cast mines were partially affected.

Production was also hit in almost all the mines in Ramagundam, Mandamarri and other areas.

The strike might result in production loss of nearly two lakh tonnes. The company is estimated to suffer a loss of over Rs 50 crore.

All major employees' unions, GLBKS, SGLBKS, TSUS, SGKS and TSKS, affiliated to five national trade unions joined the strike. Holding their union flags, the employees took out rallies, demanding the Centre to withdraw its decision.

Recognised union TGBKS affiliated to the ruling Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) has also extended its support to the strike. This is the first time after the formation of Telangana state in 2014 that the SCCL is witnessing a strike with maximum participation by the employees.

Police made elaborate security arrangements at the mines as the management promised to protect those not taking part in the strike.

The Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) leader Janak Prasad said it was only the token strike and if the Centre fails to meet their demands, leaders of all trade unions will meet by the month-end to chalk out a future course of action.

SCCL is the largest public sector company in Telangana. It is owned by the state government and the Centre on a 51:49 equity basis.

It registered a record production of 64.41 million tonnes in 2018-19. The company earned a net profit of Rs 1,765 crore.
