Azad wraps up Kashmir visit; meets transporters, traders

Azad wraps up Kashmir visit; meets transporters, traders

Visits Anantnag, to fly back to New Delhi today

SRINAGAR/JAMMU, Sep 23: The three-day visit of former Chief Minister and senior Congress leader, Ghulam Nabi Azad concluded today and he is flying back to New Delhi on Tuesday morning after meeting various delegations of transporters and business men.

The top Congress leader concluded his visit after travelling to volatile southern Kashmir's Anantnag district.

Azad, who was allowed by the Supreme Court (SC) to visit Kashmir, visited Central Kashmir's Srinagar district on Saturday, northern Kashmir's Baramulla district on Sunday and south Kashmir's Anantnag district today.

After visiting Anantnag district, Azad straightly drove to Jammu to assess the ground situation there post abrogation of Article 370 and Jammu and Kashmir's division into two Union Territories on August 5.

Senior Congress was the second after CPI (M) general Secretary SitaramYechury, who was allowed by the top court of India to visit Kashmir post Article 370 abrogation. Azad was earlier twice disallowed to visit Kashmir on the pretext of law and order situation.

Sources informed that Azad's visit in Kashmir was directed by the SC to refrain from political activities during his visit in Kashmir, therefore couldn't address media during his visit.

However, they said that Azad talked to several delegations so far including traders, transporters, house boat owners, Shikara owners as well as the patients at Valley's lone maternity hospital, LalDed.

“Azad Sahab will raise his voice and concerns of people once he reaches New Delhi tomorrow,” sources said, adding that senior Congress leader would also highlight the hardships being faced by the people in Kashmir amid communication as well as internet gag from last 50 days.

Notably, Kashmir is witnessing spontaneous shutdown from last 50 days to protest against the abrogation of Article 370 by the central government.
