CA students protest outside ICAI Headquaters in Delhi, allege errors in evaluation, demand re-checking

CA students who had appeared for the ICAI CA May 2019 Exam protested outside the ICAI Headquarters in Delhi alleging errors and irregularities in the evaluation of examination papers. As per media reports, over 200 Chartered Accounting Aspirants had thronged to the ICAI headquarters located in ITO, Delhi to protest against the irregularities and errors that were found to be part of the evaluation process. Students alleged that their answer sheets were not evaluated properly and demanded a recheck.

Correct Answer Marked as Wrong

Many students also took to twitter following the allegations of wrong evaluation of answer sheets for CA students. They alleged that examiners and evaluators had deducted marks for no reason and in few cases even correct answers were marked as wrong by them for the May 2019 Exam of ICAI. Many students also claimed that they round errors in evaluation process for both descriptive as well as MCQ based questions for the CA May 2019 Exam.

Following complaints, #dearicaipleasechange has started trending on twitter, where thousands of CA aspirants have highlighted irregularities in the evaluation process.

What are the demands of students?

As per twitter, the ICIA CA aspirants have demanded thorough revamp and reforms in the evaluation process of the CA Exam Answer Books. They have also demanded re-evaluation of the May 2019 Answer Books for CA Foundation, CA Intermediate and CA Final Exams. A tweet summing up the demands of students highlighted the following:

ICAI to make Evaluation Process Digital

Following the protests of the students and errors and irregularities highlighted by the students, Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) has decided to completely digitize the evaluation process for CA Foundation and CA Final Exams. Starting from CA November 2019 Exams, answer books of foundation and intermediate students will be evaluated through digital mode. Digital evaluation of answer sheets will completely do away with the physical handling of answer books and thereby avoiding variations in marks awarded by examiners and also eliminating scope of any totalling errors.
