Jadavpur violence: A fight for the last bastion | India Today Insight

On the evening of September 19, Kolkata's Jadavpur University (JU) erupted into fierce protests following attempts by the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) to bring in Union minister of environment, forest and climate change Babul Supriyo for what was supposed to be a programme to welcome the university's new students. Supriyo was heckled by protesting students, and as matters deteriorated into a scuffle, West Bengal governor Jagdeep Dhankar had to rush to the campus to rescue him.

With this, JU had hit the headlines again, but for all the wrong reasons. State BJP president Dilip Ghosh dubbed the university as a seat of anti-nationals and threatened a 'Balakot-like surgical strike' to make it fall in line. He dubbed the girl students as 'shameless, nothing less than sluts'. Supriyo publicly decried them as falling deliberately over their male friends to create a stampede-like situation. It was not to end there. Kolkata remained on the edge for four days as hundreds of ABVP volunteers attempted to break barriers and storm JU.

The incident is a throwback to September 2014 when JU students launched the 'Hok Kolorob' (Let there be noise) stir to protest against the alleged muted response of varsity authorities to the molestation of a student. At that time, a social media post by Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's nephew Abhishek Banerjee had labelled the agitation as a reaction to the ban on liquor and substance abuse at JU. A minister in the Trinamool Congress (TMC) government had discredited the students 'for wearing skimpy clothes no bigger than a handkerchief'. But as the stir intensified, the Mamata government initiated an inquiry into the sexual harassment allegations and removed the vice-chancellor.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | The Trump and Modi show

JU, founded in 1955, has been deemed by the University Grants Commission as an institution worthy of a central grant of Rs 100 crore under the Rashtriya Uchchattar Shiksha Abhiyan for promoting academic excellence. The university stands out for running an out-of-the-box curriculum and providing an environment that encourages the spirit of questioning and rational thinking. JU, however, has also been a battleground of political parties through their students' wings. The university's arts section is controlled by the Students' Federation of India (SFI), the science section by We the Independent (WTI) group and the engineering section by the Democratic Students' Front (DSF). The other unions are the Federation of Arts Students, United Students' Democratic Front, the ABVP and the Trinamool Chhatra Parishad (TMCP), which is considered to have the weakest presence.

One reason JU always remains in the eye of the storm is because the non-conformist university prides itself for its free thinking spirit and refuses to toe the government line. The over three decades Left Front rule in Bengal saw only intermittent dominance of the SFI in the university. In the TMC's eight-year rule of the state since 2011, JU has thwarted attempts by the party to control it through its students' body.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | The boom and bust of e-cigarettes

The violence during Supriyo's visit marked the fifth anniversary of Hok Kolorob. The ABVP had fixed the date for freshers' welcome on the Hok Kolorob anniversary in what is being seen as a move to flex muscles. The SFI, too, had planned a protest-slogan-shouting and waving of black flags-against the minister's presence. But they were soon pushed to the sidelines as ultra-leftist groups and alleged TMC activists took centrestage. What followed went way beyond the script-a six-hour gherao of the Union minister, blocking of the governor's convoy for two hours, and unrest in the city.

With the war of words between the governor, the ruling party and the BJP continuing, the controversy is unlikely to die down. The TMC has accused the governor of acting politically while the BJP says the Mamata government did not act in time and send police to the varsity. The governor has issued a press release stating how he proceeded to JU when all attempts at intervention, such as calling the DGP, the chief secretary and connecting with the chief minister several times, failed.

The students' unions, too, are refusing to back down. The ABVP and the ultra-left unions took out independent processions through Kolkata, before winding up as they came face to face, separated by police reinforcements. There was slogan-shouting. Abuses were hurled and threats and counter-threats issued. And JU was shamed and shown in poor light, once again.

ALSO READ | Won't harm your son: Babul Supriyo assures mother of Jadavpur student who attacked him

ALSO READ | Student who heckled Babul Supriyo says he doesn't regret resistance against fascism

ALSO WATCH | I was beaten up, my hair was pulled, yet nothing was done: Babul Supriyo


