Onions worth Rs 8 lakh stolen from Patna godown amid soaring prices

Amid skyrocketing prices of onion across the country there has been a unique and bizarre theft. Thieves have allegedly looted onions worth Rs 8 lakh from a Bihar warehouse.

The incident took place at Sonaru Colony in Fatuha, 30 kilometres away from Patna on Saturday night where thieves broke into the warehouse and looted the onions kept in sacks. The thieves also walked away with Rs 1.83 lakh cash that was kept in the cash box of the warehouse.

According to latest information, the warehouse belonged to Dheeraj Kumar, a businessman residing in Kolhar village in Fatuha. Dheeraj Kumar has registered a written complaint regarding the theft at the Fatuha police station.

Dheeraj Kumar said that he came to know about the theft only on Sunday morning when he visited the warehouse. When he reached he saw that the lock of the warehouse was broken and 328 sacks of onion missing.

"As per my daily schedule, I came to the warehouse at 8 in the morning on Sunday and found that the lock of the warehouse was broken. 328 sacks of onion were missing. The thieves had also broken the cash box in which Rs 1.83 lakh was kept and took it along", said Dheeraj Kumar.

Police said that they have registered the complaint of the businessman and have started an investigation in the case.

"We have lodged the complaint of Dheeraj Kumar and have begun investigation. We are going through the CCTV camera footages in and around the warehouse and trying to find leads in this case", said Manish Kumar, Station House Officer of Fatuha police station.

Prices of onion in the last few days have skyrocketed and onions are being sold at a proximately Rs 60 to Rs 70 per kg in Bihar and perhaps that could be one of the reasons for this kind of a bizarre theft.

However, Union consumer affairs minister Ram Vilas Paswan said there is no scarcity of onions in the country.

ALSO READ: Maharashtra: Onions worth Rs 1 lakh stolen from farmer's store house

ALSO WATCH: Spike in onion prices making consumers cry
