MAH CET Exam Centers for MBA Entrance Exam 2019 – PaGaLGuY

The Maharashtra Common Entrance is the only access to JBIMS, SIMSREE, K J Somaiya, PUMBA and more than 300 MBA colleges in Maharashtra. This year the MAH CET is scheduled to be held on Saturday, March 9 and Sunday, March 10, 2019. The exam is conducted every year by the Directorate of Technical Education (DTE), Maharashtra. For the smooth conduction of this prestigious exam year after year without any technical glitches in about 40cities all across India, a special State CET Cell has been created by the Government of Maharashtra. The MAH CET Exam was conducted on March 10 & 11, 2018. The DTE of Maharashtra is expected to release the MAH CET 2019 exam notifications in the latter half of the month of January 2019.

The exam is taken by a lot of students and every year the number keeps on increasing. Hence, the difficulty of the exam has also been increasing. Students are finding it hard to manage their studies and the subject matter for this entrance exam. This article covers all the information regarding the MAH CET Exam Centers for the year of 2019 and what are the procedures that need to be followed regarding any query about the center.

Location of MAH CET Exam Centers 2019

This year the exam is being conducted in 36 centers all across Maharashtra and in 12-13 cities around India. The MAH CET 2019 Exam Centres outside Maharashtra are the State capitals or prominent cities of the respective states where more candidates desire to take the MAHCET exam.

MAH CET Exam Centers in Maharashtra

The MAH CET Exam Centers in Maharashtra have been listed below:

Ahmednagar

Akola

Amravati

Aurangabad

Beed

Bhandara

Buldhana

Chandrapur

Dhule

Gadchiroli

Gondia

Hingoli

Jalgaon

Jalna

Kolhapur

Latur

Mumbai

Mumbai Suburb

Nagpur

Nanded

Nandurbar

Nashik

Osmanabad

Palghar

Parbhani

Pune

Raigad

Ratnagiri

Sangli

Satara

Sindhudurga

Solapur

Thane

Wardha

Washim

Yavatmal

MAH CET Exam Centers in other important cities of India

The MAH CET Exam Centers in other parts of India have been listed below:

Ahmedabad

Gandhinagar

Bangalore

Bhopal

Delhi/Delhi-NCR

Jaipur

Kolkata

Lucknow

Hyderabad

Panaji

Patna

Raipur

Ranchi

How to choose and Get your desired MAH CET Exam Centre for 2019

The consolidated list of MAH CET 2019 Exam Centers will soon be made available in the MAH CET 2019 information brochure that can be downloaded from the official website in pdf form. All candidates can easily make a choice of center and acquire his/her preferred MAHCET 2019 Exam Centre during the filling up of the actual MAH CET exam form. The given guidelines must be followed for the smooth selection as well as the achievement of the convenient exam center. Read on:

Make three cities your preferences for the MAHCET Exam Centers in 2019 from the drop-down menu during the filling up of your MAH CET 2019 application form. The applicant must be extremely alert and careful while filling up the preferred three MAH CET Exam Centers. This becomes a very crucial point because once the choice of MAH CET center has been made and submitted, it cannot be changed. On the basis of your preference, the DTE Maharashtra will allocate you the MAHCET exam center in 2019. Usually, the first preference is allocated unless you have filled the form very late and there are no vacancies in the city that is your first preference. Though maximum efforts are taken to allow you the first preferred MAH CET Test Centre, there might be a case of cancellation of your seat. In case of no availability of seats in the exam centers, cancellation of the particular MAH CET MBA exam center, you may be allotted the second preferred exam center for MAH CET 2019 exam. If the second preferred is also canceled, only then the third preferred exam center for MAH CET 2019 exam is allotted to the candidate. The candidates will be informed about their final MAH CET test center only after they download their respective MAHCET 2019 admit card. Care is taken so that it mentions all the details regarding the MAH CET test center venue, address, reporting time, exam time and any other information that must be known by the applicant. The admit card also contains a set of rules and regulations that must be followed while answering the final exam such as the stationary to be used and the types of clothes that need to be avoided.

Key Points to be noted by the Applicants regarding the MAH CET 2019 Exam Centres

Once the MAHCET exam center 2019 has been selected and the applicant has received his/her admit card for the final exam, some more rules must be kept in mind.

The Applicants must make sure to reach the exam center at least one hour before the commencement of the exam.

The cities in which MAH CET 2019 will be conducted are usually designated as “Centre” for the CET and the applicant must carefully fill out this detail.

Each MAH CET Test Centre usually has a number of venues depending upon the number of candidates appearing in that city. For large cities, there are about 9-10 venues.

Although a candidate appearing for MAH CET 2019 shall give his/her preference for the center, the Competent Authority has the final say regarding the allocation of the final center and venue.

No request for change of MAH CET Test center/venue/date/session for Examination is entertained by the officials. Choice of the center once finalized and submitted by the candidate will be final.

The DTE Maharashtra reserves the right to cancel any of the Examination Centers and/ or add some other Centers. It does so at its own pleasure, depending upon the response and administrative feasibility along with location and expenditure on the actual exam.

Read More
