ICAI Protest: Over 200 CA students, aspirants stage protest against, claim errors in evaluation of papers-India News , Firstpost

ICAI Protest: Over 200 students and candidates who had appeared for the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) exams protested against the body on Monday, alleging errors in the evaluation of papers.

ICAI Protest: Over 200 students and candidates who had appeared for the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) exams protested against the body on Monday, alleging errors in the evaluation of papers.

The protestors gathered outside the headquarters of the ICAI near ITO office to stage a demonstration and urged it to end its alleged practice of "moderating" the results of examinations held by it.

"We are protesting against the moderation of the results in the exams held by the ICAI. Candidates are not given marks even in the multiple-choice questions (MCQ). This is done under Section 39 of the CA Regulation which gives ICAI the right to manipulate marks in order to maintain their passing ratio," Tarun Choudhary, a student at the protest told ANI in Delhi.

Choudhary further alleged that the institute was acting on its whim and refrained from awarding full marks to students even in the MCQ segment.

The protest gained steam on social media with the hashtag #DearICAIpleasechange soon trending on Twitter.

The CA course comprises of three stages of examination, CA-Foundation (entry-level), Intermediate and Final.

The students allege that the institute was deliberately tampering with the results in the second and third stages to suit its passing percentage.

CA Sachin Gupta, a private teacher who had arrived at the protest to show solidarity with the protesting students claimed that tampering with results in the name of moderation had been going on for some years now and alleged that it was the fault of the examiners.

"They have been manipulating the evaluation for the past many years to maintain a passing percentage. Despite multiple assurances, they continue to fail students year after year. We want them to put an end to the scaling system. Some evaluators who are practising CAs treat theses exams as a side business. The institute maintains a low standard for admitting students into the course but the students are failed repeatedly for five to six years as the level of the course increases," Gupta told ANI.

"We are requesting them to introduce a uniform checking parameter, preferably by OMR sheet," Gupta added.

Niraj Arora, a practising CA who was at the protest site said, "They are slashing marks even if the students provide the correct answers and this is being done under the name of moderation. We request all the people to join us and put pressure on the institute to change its ways. We are here to make people aware of our issues."

With inputs from ANI
