Donald Trump distances himself on Kashmir issue, says Narendra Modi can solve it

New York: US President Donald Trump said Tuesday that it will be great if Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan can ‘work out something’ on Kashmir, distancing himself from any mediation between the two nuclear-armed neighbours. This certainly will be a jolt to Imran Khan as a day before the US President had said he is ready to mediate if the two countries agree.

Trump made the remarks as he met Prime Minister Modi on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) session here – their fourth meeting since Narendra Modi came to power for a second term in May this year.

“I really believe that Prime Minister Modi and Prime Minister Khan will get along when they get to know each other. I think a lot of good things will come from that meeting… It will be great if they can work out something on Kashmir,” Trump said in response to a volley of questions.

Pakistan has been trying to internationalise the Kashmir issue but India has asserted that the abrogation of Article 370 was its ‘internal matter’. New Delhi has also asked Islamabad to accept the reality and stop its anti-India rhetoric.

When asked about the terrorism emanating from the Pakistani soil and Pakistan army’s links to the militant groups, Donald Trump said, ‘the Prime Minister (Modi) will take care of it’. “You have a great PM, he will solve all problems,” Trump said, responding to another question from an Indian journalist on the same issue.

Their meeting here came two days after the two leaders met Sunday in Houston and shared the stage at ‘Howdy Modi!’ gala event where they displayed a close friendship and a common vision on fighting terrorism.

Prime Minister Modi praised Trump as ‘a good friend of India’ and expressed his happiness over the US President joining him at the ‘Howdy, Modi’ rally.

“I am thankful to Trump that he came to Houston. He is my friend but he is also a good friend of India,” Modi told reporters.

“They love this gentleman to my right. People went crazy, he is like an American version of Elvis (Presley),” Trump said, referring to the ‘Howdy, Modi!’ event.

Modi presented a framed photograph from the event to President Trump, who thanked him for the gesture.

PTI
