SC to decide today if Karnataka's disqualified legislators can contest upcoming bypolls

The Supreme Court is expected to provide some clarity on the status of disqualified legislators on Wednesday, with the their plea coming up for hearing. This will decide whether or not they can contest the upcoming bypolls.

While the legislators have sought postponement of the election till the court decides on their disqualification matter, the Election Commission on Monday had orally submitted to the court that the Speaker cannot deprive disqualified legislators the right to contest. This, they said, has given them hope.

Meanwhile, the Congress and Janata Dal (Secular) are expected to finalise their candidates for the 15 Assembly constituencies by the weekend. While the JD(S) is expected to finalise the ticket on Thursday, the Congress list is expected towards the weekend. The last date for filing of nomination is September 30.

While the BJP has decided to give tickets to those who have resigned if a favourable verdict comes from the Supreme Court on Wednesday, or to their kin, the JD(S) and the Congress, which have lost their legislators in the resignation spree, are looking for fresh faces. The JD(S) parliamentary board is meeting on Thursday.

According to former Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy, the JD(S) parliamentary board is meeting on Thursday in which party supremo H.D. Deve Gowda will be participating. “We will decide on the candidates at the meeting,” he told reporters in Bengaluru.

He said the candidate selection meeting had been completed for K.R. Pete, Yeshwantpur, Mahalaxmi Layout and Chickaballapura, the meeting to consult local leaders will be held for Gokak, Athani and Kagawad constituencies on Wednesday.

In Mysuru, Mr. Kumaraswamy said the party will field local candidates in all 15 Assembly constituencies, and expressed optimism that the bypolls will held despite the plea of disqualified legislators for putting off the polls. He said the elections were an “acid test” for all political parties.

Meanwhile, Congress sources said that the party leaders, who were in Belagavi on Tuesday to protest against the callous attitude of the government in giving flood relief, had met the ticket aspirants of Athani, Gokak and Kagwad constituencies. “Ticket aspirants have been called by the leaders in Bengaluru on Wednesday where they could draw a preliminary list. The KPCC Election Committee meeting is expected on September 26 following which the announcement of the candidates could be done on Friday or Saturday.”
