Behind the Scenes With the Climate Strike’s New York Organizers

Teen Vogue reporter Sarah Emily Baum spent weeks with the student organizers of the New York City Youth Climate Strike, attending planning meetings and getting up to speed on how they put together one of the largest mass mobilizations for climate justice in history.

Aug. 21: About one month before the Youth Climate Strike

In a New York City basement, just down the street from Trump International Hotel, 50 kids sit in folding chairs trying to come up with a plan to save the world.

“We really want this organizing body not to focus on September 20 as a goal, rather, as a catalyst,” says Xiye Bastida, a 17-year-old indigenous climate activist and member of the NYC Youth Climate Strike’s core committee. Now a resident of Morningside Heights, in New York City, Xiye spent most of her life in San Pedro Tultepec, Mexico. Back then, she saw the flooding of her hometown as an anomaly, rather than a symptom of a much more sinister problem — the climate crisis.

On September 20, Xiye and activists around the world will mobilize for the Youth Climate Strike. At the helm of this action is Greta Thunberg, a 16-year-old Swedish environmentalist who went viral for going on a weekly school strike to protest lawmakers’ inaction in response to the climate emergency. Thunberg will be joining the march in New York City ahead of the United Nations Climate Summit, where major world powers will decide whether meaningful steps will be taken to fight the climate crisis, or if they will continue stalling until it’s too late.

Until then, students like Xiye are building the movement from the ground up. “[Smaller actions like this are] important because organizing is always the backbone of every big action,” she says. “You need to be coordinated if you want to have a united front.”

Although some global warming is organic, climate scientists say human activity (like the emission of fossil fuels) has caused temperatures to increase at an accelerated rate. When the temperature warms, glaciers melt, sea levels rise, and natural disasters increase in frequency and decimate the globe. According to the United Nations, a global warming of just 1.5 degrees Celsius would be catastrophic.

Young people — especially those who are indigenous, lower-income, or people of color — are expected to be hit the hardest. That’s, in part, why they’re leading this movement. In addition to Greta and Xiye, youth-led organizations from around the country and around the world are driving the cause forward, each adding their own unique voice to the chorus of young people demanding change. Zero Hour, led by 17-year-old Seattle native Jamie Margolin, uplifts marginalized voices on the front lines of the climate fight; The Sunrise Movement, co-founded by 26-year-old Varshini Prakash of Boston, prioritizes lobbying for policies like the Green New Deal; Extinction Rebellion Youth uses nonviolent direct action to bring a sense of urgency to the climate crisis. The list goes on.
