Waste dumping on NH stretches slowing work

NHAI seeks permanent solution

Dumping of waste, especially plastic and poultry waste along the upcoming four-lane Kazhakottam-Mukkola reach I of the National Highway 66 is leading to clogging of drains, flooding of the service roads, and upsetting work schedule of the four-laning project.

The stretch in question extends to Karode on the Kerala-Tamil Nadu border.

Single-use plastics, plastic water bottles, and poultry waste tied in carry bags and plastic sacks dumped into the newly constructed drains of the four-lane corridor has lead to flooding of 100 to 200 metres of the service road near Muttathara.

The area is also on the approach path for flights arriving at Thiruvananthapuram international airport.

With rain continuing, motorists and pedestrians have a tough time moving along the stretch, as even half an hour of rain clogs the outlets from the drains due to the waste dumped into it.

The chicken waste from the poultry shops is also causing health concerns for the local people, as it attracts avian population and stray dogs in large numbers. The National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), executing the four-lane project for MoRTH, is also upset over the unregulated dumping of waste in Muttathara and near Akkulam bridge of the bypass corridor. The work of the underpass near the bridge has been hit due to the flooding caused by the dumping of waste.

NHAI officials say the dumping of waste in Muttathara is a big concern for them.

13 loads of waste

Earlier, the authority had removed 13 loads of waste from the stretch but had to bring it back to the same spot after the local people opposed dumping it near Mukkola. Later, civic authorities intervened at the request of the NHAI and disposed the dumped waste.

But, the NHAI officials say a permanent solution has to be found to curb the dumping of the waste into the bypass corridor and the drains. Workers refuse to work and removing the waste is a difficult task with foul smell emanating from waste. The lack of a proper dumping yard for the civic body is cited as the major handicap.
