A Construction Worker Destroyed The Lobby Of A Newly-Built Hotel As His Salary Was Overdue

What would you do if your company refused to pay you for the work you did? Write a letter to the authorities, talk to them, get really annoyed and try to take legal action against them? But, this construction worker did nothing of that sort.

The worker used a construction vehicle to destroy the reception area of a newly built hotel in Liverpool, UK because his pay was overdue, the police said.

Video of the whole incident which took place on January 21 afternoon, shows the worker using an excavator to destroy the reception. In the video, you can also see other workers watching the worker in amazement as he uses the crane to scrape tiles and wires from the ceiling of the hotel. He fled the scene after wreaking havoc in the building, according to the police.





Samuel White, a ceiling repairer at the site said that the destruction lasted “for good 20 to 30 minutes” and he also referred to the man as “some idiot in a mini digger” who claimed that the company owed the guy 600 pounds which is equal to Rs 55,538.

"The handover was today, everything completed, we'd put the last tile in, cleaned up and made sure everything was perfect," White said. "Then some idiot in a mini digger decided to drive through the middle of the building."

"It is alleged that the labourer couldn't track down the owner of MF Construction and he became increasingly frustrated," England-based Triton Construction, who was looking after the construction of the hotel, said in a statement. "Fortunately, there were no injuries to Staff Members or other operatives, subcontractors on site. Additionally, there is no structural damage, so repairs can be undertaken relatively quickly."

Read More: Sikhs In US Offered Free Food To Thousands Of Workers Affected By Government Shutdown

MF Construction - the company the guy works for - did not respond to his request and the allegation too. One person was treated for eye irritation at a hospital after being exposed to diesel, but thankfully no one was severely injured.

After the video went viral, a GoFundMe page has since been set up to help the driver replace his wages and to help with any legal fees he may face after the incident.
