MSCB scam: NCP chief Sharad Pawar says he will voluntarily appear before ED on Friday

A day after the Enforcement Directorate (ED) sent notice to NCP supremo Sharad Pawar and 76 leaders across parties in the 23,000 crore scam in the Maharashtra State Co-operative(MSC) bank scam, Pawar announced on Wednesday that he will voluntarily appear before the ED and answer all the queries of ED on Friday noon.



He explained that he is doing this on his own as ED hasn't called him.



"The state Assembly polls are declared so I will be busy in the election campaign. When the ED issue me notice that time I may not be available for them. They may declare me non-traceable so I voluntarily decided to appear before the ED office to under why the notice was sent to me. I will fully cooperate with them. They will also enhance my knowledge of the co-operative sectors and its rules and regulations," Pawar said in a snide comment.

NAME GAME Senior BJP leader Eknath Khadse said that as an Opposition leader he had several times raised this MSC bank scam issue in the assembly, but never read the Sharad Pawar name in there. “I am also surprised when I read that the ED had sent the notice to Shard Pawar in connection with the MSC bank. Sharad Pawar name might have added later on,” Khadse said.

ED had slapped the notices to Sharad Pawar, his nephew Ajit Pawar and other NCP leaders such as Diliprao Deshmukh, Ishwarlal Jain.



Notices were also served to Peasant and Workers Party leader Jayant Patil and former MP of Shiv Sena Anand Adsul.



"I believe in the ideology of the Mahatma Phule, Shahu Maharaj and Constitution of Dr BR Ambedkar. I wish to tell the people who are sitting in Delhi, I come from the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj state so I will never succumb to the power of Delhi," reiterated Pawar.



He said, " In my entire life, I have faced the criminal cases only twice. In 1980s, I spearheaded the farmers protest (Dindi) from Jalgaon to Nagpur. That time, I was wrongly implicated and the case was registered against me in Amarawati. However, later on, the court gave verdict in my favour. Now, the ED notice is the second instance to get me the notice," Pawar said adding that he has full faith and confidence in Indian judiciary as well.



Pawar said that he was travelling across Maharashtra and was getting an overwhelming response from people especially youth. "This could be the reason behind the notice," added Pawar.
