BSY’s task at hand: Winning ‘rebels’ and influencing voters

BENGALURU: Karnataka chief minister BS Yediyurappa ’s mettle seems to be in for a tough test as the October 21 bypolls for 15 Assembly seats in the state near.The EC’s clarification that the 15 disqualified MLAs can contest the bypolls, while bringing cheer to these legislators, has set off unrest among the local BJP leaders and workers in many constituencies. Some of these leaders are opposing party tickets to “defectors”, creating a worrisome situation for the party leadership.A win in at least half of these constituencies is necessary for the CM to save his twomonth-old regime.The disqualified lawmakers had trumped BJP candidates in the fiercely-fought polls in May last year. Ironically, Yediyurappa will have to reward them now as it was their defection that put the state’s reins in BJP’s hands. Given this and knowing that the defeated candidates can play spoilsport in the elections if they are denied tickets, the veteran politician has set out to talk to each one of them. He is also engaging with local leaders promising to protect their interests, party sources said.In Hoskote, BJP MP BN Bache Gowda’s son Sharath Bachegowda is a strong contender, while the BJP has to reward MTB Nagaraj for switching from the Congress. The young BJP ticket aspirant is said to be in talks with the Congress, and may switch over to the Congress and contest in a show of defiance to the BJP. His followers have been holding protests demanding the party ticket for him. The BJP MP, however, said on Wednesday: “I am not aware of his plans, but people want my son to contest as a BJP candidate.”Deputy CM Laxman Savadi is keen to contest from Athani in Belagavi district, the seat he lost to Mahesh Kumathalli, one of the disqualified MLAs. Kumathalli was the Congress candidate in the May 2018 Assembly polls, and the BJP will have little option but to reward him for quitting his Assembly membership. Savadi, on the other hand, is a Lingayat leader, and the BJP national leadership chose him for the deputy CM’s post hoping to consolidate the vote base of Lingayats, the largest community in Karnataka.In Bengaluru, a former MLA and a deputy mayor are BJP’s strong ticket aspirants for the Mahalakshmi Layout seat, held by K Gopalaiah, one of the three JD(S) MLAs to lose Assembly membership. Even as the BJP was prepping to form the government, groups of BJP workers had held a demonstration in front of Yediyurappa’s house opposing party ticket to Gopalaiah.At Hirekerur in Haveri district, BJP workers held a protest demonstration on Wednesday against the party fielding former Congress MLA BC Patil, a disqualified MLA hoping to contest on BJP ticket. However, BJP’s UB Banakar is a strong contender for this seat as he lost the May 2018 Assembly polls by just about 550 votes. “If leaders enter into a deal, will workers also endorse and respond to that deal? I am ready to respect the wishes of my leaders, but will workers also listen,” asked Banakar.In Kagwad, defeated BJP candidate Raju Kage wants to contest again, but the party will honour its word to Shrimant Patil, the disqualified member who quit the Congress. In Vijayanagara in Ballari district too, there is a lot of resistance from local BJP workers for fielding former Congress MLA Anand Singh.Also, sections of leaders fear a Mandya-like situation, referring to the recent Lok Sabha polls in Mandya where the lack of trust between the Congress and the JD(S) led to the victory of BJP-backed candidate Sumalatha. This factor too is a cause of concern for the CM.
