Farmers flock to district magistrate’s office in Surajpur, want villagers released

GREATER NOIDA: A group of farmers flocked to the district magistrate ’s office in Surajpur on Wednesday and protested against the arrest of 44 villagers who had demonstrated on the Yamuna Expressway and stalled traffic demanding more compensation for land acquired for the Jewar airport project.On Wednesday, around 80 farmers, under the banner of Kisan Ekta Sangh, protested against the district administration and Yamuna Authority outside the DM office. Spokesperson Ramesh Kasana of the Sangh told TOI that their immediate demand was “unconditional release” of the arrested farmers, but stressed that the government should also look into their demands for more compensation. “The farmers are seeking their rights and the state government is suppressing their voice. We demand that the farmers be released immediately,” he said.The protesters said a group of those affected by land acquisition for the Jewar airport has been sitting on a dharna in Dayanatpur village for the past one year over the compensation amount being offered to them.Krishan Nagar, district president of the outfit, said the villagers were being wronged. “They deserve enhanced compensation as their villages have been fraudulently declared as urban areas. The move was deliberate as the authority knew that in case they declared the area rural, they would have to pay four times compensation. The compensation in urban areas is twice the prevailing circle rate,” he said. The villagers are being offered Rs 2,300 per square metre.“It is not that the farmers don’t want to give land, but they are not getting adequate compensation,” Kasana said. He added that the villagers would again take to protests in case the farmers were not released.They later handed over a memorandum to the city magistrate, Sanjay Mishra.Asked about the compensation, district magistrate BN Singh said the matter was pending with the Allahabad high court.“As of now, nobody is getting bail as all these issues have been raised before. A writ petition has been filed by farmers in the high court and the district administration and Yamuna Authority have given counter-affidavits. Since the high court is hearing the case, one cannot resort to illegal activities. Barring a few, most farmers have agreed to the compensation. They called for a meeting, but they skipped it,” he said.
