Bangalore Uni V-C’s dismissal stayed by HC, a day after his appointment was quashed

Bangalore Uni V-C’s dismissal stayed by HC, a day after his appointment was quashed

A single-judge bench of the Karnataka HC on Tuesday had quashed his appointment while hearing a petition filed by another applicant to the post.

news Courts

A day after a single bench of the Karnataka High Court quashed the appointment of Professor KR Venugopal as vice-chancellor of Bangalore University, a division bench led by the Chief Justice stayed the quashing till October 18.

The stay was based on an appeal filed by Venugopal and the University administration.

A single-judge bench of the HC on Tuesday had quashed his appointment while hearing a petition filed by another applicant to the post, Sangamesh Patil, who stated that Venugopal’s appointment was done in violation of section 14(4) of Karnataka State Universities Act 2000. The stated violation was that the Governor, who is the Chancellor of the University, did not appoint the V-C by taking concurrence of the state government as mandated by the rules.

The HC had set aside Venugopal’s appointment contending this argument.

Patil further told the court that he was also recommended by the state Higher Education Minister at that time.

The Division Bench has asked Patil to submit his objections by October 1.

According to DH, the petitioner further stated, “Venugopal had submitted false caste and income certificates while he was appointed to UVCE. He was also accused of unduly favouring a student who was allowed to attend an exam despite having no attendance.”

This issue comes after the appointment of vice chancellor at the National Law School University also turned controversial. The episode ended on Wednesday with Sudhir Krishnaswamy taking charge as the vice chancellor.

The students had been protesting against the erstwhile ad-hoc university administration for allegedly delaying his appointment. Many students, who had skipped classes on Friday and Saturday as a mark of protest, had also boycotted their end-trimester exams on Monday.

The students accused registrar OV Nandimath of conflict of interest, since he himself had applied to the V-C’s post but was not selected and was also part of the administration during this transition period.
