TAYPA To Intensify Agitation Against CAB And Big River Dam Projects

A CORRESPONDENT

LAKHIMPUR: Tai Ahom Yuva Parishad, Asom (TAYPA) will intensify agitation against the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill (CAB) and big river dam projects proposed to be set up for the generation of electricity.

The extended central executive committee meeting of the organization held in Lakhimpur on Wednesday took this decision and reiterated its demands to scrap the CAB and to stop the construction of big river dam projects. The same meeting also demanded the State and Union governments to grant tribal status to the six communities of Assam immediately.

Notably, the extended central executive committee meeting of the organization was held in the Lakhimpur District Library auditorium with its president Dilip Gogoi in the chair. The meeting held detailed discussion about the three crucial issues and took resolution to oppose the present move of the Union Government taken for passing the controversial CAB and to resume the construction work of the Subansiri Lower Hydroelectric Project (SLHP) along with other big river dam projects proposed to be set up in Arunachal Pradesh causing threats to the downstream riverine areas located in Assam.

Regarding the issues, the TAYPA dignitaries informed The Sentinel that the organization strongly opposed the Union Government’s present initiatives to pass the CAB soon in the Parliament. “Our stand is clear. The members of our organization staged half-nude protest in New Delhi against CAB some months back. We will never allow the Union and State governments to pass the Bill. We will continue our agitation at any cost to prevent the Bill from being passed,” TAYPA working president Lohit Gogoi told this correspondent.

Simultaneously, the organization expressed vehement resentment over non-granting of tribal status to the Tai Ahoms along with other five communities of the State. “Both Union and State governments gave us word to grant tribal status. These were the promises given only to win the elections. We have not seen any development on the part of the government to grant us tribal status during the past days. We demand both governments, which repeatedly assure to safeguard the rights of the indigenous people, to clarify their stand in this regard and grant us tribal status soon,” asserted TAYPA president Dilip Gogoi.

Similarly, the organization, regarding the big river dam issue, said that the Union and State governments advocated big river dam projects at a time when the developed nations in the world had thought about alternative sources to generate electricity. “The big river dam projects will destroy Assam. The State will not be benefitted from them. So, we will never approve of the government’s move to set them up,” added the working president.

Also Read: TAYPA Stages Sit-in, Demands Halt to Subansiri Dam Work in Lakhimpur

Also Watch: Irani Thieves chased and caught by two daring ladies in Nagaon | The Sentinel News | Assam News
