The abuse of animals in factory farming

By Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi

California has a very interesting political system. This allows organisations and individuals to bypass politicians and put potential laws directly to a vote by the general population – as long as they can get enough signatures to support the measure in the first place.

This makes sense to me, because, in India, we are at the mercy of politicians who will rarely do anything in public interest, or even think about issues that affect people adversely and need to be corrected. Instead, they will come up with grandiose schemes that never get implemented and, even if they did, are so poorly conceived that they destroy far more – the damming and linking of rivers, the MNREGA scheme, the badly conceived feeding of children which has led to widespread malnourishment, the giving of forests to supposed tribals without verification, the lack of maintenance of heritage and complete ignorance of the value of museums, the lack of a trained teaching system for farmers, and using a defunct system called Krishi Vigyan Kendras, which do nothing and never did… I can think of a million things. The reckless import and use of pesticides and urea is top of my list, along with the export of meat, as that is destroying the country’s forests and water systems. The slaughterhouse export trade is run by NRIs and foreign nationals who loot India. Also on my list is the agriculture ministry’s refusal to even see that animals / fish / birds, grown for meat that are kept badly, injected with hormones, pesticides and antibiotics and eaten by humans, will make the human population ill– as we can see in the steeply rising statistics of people who are going to hospital every day.

So many people campaigned for NOTA on the ballot paper – None Of The Above. It has resulted in nothing. No one makes the trek to a booth to not vote. They stay at home if they don’t like any of the candidates. There is a movement, that comes in fits and starts, on the right to recall an elected person. This will result in mayhem if it ever happens, because anyone who loses an election will spend a lot of money getting signatures. Then there is the movement that women should get one third of the seats by law. None of these movements actually will bring about change to make governance participatory.

What is needed is what California is doing. Even if we go halfway and take the route, that if an issue can generate enough interest through people signing a minimum of a mandated X votes , then it deserves to be put into Parliament, or the state assembly, and voted on. Let us see where our elected representatives stand on the matter.

At the moment California voters are on the street for an issue we have been fighting here for some years, both in the ministries and courts; which is, to Change the factory farm system so that animals, grown for meat, are not caged for their entire lives.

Is this an issue for just “animal lovers” as we are called? No. It is an issue of health that should be understood and pushed with your local MLA, MP and municipal chairman. Birds, pigs, cattle – especially poultry – are stuffed into small cages. They cannot even raise their wings, so small is the space and so large the number of birds in each cage. To prevent them from fighting for space, owners of poultries cut off their beaks and toes without anaesthesia. They cannot stand without pain but there is no space to sit. They stand in their own faeces, covered with mites that suck their blood. They get very, very sick immediately and are then kept alive with antibiotics, hormones and pesticides. All these go into the meat when the bird is killed and has created major sickness in humans, starting with the superbug which is untreatable, and going on to cancer, epilepsy, kidney failure and every other major disease. This could all be prevented if the birds were allowed to roam freely in the sun with natural food (instead of spoilt grain, cardboard, the dead bodies of fellow chickens and marble mixed with veterinary drugs), given fresh sources of water and allowed to live naturally before being killed. It takes the same space that the poultry now has.

The same problem is with piggeries. The pig is an intelligent and emotional animal and locking her up in a small crate and feeding her badly with only disgusting restaurant waste, inseminating her forcibly and then taking away the babies, makes her very sick. She gets worms, serious illnesses, and all these are passed on to the consumer of pork. Veal is from baby calves who are locked into tight crates so that they cannot move and then starved to death so that they become anaemicand their meat turns white. They are killed in six weeks.

In California, hundreds of volunteers are on the street going from door to door collecting signatures from the mandatory 3,65,000 signatures. They have, by law, a finite time to collect the signatures. Some of them eat meat – they simply don’t want to be sick from it. The new law, if it comes into being, will ban the sale of all eggs, pork or veal from a caged animal – if campaigners can get enough signatures. If passed, it would be the most progressive farm animal welfare law and the most progressive human health law in the world.

The new measure would ban cages of any kind for hens, gestation crates for mother pigs, so narrow they can’t turn around, and veal crates for calves, which restrict movement for their entire lives. By the end of 2019 all hens would have to be cage-free – living, at minimum, on an open barn floor or in an indoor aviary with multiple levels for birds to go up and down.

It would have national implications, applying not just to in-state famers but to any farmer doing business with the world’s sixth largest economy. The deadline is May 1st and they have 2 lakh signatures so far. This is history in the making. It will put California ahead of the European Union, which banned battery cages for poultry in 2012 across Europe– and even cage-free leaders such as Germany and the Netherlands.

In 2008 California passed Proposition 2 in 2008 which banned battery cages and said animals must have space to turn around, lie down and stretch their limbs. In 2016, Massachusetts made history with the first sales ban on products from confined animals, which passed by a landslide 78%. California is now working to top that .

And India?? Sigh!! Committee after committee has been formed from BIS to FSSAI, the Health ministry, the Drug Controller of India. Each one agrees that something has to be done. But they pass it on to another committee. There is no political will and, in the absence of a clear order, no bureaucrat will move. On top of that there are lobbies of slaughterhouses that will pay bureaucrats and politicians not to change the filthy unhealthy status quo. I wish politicians would put human health on the top of their agenda – everything else would fall into place.

Photo Credit : Shutterstock

Twitter: @ManekaGandhiBJP

NOTE: The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent or reflect the views of New Delhi Times (NDT)

Like this: Like Loading...
