With the Gokak agitation of the 1980s as its backdrop, Kannada film 'Geetha' discusses the importance of language

The Kannada cinema industry is currently opposing the Union Home Minister Amit Shah’s 'one nation, none language pitch'

Regardless of caste, creed and culture, Kannadigas are up in arms against the alleged attempts of the Union Government to impose Hindi. Timely as it seems, Geetha, a period romantic action entertainer, with the historic Gokak agitation as its backdrop, is all set to release on September 27.

The Gokak agitation is undoubtedly the biggest language related agitation that took place in Karnataka in 1982. The genesis of this massive Kannadiga movement is the recommendation of an expert committee headed by Jnanapith recipient writer V. K. Gokak to make Kannada as the first language from class eight and to make teaching of Kannada language mandatory from class three (source: Kannada, Kannadiga, Karnataka, edited by L.S. Sheshagiri Rao, Dr. M Chidanandamurthy and R. N. Chandrashekar).

The three language formulae was adopted in the schools of Karnataka since linguistic organisation of the state in 1956. In the 60s there was a strong opposition for the usage of Hindi language. Sanskrit was the dominant language in schools, where students completed their education without having to study Kannada language. This led to a linguistic movement against maintaining Sanskrit as the first language in schools. To find a solution to the sensitive linguistic issue, the then R. Gundu Rao led Congress government constituted a committee headed by Prof. Vinayaka Krishna Gokak, which recommended to make Kannada as the first language. However, following opposition from few public sector undertakings, minority communities and various non-Kannada speaking groups, the government remained silent over the recommendations.

Though an agitation was launched by litterateurs and personalities from the cultural sphere with the support of political parties and Kannada activists, students, there was no support from the student community. Common Kannadigas did not bother to be part of this movement, as they initially failed to understand the seriousness of making Kannada as the first language. It was at this juncture, noted litterateurs approached Kannada icon Dr Rajkumar to lead the movement . With the entry of Rajkumar, besides common people, entire Kannada film industry jumped into the movement and the agitation spread like wildfire. Finally, understanding the gravity of the issue, the Congress government bogged down and accepted to implement the recommendations of Gokak Committee in letter and spirit.

Exactly after 37 years, now the Kannada cinema industry is opposing the Union Home Minister Amit Shah’s “one nation, none language pitch”. Prominent film personalities, Upendra, Ramesh Arvind, Rockline Venkatesh, Chetan Ahimsa, S.A. Chinne Gowda and others are resisting the push for Hindi supremacy now. They are of the opinion that discarding diversity for a purely majoritarian reason will be disastrous.

Meanwhile, Mayur Raghavendra is making another film-Kannad Gottilla-to present the state of Kannada in Karnataka. Noted actor Haripriya is essaying an important role along with Sudharani in this film.

“Kannad Gottilla (Don’t know Kannada) is the one and only phrase known to every non-Kannadiga speaker in Karnataka, especially in Bengaluru. This film speaks about the present state of Kannada in Karnataka. This film underlines the need of those residing in Karnataka to know Kannada and respect the regional language. Haripriya is the protagonist who protests against those who claim they don’t know Kannada as well as those know Kannada and don’t want to converse in it,” says Mayur Raghavendra.

Geetha, according to its maker Vijay Nagendra, revolves mainly around Gokak agitation. Initially, we thought of making Gokak agitation a small part of the film. As I got deep into the Kannada movement, I decided to make this the backdrop of this romantic story.”

A film with a similar title was made in 1981, starring Shankar Nag and Padmavathi Rao directed by Shankar Nag himself. “This Geetha will also carry the shadow of Shankar Nag, who was a visionary and fighter. Name of the protagonist is also Shankar and Geetha Nanna Geetha song with the same tune has also been used in this film too. Shankar Nag was proud to be Kannadiga and played an important role in taking Kannada to new heights. That’s why we thought it was apt to blend the legend’s character with Ganesh,” says director.

An advertisement of the film prominently carries picture of Kannada cine stars leading the movement and a release issued by Dr. Rajkumar at that point of time urging the government to implement the recommendations of Gokak Committee in letter and spirit. Below that there is a picture of actor Ganesh, leading the agitation demanding the implementation of Gokak Committee recommendations.

Vijay Nagendra who has put in one year of research for the film, says: “The situation has not changed even after three decades. People are opposing imposition of Hindi and fighting for the primacy of language in every sphere of life. The film might again ignite pride of Kannadiga”.

Shanvi Srivastav and Parvathi Arun are essaying roles of female leads in Geetha, besides Sudharani, Devaraju, Rangayana Raghu. “I watched a documentary on Gokak agitation just before shooting and heard Annavru’s clarion call to save Kannada. I got goose-bumps. Speeches of writers including P. Lankesh, Patil Puttapppa and others helped me in etching the character of Shankar,” says Ganesh.

Vijay Nagendra hopes Geetha will bring a substantial change in the attitude of the people about Kannada.
