Election Commission is Centre's puppet: HD Kumaraswamy after poll body defers Karnataka bypolls

HD Kumaraswamy | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights In the Indian political history, this is perhaps for the first time that such a decision has been given by a constitutional authority: HDK The MLAs had sought direction from the apex court to allow them permission to contest by-polls scheduled on October 21 The Congress vowed to defeat the rebels if they re-contest

Bengaluru: Hours after the Election Commission (EC) informed the Supreme Court that it will defer the by-polls for 15 Karnataka seats, former chief minister and JD(S) leader HD Kumaraswamy called the EC a “puppet of the government”.

He further said that in the Indian political history this is perhaps for the first time that such a decision has been given by a constitutional authority.

The EC’s statement comes after a three-judge bench headed by Justice NV Ramana said that it would decide on the batch of petitions, filed by 17 disqualified MLAs of Karnataka, challenging the order of former Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar disqualifying them from the House, news agency PTI reported.

After the bench said it would hear the matter completely and decide it, senior advocate Rakesh Dwivedi, appearing on behalf of the poll panel, said: "Then I will ask the Election Commission to defer it (by-polls for 15 Assembly seats in Karnataka) for sometime."

Meanwhile, the lawyers representing the disqualified MLAs, Congress leader Siddaramaiah and other respondents said that they have no problem if the by-polls are deferred.

The top court would continue with the hearing in the case on October 22.

This news came as a blessing in disguise for BS Yediyurappa-led BJP government which is betting big on the 15 disqualified 'rebels' of the Congress and the JD(S) winning in the October 21 Karnataka Assembly by-elections. The Congress, on the other hand, protested against the EC’s decision which has allowed the rebel MLAs to contest the polls.

The grand old party further vowed to defeat the rebels if they re-contest saying that the people of Karnataka will teach them a lesson for betraying them and conspiring with the "opportunistic" BJP to dislodge the coalition government.

The MLAs had sought direction from the apex court to allow them permission to contest by-polls scheduled on October 21.

The 17 rebels, including 14 from the Congress and 3 from the JD(S), had tendered their resignation in July in protest against the Congress-JD(S) government's poor style of functioning and lack of focus on development. Their resignation eventually led to the downfall of the 14-month-old coalition government on July 23 with the resignation of Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy.

Former Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar had disqualified the rebels in July when they defied their party whip to attend the 10-day Monsoon Session to vote in favour of the confidence motion moved by Kumarswamy on July 18 to prove majority in the house.
