BJP's Purvanchal Morcha Protests Against Kejriwal's NRC Remark On Manoj Tiwari, Demands Apology

New Delhi:

Members of Delhi BJP's Purvanchal Morcha thronged outside Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal's residence in large numbers on Thursday, demanding an apology for his NRC remark against party president Manoj Tiwari. Taking a swipe at the Delhi BJP chief, Kejriwal on Wednesday said if implemented, the National Register of Citizens (NRC) will first evict Tiwari from the national capital.

Speaking to media, Manish Singh, president of Delhi BJP Purvanchal Morcha, said Kejriwal's remarks on Tiwari humiliated not only Purvanhalis but other people from different states who live in the city. "Kejriwal should apologise not only to Manoj Tiwari but also Purvanchalis and people of other states. We want to tell him that it is he who will be removed from Delhi government after the Assembly polls," PTI quoted Singh as saying.

A large number of protesters were seen climbing up barricades, waving BJP flags, shouting slogans while trying to move towards Kejriwal's residence at Civil Lines in Delhi. However, police have detained all the protesting Purvanchal Morcha activists and taken them to nearby Civil Lines police station. They were later released.

READ | 6 Lives Lost Due To Panic Created By BJP Over NRC In Bengal: Mamata Banerjee

Delhi: Police detained members of BJP's Purvanchal Morcha who were protesting against CM Arvind Kejriwal for his remark,"if NRC is implemented in Delhi then Manoj Tiwari (BJP MP) will be the first one who will have to leave Delhi". pic.twitter.com/yb7hBgxo0U — ANI (@ANI) September 26, 2019

Singh said Kejriwal's statement aimed at Tiwari also hinted that he was "deliberately" confusing the issue of illegal migrants living in Delhi. "If Kejriwal thinks that Tiwari being a Bihari is liable to be evicted under NRC exercise then he must also be ready for eviction since he belongs to Haryana," he added.

READ | Like Assam, NRC Will Be Implemented In Haryana, Says CM Manohar Lal Khattar

Meanwhile, the Delhi unit of the BJP has also lodged a police complaint against Kejriwal while the Purvanchal Morcha vowed to continue its protest if the AAP leader does not apologise for his statement.

Tiwari also hit back at Kejriwal over his remark saying the chief minister seemed to have lost his mental balance. "Does Kejriwal, who is an IRS (Indian Revenue Service) officer, not know what NRC is? It seems Kejriwal has lost his mental balance," Tiwari had said during a Facebook Live interaction.

Tiwari, who hails from Bihar, has been demanding implementation of NRC in Delhi to identify and evict Bangladeshis and Rohingyas illegally living in Delhi.
