Delhi BJP lodges police complaint against CM Arvind Kejriwal, AAP MLA for spreading rumours over NRC

Arvind Kejriwal

Key Highlights The complaint was filed by Delhi BJP's media relations head Neelkant Bakshi and former AAP MLA Kapil Mishra This development comes after Kejriwal took a dig at Delhi BJP chief Manoj Tiwari saying he will be the first person to be evicted from the national capital if NRC is implemented Tiwari had demanded implementation of NRC in Delhi to identify and evict illegal migrants

New Delhi: A police complaint has been lodged against Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and his party MLA Saurabh Bhardwaj by Delhi BJP for allegedly spreading "rumours" that people from Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Odisha will be evicted if NRC is implemented in the Union Territory.

The complaint was filed by Delhi BJP's media relations head Neelkant Bakshi and former AAP MLA Kapil Mishra who claimed that the statements made by Kejriwal and Bhardwaj may create law and order situation in the city.

This development comes after Kejriwal took a dig at Delhi BJP chief Manoj Tiwari saying he will be the first person to be evicted from the national capital if NRC is implemented.

Earlier, Tiwari had demanded implementation of NRC in Delhi to identify and evict illegal migrants.

Talking to IANS, Tiwari said that it is important to implement NRC in Delhi as there is no record of illegal foreign migrants living in the city. Calling illegal migrants a threat to the security of the nation, Tiwari, who represents North East Delhi constituency, had said that if illegal migrants commit a crime then the Delhi Police won’t be having any record on them.

“They may also do anti-national activities. It is a security threat for the people as well as the country,” Tiwari had said.

He further assured the people of the national capital saying that the NRC will only target people who are from outside the country.

“Indians, from any part of the country, living in Delhi will not be affected in any form. The issue will be only for illegal foreign migrants,” he had clarified.

"Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and his MLA Saurabh Bhardwaj deliberately tried to spread the rumour about NRC through media, which may create confusion in the minds of the people but also gives way to the possibility of law and order situation in the city," the complaint addressed to the New Delhi DCP read.

Bhardwaj, the chief spokesperson of the AAP, had asked Tiwari if he had any proof of living in Delhi since 1971.

"Kejriwal and Bhardwaj deliberately stated that people from UP, Bihar and Odisha will be evicted if NRC is implemented in the national capital," the Delhi BJP leaders alleged in the complaint.

The ruling AAP and the BJP have been trading barbs over NRC issue ahead of the assembly polls set to be held early next year.

Earlier today, BJP workers carried out a protest outside Kejriwal's residence chanting anti-Kejriwal slogans. To stop the saffron party workers from breaching the barricade massive police contingent was deployed outside the CM’s residence.
