AASU along with 30 organisations launched ‘Khilonjiar Bajraninad’ in Guwahati to protest against CAB’16

Guwahati: All Assam Students’ Union (AASU) along with 30 other organizations staged massive protest ‘Khilonjiar Bajraninad’ against the most debated controversial Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2016 at Latasil playground today in Guwahati.

The agitated protesters were also seen chanting slogans against the bill and BJP led Government today.

Addressing the protest AASU advisor, Samujjal Bhattacharya termed the bill as communal and unconstitutional. He said, “At any cost, we are not going to accept this bill. With the Assam Movement, the Assam Accord was signed which clearly states that pre-1971, all Hindu and Muslims can stay in Assam with the rights of Citizenship. But, the entire illegal migrants who have entered Assam after 1971 will have to be deported. Assam and Northeast is not a dumping ground for illegal Bangladeshis.”

Also, Pramod Boro, the President of All Bodo Students’ Union (ABSU) addressing the mass gathering spoke on the dual issues of amendment of the Citizenship Bill as well as the granting of ST status to six indigenous communities of Assam.

Boro taunting Prime Minister Narendra Modi said, “Neither jati nor tribe is safe in Assam. The government sitting in Delhi has proven that they have not accepted us not accepted us as their own.”

Speaking in the same vein, AASU secretary, Lurinjyoti Gogoi also appealed the Government of India and Government of Assam to stop playing with the sentiments of the people of Assam. “PM Narendra Modi led BJP Government has been playing a conspiracy to implement this controversial bill, thus, trying to ruin the culture, heritage, language of the state. At any cost, the people of Assam will not accept this bill. This state belongs to the indigenous people of Assam and will remain forever,” said Lurinjyoti Gogoi.

Singing sensation and Assam’s heartthrob, Zubeen Garg was also seen today singing his newly composed song “Politics nokoriba bondhu...Dubela dukhaj bhat khuji khuji khau....Politics nokoriba bondhu”. He further appealed the Government to stop playing politics with the people of Assam in the name of Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2016.

It may be mentioned that many senior journalists including celebrities from the Assamese film industry along with students’ leaders from several parts of the state from Sadiya to Dhubri had joined in the protest today.
