Indian Citizens protest on Hindu-Sikh-Minority Persecution in Pakistan.

Indian Citizens protest on Hindu-Sikh-Minority Persecution in Pakistan.

#JusticeForNimritaKumari

#JusticeForPakistanMinorities

#JusticeForPakHinduSikh

Protest at Jantar Mantar in Indian Capital over brutal killing of Nimrita Kumari and kidnapping, conversion, murder and minority persecution in Pakistan’s Sindh province.

Upananda Brahmachari | HENB | New Delhi | Sept 24, 2019:: A bold protest rally was held yesterday at Jantar Mantar in Indian capital New Delhi to register citizen’s concern over the recent murder of final year BDS student Nimrita Kumari and recurring attacks on Hindu minorities and abduction, conversion, rape and forced marriage of Hindu-Sikh girls in Pakistan’s Sindh provinces.

Though Hindu and Sikhs are bare minority (less than 2% of total population) in Pakistan and province of Sindh has the maximum numbers of that minority population; an anti-Hindu-Sikh Jihadi racket has been set up by the fundamental Islamist groups there, so that the minority people are to be annihilated permanently from the map of Pakistan.

The suspected murder of final year BDS student Nimrita Chandani Kumari+ in recent and the attack upon Hindu temple and education institutional head for an alleged blasphemy+ or the forced abduction-conversion-marriage of Reno Kumari+ and Jagjit Kaur+ (though both Reno and Jagjit were recovered by police later) in this month and in the previous month sharply created a world wide protest of the global Hindu-Sikh people.

On Sept 23, the Sindhi Jagruti Sabha, Delhi Sindhi Yuva Ekta and other Hindu organisations organized the citizen’s protest at Jantar Mantar over the continuous persecution on minority Hindu-Sikh people in Pakistan’s Sindh province violating all Human rights norms and civil rights protocol.

Reputed Hindu Human Rights Activists Jai Aahuja (Pakistani Hindu Migrants Welfare Forum), Veteran Social Worker Shankar Lalwani (Sindhi Jagruti Sabha), Adv. Kritika Khatri (Hindu Janajagruti Samiti) and many others addressed the protest rally.

The speakers vehemently opposed the human rights violation in Pakistan and the persecution upon Hindu-Sikhs pointing out the genocide of 1.5 crores minority people there in last 70 years in Pakistan in various formats of Jihad whether it is Cultural Jihad, Land Jihad, Love Jihad or Jihad in Kashmir.

The speakers also welcomed the Pakistani migrants in India and the persecuted Hindu-Sikh people in Pakistan with warmth and appealed the Govt of India and other forums to make serious allegations in UN against ‘Terror State Pakistan’ for snatching all human rights of the minuscule minorities there.

Hindu-Sindhi-Sikh Human Rights Activists from Delhi, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh ,Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Maharashtra and Karnataka took part in the agitation at Jantar Mantar.



…

__Agencies.
