Our neglected nationhood: Decaying museums undermine the Centre’s claims to making India great again

Have you been to the National Museum lately? Did you feel awed by the Throne of the Raja of Varanasi, were you humbled by the ivory likeness of the Dashavatara Shrine? Did you interact with the dioramas in the coin gallery? Did you feel the tug of pride as you cast an eye over the richness of Indian culture etched into hard rock or painted with unparalleled finesse by the delicate hand of the Kangra school?

Or were you, like me, left saddened, verging on embarrassed, and pondering the question: How could this shoddy assemblage of some of the most beautiful and inspiring treasures be the country’s statement of our heritage?

The National Museum of New Delhi – a majestic hexagonal two storey sandstone building, caparisoned by a rotunda and defined by grand columns – promises to guide the curious through the “glorious past and the wondrous present”. Unfortunately, the promised magnificence fails to make a deep impression, coddled as the treasures are in the well-worn uniform of bureaucratic apathy and pitiful disrepair.

It is particularly ironic that despite living in a time marked out by displays of symbolic nationalism elements of our ‘nationhood’ should lie in dusty showcases or moth-balled in vaults of museums throughout the country. It’s a greater travesty when the decrepitude is fostered by a government that flaunts its nationalist credentials.

Just recently, on completing 100 days in office, NDA-2 claimed to have fashioned ‘integration with the Union’ by a push from Parliament. In its first term, it redefined patriotism as a homily to be delivered with shared gusto standing in the aisle of a film hall. Just last year, an astounding Rs 3,000 crore was spent on an homage to one of our founding fathers, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel.

This lack of care for the National Museum and its treasures is particularly heartbreaking for me, the father of a 7-year-old of mixed parentage. How does one instill the feeling of belonging proudly to two civilisations when the tools to better absorb them, like a museum, are left wanting by one of them? For museums have a great capacity to arouse a sense of belonging as they tell us so much about our identities.

In Europe museums work hard to craft stories around a single ancestry, language, dress, food and customs so that patrons can ‘imagine’ their distinctness. Carefully curated retrospectives and special exhibitions are designed to showcase antiquities that testify to the ingenuity of forefathers or the sacrifices made by national heroes during state creation or imperial expansion. It’s for this reason that the British resolutely held off the Greeks who doggedly demand the repatriation of the Elgin Marbles looted from the Parthenon. Even the Koh-i-noor, set in the British crown, is possessively guarded as a glittering ode to the greatness of the empire.

Here in India the story has been a little different. The challenge has always been to carve out a distinct national identity without alienating our remarkable diversity. The National Museum, built in the late 1950s and inaugurated in 1960, was built to play this significant role. This was always going to be a challenging objective.

As you enter its portals the magnitude of what it is trying to achieve becomes immediately visible. Visitors to its various galleries are confronted by collectibles that speak to them in a vast number of scripts and languages shaped by a myriad of ethnicities about a time before India was a nation in the modern sense of the term.

How does one weave such diversity into a common heritage? What impetus besides the aesthetic connects the dancing girl of the early Harappan period in the far northwest to the statuesque nymphs of the much later Chola period in the South? How does one trace a unifying narrative between the Mughal miniatures of the 17th century and the mythological depictions from Tanjore?

It is a marvel that the National Museum succeeded at all in its early days in conveying that the birth of the modern Indian state was not entirely providential but the outcome of a natural convergence of shared histories. If it hadn’t been for the determination of the fledgling Indian state to put down roots, the National Museum would have come apart much earlier.

Unfortunately, despite the important role a museum performs, museology has never been considered an important enough portfolio. The National Museum’s top job has been tied to the apron strings of the culture ministry, where ministers have allowed the vicissitudes of partisan politics to allow ‘traditions’ to run roughshod over historical fact.

With the position of director left vacant for vast gaps in time and its administration overseen by bureaucrats with little or no love for its treasures, the iconic institution has fallen back. It will require a massive effort on part of the National Museum’s current caretaker to inspire in its visitors the desire to romance the story of India and its glorious civilisation. As of today, there is little evidence to suggest that the culture ministry is in any hurry to resurrect the flagging image of the National Museum.

If this government is truly sincere about its self-professed commitment to a nationalistic outlook it should be looking to invest as much in the National Museum – the neglected custodian of our nationhood – as it does in building tributes to the founding fathers of our country.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
