BJP link to distressed PMC Bank embarrasses Fadnavis

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

Tribune News Service

Mumbai, September 26

The near-collapse of the Punjab and Maharashtra Cooperative (PMC) Bank has come as a major embarrassment for CM Devendra Fadnavis, who is said to be close to officials of the troubled bank.

Sources said Fadnavis was keen on fielding bank director Rajneet Singh, son of veteran BJP leader Sardar Tara Singh. The bank was originally started by Sardar Partap Singh — father of Tara Singh — shortly after the family came to India after Partition, the BJP MLA told reporters here. The bank helped consolidate clout of the Singh family among Mumbai’s Sikh community.

Tara Singh and his son have been struggling to pacify irate depositors after the RBI imposed restrictions on withdrawals. “I am sure everyone will get their money back,” said Tara Singh.

Rajneet, on the other hand, said he and other members of the board had nothing to do with the present crisis. He has been quoted as saying that officials at the branch level were responsible for lending money to various companies. Most of those who entrusted their money appear to be small and medium businessmen, including transporters, housewives and even domestic workers.

According to customers protesting outside bank’s 137 branches, they had deposited their money with this bank as it was more consumer-friendly than its competitors. “The bank used to function even on Sundays and public holidays and the staff were friendly,” says Balwinder Kaur, a depositor with its Sion branch.

Despite a strong police presence, depositors were seen cursing PMC Bank chairman Waryam Singh after reports emerged that he was on the board of directors of the troubled Dewan Housing Finance Limited (DHFL) and its associate company, HDIL. According to reports, PMC Bank may have lent around Rs 2,500 crore, out of bank’s total loan book of Rs 8,000 crore, to HDIL which is undergoing insolvency proceedings. Bank officials said deposits and interest up to Rs 1 lakh have been covered under the depositors’ insurance plan.

Congress leader Sanjay Nirupam said he was taking a delegation of depositors to the Economic Offences Wing of the Mumbai police to file a complaint of cheating against office-bearers of the bank and the HDIL.

BJP leader Kirit Somaiya, who was denied the ticket for the Lok Sabha poll at the behest of the Shiv Sena earlier this year, wrote a letter to the RBI demanding filing of a criminal cases against PMC Bank officials. Incidentally, Somaiya’s son Neil is a contender for the ticket from Mulund Assembly segment presently represented by Sardar Tara Singh.

Rs 10,000 PMC Bank customers can now withdraw from their a/cs till six months, up from Rs 1,000 earlier

60 percent of the bank's depositors will now be able to withdraw their entire balance, as per the RBI
