Nitish Kumar vs BJP again? Something is brewing in Bihar politics

Nitish Kumar may surprise political pundits once again with a new formulation in the election year. (Photo: PTI)

Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar has remained an enigma for political observers ever since he parted ways with Lalu Prasad in 1994. They were in Janata Dal. After separating from Lalu Prasad, Nitish Kumar along with George Fernandes floated the Samata Party.

Two years later, Nitish Kumar joined hands with the BJP. The alliance has continued barring four years between 2013 and 2017. He quit the alliance protesting against the elevation of Narendra Modi as the prime ministerial candidate by the BJP. For two years - 2015 to 2017 - Nitish Kumar allied with Lalu Prasad and handed the BJP one of its severest defeats in a state election since the formation of the Modi government at the Centre.

Lalu Prasad and his ambitious sons -- Tej Pratap and Tejashwi -- however proved too hot to handle politically. Nitish returned to the NDA fold accepting the leadership of Narendra Modi in 2017.

Nitish Kumar has sung paeans about PM Modi on a number of occasions. But there are signs emerging from Bihar politics that something is brewing in the JDU-BJP alliance and Nitish Kumar appears to be the cook-in-chief.

Consider these two recent decisions by the Nitish Kumar government: renaming of a major road in capital Patna after Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and the decision to not allow Ramlila as part of the Durga Puja celebration at a venue very close to celebrated Gandhi Maidan of Patna.

The interesting aspect of the first decision is that the road was already named after Pandit Nehru. The road was once called Bailey Road (originally spelt as Bayley Road), named after the first Lt Governor of Bihar and Orissa, Sir Steuart Colvin Bayley.

It was renamed as Jawaharlal Nehru Marg. Nitish Kumar government has now once again renamed it, this time as Nehru Path. The government's logic is the new name would be easier for people to pronounce.

Given that Nitish Kumar does not take decisions without considering their political messaging and implication, it appears that the Bihar chief minister wants to convey "something" to the BJP, which has no love lost for Nehru.

Nitish Kumar's decision has come at a time when the BJP has renewed its offensive against the Congress over Article 370, calling the constitutional provision a blunder committed by Nehru in order to achieve 'narrow' political gains at the cost of India's integrity.

The second decision concerning Ramlila celebrations near the Gandhi Maidan may irk the BJP further. Reports say that the Patna administration denied permission to the Ramlia Committee for organising the ten-day event.

It is not yet clear if the customary Ravan Vadh (slaying of demon king Ravan) would be held at the Gandhi Maidan or not. But messages have appeared on social media claiming that no Dussehra celebration would take place this year in Patna's Gandhi Maidan.

Union minister and senior BJP leader from Bihar, Giriraj Singh has already raised the heat over the matter. Giriraj Singh hit out at the Nitish Kumar government terming the Patna administration's decision as "putting restrictions on religion".

Giriraj Singh is not known for his admiration of Nitish Kumar. He had taken a dig at the iftaar party thrown by Nitish Kumar earlier this year asking if he would organise a "phalahar on navratra" (meals consisting of fruits during nine-day festival in the honour of Goddess Durga). It took an intervention from Union Home Minister and BJP president Amit Shah to bring a truce between Nitish Kumar and Giriraj Singh.

But there is another context to the decisions taken by Nitish Kumar.

A cabinet extension is on the card in Bihar. Nitish Kumar had recently said that the expansion would take place after Dussehra. The BJP expects to gain. Nitish Kumar, on the other hand, maybe looking for compensation at the Centre. Kumar had pulled his JDU out from the central cabinet at the last minute over the number of berths offered to his party when the Narendra Modi cabinet took oath after 2019 Lok Sabha election.

Nitish Kumar was reportedly offered just one cabinet rank berth at the Centre. He refused to be part of the government at the Centre despite having earlier made a public statement in its favour. Interestingly, Nitish Kumar announced a cabinet expansion only days later and offered just one seat to the BJP while inducting eight JDU leaders in the government.

Secondly, the Nitish Kumar government is facing flak from all corners in Bihar over the way it managed drought and flood situations in the state. The public opinion is seemingly against the government. Many right-wing opinion-makers, as well as RJD and Congress leaders, have been criticising the government severely. Nitish Kumar is clearly on defensive on this front.

Thirdly and most significantly, Bihar will go to polls early next year. The BJP has increased its base substantially since the two parties last contested an assembly election together in 2010. The local BJP leaders are pushing for a lion's share in the coalition when the election is held for the next government.

Local BJP leaders were unhappy when the central leadership decided to contest the Lok Sabha polls on the same number of seats as the JDU. The BJP had won 22 Lok Sabha seats in 2014 on its own but in 2019, it agreed to put up candidate on only 17 to accommodate Nitish Kumar in the alliance.

Nitish Kumar may be trying to set the tone for a tough negotiation for cabinet expansion and next year's seat-sharing formula in the coalition with his new decisions that are not in sync with the BJP's stated position. Alternatively, Nitish Kumar may surprise political pundits once again with a new formulation in the election year.
