Mumbai Police issues prohibitory orders, imposes section 144 in South Mumbai ahead of Sharad Pawar's visit to ED Office today

Mumbai police

NCP

Sharad Pawar

As mentioned during my press conference yesterday, I will be visiting the Mumbai ED office at Ballard Estate tomorr… https://t.co/F4cwcJlElu — Sharad Pawar (@PawarSpeaks) 1569498252000

WATCH: Sharad Pawar to visit ED office on Friday 02:09

Dear Mumbaikars! Please be advised that prohibitory orders have been issued u/s 144 CrPC for the following jurisdic… https://t.co/ph1UQEoVyT — Mumbai Police (@MumbaiPolice) 1569521569000

Mumbai: Sec144 CrPC has been imposed at Ballard Estate, where the office of Enforcement Directorate is situated;NCP… https://t.co/SzMEq06L6l — ANI (@ANI) 1569555003000

NCP leader Nawab Malik in Mumbai: Enforcement Directorate (ED) has sent an e-mail stating that Sharad Pawar is not… https://t.co/DujEuvN2ft — ANI (@ANI) 1569569078000

Sanjay Raut,Shiv Sena on NCP Chief Sharad Pawar to visit ED in Mumbai today:Govt should've seen what is happening.… https://t.co/x3iWnMJlvv — ANI (@ANI) 1569567969000

Mumbai Police uses drone for security surveillance at Ballard Estate 00:25

@MumbaiPolice @PawarSpeaks @CMOMaharashtra @supriya_sule @NCPspeaks @AjitPawarSpeaks NCP workers assemble outside E… https://t.co/MnOKZDvDV8 — Mumbai Mirror (@MumbaiMirror) 1569566439000

Mumbai: Nationalist Congress Party workers assemble outside party office, raise slogans in support of party Chief S… https://t.co/StVwvpW5Ud — ANI (@ANI) 1569565425000

Mumbai: Security outside Enforcement Directorate office beefed up ahead of NCP chief Sharad Pawar's visit today 01:04

have imposed prohibitory orders outside the Enforcement Directorate's office at Ballard Pier in South Mumbai in view ofchief's planned visit on Friday afternoonMumbai Police took to Twitter to inform Mumbaikars about the places where these prohibitory orders have been imposed to maintain law and order in the city ahead of Pawar's visit, who has said he will visit the ED office at 2 pm on September 27 even though it has not summoned him yet.Pawar, named in a money-laundering case by the ED in connection with a scam at Maharashtra State Cooperative Bank, has said he will visit the ED office and submit “whatever information” has been sought in connection.Mumbai Police tweeted, "Dear Mumbaikars! Please be advised that prohibitory orders have been issued u/s 144 CrPC for the following jurisdictions.1. Colaba PS2. Cuffe Parade PS3. Marine Drive PS4. Azad Maidan PS5. Dongri PS6. JJ Marg PS7. MRA Marg PS"NCP workers had staged protests in Mumbai, Baramati and Pune when the ED named Pawar in the case. Anticipating similar protests on Friday and to facilitate the smooth movement of traffic, orders prohibiting movement of groups of people under section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure have been imposed outside the ED office.State NCP's office is in the same area and there is a possibility that a large number of NCP supporters would gather during Pawar's visit. Pawar has appealed to party workers not to gather outside the ED office. "As mentioned during my press conference yesterday, I will be visiting the Mumbai ED office at Ballard Estate tomorrow, Friday 27 September, at 14.00 hrs. @MumbaiPolice @NCPspeaks," Pawar tweeted. "I appeal to all my NCP cadre and supporters not to gather near the ED office premises," he said.The stretch of Mumbai SS Ram Gulam Road from its Karmbhoy Road to JN Hardiya Road shall be closed except for the VIP vehicles, Police, ambulance, government vehicle, fire brigade and other emergency services providing vehicles from 6 am to 10 pm.There shall be no parking for all types of vehicles except VIP vehicles, police, government vehicle, ambulance, fire brigade and other emergency services providing vehicles from 6 am to 10 pm on north and southbound of SS Ram Gulam Road from Karmbhoy Road to JN Hardiya Road.The ED is expected to not allow entry to the NCP chief in its Mumbai office when he visits there today to “submit information” related to the alleged Rs 25,000-crore scam in a Maharashtra cooperative bank. Pawar has not been summoned yet, it said, adding he will be called for questioning and recording of the statement “whenever it is required”. The agency, meanwhile, is in the process of gathering additional evidence and statements since the case was registered in connection with the alleged scam at the Maharashtra State Cooperative Bank (MSCB).Pawar said that ED has informed him that he is not needed for interrogation today. "ED has replied to my email which mentioned that I would be coming to the ED office on Sept 27 as later I will be busy with Maharashtra Assembly elections, but they said I am not needed for interrogation. Mumbai Police CP and Jt CP came to visit me and requested me to not visit the ED office as the law and order situation may be disrupted in the city due to my visit. I am a responsible leader and I cannot trouble Mumbaikars. If in future the ED needs me for interrogation, I am all ready to go. Today, I have decided not to go to ED office," he said.Pawar said, "I had informed in a press conference that I will be going to ED office on Sept 27 as they had named me in a money-laundering case in connection with a scam at Maharashtra State Cooperative Bank. I had said I will visit the ED office and submit “whatever information” has been sought in connection as then I will be busy with Maharashtra Assembly elections."NCP spokesperson Nawab Malik informed that Sharad Pawar will address the media in a short while.NCP leader Jitendra Awhad spoke to media informing that the meet is going on whether Pawar Sahab will be going to ED office. He said, "The CP and Jt CP had come to Pawar Sahab's residence and they have requested Pawar Sahab to not go to ED office as it may disturb the law and order situation of the city. They informed Pawar Sahab that they have imposed prohibitory orders outside the Enforcement Directorate's office at Ballard Pier. Now the meeting is going on."Cops have returned from Pawar's house after meeting him for about 20 mins.Mumbai Police is trying its best to convince Pawar to not go to ED office today.NCP leader Nawab Malik in Mumbai: ED has sent an e-mail stating that Pawar is not required to visit the office today, but Pawar is firm to go to ED officeED has sent an email to Pawar stating that presently the interrogation is not needed and possibly in future also the interrogation will not be needed. Pawar had written to ED yesterday, informing them that he will be coming to ED office on Sept 27 and now ED has given its reply. However, sources reveal that Pawar will be going to ED's office.Road restriction towards Ballard Pier from Avatar Singh Bedi Chowk 10 am onwards. Buses of route 3,108 diverted via S Bhagat Singh Rd to RBI, bus routes 66 and 122 curtailed at CSMT (Bhatia Baug)and Swami Dayanand Saraswati Chowk (Fort Market) respectively.Congress leader Rahul Gandhi took to Twitter this morning and wrote, "Sharad Pawar Ji is the latest Opposition leader to be targeted by a vindictive Government. The timing of this action, a month before elections in Maharashtra, reeks of political opportunism."
