'What Greta said!': Students march around the world in second wave of climate strikes

A protester holds a placard in front of New Zealand's Parliament. Source: Getty

More than 40,000 people packed into the grounds of Wellington's parliament buildings.

Participants carried signs saying "We're skipping school to teach YOU a lesson", "Denial = Death" and "What Greta said!".

Forty towns in New Zealand held marches with 260 businesses involved. Source: AAP

New Zealander James Capie shared a similar sense of outrage and the 13-year-old said his generation would continue to protest until their demands were acted upon.

"People do have every right to be angry. My generation shouldn't be out here missing school," he said at the Wellington strike.

"But it's really important to me that we're out here making a stand against other generations that have really screwed over our planet."

Thousands of people marched on NZ Parliament to protest climate change on Friday. Source: AAP

Michael Alspach, 37, was there with 17-month-old toddler Ella, saying he would not be able to look his daughter in the eye unless he did everything in his power to secure her future.

"It's probably not going to be too bad for me, to be honest, but she's going to be 80 in 2100 and that's when the projections are looking quite bad, so I'm doing it for her," he said.

About 500 students in the South Korean capital, Seoul, urged more government action to address climate change, marching towards the presidential Blue House after a downtown rally.

"I believe government action will change only if the voices of young people are heard because we're the ones ... who are going to be the greatest victims of a climate crisis," 15-year-old Kim Do-hyeon, who was one of the organisers, said.

Social media users across Asia shared images of climate strikes.

In India, a group of students gathered outside the office of Prime Minister Narendra Modi vowing to "come every Friday till our Future is safe".

Photos from Bangladesh showed lines of people along a street in Faridpur, with signs saying "there is no planet B" and "don't burn my future".

And in Taiwan, participants braved heavy rain to take their message to the legislature.

Masses of students were seen gathering in countries across Europe, with Ms Thunberg retweeting some of the bigger crowds.

Last Friday, masses of students across the world took part in the first wave of children-led climate strikes, including hundreds of thousands in Australia.

Additional reporting: Reuters
