Amid drama, venue of Mahisha Dasara celebrations in Mysuru changed

MAHISHA A SAVIOUR

MYSURU: Controversy and high drama marred the celebrations of Mahisha Dasara after police hurriedly shifted the venue from atop Chamundi Hills to Dr BR Ambedkar Park in Mysuru’s Ashokapuram on Friday.This year’s was the sixth edition of Mahisha Dasara organised by Mahisha Dasara Aacharana Samithi and Progressive Forum. The event planned at Chamundi Hills had to be aborted after BJP MP Pratap Simha raised objections to setting up a dais next to the statue of Mahishasura. Later, police clamped prohibitory orders to prevent any untoward incidents.As opposed to the conventional Mysuru Dasara that’s now a flagship state festival, Mahisha Dasara celebrates a parallel and much-neglected narrative in which Mahishasura is a benevolent king.Sources said MP Simha was angry that a stage was set up for the celebrations on the hills, and he reportedly hauled gram panchayat officers and police personnel over the coals for giving organisers the go-ahead. A video of the MP lambasting the officers has since gone viral.Mahisha Dasara Aacharana Samithi president Purushotham, a former Congress mayor, protested the officials’ move to restrict them from celebrating Mahisha Dasara in a peaceful manner. “All of us know what transpired on the hills involving the MP. We’ve submitted a memorandum to the deputy commissioner against imposing curbs on a peaceful celebration and without any reason. Are we in a democratic society,” Purushotham said.Dalit activist and retired professor BP Mahesh Chandra Guru said Mahisha Dasara celebrations have been peaceful and incident-free in the past five years. “Earlier governments upheld our cultural rights enshrined in the Constitution. Restrictions began with the BJP’s ascent to power,” he added.Guru accused MP Simha of abusing power by violating curb orders in Hunsur to celebrate Hanuma Jayanti some months ago, and now he’s imposing the same to disallow Mahisha Dasara. “Abuse of power sounds death knell for our democratic values,” he said, adding district authorities and police too have failed the citizens.Jnanaprakash Swamiji of Urilinga Peddi Mutt said it was not right on the MP’s part to curtail citizen’s rights.Contrary to reports, writer KS Bhagavan kept away from the event of his own volition. Following threat from extreme rightwing groups, police had extended security to his residence at Kuvempunagar some months ago. On Friday, cops had set up barricades at the entrance to his house.Contrary to lore, Mahisha was a benevolent king — and not a demon — who rescued people in Mahisha kingdom, Dalit activist and retired professor BP Mahesh Chandra Guru said on Friday. The ruler followed Buddhism, and historians with brahminical tilt have reduced him to a demon, he added.Citing works of eminent historian Suryanath U Kamat and other publications, the professor said emperor Ashoka sent Mahisha to promote Buddhism in south India and Sri Lanka and ensure people-friendly administration in 3rd century BC. Mahisha’s empire was called Mahishapuri or Mahisha Mandala.“This version of history has been captured by encyclopaedia published by University of Mysuru. Details on this period are available in Buddhist history, South Indian history and Pali Kannada,” the professor said.Dr BR Ambedkar, architect of the Constitution, has documented Mahisha Mandala in his third volume that focuses on history and culture of India.
