Amid drones, NCP chief drops plan to visit ED office

Sharad Pawar

Mumbai Police Commissioner Sanjay Barve

Maharashtra State Cooperative Bank

Ajit Pawar

Police officials with the ‘voiceover drone’

MSCB scam

Around 300 NCP workers gathered on Friday at the party office, which is in the vicinity of ED office.

Mumbai CP visited’s residence to request him to defer the plan; the police was ready with 1,500 personnel.To avert a law and order situation that may have arisen out of Sharad Pawar’s planned visit to Enforcement Directorate (ED) office in Ballard Estate on Friday,talked the NCP chief out of it. Pawar has been named as an accused in the ED’s moneylaundering case related to the Rs 25,000-crore(MSCB) scam. The other accused in the case is Sharad Pawar’s nephew, who resigned from the NCP as MLA on Friday.After ED registered a money-laundering case related to the alleged scam earlier this week, Sharad Pawar announced that he will visit the ED headquarters on September 27 to find out what the case is about. He said he would lend full cooperation and share with ED any information that he may have about the case. On September 26, ED asked Pawar to not come to its office as he hasn’t been summoned in the case yet and his presence at this juncture is not required.Meanwhile, the city was on the edge and Mumbai Police, foreseeing a law and order situation, had readied 1,500 personnel from the local police, the State Reserve Police and Riot Control Police for bandobast, under the supervision of Deputy Commissioner of Police Sangramsinh Nishandar (Zone 1). With around 300 NCP supporters gathered at the party office which is in the vicinity of the ED office, the police also deployed three special “voiceover drones”, with their capability to soar several metres high in the air for visual surveillance and issue audio commands.“We had information that political workers were arriving from other parts of the state, including Thane and Nashik, and pre-emptive measures were taken to ensure they didn’t enter the city,” Nishandar told Mirror. Also pressed into service were a watercanon named ‘Varun’ and a vehicleborne ‘Emergency Response & Mobile Surveillance Control and Command Centre’. On Thursday night, prohibitory orders were issued under section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code under the seven police stations of Zone 1 for crowd-control. Until Thursday late night, DCP Nishandar was around the ED office, making arrangements and personally monitoring the situation. He was back at the spot at 7.30 am on Friday.“When we had the meeting, police commissioner Sanjay Barve and joint Commissioner Vinoy Choubey came to me and requested that there was huge mob near the ED office and they requested me not to go as the situation would be critical. We got to know that there were protests at many places. Then I accepted the request,’’ said Pawar.“Mr Pawar can come when he is asked to come, but not today (Friday). ED is an investigating agency that is carrying out an open-ended probe. We will not let anyone distract us from doing our work,” said an ED source on condition of anonymity.As part of the, the ED is probing the bank’s former top executives and directors of ‘sakhar karkhanas’ (cooperative sugar factories), soot girnis (cotton mills) and other processing units for illegalities and fraud in sanctioning and disbursement of loans.
