Rallies held across KP in support of Kashmiris

PESHAWAR: The Kashmir Solidarity Day was observed in different districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa on Friday to draw the world’s attention to the plight of oppressed people of India-held Kashmir.

The rallies were arranged by the district administration, following a government decision to expose the blatant human rights violations by India in the occupied valley.

In Peshawar, students of various schools held rallies and chanted slogans against the Indian government and Prime Minister Narendra Modi and demanded of the international community to take notice of the blatant violations of human rights in held Kashmir.

The students and teachers of Government Higher Secondary School No 2, Peshawar Cantt, held a demonstration outside the school. They were holding banners and placards inscribed with slogans to express solidarity with the people of occupied valley.

World urged to take notice of HR abuses in India-held Kashmir

Similarly, the students of Shaheed Mubeen Afridi (Cantt-1) also held a rally to mark the day. The officials of district administration, including additional assistant commissioner Gulshan Ara, principal Atteequr Rehman and civil society members participated in the event.

Another event was held at the University Town where additional assistant commissioner Abdul Wali Khan and some notables shared views about the Indian atrocities on innocent Kashmiris.

In Timergara, the main function arranged by the administration was held at Balambat under the supervision of additional deputy commissioner Ishfaq Ahmad. Timergara TMO Pervez Akhtar, government employees, students and people participated in the rally.

Students of various schools also arranged a solidarity walk and rally. The participants chanted slogans against the Indian government and its forces. On this occasion, Anjuman-i-Tajiran president Anwaruddin and Maulana Nabi Shah of JUI-F demanded of the international human right organisations to take notice of the human rights violations in India-held Kashmir.

In Shangla, the main rally was held in the district headquarters, Alpuri, which was led by additional deputy commissioner Maqbool Hussain. Political activists, government officials, teachers and students took part in the rally.

Holding banners and placards inscribed with slogans against the Indian army, they demanded of the international community to force India to stop human rights violations and killing innocent people in disputed Kashmir valley.

Addressing the rally, the protesters demanded of the UN to play its role and resolve the Kashmir dispute as per its resolutions.

In Battagram, a rally was taken out from the DC office which passed through Battagram main bazaar and ended at the Kutcheri Chowk where the participants prayed for independence of Kashmir.

Led by DC Farul Saqlain, the rally was attended by district education officer Bakhtzada and school students.

Participant of the rally were carrying banners inscribed with slogans such as ‘Kashmir will become part of Pakistan’; ‘we are with Kashmiris’ etch. They said that Kashmir belonged to the Kashmiri people and they had the legal and moral right to decide their fate.

In Khar, Bajaur tribal district, anti-India rallies were held in different bazaars and trade centres.

The main rally was held in Ragagan Bazaar, which was attended by traders and political and social activists. The participants were holding banners and placards inscribed with slogans against India and in support of Kashmiri people.

The district administration also held a rally in Khar to express solidarity with the people of India-held Kashmir. It was led by DC Usman Mehsud.

Rallies were also held in other districts to show solidarity with the oppressed people of held Kashmir.

Published in Dawn, September 28th, 2019
