Greta: Grown-ups mock children because world view...

TORONTO (AP) - Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg said Friday she doesn't understand why grown-ups and world leaders would mock children and teens for acting on science, responding to attacks on her campaign as students conducted a second wave of global protests demanding action on climate change.

When asked about U.S. President Donald Trump and others who have mocked her, the 16-year-old activist said they likely feel their world view and interests are being threatened by climate activism.

"We've become too loud for people to handle so people want to silence us," she said at a rally in Montreal after meeting Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau. "We should also take that as a compliment."

The youth climate movement has drawn criticism from some who accuse the students of overreacting and say they would be better off going to school. In an apparent sarcastic jibe at Thunberg this week following her haranguing of world leaders, Trump tweeted: "She seems like a very happy young girl looking forward to a bright and wonderful future. So nice to see!"

Instead of addressing Trump by name, she said Friday that she didn't "understand why grown-ups would choose to mock children and teenagers for just communicating and acting on the science when they could do something good instead."

Thousands later chanted "Greta! Greta!" as she spoke at an afternoon rally in Montreal.

Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau speaks Swedish environmental activist Greta Thunberg in Montreal on Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. Thunberg says she delivered the same message to Trudeau that she gives to all politicians -- that he needs to listen to the science and act on it. (Ryan Remiorz/The Canadian Press via AP)

"We will do everything in our power to stop this crisis from getting worse even if that means skipping school or work," she said. "The people have spoken. And we will continue to speak until our leaders listen and act. We are the change and change is coming."

Her comments came as students in Italy symbolically torched a replica of planet Earth, one of many protests as part of the climate strikes sparked by the Swedish teen. Some participants echoed the anger she expressed this week at a U.N. summit in New York.

"How dare you!" read one banner at a rally in Italy's financial hub of Milan, where tens of thousands took to the streets and later gathered around a giant globe to watch it go up in flames.

More than 100,000 people also rallied in Rome, where protesters held up signs with slogans such as "Change the system, not the climate" or just the word "Future."

Fears about the impact of global warming on younger generation s drew fresh protests in India, Spain, Portugal, Sweden, Finland, the Netherlands and Bolivia a week after hundreds of thousands rallied worldwide ahead of the U.N. summit.

In New Zealand, students marched on Parliament in Wellington, staging one of the largest protests ever held in that capital.

In Berlin, activists from the Fridays for Future group braved persistent rain to denounce a package of measures that the German government recently agreed on to cut the country's greenhouse gas emissions. Experts say the proposal falls far short of what's needed if the world's sixth-biggest emitter is to meet the goals of the landmark 2015 Paris climate accord.

Actor Javier Bardem joined dozens of young people in San Sebastian in one of several rallies held across Spain on Friday morning ahead of evening demonstrations in major cities such as Madrid and Barcelona. Bardem was promoting a documentary he worked on with Greenpeace.

In Austria, organizers said 150,000 people participated, while local APA news agency said the number was 65,000.

In Poland, protesters blocked traffic in downtown Warsaw by chaining themselves to a tent. Police and firefighters tried to negotiate with them.

In Buenos Aires, where school strikes inspired by Thunberg have taken place since March, several thousand people marched from the famed Plaza de Mayo to the Congress. Protests occurred elsewhere in Latin America, including in Chile and Bolivia.

Protesters even rallied on Chile's Easter Island, known for its massive statues known as moai.

In Canada, Thunberg met Trudeau, who praised her activism on climate change.

"She is the voice of a generation, of young people who are calling on their leaders to do more and do better," Trudeau said. "And I am listening."

Trudeau, who is in the middle of an election campaign, announced a plan to plant 2 billion trees over the next decade.

Thunberg, however, indicated that she expects more, even of leaders who welcome the movement. Scientists this week issued new dire warnings about the consequences of rising temperatures on the world's oceans and cold regions.

Thunberg told a crowd in Montreal it was moving to see people of all generations so passionate for a cause.

"He (Trudeau) is of course obviously not doing enough, but this is just a huge problem, this is a system that is wrong," she said. "My message to all the politicians is the same: Just listen and act on the science."

___

Giada Zampano reported from Rome. Rob Gillies in Toronto, Nick Perry in Wellington, New Zealand; Mike Corder in The Hague, Netherlands; Debora Rey in Buenos Aires, Argentina; Eva Vergara in Santiago, Chile; and Ciaran Giles in Madrid contributed to this report.

___

Follow AP's climate coverage at https://www.apnews.com/Climate

Students demonstrate during a worldwide protest demanding action on climate change, in Rome, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protests are inspired by Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg, who spoke to world leaders at a United Nations summit this week. Writing on banner reads in Italian' "Change the system, not the climate." (Massimo Percossi/ANSA via AP)

Young people gather at a climate change protest in Toronto on Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. Swedish environmental activist Greta Thunberg, who started the global climate protest movement, pushing thousands of Canadians to the streets today, says she thinks the nasty backlash she has faced from some leaders is proof positive the message is getting across. (Christopher Katsarov/The Canadian Press via AP)

Students demonstrate during a worldwide protest demanding action on climate change in Milan, Italy, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protests are inspired by Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg, who spoke to world leaders at a United Nations summit this week.(AP Photo/Antonio Calanni)

Thousands of people march on Parliament to protest climate change in Wellington, New Zealand, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protest in New Zealand was part of a second wave of protests around the world as the United Nations General Assembly met in New York. (AP Photo/Nick Perry)

Thousands of people march on Parliament to protest climate change in Wellington, New Zealand, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protest in New Zealand was part of a second wave of protests around the world as the United Nations General Assembly met in New York. (AP Photo/Nick Perry)

Thousands of people march on Parliament to protest climate change in Wellington, New Zealand, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protest in New Zealand was part of a second wave of protests around the world as the United Nations General Assembly met in New York. (AP Photo/Nick Perry)

Thousands of people gather near Parliament to protest climate change in Wellington, New Zealand, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protest in New Zealand was part of a second wave of protests around the world as the United Nations General Assembly met in New York. (AP Photo/Nick Perry)

Students demonstrate during a worldwide protest demanding action on climate change, in Rome, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protests are inspired by Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg, who spoke to world leaders at a United Nations summit this week. Signs in the background read in Italian "Change the school to change the system", left, "We protest for concrete results", top. (AP Photo/Alessandra Tarantino)

Demonstrators unveil a giant green drape during a worldwide protest demanding action on climate change, in Rome, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protests are inspired by Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg, who spoke to world leaders at a United Nations summit this week. (AP Photo/Alessandra Tarantino)

Students hold up signs with writing in Italian reading "Future" as they demonstrate during a worldwide protest demanding action on climate change, in Rome, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protests are inspired by Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg, who spoke to world leaders at a United Nations summit this week. (AP Photo/Alessandra Tarantino)

Students demonstrate during a worldwide protest demanding action on climate change, in Turin, northern Italy, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protests are inspired by Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg, who spoke to world leaders at a United Nations summit this week. Writing on banner reads in Italian' "Change the system, not the climate." (Alessandro Di Marco/ANSA via AP)

Students demonstrate during a worldwide protest demanding action on climate change, in Turin, northern Italy, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protests are inspired by Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg, who spoke to world leaders at a United Nations summit this week. (Alessandro Di Marco/ANSA via AP)

Citizens hold placards as they participate in a protest in Mumbai, India, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protestors gathered in response to a day of worldwide demonstrations calling for action to guard against climate change. (AP Photo/Rafiq Maqbool)

Exile Tibetan school children carry posters during an awareness march in Dharmsala, India, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protestors gathered in response to a day of worldwide demonstrations calling for action to guard against climate change. (AP Photo/Ashwini Bhatia)

Exile Tibetan school children carry posters during an awareness march in Dharmsala, India, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protestors gathered in response to a day of worldwide demonstrations calling for action to guard against climate change. (AP Photo/Ashwini Bhatia)

An exile Tibetan student carries a poster before participating in a march in Dharmsala, India, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protestors gathered in response to a day of worldwide demonstrations calling for action to guard against climate change. (AP Photo/Ashwini Bhatia)

Thousands of demonstrators take part in a global climate protest at the Parliament House in Helsinki, Finland, on Friday Sept. 27, 2019. (Markku Ulander/Lehtikuva via AP)

Thousands of demonstrators take part in a global climate protest at the Parliament House in Helsinki, Finland, on Friday Sept. 27, 2019. (Markku Ulander/Lehtikuva via AP)

Thousands marched as part of a second wave of worldwide protests demanding action on climate change in The Hague, Netherlands, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. (AP Photo/Mike Corder)

Thousands marched as part of a second wave of worldwide protests demanding action on climate change in The Hague, Netherlands, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. (AP Photo/Mike Corder)

In this photo provided by Greenpeace Russia, Greenpeace activists sign words 'Act now' with a banner reading 'Climate crisis' in front of the Russian government's building during a protest flash mob for climate protection in Moscow, Russia, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. (Greenpeace Russia via AP)

Thousands marched as part of a second wave of worldwide protests demanding action on climate change in The Hague, Netherlands, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. (AP Photo/Mike Corder)

Climate demonstrators hold a sign reading in Swedish "All for the climate" during a global climate protest in Stockholm, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protests are part of the so-called global climate strike that saw what organizers have said were several million people march in cities across the world last Friday ahead of the U.N. climate meeting. New Zealand, Italy, Canada and a number of other countries focused their protest efforts on the second wave, bookending a week in which climate change was at the forefront of the global conversation. (Cluadio Bresciani/TT News Agency via AP)

Students demonstrate during a worldwide protest demanding action on climate change, in Turin, northern Italy, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The protests are inspired by Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg, who spoke to world leaders at a United Nations summit this week. (Alessandro Di Marco/ANSA via AP)

Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau speaks Swedish environmental activist Greta Thunberg in Montreal on Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. Thunberg says she delivered the same message to Trudeau that she gives to all politicians -- that he needs to listen to the science and act on it. (Ryan Remiorz/The Canadian Press via AP)

Protesters block an intersection in Washington, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019, during the morning rush hour seeking to call attention to climate change. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh)

A girl holds a globe as she participates in a protest in Mumbai, India, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. Protestors gathered in response to a day of worldwide demonstrations calling for action to guard against climate change. (AP Photo/Rafiq Maqbool)

Demonstrators hold posters as they attend a protest climate strike ralley of the 'Friday For Future Movement' in Erfurt, Germany, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The demonstration is a central march in the run-up to the state elections of Thuringia in Oct. 27, 2019. (AP Photo/Jens Meyer)

A demonstrator holds a poster displaying the earth as she attends a protest climate strike ralley of the 'Friday For Future Movement' in Erfurt, Germany, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. The demonstration is a central march in the run-up to the state elections of Thuringia in Oct. 27, 2019. (AP Photo/Jens Meyer)

Activists stage a performance during an environmental demonstration, part of the Global Climate Strike, in Warsaw, Poland, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019.(AP Photo/Czarek Sokolowski)

Activists stage a performance during an environmental demonstration, part of the Global Climate Strike, in Warsaw, Poland, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019.(AP Photo/Czarek Sokolowski)

Activists stage a performance during an environmental demonstration, part of the Global Climate Strike, in Warsaw, Poland, Friday, Sept. 27, 2019.(AP Photo/Czarek Sokolowski)

Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau speaks Swedish environmental activist Greta Thunberg in Montreal on Friday, Sept. 27, 2019. Thunberg says she delivered the same message to Trudeau that she gives to all politicians -- that he needs to listen to the science and act on it. (Ryan Remiorz/The Canadian Press via AP)
