People hold anti-India demonstrations in IOK

F.P. Report

ISLAMABAD: In occupied Kashmir, defying restrictions, people held forceful demonstrations in central, north and south Kashmir, today, to register their protest against the Indian occupation and repeal of special status of the territory by India.

Immediately after Juma congregational prayers, people took to the streets in Srinagar, Budgam, Ganderbal, Islamabad, Pulwama, Kulgam, Shopian, Bandipora, Baramulla, Kupwara and other areas of the occupied territory.

The protesters raised high-pitched pro-freedom and anti-India slogans. Indian troops and police personnel fired teargas shells and pellets on protesters at several places, injuring many of them.

The occupation authorities had imposed restrictions in Srinagar, Ganderbal, Islamabad, Awantipora, Sopore, Handwara and other areas. The authorities did not allow people to offer Juma prayers at any of the major mosques or shrines in the Kashmir valley including Srinagar’s historic Jamia Masjid, Dargah Hazratbal, Dastgir Sahib and Charar-e-Sharif for the 8th successive week, today, since 5th August.

People had also staged an anti-India demonstration in Srinagar’s area of Batamaloo and took out a torch procession in Anchar, yesterday. Anchar has become a no go area for the Indian forces.

Meanwhile, life remained paralyzed in Kashmir valley on 54th consecutive day, today, with shops, markets, business establishments and educational institutions remaining closed and public transport off the road.

The communications means including mobile and internet services and TV channels continue to remain shut in Kashmir valley and Muslim majority areas of Jammu region.

Indian troops during continued cordon and search operations arrested a dozen people including human rights activist, Muhammad Ahsan Untoo, and an All Parties Hurriyat Conference leader, Muhammad Yasin Attai, in Shopian, Ramban, Kishtwar and Samba districts.

The authorities booked a member of National Conference, Muhammad Maqbool Yatoo, under black law Public Safety Act.

The villagers in Baramulla district torched a vehicle of Indian Border Security Force after it hit a civilian car and injured three persons including two women.

A soldier of Indian Border Security Force committed suicide by shooting himself with his service rifle during duty hours at the main gate of the office of Deputy Commissioner in Doda town.

This incident of suicide raised the number of such deaths among Indian troops and police personnel to 441 since January 2007.
