Ram Rajya: A populist dystopia?

India’s independence movement had both radicals and liberals. The liberals, mostly pre-Gandhian leaders, had a clear idea on where to lead India. They stood for parliamentary democracy and secularism. Their aim was indigenisation of the Indian administration and they advocated dominion status for the country. They sought democracy, not total freedom, at least in the initial phase. Politically, they might have been conservatives but socially they were reformists.

Mahatma Gandhi was, however, on the other side. Gandhi once said that Gopal Krishna Gokhale, a liberal and moderate, was his guru. This was wrong. In truth, Gandhi’s ideology was inclined towards radical leaders like Bal Gangadhar Tilak who advocated protests, boycotts and agitation. No wonder, even Gokhale saw through this, for he was to soon proclaim, “this man [Gandhi] is enough to negate whatever we have achieved”.

Gandhi’s aim was to turn the people against the British and to drive them out of India and he did indeed make life impossibly difficult for them. However, his tactics had serious flaws and they were hardly made with a long-term perspective. Let’s take one such instance: The linking of the Khilafat movement with the noncooperation movement by Gandhi. Khilafat was a religious issue while the non-cooperation movement was a political one. Mixing a political issue with a religious one was helpful in rallying the people; however, doing the same by politically educating the people became difficult. The move by Gandhi was deliberate. He was well aware that the Khilafat movement was not even relevant in Turkey where the Ottoman empire was in its death throes, but he sensed an opportunity in deriving emotional traction out of it.

Khilafat was used to mobilise Muslims, while Bipin Chandra Pal and Lala Lajpat Rai tried to mobilise the Hindus. Ganapathi utsavs were held to organise Marathas. Gandhi thought it was a good strategy to unite Muslims and Hindus against the government. It worked, but for only for a very short time. Several liberals, including our own Chettur Sankaran Nair, had critiqued this move, saying that religion and politics shouldn’t mingle and that it would lead to communalism. In that sense, part of Gandhi’s strategy is similar to today’s Hindu nationalism.

Gandhi’s opinion on chaturvarna (the caste system) was another bone of contention even then. He had opined that chaturvarna was alright if extreme practices like untouchability were removed. However, the liberals said untouchability itself was an inherent part of the caste system and that the whole thing must go.

Similarly, take the case of Simon Commission. Gandhi advocated total boycott of the Simon Commission. It reflected Gandhi’s inability to go against popular opinion. While it was right to protest against the commission, which was fully made up of British members, it was also necessary to present our side to the commission so that it would be heard in the British parliament. By going for the popular move of boycotting them indiscriminately, Congress leaders overlooked this. However, some leaders like Sankaran Nair resisted, which made him an outcast.

Gandhi once compared democracy to a prostitute, saying that it leans towards liberals one day and towards conservatives another day. His call for Rama Rajya also was a flawed approach. At that time, India’s literacy rate was less than 10%, so he used an image which was already established in the minds of the people. By saying that the ‘kingdom of Ram’ should come, he was able to sway a lot of people. But beyond that, he didn’t have a clear idea on where he was taking the people.

Luck of course favoured Gandhi, because from a British perspective — due to various international and internal issues in Britain — it was the right time to leave India. Gandhi hastened their departure through mass agitations. He was a tsunami that lasted for about 22 years but what was implemented after independence were the strategies of the Congress before Gandhi.

In the final analysis, Gandhi was a failed messiah. He stood for India’s unity, Hindu-Muslim friendship and non-violence. Which one of these really succeeded? However, his failures were glorious since the goals were glorious. That’s why Gandhi’s failures continue to move us and inspire us.

The writer, S Rajasekharan Nair, is secretary of Chettur Sankaran Nair Foundation and a retired professor of history.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
