Indian Police Impose Restrictions in Kashmir after Pakistan PM's Speech

Khan, in an address to the United Nations General Assembly on Friday, warned there would be a bloodbath once India lifts its restrictions in Kashmir, which have been in force since it revoked the region's decades-old autonomy in August and detained thousands of people.

Late on Friday night, soon after Khan's speech, hundreds of Kashmiris came out of their homes, shouting slogans in support of the Pakistani prime minister and calling for the independence of Kashmir.

On Saturday, police vans fitted with speakers made public announcements in some parts of Srinagar about movement restrictions, while additional troops were deployed to prevent any protests, according to officials and two witnesses.

The troops also blocked access to the city's main business center with razor wire.

"This was necessitated after protests across Srinagar city last night soon after Imran Khan's speech," said a police official, who declined to be identified, Reuters reported.

Muslim-majority Kashmir has long been a flashpoint between nuclear-armed India and Pakistan, which have fought two of their three wars over the divided territory. Both countries rule parts of Kashmir while claiming it in full.

India's crackdown as it revoked Kashmir's special status was accompanied by severe restrictions on movement, as well as disconnection of telephone services. Though New Delhi has eased some of the movement curbs, no prominent detainees have been freed and mobile and internet connections remain suspended.

While warning of the consequences of lifting what he described as an "inhuman curfew," Pakistani premier Khan demanded India do so and free all detainees.

In some areas in Kashmir – including the Soura region near Srinagar, which has witnessed protests against India's decision – people clashed with security forces by throwing stones on Friday night. Police used tear gas to disperse them, said the Indian official.

Khan addressed the United Nations a day after a senior US diplomat for South Asia called for a lowering of rhetoric between India and Pakistan, saying that Washington hoped to see rapid action by India to lift restrictions it has imposed in Kashmir and the release of detainees there.
