India replies with a swipe at CPEC against China’s reference to J&K, Ladakh at UNGA

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: Raising the Kashmir issue at the UNGA, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang had said that the "dispute" should be peacefully and properly addressed in accordance with the UN Charter, Security Council resolutions and the bilateral agreement.

Taking on the reference made by Chinese counterparts to Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh, India on Saturday said, “China should "respect India's sovereignty and territorial integrity" as the recent activities in Jammu and Kashmir are "solely an internal matter of India”.

Also Read: ‘Pak PM’s threat of nuclear devastation brinkmanship, not statesmanship’: India on Imran Khan’s speech at UNGA

China, a close ally of Pakistan, also stressed that no actions should be taken that would unilaterally change the "status quo".

External Affairs Ministry Spokesperson Raveesh Kumar giving a befitting reply said, "The Chinese side is well aware of India's position that Jammu, Kashmir, and Ladakh are an integral part of India, and that the recent developments are entirely a matter internal to us."

He also stressed upon other countries should respect India’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and should not interfere in its internal matters.

"We expect that other countries will respect India's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and desist from efforts to change the status quo through the illegal so-called China Pakistan Economic Corridor in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir," he said.

Also Read: ‘Creating content for cartoonists’: Rajnath’s dig at Imran Khan for going door-to-door around the world over J-K

Kumar also highlighted the “illegal so-called China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) in PoK as an attempt to change the status quo. The corridor which connects China with Pakistan has always been the pain point in Indo-China ties as the corridor passes through PoK, and India had protested against it from the time China started the work”.

Last month, India withdrew the special status of Jammu and Kashmir and bifurcated the state into Union Territories of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh, which will come into being on October 31

"The Kashmir issue, a dispute left from the past, should be peacefully and properly addressed in accordance with the UN Charter, Security Council resolutions and bilateral agreement," State Councillor and Foreign Minister of China Wang Yi said in his address to the UN General Assembly on Friday.

Also Read: From Laden to Saeed to blacklisting in FATF; how India slammed Pakistan with 5 questions at UNGA

"No actions that would unilaterally change the status quo should be taken. As a neighbour of both India and Pakistan, China hopes to see the dispute effectively managed and stability restored to the relationship between the two sides," Wang said.

India's last month decision evoked strong reactions from Pakistan, which downgraded diplomatic ties and expelled the Indian ambassador.

Posted By: Talib Khan
