'The climate change anxiety is real,’ says Bengaluru-based youth activist Karen Raymond who's inspired by Greta Thunberg

Raymond

climate justice

Mumbai

..................

NITI Aayog

As a co-ordinator of the Bengaluru chapter of FridaysForFuture strikes, this 25-year-old wants the government to address climate crisis on prioritySwedish teen climate activist Great Thunberg has said it. The latest UN IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) confirms that the Earth is in serious danger right now. A new Breakthrough National Centre for Climate Restoration paper even predicts that the planet could collapse by 2050. Yes, the panicis real, says aerospace engineer-turned-entrepreneur Karenfrom Bengaluru, while dismissing Australian PM Scott Morrison’s quote that it is a ‘needless anxiety.’The 25-year-old is co-ordinating the Bengaluru (and a few other Indian chapters) of FridaysForFuture (FFF), a series of strikes involving youngsters, called on by Thunberg to demand faster action on climate change at the government level, across the world.Raymond, whose team of five was recently awarded by Amnesty International India for their activism, spoke to BM after they concluded their week-long campaign forin Bengaluru on Friday.Being in the field of aerospace, I realised that aviation is one of the highest emitters of carbon dioxide and this was bothering my conscience. Meanwhile, early this year, I came across a video message that Thunberg had for our Prime Minister, saying if he fails at curbing climate crisis, he would be the worst villain in human history. That got me to read up about her FFF strikes. It inspired me to mobilise like-minded people in Bengaluru andto come out and strike on March 15 (first in India). To my surprise, I found that Delhi and Gurugram were planning the same.It’s difficult to say but based on my interactions, 30 per cent of them are suffering due to climate change, 40 per cent are concerned about the future and for the rest 30 per cent, it’s just another day to click selfies. As for me, my climate battle is linked to social injustice. Asa Class 3 student, on some days, I would to go out and fetch water from community taps before rushing to school and get late. I miss the custard apple tree that BBMP cut down outside my house for a cable line – they killed the habitat of 30 sparrows. One of our volunteers shifted to Europe recently after developing asthma in Bengaluru. So with FFF, we are trying to give the youth, rich and poor, a common ground to voice their concerns.Seventeen of the 18 warmer years have all occurred since 2001, with 2016 being the warmest (1998, before that). And the average age of these protestors is 18. You see, these students are living in bad times already and as we continue with business as usual, we are accelerating towards the sixthmass extinction. So it is natural for the younger generations to feel threatened about their future.We want the governments to declare a climate emergency. This means, climate and ecology should become our topmost priority in decision-making at verticals from national to ward-level. Look at what India is doing, by building a metro car shed through a thriving forest such as Aarey and publicly denying the ecosystemof thousands of trees to be a forest. Then we are razing the forests of Hasdeo and Aravallis for coal mining and dams, just opposite to the promise of contributing 2.3 to 3 billion tonnes of additional carbon sink (by afforestation, for instance).Address water scarcity and air toxification. Next, electrify public transport system. Then, all government and private projects that destroy the remaining biodiversity must be stopped and should not take off without an open and transparent consensus by citizen assemblies. At the same time, compensation must be paid for losses borne by indigenous communities. With the Amazon rainforests facing threats of denudation and the Indonesian wildfires, the least one can do would be to preserve the existing tree cover. And the government should alert 130 crore citizens of India about this crisis!We are not saying that climate justice is only the government’s responsibility. Individual contributions also count but only a change in the system, such as the move to phase out six types of single-use plastics, can complement individual changes. As for me, I didn’t shop for an entire year between 2017 and 2018 and now I am a happy minimalist. I use personal care products that come in glass bottles and are cruelty-free. I have become a vegan and I keep a count of my carbon footprint every month. I travel in buses, Metro and trains.We have written to education ministers to update teachers and students about the environmental crisis. We wrote to the PM and all environment ministers, reiterating thefindings that 21 states will run out of groundwater by 2020, but only Kerala, Goa and Delhi cared to respond. Meanwhile, we are talking with around 20 schools and four colleges in Bengaluru to run a four-week module, to sensitise students about the environment, to go plastic-free, adopt composting and RainWater Harvesting.A bit. A few senior environment activists have tried to dictate roles, saying they would manage this fight. They said that they have been fighting court cases and even gone to jail, so our protests won’t help. Some call us global leftists and anti-government, which is not true. At home, my mom told me, ‘if you can’t put your room in order, how will you change the world?’ (laughs). We have been very busy.Now that there is a massive awakening among the youth, it’s given renewed hope to the scientific community to push for political will towardsclimate action.We have bigger things to do. We don’t have time to engage with you.
