Mizoram NGO to protest on October 5, the day Union Home minister will visit the state

GUWAHTI: Conglomerate of several civil societies organisation, NGO co-ordination committee will hold protest programme on October 5 the day Union Home minister Amit will visit the state.General Secretary of the committee Lalhmachhuana said that they have appealed people to wear black shawls to register their protest against the Citizenship Amendment bill. Protestors will carry placards against the bill.Shah’s first visit after he assumed the charge of Home minister is being seen as an attempt to reach out on proposed Citizenship Amendment bill.Already BJP led government has announced its plan of reintroduction of the Citizenship bill after consultation with stakeholders and sufficient tweaking.Shah is expected to address the party workers. Shah who visited Guwahati early this month to attend the BJP floated platform of non-congress parties, North East Democratic Alliance (NEDA) convention has assured that new citizenship Amendment bill will be brought in parliament only after the consultation with the stakeholders.Assam finance minister, Himanta Biswa Sarma recently said that stakeholder discussion is on. The home minister has stated that bill be brought in next session of parliament and before that consultation process has to be over “In next one month you will see the visit important BJP leaders to the region. Consultation is on at various levels.”He said new Citizenship amendment bill is being drafted and consultation will be the stakeholder is on. The bill will be moved in parliament once again but this will new feature, the cut of date will be December 31, 2014. Those Buddhist, Jains, Christians, Sikhs and Parsis who have come to India prior December 31, 2014 will be only eligible for Indian citizenship."Mizoram witnessed bitter resistance to the bill while it was introduced in Lok Sabha prior early this year. The bill was passed in Lok Sabha however government did not table the bill in Rajya Sabha Mizoram’s NGO Coordination Committee had boycotted Republic Day celebrations in the state in protest against the bill.Mizoram Chief Minister while speaking at the NEDA conclave in Guwahati on September 9 said that Citizenship bill is a very sensitive issue. “Regional parties who supported the bill are on the verge of political suicide. Northeast India being bordering states are vulnerable and it must be seen if the bill is taken up minus North eastern states.“Shah in the convention has stated that the citizenship amendment bill which is in contemplation will not affect the Article 371, which gives Northeast eastern states special provision.Shah on September 9 in Guwahati said, “Government of India will ensure that article 371 will not be hurt by Citizenship amendment bill. When we will bring the bill the laws which protect tribal laws and cultural identity will not be affected. There will be no change that is your right.”Shah said, “The citizenship bill which in our contemplation has cut off date of December 31, 2014.”
