JACTTO-GEO’s protest across State continues for the 2nd day

DMK leader Kanimozhi meets agitating staff at Thoothukudi

The indefinite strike called by the Joint Action Council of Tamil Nadu Teachers Organisations and Government Employees Organisations (JACTTO-GEO) continued for the second day throughout Tamil Nadu, stressing the nine-point demand. The list of demands includes dropping of the new pension scheme.

The JACTTO-GEO said 90% of the 12 lakh staff participated in the strike across Tamil Nadu.

Teachers and government staff protested inside the Chennai Corporation campus. They maintained that getting the strike to a close was in the hands of the Chief Minister and ministers D. Jayakumar and Sengottaiyan. Similar protests were also seen in front of Zonal offices in Tambaram and Madhavaram.

Central region

Thousands of striking government employees and teachers were arrested across the Central region on Wednesday after they resorted to road roko agitations in support of their charter of demands in eight places in the districts. This reflected in elementary schools being closed in some parts of the region.

The participation of government employees was about 30% to 40% in Tiruchi district, claimed J. Valavan Arasu, Tiruchi district secretary, Tamil Nadu Government Employees Association. About 70%-75% of teachers continued their strike in Tiruchi district with many elementary schools remaining closed on Wednesday too, said S. Neelakandan, one of the district coordinators of JACTTO-GEO. Over 2,400 striking employees and teachers were arrested in Thanjavur district. Arrests of protesters were also made in Pudukottai, Perambalur, Tiruvarur, Nagapattinam and Ariyalur districts.

In southern Tamil Nadu, over 21,000 government employees and teachers, owing allegiance to JACTTO-GEO, were detained for participating in road roko on the second day of the indefinite strike. In all the nine districts, more women were seen in the agitation venues. JACTTO-GEO office-bearers in some districts claimed that response to the strike call had improved.

Work in some of the departments remained affected while primary and elementary schools were kept open as per instructions of the Chief Educational Officer. All the arrested employees and teachers were kept in private halls.

In Thoothukudi, DMK Rajya Sabha MP Kanimozhi met the agitating staff in a private hall, where they had been kept after arrest, and assured that her party, if voted to power, would concede all their demands.

In Coimbatore district, nearly 2,500 State government employees and teachers participated in road roko agitations held at nine places on Wednesday. Functioning of government offices in Erode, Salem, and Namakkal districts were affected. However, functioning of schools was not affected.

As many as 7,729 members of JACTTO-GEO were removed after they staged road roko at various places in these three districts.
