PM Khan’s speech — a global awakening jerk

PM Imran Khan won many hearts when he acted as a Kashmir’s ambassador in the US. He, indeed, proved himself as true leader of the whole Muslim Ummah by holding meetings with over 70 global leaders and briefing about the intense situation in Kashmir. Trump and PM Khan met on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly session where Khan noted that Kashmir was subject to humanitarian problems with millions under siege. He also cautioned that if Modi wouldn’t lift the blockade, the crisis could get much worse. While talking to global media, including Washington Post, New York Times and BBC, Khan emphasised Indian unending aggression in occupied Kashmir.

The 50-minutes speech by IK was a package of passion and power where he conveyed a heartfelt message to the world about the image of whole Muslim Ummah, which has fast deteriorated after 9/11. He intelligibly remarked that there was no such thing as “Radical Islam.” By stating that Islam was not radicalised, he revitalised the true ideology of Islam all across the globe.

During his speech, he unveiled the concealed face of RSS by pronouncing that its political philosophy was created on the ideologies of Hindutva, which promoted the supremacy of a Hindu state and cultivated Hindu values. It was not only dangerous for Kashmiris but also detrimental to Indian Muslims, Christians and Dalits.

Big thanks to PM Khan for creating a strong case for Kashmir in UNGA. He has cautioned the world that the failure of resolving Kashmir issue can result in massive devastation. The whole speech shell was to give the right of self-determination to the people of Kashmir. According to PM Khan, Kashmir was a trial for the UN to refurbish its credibility by giving rights to the people of the disputed region.

On the other side, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi touched upon spreading threat of terrorism but never directly mentioned Kashmir. PM Khan said that there were 900,000 Indian soldiers in the region policing eight million Kashmiris.

The 50-minutes speech by IK was a package of passion and power where he conveyed a heartfelt message to the world about the image of whole Muslim Ummah

“PM Imran Khan’s diplomatic speech, yet, perturbed ache to Modi”

PM Khan, utterly, altered the concept of radicalism gushed out of Kashmir. He has prevailed sense by highlighting that anyone being caged in for a long time, would spring out as a radical. Hence, the responsibility went to India for making Kashmiris one.

The speech verified the coverage of Kashmir issue by lightening up New York’s Time Square with ‘Free Kashmir’ slogans. Consequently, a definite victory of IK, as now for the first time Kashmir issue was given a desirable voice. The biggest protest to be recorded in the history of the UN and people, including Sikhs, Christians, and Muslims, has gathered against Indian massacres and chirped anti-Modi slogans.

The reaction IK got from the Indian side was quite an expected one. Vidisha Maitra, First Secretary MEA, burst her aggressive response by dumping PM Khan’s words as “brinkmanship” and those of a terrorism supporter rather than “statesmanship.” And, here, she lacked nothing but the truth.

At all times, India has liberated a lethal campaign against Pakistan but, our Prime Minister, Imran Khan, quick-wittedly proved his vocal and bold response to the situation and, indubitably, a reflection how a headman should direct a political issue as he did for Kashmir.

The writer is a former employee of the Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI) and she is a freelancer
