From Congress’ OBC poster boy to BJP by-poll candidate in Gujarat – the dramatic journey of Alpesh Thakor

Alpesh Thakor will contest the Radhanpur seat on a BJP ticket this time, in the upcoming Gujarat by-polls. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Former Congress MLA Alpesh Thakor will contest from Radhanpur in the upcoming Gujarat by-polls on a BJP ticket As a champion of the OBC community, Thakor formed the Gujarat Kshatriya Thakor Sena in 2011 Along with Dalit leader Jignesh Mevani and Patel Andolan activist Hardik Patel, Thakor formed a trio of young politicians representing different caste groups -- and gave the BJP some tense moments in the 2017 Assembly elections

Former Congress MLA Alpesh Thakor will contest from the Assembly seat of Radhanpur in the upcoming Gujarat by-polls, but he will be doing so on a Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) ticket this time. The OBC (Other Backward Classes) activist-turned-politician had previously won the Radhanpur seat in 2017 while part of the Indian National Congress. Thakor stated, “The decision on likely candidate from Radhanpur will be decided by the parliamentary board of the BJP. However, senior BJP leaders have indicated that I will contest. I am very much interested.”

Thakor’s breakthrough into mainstream politics came after years of campaigning for the rights of OBCs. As a champion of the OBC community, Thakor formed the Gujarat Kshatriya Thakor Sena in 2011 and has since led several movements to secure more rights for the disadvantaged castes in the state. However, he came to prominence in 2015, when he launched a movement to counter the escalating Patidar reservation agitation.

Patidar Agitation and OSS Ekta Manch

In July 2015, the Patidar community in Gujarat began holding a number of demonstrations across Gujarat, demanding they be classified as an OBC. OBCs in Gujarat benefit from a 27% reservation quota for government and education jobs, as per affirmative action policies implemented under INC’s Madhavsinh Solanki government in 1981. In 2015, 22-year old Hardik Patel emerged as a Patidar youth leader, and the Patidar Anamat Andolan Samiti (PAAS) was formed, which held protests all across the state. The protests, though, soon turned violent with several cases of vandalism and arson being reported, first in Ahmedabad, and later in other areas of Gujarat.

In response to the agitation, Thakor launched the OSS Ekta Manch movement and proposed that OBC quotas must be determined proportionately vis-s-vis the population of a community within the state. Resisting the Patidar’s demands, Thakor ultimately called for a 100% caste-based reservation system as the only solution to the agitation. However, Thakor and Patel chose to put aside their differences and unite in 2017, as they sought to defeat the BJP in the 2017 state elections. Although Thakor ran on an INC ticket, Hardik Patel (who had not turned 25 yet) opted not to join the Congress at the time. Despite polls showing the BJP ahead, Thakor went on to win the seat of Radhanpur. Along with Dalit leader Jignesh Mevani and Hardik Patel, Thakor formed a trio of young politicians representing different caste groups -- and gave the saffron party some tense moments in the 2017 Assembly elections. Hardik went on to formally join the Congress later.

Resigns From Congress

Thakor, however, quickly grew disillusioned with the hierarchy of the Congress, and quit the party as recently as April this year. He claimed that he had been treated unfairly, and that top guns of the party were averse to listening to junior members. It was reported that Thakor was insistent on contesting from the Patan seat, which the Congress was disinclined to authorise. He also came up against criticism for allegedly inciting violence against Hindi-speaking migrants in the state, following his rallies demanding justice for a rape survivor in October 2018. Rumours about Thakor swapping allegiances were confirmed in July 2019, when he announced that he would be joining the BJP.
