Opposition parties in Andhra gear up to protest against uranium mining in Kurnool

Opposition parties in Andhra gear up to protest against uranium mining in Kurnool

On Sunday, opposition parties held a round table meeting asking the state government to take steps to stop mining of uranium minerals in Kurnool district.

news Politics

Earlier this week, concerns were raised after a bore well drilling took place for collecting uranium samples by Atomic Minerals Directorate (AMD) for exploration and research. However, it was prevented by villagers at Yadavada in Allagadda mandal in Kurnool district of Andhra Pradesh on Saturday.

The villagers were led by Bhuma Akhila Priya, TDP leader and former state minister. According to reports, as many as 15 places in the district are witnessing drilling in search of uranium samples.

Kurnool district of Rayalaseema falls in the Nallamala forests, which is spread across the districts of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. Concerns have been raised following 'in-principle' approval for uranium survey and exploration by the Forest Advisory Committee (FAC) under Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEFCC) in Telangana's Amrbad Tiger Reserve in Nallamala forests. Following protests by people and civil society organisations in the region, a unanimous resolution has been passed in the state assembly against uranium mining in the state.

On Sunday, opposition parties held a round table meeting asking the state government to take steps to stop mining of uranium minerals in Kurnool district. The meeting was addressed by leaders like Bhuma Akhila Priya, CPI Secretary Ramakrishna and other leaders from the Jana Sena Party, Congress and Aam Aadmi Party.

Andhra CPI Secretary wrote a letter to the CM drawing his attention towards the issue. In the letter, Ramakrishna asked CM YS Jagan Mohan Reddy to take necessary action to stop the drilling procedure which is being carried out for uranium minerals.

Opposition parties have decided to launch a fight against uranium mining in the state. The leaders will be visiting Allagadda mandal in Kurnool on October 6 and Thummalapalle in Kadapa on October 7.

Speaking to TNM, Ramakrishna said, "We are opposing drilling for uranium minerals and demanding to stop uranium mining companies in the state."

He further added, "The Telangana state assembly has already passed a resolution against uranium mining. We demand that the YSRCP government pass a similar resolution in this regard."

The Uranium Corporation of India Ltd (UCIL) is operating a uranium mine in Tummalapalle of Pulivendula in Kadapa district. Over the last few years, local farmers and environmentalists have been alleging the contamination of soil, groundwater and destruction of water bodies due to discharge of slush and by-products of mining activity.
