Congress protests outside PMC bank with a begging bowl

Leader demands complete refund of depositors money

Members of the Mumbai Congress, led by vice-president Charan Singh Sapra, on Monday staged a bheek maango protest outside the Sion branch of the Punjab Maharashtra Cooperative (PMC) Bank, as it entered the seventh day of crisis.

Around 50 people — party members and account holders — sat outside the branch with bowls in their hands, and placards reading, ‘Why Do Depositors Have To Beg For Their Own Money?’

“Today, 16 lakh people are crying because of the PMC Bank crisis. Its customers need money for various purposes. Are they supposed to beg for their own money?” Mr. Sapra asked.

On Friday, Mumbai Congress president Eknath Gaikwad announced that they would also protest outside the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) office and go to court if they did not get a proper response from the RBI.

Mr. Sapra said the party is coordinating with the RBI office and will soon have a meeting with the Governor.

“It has been seven days since the RBI put these restrictions, but the government is doing nothing. The Finance Minister has also not tweeted anything about it and the Prime Minister, who has returned from the Howdy Modi event in Houston, has no concern about Howdy PMC. Members of the Bharatiya Janata Party and Shiv Sena were connected to this bank and now none of them are to be seen,” he said, adding that the PMC management and RBI were equallyat fault.

The leader, who himself has an account in the bank, said, “We demand for the complete refund of every account holder’s money or else we will continue the bheek maango andolan outside CM’s house as well as every MP and MLA’s house.”

Dharmendra Choudhary, a tempo driver who has an account with the bank, lamented the fact that he was facing problems accessing his own money. “Navratri has arrived and many other festivals will follow. The bank staff says that they can’t do anything. Who should we go to?” he said.

Another account holder, Deepak Maru, said, “I have had my account in this bank since it had only one employee. Today, I have three accounts here but can withdraw money only from one. I wasn’t allowed to withdraw money from my shop’s account. How am I supposed to run my business now?”
