Activists demand action against brick kiln owners

Activists campaigning against illegal red earth mining in Thadagam valley, who were allegedly threatened by brick kiln owners, demanded action against the owners on Monday.

S. Ganesh and T.M.S. Rajendran submitted petitions to Collector K. Rajamani during the grievances redress meeting. In his petition, Mr. Ganesh said over 60 men barged into his house in Chinna Thadagam on Sunday and allegedly demanded him to withdraw the Public Interest Litigation (PIL) filed in the Madras High Court seeking ban on illegal excavation.

Noting that the incident was recorded in CCTV cameras, Mr. Ganesh claimed in the petition that he and his family were not safe.

Mr. Rajendran, in his petition, stated that the men tried to kill his family in his house on Friday.

‘Include Tamil paper in TNPSC’

A group of lawyers affiliated to Thanthai Periyar Dravidar Kazhagam (TPDK) staged a demonstration outside the Collectorate urging the government to include Tamil paper in the preliminary exams of Group II and Group II A conducted by the Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission (TNPSC). TPDK general secretary K. Ramakrishnan submitted a petition in this connection to the Collector.

CB-CID investigation sought

A caste outfit demanded investigation by Crime Branch – CID (CB-CID) into the suicide of an employee in a beauty parlour at Sulur. N. Boopathi, president of the outfit, said that P. Shobana (25) hanged herself in the parlour on July 16 and days before her death, she alleged torture by her employers.

Accusing police of not taking action, the outfit members staged a demonstration outside the Collectorate. Mr. Boopathi submitted a petition seeking action against the parlour owners.

Tiruppur

A differently abled man alleged harassment by officials at the Collectorate here on Monday. In a petition submitted to Collector K. Vijayakarthikeyan, Mahadevan from Avarampalayam, who applied for a sewing machine under a government scheme, alleged that the officials from the Department of Welfare of Differently Abled Persons asked him to demonstrate the machine.
