Rajkot: Elderly woman’s murderer turns out to be serial killer

Rathod killed to release stress

Kept victim's ornament as trophy

RAJKOT: The killer who had strangled a 71-year-old woman, using a nylon rope and looted her jewellery in Hadida village of Savarkundla in Amreli on September 24 was arrested on Monday.Police said the accused, identified as Milan Rathod (34), turned out to be a psychic serial killer, who confessed to four more murders in the past.Rathod’s last victim was Ujiben Ghodadara. Rathod had first strangled Ghodadara, who was alone in the house at that time and then removed her gold earrings, chain and silver anklets on September 24.“Rathod was arrested on the basis of a CCTV footage of the crime in which he was seen riding a bike. We found that no man matching his description to be resident of the village. Hence, we focussed our investigation on him. When we rounded him up for interrogation, he broke down and confessed to the crime,” said Ashok Yadav, Bhavnagar range inspector general of police, while addressing a press conference.“During interrogation, Rathod confesssed of deriving sadistic pleasure from killing his victims. He said that with the intention of committing loot, he had killed Ghodadara and also the four other victims in the past,” said Yadav.On August 26, Rathod had strangled 60-year-old Pachi Kacharia and looted Rs 45,000 cash from her in Loyanga village of Mahuva taluka in Bhavnagar district . Six months ago, he had strangled 50-year-old Lilu Baraiya and robbed her of her jewellery in Degvada village of Mahuva taluka. Four years ago, he had strangled 50-year-old Govind Hadia in Sendarda village of Mahuva taluka. About 17 years ago, he had strangled his aunt Shantu Rathod and looted Rs 6,000 cash.Cops have seized a gold ring, Rs 58,000 cash, a bike and a cellphone from him. They have also arrested two jewellers, identified as Pranav Mehta (39) and Mihir Mehta (37), who used to purchase the looted jewellery from Rathod.“We have recovered silver and gold jewellery worth Rs 1,03,600 from the jewellers duo. Rathod has also confessed to having committed two thefts,” added Yadav.Serial killer Milan Rathod left his interrogators shocked when he described the motive of killings and the modus operandi. Rathod used to mostly target old women who couldn't offer any resistance. Though he stole the ornaments worn by the victims, Rathod's intention of killings was never robbery or loot. "He simply released his psychological stress by killing women. He first strangulated the victim and then smothered them. After the victim died, he used to sit near the body for a while and take away the ornaments," said a senior Amreli district officer. Rathod never broke into the cupboards in the victim's houses.While he used to sell off most ornaments removed from the victim's bodies, Milan Rathod always kept one of the jewellery with him as a 'trophy'; a trait often seen among serial killers. "He kept one of the ornament of his victims only to see it later so that he could derive satisfaction of the killing," said a senior officer. After killing the old women in Hadida, he had worn her ring and was on way to commit another murder before he was caught in Savarkundla.
