DMK protests Sanskrit ‘imposition’ in Tamil Nadu, Stalin urges Modi to recognise Tamil as an official language

The student wing of DMK protested against Anna University over their Sanskrit and Hindi imposition. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights PM Modi had on Monday said he had only recently learnt that Tamil is a very rich and diverse language Stalin has sought the Governor’s and state Higher Education Department’s intervention for a revision of the syllabus

Chennai: Barely a day after Prime Minister Narendra Modi praised the Tamil language, the student wing of the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) took out protests on the streets of Tamil Nadu on Tuesday over the ‘imposition’ of Sanskrit language in the educational curriculum. The protests came in the wake of Bhagavad Gita being introduced in the curriculum by the Anna University.

The student wing of the DMK protested against the Anna University over their Sanskrit and Hindi imposition though the varsity had made it clear that the Bhagavad Gita is an optional subject, not compulsory.

The DMK had last week accused the Centre over the “imposition” of Sanskrit on the state that speaks the Dravidian language following the introduction of Bhagavad Gita, along with other Hindu scriptures, by the varsity under the ‘mandatory’ section of ‘philosophy syllabus’.

PM Modi had on Monday said he had only recently learnt that Tamil is a very rich and diverse language. “When I visited the United States of America where I addressed the people there, I learned that Tamil is a rich and diverse language,” he said while delivering the speech at the 56th convocation of IIT-Madras.

The DMK also urged PM Modi to declare Tamil an official language. In a statement, DMK chief MK Stalin welcomed the Prime Minister’s remarks hailing the Tamil language and culture and said that a lot of central government schemes have been named in Hindi but later translated in Tamil for publication, adding that Tamil should also be the administrative language for the Madras High Court.

The protests on Tuesday were also over the state government’s proposal that there will be state board exams for class 5 and class 8 students.

Stalin has sought the Governor’s and state Higher Education Department’s intervention for a revision of the syllabus.
