Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019: Revolt in Shiv Sena's Navi Mumbai unit; 200 party workers resign

File picture: Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray | Photo Credit: IANS

Navi Mumbai: A day after confirming its alliance with the Bharatiya Janata Party for the upcoming Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019, the Navi Mumbai unit of Shiv Sena on Tuesday witnessed major revolt within the party due to the seat-sharing pact.

Two hundred Shiv Sena workers have resigned from the party to protest its decision to offer an election ticket from Navi Mumbai to former Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leader Ganesh Naik, who had defected to the BJP on September 11 along with his son Sandeep.

As per reports, Naik has been offered a ticket to contest the October 21 polls from Belapur and Airoli Vidhan Sabha constituencies in Navi Mumbai.

Shiv Sena’s Navi Mumbai city chief and district vice-president have also tendered their resignations in protest.

On Monday, senior state BJP minister Chandrakant Patil had announced that the BJP and Shiv Sena have finalised the seat-sharing pact for the Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019.

He had added that Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray will jointly declare the quantum of seat-sharing.

As per reports, no formula for seat-sharing between the BJP-Sena and allies has been finalised as yet.

Maharashtra's ruling combine comprises BJP, Shiv Sena, Republican Party of India-A, Shiv Sangram Party, Rashtriya Samaj Paksha, and Rayat Kranti Sanghatana.

The 288-member Maharashtra Assembly will go to the polls on October 21. The results will be declared on October 24.

Aaditya Thackeray to contest Maharashtra polls

In what could change its dynamics with the BJP, Shiv Sena has decided to nominate Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Uddhav Thackeray in the upcoming October 21 Assembly Elections.

Aaditya Thackeray will reportedly contest from the Worli constituency in south-central Mumbai.

"I am contesting the elections... I have taken a big plunge. For me, this is a big moment and historic development. Let anybody stand against me, it is their right. I am not scared as I am sure you will not let me down," Aaditya had said at the party's meeting in Mumbai last evening.

"This decision is not for me, but for the people and getting justice to the masses. This is the time for us to to create a 'New Maharashtra'. It is not for me to become the Chief Minister but to fight for the peoples' rights," Aaditya had further proclaimed.

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut had, meanwhile, set political circles abuzz by announcing that Aaditya Thackeray was like a 'Suryayan' which will alight on the sixth floor of Mantralaya (where the Maharashtra Chief Minister's office is located) after the polls.

"Due to a technical error, recently, the 'Chandrayan' couldn't land on the moon. But Aaditya is a 'Suryayan' which will land with precision," Raut had said.
