After facing backlash over 'outsider' remark, Arvind Kejriwal says 'never denied medical treatment to anyone'

Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Never denied medical treatment or education to anyone: Kejriwal Patients from other states come to Delhi to avail free medical treatment, said Delhi CM Delhi CM’s remarks show his hatred for the natives of other states: BJP

New Delhi: A day after drawing huge flak for “outsider” remarks, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, on Tuesday, issued a clarification over his statement.

The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) chief, on Monday, sparked a row after he said that a large number of patients from other states come to Delhi to avail free medical treatment.

However, the Delhi CM clarified his remarks and said that his government never denied medical treatment or education to anyone.

“We have never denied medical treatment or education to anyone. We're happy, if we can help needy people, give them treatment, and educate children, be it any citizen of country. We want educational and medical facilities like Delhi to be provided in the rest of the country as well,” Kejriwal was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

On Monday, Kejriwal, while addressing an event had said that people in Delhi had to stand in long queues inside hospitals to buy medicines and avail other healthcare facilities because of "people coming from outside to avail medical facilities here."

"The situation is such that a person from Bihar buys a ticket to Delhi for Rs 500 and returns after availing free treatment worth Rs 5 lakhs. It makes us happy as they are people of our own country, but Delhi has its own capacity,” the Delhi CM had said.

"How can Delhi serve people of the entire country? Hence there is a need to improve the healthcare services here," he added.

Kejriwal’s comment did not go down well with the BJP that said Delhi CM’s remarks show his hatred for the natives of other states.

"Arvind Kejriwal's hate for people belonging to Bihar, Purvanchal, Uttar Pradesh and other states is now clearly coming out. He may have political enmity with me but the hatred against people of Bihar and Purvanchal is not right. This clearly shows his frustration. He knows very well that he has lost the ground and the citizens of Delhi will give him a befitting reply very soon," Delhi BJP chief Manoj Tiwari said.

The Janata Dal (United) also slammed Kejriwal and said his remarks show that the Chief Minister is drunk on power, has sacrificed human values and forgot common people.

Earlier in the day, workers of BJP’s Delhi unit along with Rajya Sabha MP Vijay Goel took to the streets to protest against AAP chief’s comment. They gathered near the ITO carrying placards and raised slogans against the AAP and Kejriwal.
