Arvind Kejriwal lambasted by BJP, JDU for calling people from Bihar 'outsiders'

Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal was lambasted on Tuesday by the Delhi BJP unit and the Janta Dal United (JDU) in Bihar for his recent reactionary statement wherein he had said that people from Bihar, who he termed as 'from outside', buy a ticket to Delhi for Rs 500 and return after availing free treatment worth Rs 5 lakhs.

Delhi BJP workers on Tuesday staged a protest against Kejriwal for saying that "people from outside" were landing up in the national capital to avail the free medical benefits for those living in Delhi.

The protestors including BJP leaders Vijay Goel and Vijender Gupta gathered near the ITO carrying placards and raised slogans against the Kejriwal-government.

The BJP workers were to take out a protest march from Shaheedi Park to the Secretariat, but the police stopped the BJP workers near the ITO.

"Arvind Kejriwal has insulted Purvanchalis with his statement. We are protesting here against it. He is doing politics of hate and division. Delhi is the capital of the country and anyone can come here. Kejriwal has to apologise for his statement. We will fight against the wrong thing," Goel told ANI.

BJP leader Vijender Goel while speaking to news agencies also reiterated that Arvind Kejriwal should apologise to the people over his statement as it has hurt the sentiments of the people.

In a letter today, JDU Delhi unit chief Satya Prakash Mishra said, "Do residents of Bihar not have any right over the national capital of the country? People of Bihar and Poorvanchal have contributed to the development of Delhi. Kejriwal's comment has hurt the people of Bihar and it is an assault on their rights."

"If a person sitting on a constitutional post makes this kind of comment then action should be taken against such person. JDU will continue its protest until the government of Delhi stops its mentality of regional bias," he said.

In the context of the assembly elections in Delhi next year, Mishra said that the organization of JDU in Delhi is getting stronger and Kejriwal is viewing this as an indication of defeat in the assembly polls. "Kejriwal has not worked for the people of Delhi and has not fulfilled his promises, so he is doing politics of regionalism."

The people of Delhi will reject this politics of Kejriwal, he added.

Delhi Chief Minister Kejriwal while addressing an event recently had said, "The situation is such that a person from Bihar buys a ticket to Delhi for Rs 500 and returns after availing free treatment worth Rs 5 lakhs. It makes us happy as they are people of our own country, but Delhi has its own capacity."

(With ANI inputs)
