Concillor threatens protest

Ludhiana: Irked over the non-development works in Ward Number 57, BJP councillor Manju Aggarwal has threatened to sit on protest outside mayor Balkar Sandhu office in case the approved works for the ward did not start at the ground level within a week. She claimed that development work worth crores of rupees was approved for her ward and most of the work was related to the construction of roads, but the tendering process did not begin even till date.

Aggarwal rued that ever since she took oath as councillor from ward number 57, no development work has been done in her ward due to which the residents are facing problems. “People are troubled with the pathetic condition of roads and despite several requests the tenders are not being floated. I can’t face the general public in the ward.

She mentioned that the Mayor had earlier claimed that there will be impartial development of all the wards of the city but he failed to keep his promise. She said the development works were passed for construction of roads in Shivaji Nagar, Kashmir Nagar, Dharampura and Harcharan Nagar. She said there is one week time with Mayor otherwise she will sit on protest outside Mayor office for protest.

A resident of Kashmir Nagar Rakesh Kumar said the roads are in very bad condition and daily people stumble from the potholed roads. He said now when rainy season is over, the roads should be repaired as soon as possible. Kumar claimed that public safety should be considered on priority.

Meanwhile when contacted Mayor Balkar Sandhu said, “There is no pick and choose policy with regard to the development work concerning councilors as I have approved all the files that were sent to me in the past meetings but the problem is at tendering stage. I cannot force the contractors to file tenders for any ward or specific work. I have conveyed to all the concerned officials to pay attention towards the tender process so that development works could take place.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
