Haryana Assembly elections: Congress' Ashok Tanwar, supporters protest outside Sonia Gandhi's residence over 'corruption' in ticket distribution-Politics News , Firstpost

In a bid to end factionalism in the party ahead of Assembly polls in Haryana, the Congress last month named Kumari Selja chief of its state unit, replacing Ashok Tanwar, and appointed Bhupinder Hooda as chairperson of the election management committee

New Delhi: Infighting in the Haryana Congress reached the doorstep of interim party president Sonia Gandhi with former PCC chief Ashok Tanwar and his supporters protesting on Wednesday outside her 10, Janpath residence in New Delhi, alleging corruption in distribution of tickets for the upcoming Assembly polls.

As his supporters raised slogans against management committee chief Bhupinder Singh Hooda, Tanwar alleged that tickets were being distributed on whims and fancies and were being "sold", ignoring those who had worked for years.

In a bid to end factionalism in the party ahead of Assembly polls in Haryana, the Congress last month named Kumari Selja chief of its state unit, replacing Tanwar, and appointed Hooda as chairperson of the election management committee.

Hooda had openly come out against Tanwar, who is known to be close to Rahul Gandhi and had been state unit chief since 2014.

Tanwar's remarks came ahead of the release of the list of nominees by the party for the Assembly polls.

Hooda's supporters have claimed that the situation in the Congress worsened in Haryana due to Tanwar and he is blaming the former chief minister as he is upset at being removed from his post.

Congress president Sonia Gandhi had appointed Hooda the Congress Legislative Party (CLP) leader, and by virtue of that leader of Opposition in the state Assembly.

The last date for filing nomination for the 21 October Assembly polls is 4 October. The counting of votes is on 24 October .

Hooda was the chief minister of Haryana for 10 years before the Congress was ousted in 2014 by the BJP.
