Trouble mounts for Congress before polls, Haryana leader alleges corruption in ticket distribution

The infighting in Haryana Congress reached 10 Janpath on Wednesday as form Haryana Congress chief Ashok Tanwar and his supporters protested outside party president Sonia Gandhi's residence, alleging corruption in ticket distribution for the upcoming assembly polls.

As his supporters raised slogans against management committee chief Bhupender Hooda, Tanwar alleged that tickets were being distributed on whims and fancies and were being "sold", ignoring those who had worked for years.

"The ticket for Sohna assembly seat was sold for Rs 5 Crores. We will fix the situation. If ticket distribution has been unfair then how those who have been chosen will win?" Ashok Tanwar told India Today TV.

During his address to his supporters outside Sonia Gandhi's residence, Tanwar trained guns at former chief minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda who has been appointed as the election management committee head by the party recently.

Both leaders have been at loggerheads over the last five years which intensified after the party returned a blank in Haryana in the Lok Sabha polls. Hooda had been blaming Tanwar for the party’s poor show in the state and demanded his ouster as PCC chief.

Sources have told India Today TV that Ashok Tanwar had submitted a list of 85 candidates to the state election committee which was given no place in the screening committee meeting. Incensed at a raw deal to his supporters, Ashok Tanwar declared that certain elements within the party were hell-bent on his political murder but he was a human bomb. He praised Rahul Gandhi and said that "they have come to temple of justice (10 Janpath) but if demands were not met then his supporters were free to chalk out a future course of action".

While the ruling BJP has already cleared a large chunk of candidates for the polls, Congress is still struggling due to infighting among its leaders. Despite a three-and-a-half-hour-long Central Election Committee meeting at 10 Janpath on Tuesday, the list of candidates is yet to get a final nod from top leadership.

The last date for filing nomination for the October 21 assembly polls is October 4. The counting of votes is on October 24.
