Bihar CM Nitish Kumar blames climate change for state's 'present condition', says 'it led to heavy rainfall'

Bihar CM Nitish Kumar | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Union Minister Giriraj Singh targeted Bihar government for poor handling of floods This year in July there were flash floods in 12 to 13 districts due to which water level in river Ganga increased Floods provide an opportunity for administration to loot in the name of relief: Giriraj Singh

Patna: Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar blamed climate change for the state’s present condition. Speaking at an event in Patna he said that it led to drought and sudden heavy rainfall.

This year in July there were flash floods in 12 to 13 districts due to which water level in river Ganga increased and now the state is facing sudden heavy rainfall leading to the vast scale of flooding in many areas in Patna.

Meanwhile, Union Minister Giriraj Singh came down heavily on Bihar government for poor handling of floods due to heavy rains in the state. Singh gave this statement while speaking at a press conference in his parliamentary constituency, Begusarai.

He further blamed Nitish Kumar-led NDA government and its callous attitude for the worst waterlogging in Patna and floods in the state.

The minister said that floods provide an opportunity for the administration to loot in the name of relief adding that they get an excuse for boat scam.

"In Patna, people are suffering due to the fault of the state government and the administration. There is loot in the name of relief in floods affected areas", IANS quoted Singh as saying.

Singh, who is known for his straightforward comments, also questioned Begusarai district administration for the purchase of boats and asked where are 300 boats that were purchased and claimed that only 20 are fit to be deployed in the water.

Several parts of Bihar including capital city Patna were inundated after the heavy rainfalls in the last few days.

The situation in the state is so grim that it forced the Nitish Kumar-led government to defer the much-hyped launch of its ambitious "Jal Jeevan Haryali Abhiyan" on October 2.

Apart from this, all the programmes to mark the 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, including the cultural programme, were also cancelled.

Schools in the state have been closed till Tuesday while exams have been also been postponed. The government has also extended the date of official and private functions.

The state government deployed two helicopters for dropping food, water and other essentials to the people in the flood-ravaged state. Boats have also been deployed to help the stranded people and Patna Municipal Corporation (PMC) and Urban Development Department stationed high-tech machines to pump out water from the waterlogged localities.

However, as per the initial reports, the PMC is having trouble in pumping out water as many drains were choked and some permanently clogged due to accumulated silt.
