Shiv Sena Rally Live Updates: Maharashtra enters new political era as Aaditya Thackeray files nomination

Aaditya Thackeray, the first member of the Thackeray clan to contest elections, will be filing nomination papers for his electoral debut on Thursday morning. Aaditya Thackeray will be accompanied by his father and Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray and other members of the family while ally and Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis is also expected to join the Shiv Sena rally before he files the nomination papers.

Shiv Sena has put up huge hoardings of Aaditya Thackeray all over the constituency with greetings written on various languages apart from Marathi.

Here are live updates from the Shiv Sena rally for Aaditya Thackeray:

12:25 am: Speaking to media after filing nomination, Aaditya Thackeray said that he is excited about fighting the elections. Aaditya said he understands the weight of the responsibility on his shoulders as he will be the first member of the Thackeray to contest in an election.

12:18 am: Aaditya Thackeray has filed his nomination as he makes his way out of the collector's office. He will be contesting from the Worli constituency in the upcoming Maharashtra Assembly elections.

12:08 am: Uddhav Thackeray thanks all Shiv Sena workers and people who joined the mass rally to support Aaditya Thackeray. He said Thackeray family has a tradtion of public service and added that his son Aaditya Thackeray will take this legacy forward.

12:04 am: Mumbai BJP chief Mangal Prabhat Lodha has also come to the collector's office where Aadtiya Thackeray is filing his nomination. Lodha's presence makes it clear that BJP is supporting the move. Speaking to India Today TV earlier, Aaditya Thackeray said that Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis also congratulated him in the morning over the phone.

11:53 am: Aadtiya Thackeray is expected to file his nomination shortly. His father Uddhav Thackeray has also joined him at the collector's office, according to reports.

11.35 am: Aaditya Thackeray speaks to India Today TV, says, "With the blessings of the people Maharashtra will soon see a Shiv Sena chief minister. For now, I will fulfill all the responsibilities bestowed in me." He also said that he is thankful to people for supporting him and promised to work for their welfare.

11.30 am: Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray has reached the collector's office for son Aaditya Thackeray's nomination filing.

11 am: Aaditya Thackeray leads mega rally in heart of Mumbai. Shiv Sena workers shower flowers petals on the Thackeray scion as he goes to file his nomination papers.

Aaditya Thackeray offered prayers before a photograph of grandfather and Shiv Sena founder Balasaheb Thackeray before leaving to file his nomination papers for the big electoral debut.

10.35 am: Aaditya Thackeray on way to file his nomination papers for the upcoming Maharashtra assembly elections.

10.10 am: Shiv Sena supporters and party workers decked in saffron gather on the streets of Mumbai to accompany Aaditya Thackeray on his rally to file his nomination papers.

10 am: CM Devendra Fadnavis is likely to join Aaditya Thackeray's nomination rally on Thursday morning along with Uddhav Thackeray and other members of the Thackeray family.

Uddhav Thackeray, Rashmi and brother Tejas Thackeray will accompany Aaditya in the mega show of strength in Mumbai on Thursday. Aaditya will be contesting the October 21 Maharashtra assembly elections from Worli.

9.55 am: South Indian traditional band "Naad Swaram" being played at Aaditya Thackeray's nomination rally. Shiv Sena has also put up hoardings in various languages apart from Marathi across the Worli constituency.

Shiv Sena on Sunday said it has decided to field Aaditya Thackeray, the elder son of party chief Uddhav Thackeray, from the Worli assembly constituency in Mumbai.

Ever since the Shiv Sena was founded by late Bal Thackeray in 1966, no member of the family had contested any election or held any constitutional post.

Uddhav's cousin and Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chief Raj Thackeray had announced his intention to contest the 2014 state assembly elections. However, he had later changed his mind.

If Aaditya wins the election, he will be the first member of the family to represent the people.
