Women’s gang strikes again, robs 73-yr-old of gold ‘kara’

Ludhiana: Active in the city for the past several years, the women’s gang, which travels in a white-coloured car, struck again on Wednesday. They robbed an elderly woman, who is mother of a high court lawyer, of her gold ‘kara’ in broad daylight, a few meters away from Kitchlu Nagar police post on Wednesday morning.

The gang members dragged Veeran Malhotra, 73, of Rajpura road near Kitchlu Nagar, inside the car near the police post, drove her to some distance, took away the ‘kara’ and finally pushed her out of the vehicle, before escaping.

Veeran is wife of D K Malhotra, retired joint director, prosecution litigation, Punjab, and mother of Rajat Malhotra, advocate in Punjab and Haryana high court.

Rajat alleged at around 10am on Wednesday, his mother was standing outside their house when a white Maruti Suzuki Swift stopped nearby. While a man was on the driver’s seat while two women were sitting on the rear seat.

He said the woman called his mother, saying that their relative Ramesh Sharma has met with an accident at the next chowk and he is asking for her to come. Even as his mother said she did not know any man with that name, the women pulled her inside the car.

The gang then drove her towards Kithclu Nagar and in the way removed her kara weighing 15g. Thereafter, the accused pushed her out of the car merely 200 meters away from the police post Kitchlu Nagar and escaped.

Rajat said his mother got his knee injured, and she was in trauma following the incident. Veeran walked back to the house and narrated the incident to him following which he lodged a complaint with police.

ASI Sukhdeep Singh, in-charge, Kitchlu Nagar police post, said the police have registered a case against unidentified accused. The CCTV cameras installed at the entrance of house was not functioning. Another CCTV camera installed near the locality has captured a white car moving, however its number is not clear.

Box- Previous victims of the gang

July 24 | Women’s gang looted a gold chain of Kanchan Sharma, 45, of Chandigarh, near Kohara when she had come to the city to meet her relatives

June 7 | The gang targeted elderly Jaswant Kaur of Urban Estate, Focal Point, and took away her gold bangles after offering her lift in their car

May 26 | The gang again robbed a woman — Usha Kakkar, 38 of Tagore Nagar — of her ‘mangal sutra’ and a gold bangle on Humbran Road on the pretext of offering her lift

Feb 8 | The gang targeted Karamjeet Kaur, 70, and escaped with her gold bangle of 50g outsider her house in Phase-II of Urban Estate, Dugri

July 9, 2018 | The gang robbed 85-year-old Kamala Malhana of Saheed Udham Singh Nagar of her two gold bangles near Tagore Nagar on July 9

July 16, 2018 | 3 women and a man abducted a 65-year-old Veena Soni of Pakhowal road and robbed her of gold bangles near the house of an MLA in Ghumar Mandi

April 21, 2018 | The gang robbed Asha Rani of her four gold bangles on the pretext of enquiring about an address in Rishi Nagar



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
