Yogi govt gives Y+ security to defiant Congress Raebareli MLA Aditi Singh

The Yogi Adityanath-led BJP government in Uttar Pradesh has decided to provide 'Y-plus' security cover to defiant Congress MLA from Raebareli (Sadar) Aditi Singh. This comes a day after Aditi Singh took part in the special session of the Vidhan Sabha on Tuesday. She participated in the session despite the Congress party boycotting it.

The UP government had called a special 36-hour session to discuss sustainable development goals on the occassion of Mahatma Gandhi's 150th birth anniversary. The Samajwadi Party (SP), Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) and Congress decided to boycott this session, claiming the state government was just out to set a record

After attending the session, Aditi Singh had said she attended it because it was called to discuss sustainable development goals. "In my speech, I only spoke about development. When Article 370 was abrogated in Kashmir, I decided to fully support it. Whenever discussions on development take place, we should think beyond the party line. I will accept whatever decision is taken by the party on my move to attend the session but my priority will always be serve people in my constituency," Aditi Singh had told reporters on Tuesday.

Lucknow: Congress MLA from Rae Bareli, Aditi Singh, attended the special session of UP Assembly yesterday, where discussions over 17 sustainable development goals defined by the UN were taken up.Congress along with SP-BSP had decided to boycott the special session of UP assembly pic.twitter.com/scojVH5mPE ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) October 2, 2019

Aditi Singh's assembly constituency is part of Congress working president Sonia Gandhi's Lok Sabha seat.

Recently, Aditi Singh had requested security cover following an attack on her in Raebareli. She even met Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath to put forward her demand.

On Wednesday, security guards who were part of the 'Y plus' security arrangement were spotted outside her residence in Raebareli.

Earlier this year, the government removed Z plus security cover for former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister and president of Samajwadi Party Akhilesh Singh.

In Uttar Pradesh, at present 'black cat'commandoes of the National Security Guard (NSG) protest three VVIP's-Samajwadi Party founder and former CM Mulayam Singh Yadav, BSP supremo and former CM Mayawati and state Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath.

ALSO READ | Home Ministry to withdraw SP chief Akhilesh Yadav's VIP security cover

ALSO READ | Congress Raebareli MLA Aditi Singh defies party line, attends UP special session
