[VIDEO] Farmer in Telangana attempts to bury himself alive in protest

Video of the suicide attempt that is going viral | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Locals came to Reddy's rescue and thwarted his attempt to bury himself alive Farmers in Telangana have more than once accused revenue department of wrongdoing A probe has been initiated into Reddy's complaint

Hyderabad: Over the course of the past decade, the agrarian crisis in India has intensified. This has led to an unprecedented spike in the number of farmer suicides recorded across the country. However, farmer leaders have time and again reiterated that the problem lies primarily with the fact that concerned authorities fail to listen to the plight of farmers and their family members.

In a recent case which is surfacing from the state of Telangana, a farmer decided to bury himself alive as part of a demonstration against local authorities. Fortunately, locals came to the rescue of the farmer and subdued his plans before it was too late. When asked, the man said that he decided to take the extreme step out of frustration after revenue officials refused to issue him a 'pattadar passbook'.

A farmer tried to bury himself, in protest against revenue officials who refused to give him his patta documents in #Telangana's #Mehbubabad district. He says revenue officials are saying that the local MLA has asked them not to distribute it. pic.twitter.com/UdQWS7t3m1 — Paul Oommen (@Paul_Oommen) September 30, 2019

Identified as Meka Sudhakar Reddy, a resident of Mahbubabad district of Telangana, the distraught farmer said that he requires the passbook to establish proof of ownership of about 15 acres of land jointly owned by him and his brothers in Ramannagudem Mandal. Reddy further explained that his act of burying himself alive was the last resort after his repeated pleas to the revenue department went unanswered.

Here's what he has to say pic.twitter.com/rAtIS7mimy — Paul Oommen (@Paul_Oommen) September 30, 2019

In fact, Reddy also claimed that the revenue officials refused to issue him the passbook because they were instructed to do so by a local politician. The allegations are yet to be confirmed pending an official response from the revenue department of the concerned area. While Reddy's demonstration has caught the public eye and is going viral on social media platforms, thousands of other farmers are waiting for their voices to be heard.

Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao has on multiple occasions met farmers and farm leaders, assuring them that justice will be done and any government official found at fault will be punished. Rao had also proposed a new revenue law aimed at reinvigorating the operations of the state's revenue administration. Recent inputs suggest that a probe has been ordered into Reddy's complaint and further details are awaited.

In September of this year, farmers in Telangana launched massive protests over the shortfall of fertilisers crucial for the growth of crops. The protests were prompted by an acute shortage of urea, among other fertilisers, in the state. Visuals of farmers standing in long queues to collect urea were being widely circulated on social media. Tensions cooled only after the state government stepped in to balance the supply of the fertiliser.
