Nun yet to get response to appeal

Sr. Lucy received dismissal order from Clarists in August

Sister Lucy Kalappura of the Catholic religious order Fransiscan Clarist Congregation, who was dismissed from the congregation in May this year, said she was still awaiting a verdict on her appeal against her dismissal. Though the congregation passed the decree in May, Sr. Lucy received the dismissal order in August. She made an appeal for reconsideration of the congregation’s decision through the apostolic nuncio in India.

Sr. Lucy told The Hindu on Thursday that everyone in the Clarist convent at Mananthavady in Wayanad district knew of her dismissal except herself until the letter reached her in August. “It was obvious from their behaviour towards me that I had been dismissed,” she said, recalling how she was ostracised by her fellow nuns and superiors despite living in the same building complex.

She said that she continued to be persecuted at the convent where she continued to stay while working as a mathematics teacher at the nearby Sacred Heart Higher Secondary School.

She said that though her colleagues were afraid to come out in the open in support of her cause, many of them silently backed her. The students were always forthcoming with their support and goodwill, she added.

Franco Mulakkal case

Sr. Lucy emerged in the media in September last year with her Facebook post in support of a group of nuns, who held a public protest in Kochi demanding the arrest of Bishop Franco Mulakkal of Jalandhar on charges of rape of a Catholic nun. “Since the Facebook post I have been targeted by the congregation,” said Sr. Lucy.

Nuns’ protest

The nuns’ protest in Kochi, which lasted over a fortnight, was unprecedented in the history of the Catholic Church. The bishop was later arrested and released on bail. His trial is expected to begin soon.

Meanwhile, the Clarists accused Sr. Lucy of living a life against the style and spirit of the congregation. She was dismissed for not taking “canonical warnings” seriously.

Her dismissal order had said that she did not show sufficient “remorse” and “failed to give satisfactory explanation.”
