Watch: Clash Breaks Out At JNU As MoS Jitendra Singh Speaks On Article 370

Soon after the AISA students hurdled outside the Convention Centre of the university, several student supporters of ABVP reached there and began counter protest, leading to heckling and manhandling by rival groups. ABVP is a right-wing all India student organisation affiliated to the Hindu nationalist Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). Watch the video here: #WATCH: Scuffle broke out between two groups of students during a seminar on #Article370 at Jawaharlal Nehru University campus in Delhi, today. Union Minister Jitendra Singh was speaking at the seminar. pic.twitter.com/KOLU18Cyo7 — ANI (@ANI) October 3, 2019 The Union minister was invited to the varsity for a talk to deliver a lecture on ‘Abrogation of Article 370: Peace, Stability and Development in Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh. In a similar incident, BJP MP from West Bengal Babul Supriyo faced a protest at Jadavpur University in Kolkata by Left students during which he was heckled by some students. Supriyo was held up in the campus with protesting students blocking the way to his car. BJP leader alleged that he was manhandled by the students. "I did not come here to do politics. But I am saddened by the behaviour of some of the students of the university, the way they have heckled me. They pulled me by my hair and pushed me," Supriyop had claimed.

A scuffle broke out between the members of two students' union groups - All India Students Association (AISA) and Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) - at the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) in New Delhi on Thursday evening during a seminar organised on Article 370. According to reports, an event was organised at the JNU campus where Union Minister Jitendra Singh was invited to deliver a lecture on 'Abrogation of Article 370: Peace, Stability and Development in Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh'. It is being said that some university students resorted to sloganeering during a talk by Union Minister, which was countered by ABVP activists. A section of students raised pro-Kashmir slogans, while ABVP activists countered with “Kashmir se Kanyakumari, Bharat Mata ek Hamari”. According to news agency PTI, students associated with AISA, a left-wing student organisation started protesting against Singh's presence in the University and also raised Slogans against the Central government for its August 5 decision to scrap special status of Jammu and Kashmir granted under Article 370.
