EXPLAINED: The protests in Wayanad against closing Kerala-Karnataka highway running through Bandipur Reserve

Youths take part in protests against the NH 766 highway ban in Wayanad | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The apex court is looking to permanently shut down the highway The ban was implemented to the dismay of several transport operators in both Kerala and Karnataka The SC ordered the Karnataka government to upgrade an alternative route, crucially citing that it was not a Critical Tiger Habitat, and would not disturb wildlife

For over a week now, Wayanad has been the site of intense protests from groups objecting to the recent Supreme Court directive to the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change to identify alternative routes to the NH 766 highway that runs through Karnataka’s Bandipur Tiger Reserve. The apex court is looking to permanently shut down the highway amidst reports from the reserve that night traffic on the highway was having significant and adverse impacts on wildlife numbers.

Origin of the ban

Approximately a decade ago, the administration of Chamarajanagar district put a ban into effect along the 19-km stretch of the NH 766 highway that runs through the Bandipur Tiger Reserve. Citing disruptions to animal life-cycles among other factors, the administration banned traffic between the hours of 9 pm and 6 am. Any vehicles found on the stretch were immediately stopped and only allowed to resume their journeys after sunrise.

The ban was implemented to the dismay of several transport operators in both Kerala and Karnataka. The road, designated as a national highway over three decades ago, is an important transport link between Kerala and the rest of the country. With Wayand thriving as a premier tourist destination, and the convenience the route provides to commuters and goods carriers, a petition to remove the ban was filed with Chamarajanagar Deputy Commissioner. In response to this, a group of conservationists approached the Karnataka High Court, eventually managing to re-instate the ban via an interim order.





Ban Upheld

The high court opted to uphold the ban reasoning that an alternative route to NH 766 did exist. Despite being 35km longer, the high court concluded that protecting wildlife was more important than inconveniencing the commuters or transport operators. However, the Kerala government then opted to file a special leave petition with the SC, and despite several discussions, no resolution was found.

The deadlock was broken last week when the SC ordered the Karnataka government to upgrade the alternative route, crucially citing that it was not a Critical Tiger Habitat, and would not disturb wildlife.

Meanwhile, Wayanad Lok Sabha MP and former Congress president Rahul Gandhi jumped into the debate when he announced his support for members of the Democratic Youth Federation of India, Youth Congress and Youth League who had begun fasting in protest of the SC directive. Police reported on Saturday that four members of the youth parties have been hospitalised. Gandhi’s support for the protest though has been slammed by conservationists as well as BJP MP Shobha Karandlaje, who accused the Congress leader of trying to politicise the issue and "gain some political mileage".
