Politics Live | Maharashtra polls: BJP to contest in 148 seats; Shiv Sena 126, other allies 14

Maharashtra

BJP to contest 148 seats in the upcoming Assembly polls, says Fadnavis

Addressing a joint press conference with Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray, Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis announced the seat-sharing arrangement for the upcoming Maharashtra Assembly polls. The Shiv Sena will contest 126 seats, followed by 14 seats for allies. The BJP will contest the remaining 148 seats, he said.

He also said that despite differences, BJP and Shiv Sena share a common thread of Hindutva.

Aaditya Thackeray will win the Assembly polls securing highest votes, the CM added.

Kerala

Country is moving towards authoritarian state, says Rahul Gandhi

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi said that the country is moving towards an authoritarian state. Answering to a query of media persons in Kalpetta on Friday regarding an FIR against 49 eminent personalities for writing a letter to the Prime Minister on their concern over the growing incidents of mob lynching, Mr. Gandhi said that the country was moving towards an authoritarian state and that was pretty clear.

“Everybody knows what is going on in the country and it is not a secret,” said Mr. Gandhi adding that anybody who was saying anything against the government was put in jail and attacked.

Haryana

Congress' 7th list out on last day

The Jannayak Janta Party on Friday announced the names of five candidates for the upcoming Haryana assembly polls. According to the seventh list declared on the last day of filing nomination papers, the JJP has fielded former Congress legislator Anita Yadav’s son Samrat from Ateli segment.

The Assembly elections in Haryana will take place on October 21 and the results will be declared on October 24.

The last day for filing nominations is October 4.

The party also announced candidates for the Nalwa, Bhiwani, Tosham and Ferozepur Jhirka segments.

A party spokesperson said JJP, which is contesting the Assembly polls independently, has now announced candidates for all the 90 segments.

The JJP had announced the names of 15 candidates in the first list on September 13.

Maharashtra

Will take up issue with BJP leadership: Tawde

Putting up a brave face after BJP denied a ticket to contest in Maharashtra Assembly elections, former cabinet minister Vinod Tawde said he would take up the issue with the leadership after the polls.

"This is not the right time to analyse why I have not been given a ticket or if I fell short on performance. I will meet party leadership post elections and seek answers to these questions, Mr. Tawde said on Friday.

"I have no charges of corruption against me and will continue to work for the party. My values are based in the RSS ideology and keeping that in mind I will continue the social work I have been doing past many years," he added.

Maharashtra

Khadse’s daughter in BJP's 4th list

The Bharatiya Janata PartyP on Friday released its fourth list of seven candidates for the October 21 Maharashtra Assembly polls, dropping senior leader Eknath Khadse and cabinet minister Vinod Tawde.

It fielded Eknath Khadse’s daughter Rohini from his Muktainagar constituency in north Maharashtra. The decision to field Rohini Khadse indicates the BJP succeeded in placating her father, who had been representing Muktainagar since 1991.

One of the senior-most BJP leaders in Maharashtra, Eknath Khadse had been sidelined in the party following allegations of corruption and that he misused his office in a land deal.

He had to resign as Revenue Minister in 2016 and has not been taken back into the Cabinet by Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis.

Party sources said it was made clear to him that he would not be given ticket this time.

Khadse, 67, had filed his nomination papers from the seat this week as an Independent candidate.

Cabinet Minister dropped

The party also dropped Cabinet Minister Tawde and fielded Sunil Rane from Borivali seat.

BJP and Shiv Sena are the main constituents of the ruling alliance in Maharashtra.

The last date of filing nomination papers for the polls to the 288-member assembly is October 4, while the date for their scrutiny is October 5.

Nominations can be withdrawn till October 7.

Manipur

Crisis blows over for Manipur CM Biren Singh

The crisis over Manipur Chief Minister N. Biren Singh seems to have passed with the BJP high command in New Delhi having taken a decision that there will not be a change of leadership in the State’s government.

According to top sources in the BJP, Mr. Singh along with other MLAs met with BJP president Amit Shah, working president J.P.Nadda and general secretary organisation B.L.Santhosh late on Wednesday evening and had a patient hearing from all the three.

He had been facing dissidence from within his own government and also protests over the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), which home minister Amit Shah had declared would be coming soon, before undertaking a National Registration of Citizens (NRC) exercise in several parts of the country.

Another blow to Maharashtra Congress

In yet another blow to the Congress before elections, former MP and ex-Mumbai president Sanjay Nirupam on Thursday announced his decision to not participate in the party’s election campaign for the assembly polls to be held on October 21.

“It seems Congress party doesn’t want my services anymore. I had recommended just one name in Mumbai for Assembly election. Heard that even that has been rejected. As I had told the leadership earlier, in that case I will not participate in poll campaign. Its my final decision,” Mr. Nirupam tweeted on Thursday evening.

When asked him whether he will quit the party, Mr. Nirupam said, “I hope that the day has not yet come to say good bye to party. But the way leadership is behaving with me, it doesn’t seem far away.”

(With inputs from agencies)
