Rahul Gandhi joins Wayanad's protests against highway traffic ban

I am in Wayanad, Kerala to stand in solidarity with the youth who have been on hunger strike, protesting against th… https://t.co/ZjsI1ggpzk — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) 1570163659000

(With inputs from agencies)

NEW DELHI: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Friday reached his constituency, Wayanad , to join a group of protesters staging hunger strike against the night travel ban on National Highway 766."I am in Wayanad, Kerala to stand in solidarity with the youth who have been on hunger strike, protesting against the travel ban on National Highway 766. Earlier I visited those who have had to be hospitalised, as a result of the prolonged fast," the Congress leader tweeted.The movement of traffic through the Tiger Reserve is banned on this stretch from 9 pm to 6 am to reduce disturbance to wildlife.Rahul visited five youths sitting on a relay hunger strike for 10 days against the restriction on movement of vehicles on a national highway that passes through a tiger reserve in neighbouring Karnataka.Expressing solidarity with the youths, Gandhi spoke to them and said he hoped the issue would be resolved soon. He promised to make available legal help to the youths.Gandhi, who reached the site of the protest at Wayanad's Freedom park, said the youngsters represent the cause of Wayanad, his Lok Sabha constituency, and thanked them for their "sacrifice"."They represent the suffering of the people here. All political parties are united as far as the night travel ban issue is concerned. There is no political difference on this," he was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.Gandhi had recently met chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan in New Delhi and apprised him of the hardships faced by people of Wayanad due to the night traffic ban.On Tuesday, the Centre assured Kerala CM Vijayan that a committee would be formed to study the ban. Thousands of farmers and students have taken out long marches against the ban.The Kerala government has suggested construction of an elevated stretch through the core area of the tiger reserve.However, Union Environment Minister Prakash Javadekar in a letter to Vijayan last month stated that the state's recommendation had been discussed and it was suggested that a 'status quo' be maintained.Several ministers in Karnataka government questioned Congress leader Rahul Gandhi's stand against the night traffic ban on a national highway passing through Bandipur Tiger Reserve, Karnataka Tourism Minister CT Ravi on Thursday alleged the interests of various mafias was more important for the party than the safety and lives of wild animals.The wildlife reserve lies on the border between Kerala and Karnataka."Congress MP Rahul Gandhi wants the National Highway passing through Bandipur Forest to be opened for vehicular traffic even during the night. It is clear that the interests of various Mafias are more important for INC India than the safety and lives of Wild Animals," Ravi tweeted.Later speaking to reporters here, he said, Gandhi was "playing politics" on the issue and referred to a court order in this regard. It was the responsibility of the state government to protect wildlife.Chief minister BS Yediyurappa too on Wednesday had said there is a court order not to allow vehicles in the night. I cannot violate the court order. Rahul Gandhi should know about it.
