Citizenship bill protests rock Northeast

GUWAHATI/IMPHAL: The northeast, on Thursday, was hit by a series of protests against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) which aims to provide citizenship to all non-Muslim refugees staying in India on or before December 31, 2014. From Kohima to Imphal, people from various sections of the society flocked the streets days ahead of Union home minister Amit Shah's visit to Aizawl.In Kohima, the Nagaland Joint Committee on Prevention of Illegal Immigrants (JCPI) held a protest march starting from Badminton Stadium to the residence of chief minister Neiphu Rio. Later, they submitted a memorandum to the chief minister opposing the bill in its present form. "Presently, there are around three to four lakh illegal occupants in Dimapur. With Assam publishing the final National Register of Citizens (NRC) on August 31, the number is going to rise further. Once there is CAB, these occupants will become citizens and Nagaland will never be same," a statement said. Manipur too was rocked by a series of protests, organised by the Manipur People Against Citizenship Amendment Bill (MANPAC) on Thursday, against the controversial CAB. The protests kicked off with a march from the Khwairamband women's market with people holding placards reading "No CAB in Northeast" and "Withdraw CAB Unconditionally". Various civil bodies, local clubs and college and school students participated in the protest. Ningthouja Lancha, NEFIF convenor, said "We will reach out to the United Nations if the Centre passes the bill ignoring the people of the northeast." He added that the chief minister, who has been elected by the people, should protect the interests of the citizens of Manipur.Members of the All Manipur Matam Ishei Kanglup (AMMIK), an apex body of modern Manipuri song and music, also joined the protests. AMMIK leaders said they have come out against the bill as they wish to protect the indigenous people of Manipur. Yumnamcha Dilipkumar, convenor of MANPAC which is a key unit of NEFIP, said they will continue to protest as they do not wish the northeast to become a second Kashmir. Apprehensions among such groups grew after Union home minister Amit Shah, at the North East Democratic Alliance (NEDA) meeting in Guwahati, said that the government is committed to pass the bill during the winter session of the parliament.In Itanagar, too, a protest against the bill was led by Northeast Forum for Indigenous People. The forum said it is high time that people of the region became aware of the harms of the controversial bill.Amit Shah will be visiting Mizoram on October 5 to address the party workers of the region. Shah had recently visited Guwahati where he assured that the citizenship bill will be introduced in the winter session of the parliament. The Bill is aimed at making minority communities such as Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan eligible to apply for Indian citizenship. The BJP, in its 2019 Lok Sabha election manifesto, had said, "We are committed to the enactment of the Citizenship Amendment Bill for the protection of individuals of religious minority communities from neighbouring countries escaping persecution.
