Modi should answer why he destroyed economy: Rahul Gandhi

Congress leader and Wayanad MP Rahul Gandhi said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi should respond to the condition of the economy. He said that the PM should answer why "he has destroyed the economy." Rahul's attack came while he was speaking to the media in Wayanad.

"India's biggest strength was its economy. That economy has been destroyed by Narendra Modi and BJP. There is joblessness in the country. GDP growth is not visible anymore. The government of India can give 1.25 lakh crores tax benefit to 15 people but people of Kerala had to beg for MNREG and have to beg for money for the roads. BJP should answer clearly. Is this the country for 15, 20 people?" he asked.

He further went on to say that, Modi should answer why he destroyed the Indian economy. "Why he has created massive levels of joblessness in the country. The youngsters cannot dream about getting a job in this country. That's what Modi should be discussing," he said.

Responding to the questions about FIR registered against eminent writers, Rahul Gandhi said that the country is moving to an authoritarian state.

Speaking in Kalpetta, Gandhi said, "Everyone knows what is happening in the country. In fact, the world knows what's happening. Anybody who says anything against the PM, anybody who questions the government is put in jail. Media is crushed, everybody knows what's going on. It's not a secret," he said.

Rahul Gandhi was in Wayanad for a one day visit. In the morning he attended the ongoing agitation in Sulthan Bathery. Local residents and farmers in the region have been protesting against the plans to shut the forest stretch in NH766 completely. The people fear that the restriction would deprive them of the easiest access to Karnataka.

Following that, he attended a meeting of district administration in Wayanad to assess the status of central government projects in his constituency.

Also Read | RBI policy review: Will central bank opt for another rate cut today?

Also Watch | Will economic slowdown have any impact on brand Modi?




