Election time : Perfect time for internal democracy to resurrect itself in politics

Lakshmi Iyer is a journalist worked with Mumbai Mirror, who has been covering politics for three decades in Delhi & Mumbai.

Election time is perfect season for internal democracy to resurrect itself in every political party. Supporters of a disappointed ticket aspirant /leader can unleash wrath, smash window panes of cars defying party diktat as it happened in Mumbai BJP on Friday. Or take to street protest to allege party tickets are being sold for a huge kickback as was done by outgoing state president of Harayana Congress.

The only difference between apparent discontent simmering in the two national parties is that while the so-called disappointed BJP leaders made no reference to Big Two leaders in the party, the Congress rebels who came out of the closet no longer fear their Big Two—the Gandhis. Both Congress president Sonia Gandhi and her son Rahul have became reference point for the challengers

Infact , former Mumbai Congress Regional Committee President Sanjay Nirupam even suggested that an ideological battleof sorts was currently raging between those in the Congress backing mother Sonia and son Rahul. To substantiate this , he pointed to how young turks like Ashok Tanwar and him were being targeted by Sonia’s new coterie as they had all been handpicked by Rahul Gandhi.

Normal Politics in Election Time

Interestingly both Tanwar and Nirupam had issues only about ticket distribution. Party sources feel in all possibility their public protests must be more to ease pressure on themselves from ticket-seekers demanding their pound of lesh, nothing to do with party issues .

“ It is quite possible both these men may have made some past commitments/ promises for tickets . And are under duress. To ease pressure on themselves , they are speaking against the Gandhis—Soniaji, particularly. Or else, what do they gain by kicking and crying foul now, “ points out a old timer

Nirupam’s gripe with party leadership is that the Congress high command had ignored his wish for a single seat and even charged that leadership wanted him out.

“ He is already out . After all Sanjay Nirupam has already been replaced . Eknath Gaikwad is the new president of the MRCC appointed in August . It is quiet likely that the party leadership must have given tickets to candidates as sought by new party chief . But then that is not good reason for Nirupam to go public, “ pointed out a Congress source.

With media blindly lapping up all that rebel Congress leaders are uttering , party leaders admit that they find it bizarre to counter charges made by rebels. ” During election time , leaders do make charge to pacify their supporters. That is normal politics Why are they being played up so seriously, ” asks a Congress functionary

Hooda-AP video to fix Tanwar

Of course , Nirupam is not the only one to receive coveted media blitz. Loud street protest by former Haryana PCC president Ashok Tanwar on October 2 outside AICC headquarters similarly received media attention. Tanwar had charged his successor in the Haryana Pradesh Congress Committee– Bhupinder Hooda of selling tickets for Haryana assembly elections – he even named a particularly seat.

Party sources preferred to describe Tanwar’s street drama as being more aimed at putting pressure on the party’s Central Election Committee that was considering Haryana list on October 2, to take a favourable view of his recommendations also. Whether the street protests worked or not— , it certainly got him into more trouble.

Matters got a so complicated for Tanwar as Hooda had his own way of getting back at his rival .A video clip of a purported conversation between Haryana PCC chief Bhupinder Hooda and senior Congress leader Ahmed Patel deliberately got leaked and it went viral. In the video Hooda is seen giving a dismal picture of the Congress in the state and Patel is heard asking “ Party gayi kahan” (Where has the Congress gone).

Sources say the video was leaked by the Hooda camp to indict Tanwar , who has been asserting that he has been working hard in the past 5 years and the former CM was given charge of the state in the nick of elections to take credit just at a time when it is poised for a “ bounce back”.

“ Soniaji was about to rehabilitate Tanwar in the AICC after she paved way for Hooda’s return as Haryana PCC chief . But Tanwar’s street protest spoiled it all. There was a proposal to take even disciplinary action against him after what he did outside AICC , “ said a senior leader

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
