People who used to conspire against Rahul Gandhi are running party today: Mumbai Cong leader Sanjay Nirupam

Rahul Gandhi with Sanjay Nirupam | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights He also said the party was no longer taking feedback from the grassroot level Without naming anyone Sanjay Nirupam claimed that Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi was being misled by few people He also expressed his disappointment over ticket distribution saying his views were not considered

Mumbai: Alleging a conspiracy against former president Rahul Gandhi, Congress leader Sanjay Nirupam said that those who occupied high offices in the All India Congress Committee (AICC) and used to conspire against Rahul are running the party today. Without naming anyone he further claimed that they were misleading the Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi.

Addressing a press conference, Nirupam gave examples of Haryana and Maharashtra, which are going to polls on October 21, saying that in Haryana, Ashok Tanwar, a Rahul loyalist, was removed from the post of state party president while old guard Kumari Shailja was brought back as party president.

Attacking the Congress high command, he said there was a "systematic fault" in the grand old party adding that the process of getting parallel feedback from the grassroot (workers) has been scrapped.

He further claimed that the way in which candidates have been selected in Mumbai, the grand old party is only going to win from three to four seats while on the remaining seats it will lose its deposit.

Nirupam’s press conference comes a day after he went public with his views against the Congress in a series of tweets.

He also said the party was no longer taking feedback from the grassroot level saying he was not given any role in the Assembly poll process.

“My views have not been considered during (Assembly) ticket distribution in my own Lok Sabha constituency,” he had said.

Earlier, the Mumbai Congress leader announced that he would not campaign for the party in the Assembly polls set to be held on October 21 as the party leadership was sidelining him despite him serving as Mumbai Congress president for four consecutive years.

A miffed Nirupam also expressed his disappointment over ticket distribution saying his views were not considered.

Nirupam had suggested one name as the party's candidate for the Versova Assembly constituency, which falls under Mumbai North-West LS seat.

Meanwhile, launching a scathing attack on Nirupam Congress asked him to stop fuelling conspiracy theories. Addressing a press conference, Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari advised Nirupam and former Haryana Congress president Ashok Tanwar to stop making statements against the party ahead of the assembly elections in the state and urged them to act responsibly.

Tanwar had earlier protested outside the residence of Congress president Sonia Gandhi over alleged corruption over ticket distribution. He later resigned from the election committees of the party saying he would continue to work as an ordinary party worker.
