A House divided: What’s behind the Congress rebellion in two poll-bound states?

Sanjay Nirupam and Ashok Tanwar have spoken out against the Congress party leadership's distribution of tickets | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights With Assembly elections in Maharashtra and Haryana just three weeks away, Congress is facing the prospect of rebellion within its ranks In Haryana, Ashok Tanwar resigned from all election-related duties in protest of what he has described as a political bias towards former Haryana Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda In Maharashtra, Sanjay Nirupam unleashed a tirade against the Congress, accusing the leadership of not standing by him

With Assembly elections in Maharashtra and Haryana less than three weeks away, the Congress is facing the prospect of rebellion within its ranks, leaving party president Sonia Gandhi with decisions to make regarding two of INC’s long-serving members. The party may have been hoping for a better showing this time around, having been voted out in both states in 2014, and comprehensively defeated during the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. Former Haryana Congress president Ashok Tanwar and former Mumbai party chief Sanjay Nirupam have both made explosive statements over the last few days, alleging mismanagement and corruption in ticket distribution.

Accusations of corruption

Tanwar, on Thursday, opted to resign from all election-related duties in protest of what he has described as a political bias towards former Haryana Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda, in the distribution of tickets. His resignation follows a protest staged outside the home of interim Congress President Sonia Gandhi, and the release of a three-page letter in which he expressed “immense pain” at the way in which ticket distribution had taken place. He also alleged that some Congress leaders were looking to ‘sabotage’ the party, questioning the motives of Haryana party-in-charge Ghulam Nabi Azad in privileging Hooda’s candidate suggestions.

In offering to provide proof of corruption leading to the sale of tickets within the Congress party, Tanwar might face the risk of being ousted from the party altogether. While he has not openly threatened to declare an all-out war just yet and stated openness to campaign on behalf of the INC’s official candidates, his days in the party could well be numbered.





Plagued by factionalism

Nirupam, who was removed from his position as the Mumbai Congress chief prior to the Lok Sabha elections, has also unleashed a tirade against the party, accusing the leadership of not standing by him. He also expressed his unhappiness at the party’s decision to overlook his recommendations in the distribution of tickets. In a series of tweets, Nirupam lay blame at the feet of his assumed rivals within the party, and announced his decision to stay away from any campaigning activity.

The latest statements from Nirupam follow an earlier controversy ahead of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, when a number of party members issued complaints to its leadership about Nirupam, seeking his removal. In response to the complaints, Nirupam was replaced with Milind Deora. Despite the change, the party was still defeated across all five out of the six seats it contested, leading to the swift resignation of Deora.

The latest controversy surrounding Tanwar and Nirupam illustrates Congress's problem of factionalism. The party has a long way to go before putting its house in order.



The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
