Amit Shah to visit Mizoram tomorrow with amid protests against CAB

Guwahati, Oct 4 (IBNS): Amidst visit of Union Home Minister and BJP national president Amit Shah to Mizoram on Saturday, several organizations of the North-Eastern state are planning to hold street protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

The activists of the People’s Representation for Identity and Status of Mizoram (PRISM) party and Mizoram People’s Conference (MPC) party will conduct street demonstrations in Aizawl to protest the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

PRISM Party president Vanlalruata said that the BJP had promised exemption of Mizoram and other North-Eastern states from the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill purview and we demand that, BJP should recall their promises.

“The people of the region don’t want Citizenship (Amendment) Bill and already massive protests were held across the region,” Vanlalruata said.

Shah will inaugurate an exhibition of northeast handloom and handicraft products in Aizawl on Saturday.

He will also meet state BJP leaders.

Recently, Amit Shah said during a public meeting held in Kolkata that, the centre will bring the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill to grant Indian Citizenship to the Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan.

The Union Home Minister also said in the fourth conclave of BJP-led North East Democratic Alliance (NEDA) held in Guwahati that, the centre will not touch the Article 371 of the constitution which gives special status to the North-Eastern states or allow any legislation that overlaps the tribal laws, local acts and inner line permit in the North-Eastern states.

“I would like to state that, the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill will not interfere with tribal laws, indigenous people’s rights that protect the identity and culture of the region. We have already fixed December 31, 2014 and will not grant citizenship to those enter after the cut-off date,” Amit Shah said in the fourth conclave of NEDA.

On the other hand, a conglomerate of civil society groups and student bodies of Mizoram said that its leaders will meet the Union Home minister Amit Shah in Aizawl tomorrow.

The organizations have changed their earlier decision to hold a protest rally on the issue.

A leader of the NGO Coordination Committee said that they will submit a memorandum and discuss with the Union Home minister over the centre’s move to bring the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

The NGO Coordination Committee has changed their decision after Mizoram Chief Minister Zoramthanga urged them not to protest during the first visit of Amit Shah to the state after becoming the Union Home minister.

On Thursday, several organizations of Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland had staged massive protests against the centre’s move to implement the Citizenship (Amendment), Bill.

(By Hemanta Kumar Nath, Guwahati)
