The Seas Are Rising—And So Are They

Outside the United Nations building in New York City, a murmur echoed through the security line posted alongside First Avenue as Al Gore was escorted into a cordoned-off area. It was September 23, the temperature approaching a humid 90 degrees on the first day of fall, and the U.N. Climate Action Summit was set to begin, paving the way for December’s Climate Change Conference, COP25, in Santiago, Chile. António Guterres, the United Nations secretary-general, had invited world leaders with an admonition: “Don’t come to the summit with beautiful speeches,” he said, but with “concrete plans—clear steps to enhance nationally determined contributions by 2020—and strategies for carbon neutrality by 2050.”

Perhaps predictably, the story of the summit was ultimately not the solutions offered, but the urgent need for them. Three days earlier, approximately 4 million people in 185 countries had participated in coordinated global climate change strikes as part of the youth-led Fridays for Future movement begun by 16-year-old Swedish activist Greta Thunberg. Gore, whose 2006 film An Inconvenient Truth cast global warming as a “planetary emergency,” spoke to the cameras. “They’re here, basically, to shame the adults,” I heard him say.

A moment later, another, more visceral murmur rippled through the security line as Thunberg walked swiftly past, her shirt a magenta blur, her braid swinging down her back, to deliver a call to action stinging with righteous anger.

“We are in the beginning of a mass extinction, and all you can talk about is money and fairy tales of eternal economic growth,” she said. “How dare you?” Her speech lasted approximately four and a half minutes. Thunberg did not waste any time—the point being, of course, that there is no time to be wasted.

After her speech, Thunberg joined 15 other activists from around the world at UNICEF to collectively launch a formal legal complaint against Brazil, France, Germany, Argentina, and Turkey alleging that the countries are violating their rights under the Convention on the Rights of the Child by failing to sufficiently address climate change. Three of the petitioners are from the Marshall Islands, which are at risk of becoming uninhabitable as soon as 2030. The youngest of the named petitioners is eight.
