Mumbai: Protesters enter metro rail site as BMC begins felling trees in Aarey Colony

Hours after the Bombay High Court dismissed all petitions against the proposed cutting down of over 2,500 trees in Aarey Colony of Mumbai, the protesters opposing the BMC tree authority's decision entered the metro rail site as the municipal corporation began felling of trees.

In a setback to environmental activists, the Bombay HC on Friday refused to declare Aarey colony a forest. It also declined to quash the BMC tree authority's decision allowing felling of over 2,600 trees to pave way for a metro car shed.

As the BMC began cutting trees, Preeti Sharma Menon, spokesperson of Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), alleged that it was a violation of the Model Code of Conduct (MCC) which has been in place since the Election Commission announced assembly election dates in Maharashtra.

Speaking with India Today TV, the AAP spokesperson said, "This is a clear violation of the Model Code of Conduct enforced during the elections which forbid new orders. The order was uploaded by BMC only today so it is deemed as an order today. They cannot pass such orders during MCC."

"The rule is that cutting begins after 15 days of being uploaded [the order]. They have begun hacking with a few hours! As a rule trees are not cut in the night. This government has gone mad with power and greed. The opposition is dead. The Shiv Sena has sold itself," Preeti Sharma Menon said.

Reacting to the accusations of the AAP spokesperson, Ashwini Bhide, Managing Director of Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation, said that the permission from the tree authority was granted on September 13 and not on Friday.

"This is the Tree Authority permission issued on 13th Sept 2019. [Bombay] HC has dismissed four petitions today and has also imposed fine of Rs 50,000 for a frivolous petition," Ashwini Bhide said.

Activist and Swaraj India President Yogendra Yadav also took to Twitter to protest against the cutting down of trees in Aarey Colony and said it was worrying.

"At a time when effects of climate crisis are so chillingly visible, Maha Govt's insistence on felling Aarey trees & its refusal to look for other spaces for building metro parking shed is quite worrying. This myopia towards the future of Earth will come to haunt us," Yogendra Yadav said.

At a time when effects of climate crisis are so chillingly visible, Maha Govt's insistence on felling Aarey trees & its refusal to look for other spaces for building metro parking shed is quite worrying. This myopia towards the future of Earth will come to haunt us@Youth4Swaraj pic.twitter.com/pmqXU3Ywtc Yogendra Yadav (@_YogendraYadav) October 4, 2019





Actress Swara Bhasker said, "This is Mumbai..Protesting against tree cut in Aarey colony..Unlike conspiracies in dark, these trees cut is done n over 100 trees are suspected to be cut in just2 hours..."

This is Mumbai..

Protesting against tree cut in Aarey colony..

Unlike conspiracies in dark, these tree cut is done n over 100 trees are suspected to be cut in just2 hours... #SaveAareyForest @ReallySwara @PritishNandy @suchetadalal @Simi_Garewal @Chinmayi @SethShruti pic.twitter.com/aCYKUH80T4 #SaveMumbaiforest (@SaveMumbaifore1) October 4, 2019




