Kashmiris hold anti-India demonstrations in IOK

SRINAGAR (Web Desk): Forceful demonstrations were held against the Indian occupation and repeal of special status of the territory by India.

According to Kashmir Media Service, as the Juma congregational prayers culminated, people took to the streets in Srinagar, Badgam, Ganderbal, Islamabad, Pulwama, Kulgam, Shopian, Bandipora, Baramulla, Kupwara and other areas of the occupied territory.

The protesters shouted high-pitched pro-freedom and anti-India slogans. Indian troops and police personnel fired teargas shells and pellets on protesters at several places, injuring many of them. The occupation authorities had imposed restrictions in Srinagar and other areas to forestall the demonstrations. The authorities disallowed the people from offering Juma prayers at Srinagar’s historic Jamia Masjid, Dargah Hazratbal, Dastgir Sahib and Charar-e-Sharif and many other major mosques or shrines in the Kashmir valley for the 9th consecutive week, today, since 5th August.

Meanwhile, the sufferings of the people of Kashmir valley and Muslim majority areas of Jammu region continue unabated as restrictions and communications blockade completed two months, today. The continued gag on communications means is badly affecting the common people especially students, journalists and other professionals. Normal life remains crippled with shops, markets, business establishments and educational institutions closed and public transport off the road.

On the other hand, India’s National Investigation Agency today filed a chargesheet before a Delhi court against senior Hurriyat leaders including Muhammad Yasin Malik, Shabbir Ahmed Shah, Aasiya Andrabi and Masarrat Alam Butt in a false case registered against them in 2017. This is the second chargesheet which has been filed in the same case against the leaders. Additional Sessions Judge Rakesh Syal put up the matter for taking cognisance on 23rd of this month.

Indian police in its continued crackdown arrested four more persons including a Hurriyat leader, Noor Muhammad Malik, and a religious scholar, Manzoor Ahmed Ganai, in Kishtwar and Doda districts. Over 20 persons have been arrested by the police during last four days in the two districts.

In New Delhi, the students of Jawaharlal Nehru University during an event attended by Indian Minister Jitendra Singh staged a protest against the scrapping of Article 370 of the Indian Constitution that granted special status to occupied Kashmir. The students protesting outside the JNU convention centre carried posters and raised slogans like “Kashmir belongs to Kashmiris – It’s not an ancestral property of Indians”.
