Mumbai Aarey Colony protests Highlights |‘They made corpses of lungs of Mumbai’: Cong slams tree felling at Aarey

‘They made corpses of lungs of Mumbai’: Congress criticises Centre on Aarey

The Congress also hit out at the Centre for the cutting down of trees at Aarey Colony. In a tweet from its official account, the party said, “ Last night- they came in the middle of the night, armed with axes and malicious intent, they made corpses of the lungs of Mumbai.”

Last Night - they came in the middle of the night, armed with axes and malicious intent, they made corpses of the lungs of Mumbai.



Today - they locked away the protestors, laughing as their men continued to hack away.



Tomorrow - Mumbai will choke for fresh air.#SaveAarey pic.twitter.com/7lUN5NsF4Y — Mumbai Congress (@INCMumbai) 5 October 2019

Environment minister Javadekar backs metro shed at Aarey

Union Environment Minister Prakash Javadekar on Saturday backed the proposed metro shed in Aarey forest area and said that development and environment protection should be done together, reports ANI.

He said, “The High Court has ruled that Aarey is not a forest. Metro came to Delhi; now today it is the best metro across the world. How does it develop? When the first metro station was constructed, 20-25 trees were cut down. People then protested against it, ” drawing parallels between the development of Delhi Metro and Mumbai metro.

“But metro has planted 5 trees for every single tree that it has taken down. Now, there are 271 stations. Forest undercover area has increased in Delhi. 30 lakh people are using the metro as public transport. This is the mantra of development and protecting the environment. Both should go together,” the BJP leader said.

Activists taken to Goregaon police station

An unspecified number of activists were forcefully evacuated from Aarey check post and taken to local police station at Goregaon.

‘We’re not letting go of issue’: Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray on Aarey

Talking about the issue in a press conference in Mumbai, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray said, “Aarey is an important issue. We are not letting go of the issue. I will take all information on what happened last night, today and will speak openly about it. I am confident that our government is coming back to power; then we will see what has to be done to the killers of the trees.”

Activist hugs tree at entry of Aarey Colony

An activist was seen hugging a tree at the entry into Aarey forest from Marol Maroshi Road where Section 144 has been imposed.

An activist hugs a tree outside the Aarey Colony, October 5, 2019. ( ANI / Twitter )

Felling of trees underway in Aarey Colony

Felling of trees is underway in Mumbai’s Aarey Colony even as police arrested 29 activists who were among those protesting the felling of trees.

‘Who is authorizing this?’ Sena’s Aaditya Thackeray tweets

Aaditya Thackeray, Shiv Sena’s Worli candidate and son of party president Uddhav Thackeray, posted a series of tweets to back activists protesting the cutting of trees.

The use of a large number of police personnel. Hacking trees in the dead of the night, even after winning in court (then why not broad day light) and detention of peaceful protesters and citizens. Who is authorising this? During Code of Conduct? All these powers handed to MMRC? https://t.co/SGv5yySfXn — Aaditya Thackeray (@AUThackeray) 5 October 2019
