Kangana Ranaut on Manikarnika row: Rani Laxmibai is not my relative, I will not apologise to Karni Sena

New Delhi:

After wreaking havoc in its protest against the release of the Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s Padmaavat, exactly around the same time last year, Karni Sena is at it again. The Maharashtra Karni Sena has written a letter to the director, producers and the writers of Manikarnika: The Queen Of Jhansi threatening them that if the image of Rani Laxmi Bai is maligned in the movie or if she is shown to be the lover of some Britisher, the makers will have to bear the repercussions.

Now, the fringe group demanded an apology from Kangana Ranaut for making the derogatory statement against their organization.

This came after Kangana issued a statement saying that she will destroy the Karni Sena if they continue to harass her over the release of Manikarnika: The Queen of Jhansi. “Four historians have certified Manikarnika, we have got censor certificate as well, Karni Sena has been conveyed this but they are continuing to harass me. If they don’t stop then they should know I am also a Rajput and I will destroy each one of them,” Actress Kangana Ranaut said on Friday.

The actor, however, is not going down lightly to the alleged, ‘harassment’ much like the queen she is playing.

While conversing with reporters in Mumbai on Wednesday, Kangana refused to lay low and said, "I will not apologize to anybody. I have never apologized whenever I haven't made a mistake.''



''We have promised that we haven't shown anything wrong about Rani Laxmibai in the film so, they should support us,'' the actress added.

The three-time National Award winner went on to say, ''Rani Laxmibai is not my relative and I feel she is the daughter of the entire country so, we all should support the film. Shri Rajput Karni Sena should not play their ego card with me because I am not here to say sorry to anyone."

Previously, Karni Sena president issued a warning to the actress to not to speak anything against it or else they would ruin her career prospects and burn her film sets. “If she continues to threaten the members of our outfit, we will not let her walk freely in Maharashtra and will burn her film sets,” Ajay Singh Sengar, president, Maharashtra Karni Sena, was quoted as saying by the news agency, ANI.

Sengar also said that the Hindu society will not be very forgiving if Kangana’s film insults the Queen of Jhansi, who was one of the key leaders in the Indian Rebellion of 1857.

Ever since the film went on floors, Manikarnika has been in the news for no good reasons. One of the most controversial films of the year, Manikarnika had to face a lot of backlash from its cast and crew.

Manikarnika tells the story of Jhansi's Rani Laxmi Bai in the 1857 Mutiny against the East India Company and will also see Ankita Lokhande, Atul Kulkarni, Suresh Oberoi, Danny Denzongpa and Jisshu Sengupta among others. The film is set to hit the theatres on 25 January 2019.

For all the Latest Entertainment News, Bollywood News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
