Several trees were felled for Delhi Metro too: Environment minister Prakash Javadekar on Mumbai Aarey row

Prakash Javadekar | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Several trees were felled for the Delhi Metro too: Javadekar Bombay High Court on Friday dismissed several petitions against the felling of over 2,500 trees in north Mumbai BMC tree authorities started hacking trees in Mumbai’s Aarey Colony area on Friday

Mumbai: Amid ongoing controversy over felling of trees in Mumbai’s Aarey colony, Environment minister Prakash Javadekar on Saturday backed the cutting of trees for Mumbai Metro car shed and said several trees were felled for the Delhi Metro too.

The Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change further said that environmental concerns will be taken care of and appealed to people protesting against the felling of trees to be patient.

“We have the court's order in favour of felling.... We have to be patient and see what the government does. Environmental issues will be taken care of,” Javadekar said.

"The High Court has ruled that Aarey is not a forest. Metro came to Delhi now today it is the best metro across the world. How does it develop? When the first metro station was constructed, 20-25 trees were cut down. People then protested against it. But metro has planted five trees for every single tree that it has taken down. Now, there are 271 stations. Forest undercover area has increased in Delhi. 30 lakh people are using the metro as public transport. This is the mantra of development and protecting the environment. Both should go together," the BJP leader said.

The Bombay High Court on Friday dismissed several petitions against the felling of over 2,500 trees in north Mumbai’s Aarey colony, saying the matter is pending before the Supreme Court and the National Green Tribunal.

Shortly after the court’s order, the BMC tree authorities started hacking trees in Mumbai’s Aarey colony on Friday midnight, sparking a huge furore. A large number of activists camped at the area late Friday night to protest against the cutting of trees where car shed for Mumbai Metro trains is to be built.

The protestors alleged that they were stopped by the police from entering the area while the authorities came to raze the trees under cover of darkness.

Meanwhile, Section 144 has been imposed in Aarey while over 28 people have been arrested and more than 30 others were detained.

The matter has also triggered a political slugfest with many politicians slamming the Devendra Fadnavis government for the move.

Earlier today, Shiv Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray said that there is no point of its Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to exit or speak on plastic pollution when Metro authorities are “senselessly” destroying the Aarey vicinity.

“A project that should be executed with pride, the Metro 3, @MumbaiMetro3 has to do it in the cover of the night, with shame, slyness and heavy cop cover. The project supposed to get Mumbai clean air, is hacking down a forest with a leopard, rusty spotted cat and more,” Aaditya said in a tweet.
