Aarey protest: Shiv Sena’s Priyanka Chaturvedi detained following protests in Mumbai

Aarey protest: Shiv Sena leader Priyanka Chaturvedi has been detained by the Mumbai police today after she was spotted in the area where section 144 was imposed, following the protests at Aarey Colony. Reportedly, 29 people have also been detained in connection with the protests against cutting of over 2000 trees.

Aarey protests: Shiv Sena leader Priyanka Chaturvedi was today, October 5, 2019, arrested by the Mumbai police following protests against the cutting down of 2700 trees at Aarey Colony. In total, 29 people have been arrested in connection with the protests so far under various sections of the Indian Penal Code for disturbing public order and obstructing govt officials from performing their duties. The government had imposed section 144 in the entire area and Priyanka Chaturvedi according to reports was arrested on grounds of exploiting the same.

According to media reports, Chaturvedi said that she did not violate the law and was standing alone when she was arrested by the police. When asked by some reporters she even said that she didn’t know on what grounds she has been detained. Chaturvedi even shared a post through her official Twitter account tagging the Mumbai Police which read, “I have been forcibly evicted by the cops and I wasn’t even breaking the law! The cops in the car won’t even tell me where I am being taken … this is insane @MumbaiPolice”.

Here’s the Tweet shared by Priyanka Chaturvedi:

I have been forcibly evicted by the cops and I wasn’t even breaking the law! The cops in the car wont even tell me where I am being taken … this is insane @MumbaiPolice — Priyanka Chaturvedi (@priyankac19) October 5, 2019

Moreover, the Bombay High Court yesterday i.e. on October 4, 2019, cancelled four petitions which challenge cutting of trees at Aarey Colony. The protests started soon after a video showing cutting of trees at the Aarey Colony went viral on social media. Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) uploaded the permission grant for the tree cutting of Aarey metro 3 Car shed depot on its official website on October 4, 2019 evening and the raze of trees began the same night.

Meanwhile, police, on the other hand, has stated that those who were arrested had manhandled some of the police personnel and even laid hands on them. Police said that six out of the 29 protestors are female.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
