Have cut 1,800 trees in Aarey, MMRCL tells Bombay HC; arrested activists sent to judicial custody

Residents gathering in protest at Aarey on Friday night | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights A bench of the Bombay HC refused to stay the felling after an urgent hearing on Saturday The 29 protesters arrested by Mumbai police were sent to judicial custody on Saturday MMRCL has claimed that 1,800 trees have been cut between Friday and Saturday

Mumbai: A court in Borivali has sent 29 protestors who were arrested by police for protesting against the axing of trees in Mumbai's Aarey Milk Colony, to judicial custody. The arrests were made after Section 144 was imposed in the area following widespread protests. The land in question is being cleared by the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) for the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Limited (MMCRCL). Mumbai Police today said that a total of 38 people have been arrested and another 55 detained for protesting in Goregaon.

This served as a second blow to environmental activists who have been demanding that the location of the proposed metro car shed be shifted from Aarey in order to avoid the loss of green cover. On Saturday, a bench of the Bombay High Court refused to entertain a plea by activists to stay the ongoing tree cutting. This came a day after the HC dismissed four petitions seeking directions to the BMC's Tree Authority to halt the felling of trees as the matter is being heard at the Supreme Court.

In an oral statement, the MMRCL said that 1,800 trees have already been cut in the area. Ashwini Bhide, Managing Director of MMRCL has said that the rake depot for the metro-3 line (Colaba-Bandra-Seepz) will merely occupy 33 hectares in the southern part of Aarey Milk Colony. She also said that the BMC's tree department has no reason to delay the process of axing the trees since an official approval in this regard was already posted on a government website more than 15 days ago.

The petitions dismissed on Friday were filed by a city-based NGO, activist Zoru Bathena and a Shiv Sena corporator. While hearing the urgent plea on Saturday, a bench comprising Justices SC Dharmadhikari and AK Menon stated that the decision by BMC's tree authority was reached following a fair and transparent process based on reason. A day earlier, another bench of the HC had termed the environmentalists as 'Davids' taking up a fight with the industrial 'Goliaths'.

Activists and residents of India's economic capital expressed their displeasure with the civic body and the MMRCL after videos of officers chopping down trees on the same day as the verdict emerged on Friday. Scores of people gathered in Goregaon and demanded that Aarey be declared a forest. Out of these, 29 people were arrested and 29 detained for "obstructing" the work of MMRCL. With the Maharashtra Assembly elections around the corner and the state's ruling allies taking different sides on this issue, the trees in Aarey are expected to play a central role in the upcoming polls.


