India's Environment Minister Supports Felling Of Trees In Aarey Forest! #Facepalm

Tree felling started at Aarey after Bombay HC threw out Public Interest Litigations (PILs). BMC’s Tree Authority cleared the Mumbai Metrorail Corporation Limited’s (MMRCL) proposal in August to cut 2,702 trees to build Metro 3 car shed in Aarey Colony.

Union Minister of Environment Prakash Javadekar compared the tree-felling to Delhi metro construction, saying more trees were planted than cut down.

Drawing parallel he said, "The High Court has ruled that Aarey is not a forest. Metro came to Delhi now today it is the best metro across the world. How does it develop? When the first metro station was constructed, 20-25 trees were cut down. People then protested against it".

Union Minister of Environment Prakash Javadekar on #AareyForest: Bombay HC has ruled that it's not a forest. When the first Delhi metro station was to be constructed, 20-25 trees were to be cut, people had protested then too, but for each tree cut, five trees were planted. pic.twitter.com/pCAUuBFmAb — ANI (@ANI) October 5, 2019

"But metro has planted 5 trees for every single tree that it has taken down. Now, there are 271 stations. Forest undercover area has increased in Delhi. 30 lakh people are using the metro as public transport. This is the mantra of development and protecting the environment. Both should go together," the BJP leader said.

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray warns authorities on the issue of felling of trees in Aarey Colony and said that a new government is coming to power and it will not spare those who have murdered the trees in Aarey Colony.

The @ShivSena ‘s @sheetalmhatre1 ji & Shubha Raul ji at Aarey. Even @prabhu_suneel ji has been standing up for it with the citizens. Wonder why @MumbaiMetro3 is treating Mumbaikars like criminals and not listening to sensible demand of sustainable development. https://t.co/ZdjF8ttKTk — Aaditya Thackeray (@AUThackeray) October 4, 2019

"A project that should be executed with pride, the Metro 3, @MumbaiMetro3 has to do it in the cover of the night, with shame, slyness and heavy cop cover. The project supposed to get Mumbai clean air is hacking down a forest with a leopard, rusty-spotted cat and more," tweeted Youth President Aaditya Thackeray.

A project that should be executed with pride, the Metro 3, @MumbaiMetro3 has to do it in the cover of the night, with shame, slyness and heavy cop cover.

The project supposed to get Mumbai clean air, is hacking down a forest with a leopard, rusty spotted cat and more — Aaditya Thackeray (@AUThackeray) October 4, 2019

On October 5, Mumbai police arrested at least 29 people who were protesting against the move. The police have imposed Section 144 of the CrPC in Aarey Colony and its surrounding areas following massive protests.

For the last two years, environmentalists have been protesting the decision of constructing a car shed at Aarey Colony, which has more than five lakh trees. But it seems like now it's too late.
