Bypolls: Dissent in Gujarat Congress

Congress party in Gujarat suffered a twin blows on Saturday when two of its state spokesmen protested against party nominations in upcoming by-polls.

Former leader of the opposition in Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Badruddin Shaikh resigned from the post of party spokesman over the nomination of the party candidate in by-poll for Behrampura ward of AMC, while Jayrajsinh Parmar vented his anger over not being nominated for Kheralu state legislative Assembly constituency. Congress party did not give any official response to the developments.

Badruddin Shaikh is a former chairman of the Standing Committee of AMC and former leader of the opposition in AMC. He told media persons in the city that nomination of Kamaruddin Pathan for Behrampura ward has disappointed party workers.

"There were 17 candidates shortlisted for nominations. Of these, 16 have been party workers and have risen in the party. However, the candidate finalised by congress has been retired from AMC just two months ago," said Shaikh, who has been associated with the party for the last 45 years.

He warned that such decisions will weaken the party. Shaikh claims that 15 office bearers of Congress have also resigned from their posts in his support. Shaikh is likely to have talks with Gujarat Congress Chief Amit Chavda and then decide the future course of action.

In yet another development, party spokesman Jayrajsinh Parmar vented his anger earlier during the day, for not being nominated by the party as the candidate for Kheralu Assembly constituency. Party has nominated Babuji Thakor as the candidate for the by-elections.

Talking to Zee 24 Kalak, Parmar said that he has been a committed worker of the party but is now disappointed with the functioning of the party. "The party failed to appreciate my contribution. It did not make me the candidate for the Kheralu constituency. I had worked hard during the 2007, 2012 and 2017 Assembly elections. An impression was created that I will be made the party candidate. However, now I am left out. There is a feeling of injustice," Parmar told Zee 24 Kalak.

He categorically denied that he is resorting to pressure tactics and reiterated that he has been a committed party worker. "I had joined the party at the age of 18. Then I had put party posters during elections. From there, I have risen to this level. Often my life was at a risk. Neither Congress utilized my full potential, nor did it appreciate my efforts," lamented Parmar.
