29 held for Aarey tree felling protest

Hours after the Bombay High Court dismissed all petitions against the proposed cutting down of over 2,500 trees in Aarey Colony of Mumbai, the protesters opposing the BMC tree authority’s decision entered the metro rail site as the municipal corporation began the felling of trees. This resulted in a clash between protesters and police, after which 29 persons were arrested on Saturday.

On Saturday early morning, the Mumbai police had completely lockdown the Aarey colony area. Barricades were installed three kilometers from the carshed spot and no one was allowed to venture near the construction site.

Cordoned off came after hundreds of green activists tried to stop the felling of trees in the area. The police claim that they had to face resistance from the activists who are protesting near the site since Friday evening. The protest turned violent as some activists blamed that they were manhandled by the cops. Section 144 CrPC (banning unlawful assembly) was imposed in the area after protests over the cutting of trees. It is estimated that close to 1,500 trees were chopped down by the end of the day. However, no official data has been released yet.

POLITICAL FIGHT

Terming the axing of trees in Aarey Colony as shameful and disgusting, Shiv Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray tweeted that the Mumbai Metro 3 officials should be posted in PoK to destroy terror camps rather than trees. In a series of tweets, he also said that several environmentalists and even local Shiv Sena members tried to stop the tree felling.

The Yuva Sena chief went on to say that with the increased police presence and deforestation, Mumbai Metro 3 is destroying everything that India had said at the United Nations (UN). Shiv Sena leader Priyanka Chaturvedi was also detained by Mumbai Police during protests. Reacting sharply, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray said the Shiv Sena will deal with the murderers of Aarey if they are voted to power in the 2019 Maharashtra assembly election. Bollywood celebs also vented out anger on social media.

Also read: Aarey Forest row: Shed to jaayega, says Aaditya Thackeray; Shed wahin banayenge, says Fadnavis

ALSO WATCH| Mumbai: 1,500 Aarey trees axed despite massive protests, 29 arrested
