Even as Assembly elections in Maharashtra, Haryana inch closer, Rahul leaves for Bangkok

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Rahul Gandhi left for Bangkok on Saturday The Congress leader's visit to Bangkok at such a crucial time will definitely raise many eyebrows Rahul’s trip comes at a time when the Congress is facing political disturbance

New Delhi: Just two weeks ahead of crucial Assembly elections in Maharashtra and Haryana, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi left for Bangkok.

Rahul’s visit to Bangkok at such a crucial time will definitely raise many eyebrows as the Congress party has been witnessing political turmoil on the heels of upcoming Assembly elections in the two states scheduled for October 21.

The Congress leader left for Bangkok on Saturday on a Vistara flight, news agency IANS reported.

Rahul’s trip comes at a time when the Congress is facing political disturbance as several senior leaders of the party resigned recently.

On Saturday, Rahul's aide and former Haryana Congress chief Ashok Tanwar resigned from the primary membership of the party. Tanwar’s resignation came a day after he was announced as one of the star campaigners for the party in the upcoming Haryana Assembly elections. He alleged that those groomed by Rahul are being sidelined in the party.

Tanwar recently protested outside the residence of interim Congress president and United Progressive Alliance chief Sonia Gandhi in Delhi over the distribution of election tickets.

On Thursday, he had resigned from all election committees of the party but said he would continue to work as an ordinary party worker.

“I am writing this letter with immense pain to inform you that after due consideration and exhausting all available avenues to get my voice heard. I have not been left with any other option but to resign from the responsibilities you have assigned to me as member of various committees for Haryana Assembly elections," Tanwar had said in his letter.

"It is excruciating to see the same individuals taking all the decision and instead of allowing just, free and fair selection of candidates, which has been the hallmark of your leadership and has taken an ordinary person like me to Parliament. These individuals are selling tickets and subverting the great political legacy of the Congress party by ruthlessly killing the political career of the hardworking Congress leaders," he added.

In Gujarat, the party also saw senior Congress leader Badruddin Shaikh resigning from all party posts on Saturday.

Shaikh, who has been associated with the grand old party for the last 45 years, was the leader of opposition in Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC).

Talking about his resignation, Shaikh said,"Right now, the situation of the Congress in Gujarat is weak."

He added, "If we talk about Ahmedabad in my area, I am the councillor of my ward. A by-election is to be held for one of the councillor seats in my area. Around 17 people from party asked for a ticket but I am saddened by the way the party gave the ticket to a candidate who is a retired officer of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation. He is not a member of the party."

"The ground level workers are not happy with the decision of the party and this is the reason why it is getting weak," he said.
