Aarey protests updates: Who says it's BJP v/s Sena? Aaditya Thackeray blames MMRC for chopping trees

As the stir continues over felling of over 2,500 trees in Mumbai's Aarey Colony for the proposed car shed for Mumbai Metro 3, a big political row has erupted. Protests intensified on Saturday amid heavy restrictions leading to the arrests of 29 people and 38 being booked. Several leaders were also detained while protesting.

Nearly 1,500 trees were chopped on Day 1 of felling as greens failed to stop officials from carrying out the high court's orders. Police imposed Section 144 CrPC in Aarey, restricting movements and gathering of groups, and cordoned off the area. The blockage of roads in Aarey and surrounding areas is causing difficulties for the locals and tourists.

Meanwhile, allies Shiv Sena and BJP have been at loggerheads over the issue. The opposition in Maharashtra blamed the ruling alliance for the "slaughter" of trees. Congress also slammed Shiv Sena of adopting double standards by condemning BMC tree authority's decision to cut trees but continuing to support the BJP-led government. Political drama is heating up over the axing of trees and more reactions are pouring in.

Here are the latest updates:0

22:30: Crowdfunding for arrested protestors completed

The crowdfunding, which was done to raise the amount for bail of the arrested protesters, received widespread support.

8:50: Aaditya Thackeray blames MMRC for chopping off trees in Aarey

Aaditya Thackeray has solely blamed the MMRC for cutting trees in the Aarey Colony, He said, "Who is saying it's BJP v/s Sena on Aarey? MMRC is responsible for this issue. After getting the order form the high court, they just went at the spot during the night and started cutting trees."

"I think charges should be dropped against 29 people. We teach people to plant trees. We can't punish those who try to save trees," he said.

8:45: MMRCL claims it planted 24,000 trees, MD justifies

The Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation (MMRCL) has posted a video claiming it had planted 24,000 trees across the city even as its MD Ashwini Bhide justified the "inevitable destruction", saying it paves the way for "new creation".

Promises kept Commitments delivered. #MMRC has planted arnd 24,000 trees across Mumbai including #AareyMilkColony and degraded areas of #SGNP. Sturdy native species like Behada,Kadamb, Karanj etc 6 - 12 inch girth & 12-15 ft height planted. 2 years efforts and results show up. pic.twitter.com/iXtCFb43wj MumbaiMetro3 (@MumbaiMetro3) October 6, 2019

8:14: SC to hear Aarey forest issue tomorrow

Supreme Court has taken suo motu cognisance of the Aarey tree felling. A special bench will sit on October 7 to hear the matter after a letter was sent to Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi by students to intervene in the matter. The bench will hear the matter at 10 am, tomorrow.

A delegation of students had written a letter to the Chief Justice of India earlier today, "requesting the Supreme Court to take cognisance in Mumbai's Aarey matter and order stay in tree-axing undertaken by the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai with Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation and the Mumbai Police".

6:30: 29 protestors granted conditional bail, unlikely to walk out of Thane jail

Additional sessions court judge HC Shende of the holiday court ordered the release of 29 detained protesters on certain conditions including production of personal surety of Rs 7,000 and assurance that they would not take part in protests.

However, the protesters are unlikely to walk out of the Thane jail, where most of them are currently lodged, on Sunday pending completion of the legal procedure and other formalities.

4:41: All 29 Aarey protesters produced before session court, get bail

The Borivali holiday court has granted bail to all 29 people who were arrested by the Mumbai Police. They are to be released after submitting bail bond of Rs 7,000.

The protesters were arrested under various sections of the Indian Penal Code for disturbing public order and obstructing government officials from performing their duties.

Bail order for 29 Aarey protesters

4:23: "What message government wants to give to young generation"

Mother of a youth who was arrested being part of the protest in Aarey colony questioned the government what wrong her son had done. Helen Lopez said, "Why did they treat my son like that. He is not a criminal. He rescues animals at his own cost. What wrong did he do? What is the message that the government wants to give to the young generation."

"Will the government be able to stop floods, pollution? We are not against the metros. All we want is that development should not be at the cost of the environment. Those who have been arrested are not criminals. They are only animal lovers. They should be released," Lopez said

"The government should accept that it has done a mistake and take the case back. We condemn their action," mother of a PhD student cries.

3:53 pm: Few students submit petition in SC seeking BMC action, urgent listing of matter

Few students have submitted a petition in Supreme Court seeking action by the BMC and urgent listing of matter to ask for stay. The petition has been submitted by fourth-year law student Rishav. He said, "This is not all a lost battle....The effort is to prevent the felling of trees."

A student delegation submitted a petition before the Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi (CJI) on Sunday asking him to exercise his special jurisdiction and go out of the conventional way for stay on felling of trees in Aarey colony by Mumbai authorities.

The delegation believes that there is no time for filing an appeal petition and go through legal technicalities as by then, Aarey will be cleared off.

3:50 pm: "I am scared to plant trees. Did schools teach us wrong?"

Prakash bhoir, a resident of Aarey whose wife was arrested and is behind bars said, "In school, we are told about how we should plant trees and here we are being slapped with cases for protecting trees. Did they teach us wrong thing. It is good that my wife was arrested because we did a lot of wrongs. We have planted 500 trees."

12:40 am: Prakash Ambedkar detained while trying to enter Aarey

Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi (VBA) chief Prakash Ambedkar was detained by police and taken to Powai when he tried entering Aarey to protest.

12:30 am: AAP Maharashtra quotes climate activist Greta Thunberg, says How dare you? to CM Devendra Fadnavis.

11:10 am: Student delegation to meet CJI for stay on Aarey felling

A student delegation will visiting the CJI Ranjan Gogoi's residence around 3 pm today, asking him to exercise his special jurisdiction and go out of conventional way for stay on felling of trees in Aarey.

The delegation believes that there is no time for filing an appeal petition and going through legal technicalities, as by then the trees would be cleared off by Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Ltd (MMRCL).

10:15 am: 2,500 trees already cut down, felling to completed by evening, say sources

Sources say over 2,500 trees have already been cut down. However, there is no official confirmation of the figure yet. Sources say the felling process is in its final stage and will be completed by this evening. Later, the trees will be cut into smaller pieces and transported through trucks.

9:35 am: Fear of police action keeps protesters away

The cops have managed to scatter protesters. Because of the fear of detention and arrest, many did not turn up to protest.

9:30 am: Families of 29 students arrested to speak out

The family members of 29 college students who were arrested by Mumbai Police for protesting over Aarey felling will speak to the media today. They will be expressing their views on the injustice that they are facing.

9:20 am: Majority of trees already cut down

Sources have told India Today that most of the trees out of 2,700 which were to be felled have been cut down. These trees will be cut into smaller pieces and will be transported to other places later via trucks. More JCB machines have also been called in.

9:15 am: Complete lockdown in Aarey

On Day 2 of felling trees in Aarey Colony, the area is still on complete lockdown. Just like Day 1, no one is being allowed inside. A radius of 3 km from the car shed site is still barricaded and there is heavy deployment of cops.

There are over four ways to reach the site and all of them have been blocked by police with several layers of barricading. People living in Aarey have to show their ID cards, only then are they being allowed inside.

8:30 am: Aaditya Thackeray hits out at government over axing of trees in Aarey

Speaking Exclusively to India Today, Shiv Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray hit out at the government terming the arrests over Aarey protest as dictatorial behavior.

Aaditya Thackeray said, We want Metro. The propaganda was MMRCL is absolutely wrong. Aarey issue is not just about 2,700 trees, it's about a complete eco system. There are some endangered species. It's also the plain of Mithi River. If flood happens Sunday, who is to be blamed?

Unscientific methods are being followed. If you have a won court case why are you doing it in the night? Why do you have to deploy hundreds of cops to cut down 2,700 trees? You are arresting 21-year-olds. This is absolutely shameful behaviour on part of the MMRCL, he added.

Such authorities should be sent PoK to get rid of terrorists than getting rid of our ecosystem The problem is some people have taken it to their ego and are taking our government to dumps. They are trying to be politicians than behaving like officials. They will take the government to shame if this continues, he further said.

8:00 am: What happened yesterday

As the felling of trees began, a high political drama erupted with the opposition in Maharashtra blaming the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Shiv Sena for the "slaughter" of trees. Congress also slammed the Shiv Sena of adopting double standards by condemning the BMC tree authority's decision to cut 2,600 trees but continuing to support the BJP-led government.

Police have also booked 38 protesters under various sections of the IPC since late Friday night after they entered the metro rail site as the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Ltd (MMRCL) began felling of trees. Several people, including NCP MLA Jitendra Awhad, Shiv Sena leaders Priyanka Chaturvedi and former Mayor Shubha Raul, were detained while protesting against the felling of trees. Read all that happened yesterday in 10 points here.
