Uddhav Thakrey Says He Will Deal With 'Aarey Murderers', Reminded He's Currently Running Govt

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray found himself in an embarrassing situation after he said that his party will deal with the "murderers of Aarey" if they are voted to power in the 2019 Maharashtra assembly election.

Addressing a press conference in Mumbai, Uddhav Thackeray said the felling of trees at Aarey Colony is the "most important issue" for him and he will take detailed information about the situation.

"Aarey is the most important issue for me right now. Whatever is happening today, whatever was happening yesterday and whatever will happen in future, I'll take detailed information of what the situation is and will speak firmly and directly on the issue," Uddhav Thackeray said.

Shiv Sena Chief, Uddhav Thackeray: The upcoming government will be our government and once our government comes into power once again, we will deal with the murderers of #AareyForest in the best possible way we can. https://t.co/weNHtCbhUy pic.twitter.com/o0ePTCBi8V — ANI (@ANI) October 5, 2019

Uddhav Thackeray's son Aaditya Thackeray, who is contesting the Maharashtra assembly polls from Worli assembly seat, slammed Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Limited (MMRC) for cutting trees in Aarey Colony at the night.

Taking to Twitter, Aaditya Thackeray condemned the arrest of activists, including women, outside Aarey Colony and felling of trees.

"The use of a large number of police personnel. Hacking trees in the dead of the night, even after winning in court (then why not broad daylight) and detention of peaceful protesters and citizens. Who is authorising this? During Code of Conduct? All these powers handed to MMRC?" Aditya Thackeray tweeted.

Detaining citizens and arresting youth for standing with environment. So much for speaking about environment at global level while we destroy ecosystems here in the middle of the night. https://t.co/BI10eHsUIz — Aaditya Thackeray (@AUThackeray) October 5, 2019

"These protesters can't be arrested and filed cases with. It's a shame if we do that. I call out and request @CMOMaharashtra to look into this and ask the police to not put any cases for people with love for the environment. We'd be hypocritical then at the @UN if we do this," he said.

While Uddhav and Aditya extended support to the protesters, Congress slammed the father-son duo for the hypocrisy. Congress reminded the two that it is their own government in Maharashtra that has given the orders to cut trees.

As the protests began gaining momentum there was a massive deployment of police to blockade the area and Section 144 was imposed.

Congress leader and former MP Sanjay Nirupam, who has been vocal against the cutting down of trees at Aarey, hit out at Shiv Sena’s pretence as it condemns the felling of trees on one hand while on the other it continues to support the BJP-led government inn Maharashtra.

Actually its #BMC which has permitted #MMRCL to cut trees in #AareyForest and I would like to remind everyone that #BMC is controlled by ShivSena.

So #ShivSena must stop its lip service against tree cutting in #Aarey & tell Mumbaikars that they are helpless before #BJP pic.twitter.com/hl2Ofvt92B — Sanjay Nirupam (@sanjaynirupam) October 5, 2019

"Such double standard would not do," he said.

So far, Mumbai has arrested 29 protesters and more than 100 have been detained by the Mumbai Police in connection with the protest against the cutting of trees in Aarey Colony on October 5.
