Madhya Pradesh: Intruder enters GMC hostel, robs and attempts to rape MBBS student

As the news of the intruder's entry spread in the hostel, students staged a massive protest demanding better security. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights MBBS student escapes rape attempt after intruder enters her hostel room Accused managed to flee after the victim fought back the attacker Intruder decamped with two smartphones and Rs 15,000 cash

Bhopal: In a shocking incident, an MBBS student escaped an attempted rape after an intruder entered her hostel room at Gandhi Medical College in Bhopal on Saturday. However, the accused managed to flee after the victim fought back the attacker.

The incident occurred in the early hours of Saturday when miscreant held the victim by her neck from behind and asked her to remove her clothes.

According to a report, the girl student kicked the intruder forcing him to fall down on the bed. The victim also snatched an 18-inch screwdriver from the intruder's hand. Stunned by the girl's fightback, the accused managed to escape as the victim screamed for help.

As the news of the intruder's entry spread in the hostel, students staged a massive protest demanding better security.

Initially, police filed a case of theft despite the victim claiming that the intruder tried to rape her. Later, police added loot and molestation charges in the FIR.

According to the victim, the accused decamped with two smartphones and Rs 15,000 cash. In the past too, the girl had been a victim of theft in the same room, but police didn't register a case. According to students residing at GMC hostel, this is the 10th case of theft in the hostel.



Bengaluru: Driving school instructor barges into engineering student's home, tries to rape her

In a similar incident reported from Karnataka, a 19-year-old engineering escaped an attempted rape after a driving school instructor barged into her home in Bengaluru on Tuesday (October 1). The accused was identified as 22-year-old Girish, a resident of Kalaburagi district.

The accused driving school instructor was later arrested by Talaghattapura police on Wednesday. He was arrested after the victim, a Mumbai resident, filed a complaint against the accused. The incident occurred on the night of October 1. Explaining her ordeal, the victim told police she went to bed at around 8.30pm , but woke up around two hours later after hearing some noise in her house.

The girl said she screamed for help as she saw her neighbour Girish in the house. She also told police that the accused also bit on her chin and scratched her neck. After the scuffle, the accused fled from the spot. Later, the victim called her parents and narrated her plight. Her parents advised her to file a police complaint.
