All 29 Protesters Granted Bail, But Tree Cutting Continues Unabated In Aarey Colony

The Borivali holiday court has granted bail to all 29 people who were arrested by the Mumbai Police while protesting against the felling of over 2,500 trees in Mumbai's Aarey Colony for the proposed car shed for Mumbai Metro.

They are to be released after submitting bail bond of Rs 7,000.

bccl

In the meanwhile, prohibitory orders continued to be in force in Aarey Colony and surrounding areas for the second day today, as felling of trees was underway to make way for a Metro car shed, a police official was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.

Heavy security was deployed at Aarey Colony's five entry points, including the key connecting road near the Western Express Highway, to prevent people from going towards the area and to avoid any untoward incident, he said.

Most of the shops, restaurants and roadside stalls remained closed in the area in view of the imposition of Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC), banning unlawful assembly, since Saturday.

bccl

The police official said the situation was expected to become normal soon.

Patrolling was stepped up in the tribal hamlets located in Aarey area and those found assembling there were being taken into custody, but later let off after proper verification, he said.

On Saturday, clashes broke out between the police and green activists who tried to stop tree cutting by Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Ltd (MMRCL) in Aarey Colony, leading to arrest of at least 29 people.

bccl

The MMRCL started hacking trees from Friday night to make way for the car shed, hours after the Bombay High Court dismissed four petitions filed by NGOs and activists challenging the decision to allow felling of nearly 2,700 trees in the prime green lung of the city.

Earlier, opposition parties slammed the ruling BJP- Shiv Sena, stating they failed to save the trees. Yuva Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray also criticised the MMRCL and backed the protesters.

bccl

The MMRCL has defended tree felling by contending that it is restricted only to a small area in Aarey Colony, and is necessary to ensure a modern transport system for Mumbaikars.

The proposed car shed for the Metro-3 line (Colaba- Bandra-Seepz) will occupy 33 hectares.

With PTI Inputs
