Aarey tree cutting: Supreme Court takes suo motu cognisance, schedules hearing on October 7

The felling of trees in the Aarey forest began after the Bombay High Court dismissed four petitions that sought a stay order on the decision (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

As protests grow over the cutting of trees in Aarey forest in Mumbai, the Supreme Court has taken Suo Motu cognisance of the matter and scheduled a hearing on October 7.

Meanwhile, a Mumbai court on Sunday granted bail to the 29 protesters, who were arrested while protesting against the axing of the trees by the authorities in Aarey colony for construction of a metro car shed.

The protestors were arrested for allegedly disturbing public order and obstructing government officials from performing their duties.

Advocate Aditya Bambulkar, who appeared for the protestors, confirmed that they were granted conditional bail by the Dindoshi Holiday Court on a cash bond of Rs 7,000 each and they have to appear at the police station for further inquiry.

The protestors were arrested under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

One of the family members of the arrested person said, "They have been charged under the worst sections of the IPC which will affect their career. Government has to understand that we are protecting our mother nature and we are not criminals."

Earlier, a representation was given to Chief Justice of India (CJI) Ranjan Gogoi, seeking his urgent intervention to stop the axing of trees by the authorities in Mumbai's Aarey Colony for constructing a metro car shed.

"As we write this letter to you the Mumbai Authorities continue to kill the lungs of Mumbai, that is, Aarey Forest by clearing of trees near Mithi river bank and according to news reports 1,500 trees have already been cleared by the authorities," reads the letter dated October 6 to Chief Justice Gogoi by Rishav Ranjan, a law student of Lloyd Law College, Greater Noida, representing the delegation.

On Saturday, Bombay High Court refused to entertain urgent hearing in the matter. Justice SC Dharmadhikar refused urgent mentioning in the case and asked the petitioners to approach Chief Justice of Bombay High Court.

On Sunday, more and more people joined protestors near Aarey Colony area, where the Mumbai Police imposed Section 144, thereby banning unlawful assembly.
