Aarey protests: Mothers of arrested students want them to continue fight against felling of trees

A holiday court in Mumbai on Sunday granted bail to the 29 protestors who had been arrested in the Aarey area of the city on Friday night. Sections 332, 353, 143 and 149 of the India Penal Code (IPC) were slapped against the 29 protesters. Since all the offenses were non-bailable, all the accused were sent to the judicial custody by the magistrate court on Saturday.

However, the advocates for the accused on Sunday filed bail applications before the sessions court and argued that these protesters meant no harm to the state and were only expressing their anguish at the chopping of the trees in Aarey. They also argued that the accused were not arrested from within the Aarey car shed area but from quite a distance.

The court ordered the protestors to furnish Rs 7,000 surety and mark their attendance at the police station once in a fortnight in between 6 and 9 pm. With this, all the accused were granted bail by the court. In the meantime, all the relatives of the protestors gathered at the Goregaon East area of Mumbai and expressed their anger.

Manisha Dhinde, a resident of Aarey who had been picked up by police on Friday night, spoke about how she was let off by police only because she had an exam but was again picked up by police while she was on her way to the exam hall.

She said, "The policemen spoke badly and my hands were also scratched and bruised. It was only after my principal pleaded to them over the phone that they finally let me off to write my exam paper."

Both Vidya Poddar, a resident of Palghar district and Helen Lopez, a resident of Thane district, were at home when their sons were arrested by police on Friday night.

The women, while they feared for the future of their sons, said they were proud of them. The two regretted the high handedness shown by the Mumbai Police but reiterated that they would want their sons to fight for the environment and not get bogged down by this one case.

"We want them to continue to save our trees at Aarey. If we don't do it now, it might get too late later," the women said.

Jayshree Ghadi, whose husband Shashikant Sonawane will now be out of the Thane jail only by Monday, said, "Protesting against the wrong is our right and we will continue to do so. We want to leave a better planet, a better India for our children."

The protestors emphasised that they are not against the metro rail per se. They only want that it should not be constructed in the green zone of Aarey.

Meanwhile, the police converted Aarey into a fort barricading all roads leading to the green zone as the protests intensified. Police also checked the identity cards of all the people who tried to enter.

The Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Limited (MMRCL) chief Ashwini Bhide tweeted, "Sometimes to construct something new, destruction becomes inevitable but it also paves the way for new life and new creation."

Prior to this, the Mumbai Metro Twitter handle, amid the protests, tweeted, "Promises kept Commitments delivered. MMRC has planted around 24,000 trees across Mumbai including Aarey Milk Colony and degraded areas of SGNP (Sanjay Gandhi National Park). Sturdy native species like Behada, Kadamb, Karanj etc 6 - 12 inch girth and 12-15 ft height planted. 2 years of efforts and results show up."
