PMC account holders protest outside RBI

assembly election

Reserve Bank of India

Bandra Kurla Complex

Mini Punjab catering service

Waryam Singh ‘bridge’ between bank & HDIL Police tell court most loans sanctioned to HDIL during Singh’s chairmanship.

Housing Development and Infrastructure Ltd

HDIL

Photos by Gurujeet Singh Devgun

Bank depositors hold placards outside the RBI’s office in Bandra Kurla complex

PMC bank ex-chairman Waryam Singh sent to police custody 00:38

Depositors say they will continue protesting ahead of thePunjab & Maharashtra Cooperative Bank (PMC Bank) account holders held a silent protest outside theoffice aton Sunday. They also held a protest in front of Mini Punjab hotel in Bandra – Surjit Singh Arora, a member of the suspended board of PMC, has aSome protesters wanted to go to Matoshri, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray’s residence, but the police did not allow them.Some of the posters the protesters held said: ‘Nahi denge hamare paise to vote karenge kaise’, ‘Black Diwali for PMC A/C holders release our funds’, ‘Poora pasia lenge, kuch aur nahi chalega’ and ‘No Vote’.At Mini Punjab, one of the partners, Praveender Singh, said: “The bank’s board members were not aware of the way business was being run by the chairman and MD.”He also appealed the protesters to leave, saying it is not fair to call for a boycott of the hotel. “Surjit Singh Arora is not directly involved in this hotel. This is run by Kuldeep Singh and Karnail Singh. Surjit Singh has a separate catering service,” he said.The depositors have decided to continue protesting ahead of the state assembly election, which is scheduled on October 21. The former MD of PMC Bank, Joy Thomas, and chairman Waryam Singh have already been arrested by Mumbai Police. Rakesh and Sarang Wadhawan, the promoters of), are also in custody.Manjula Kotiyan, 50, one of the protesters, said she has more than Rs 7 lakh in fixed deposits in the bank. Her husband used to work as a stuntman in Bollywood. He lost both hands in an accident during shooting. “All the help he got after the accident was put in this FD and now it is really sad that every day we have to step out and fight for our money,” Kotiyan said.Vishwanath Shetty, 61, has around Rs 30 lakh in PMC Bank’s Poonamnagar branch. He has been protesting since September 24, the day RBI imposed restrictions. His daughter is getting married in February.“I feel so helpless. But we are not going to stop until we get our money back,” Shetty told Mirror.Meanwhile, depositors from Goa, Maharashtra and Delhi have come together on social media platforms such as WhatsApp and Facebook to share news of the bank. They have also created a new email ID – pmcbankfraud@ gmail.com – to gather information about everyone.There is a new Twitter account, which is being called ‘A community for people with account in the troubled PMC’.
