Aarey cattle owners stare at losses

Milk producers have become the unlikely casualty in the face-off between the police and the protesters at the Metro-3 carshed site in Aarey Colony. With a heavy deployment of cops and imposition of prohibitory orders in the area, cattle owners are staring at losses.

"Please help the cattle owners of Aarey Milk Colony by cooperating with us and allowing fodder and cattle feeds. We have to milk our cattle twice a day and deliver it as soon as possible," said CK Singh of the Mumbai Milk Producers Association in a letter to the cops.

The cattle owners said they use nearly 1.7 lakh kgs of fodder and 120 tonnes of cattle feeds every day. "Some of us reside outside Aarey. We return to our sheds twice a day. In these circumstances, we need your department's cooperation."

AREA TURNS INTO A FORTRESS Over 6,00 policemen have been deployed at the five major entry points to the Aarey Milk Colony to avoid any untoward incidents



A Borivali court granted bail to the 29 people who had been arrested on Friday night. They have been asked not to be a part of any protest there in future



Milk producers apart, shops and eateries in the vicinity of the carshed site have been affected due to the face-off between protesters and cops

Subhash Jhadav, divisional ACP of Dindoshi division, said they understand the concerns of the milk producers and will fully cooperate with the truck drivers transporting cattle feed. The officer said checks are being conducted to avoid any untoward incidents.

Aarey turned into a fortress after enraged activists on Friday night tried to stop Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation officials from clearing trees.

Hours ago, the Bombay High Court had allowed the MMRC to go ahead with its plan by dismissing four pleas.

To contain the situation, the police arrested 29 protesters. They also detained nearly 200 people on Saturday. The Borivali Holiday court on Sunday granted the arrested bail on the condition that they won't be a part of any agitation further.

Earlier in the day, their families spoke to the media saying the protesters were nature lovers who suffered rough treatment at the hands of the police. "One needs to understand that we are not against the Metro but there has to be some alternative to carry out the work. Why kill trees? Is this what we were taught in the school?" asked the mother of a protester named Nelson.

Over 600 policemen are currently guarding the five main entry points at Aarey, said sources.

They added that the diversion of manpower is a huge challenge for the department ahead of the assembly elections.

"All these spots have been covered by the police and the public is advised to stay away in a radius of 4-5 kilometres. Residents of Aarey Colony need to show their Aadhaar cards to gain access to the area," said an officer who did not wish to be named.

Milk producers apart, a source said, owners of shops and eateries around the Metro car depot have also been affected as the joints are closed following the protests.

Meanwhile, Dalit leader Prakash Ambedkar was detained for defying police orders. The Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi chief was later let off after some time.
