Brahman Mahasangh fires district prez who declared support for BJP

STATE ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2019



In the meanwhile, city Shiv Sena leaders have questioned seniors’ request to aid alliance partner; they refuse to withdraw independently filed nominations



As the polling day edges closer by the day, interesting developments have surfaced in the city’s political scenario — mostly revolving around Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Shiv Sena. On Sunday, Brahman Mahasangh members have sacked their spokesperson for announcing their support to BJP candidate of Kothrud constituency and state unit chief, Chandrakant Patil, who has already irked certain people. The drama was no less in Sena’s corner as the leaders questioned their seniors on helping BJP.

~~71469466~~

Brahman Mahasangh still in the race



The Brahman Mahasangh has sacked its spokesperson and district president, Anand Dave, after he declared support for Patil. The Sangh members have stated that they will contest the elections — a flip from their decision on Saturday, when some of the members had declared the withdrawal of candidature. They had announced their backing for Patil, who is contesting from the Kothrud constituency.



However, things have not been smooth for Patil either, as the Mahasangh have said that he has “failed to address their concerns and issues”. This was one of the primary reasons behind the Brahman community fielding four candidates from the constituency. A day after they had filed their nominations, they were called in by Patil for a meeting on Saturday. It was followed by Brahman Mahasang members retracting their candidature and announcing their support for Patil.



The senior members of the Sangh took umbrage to this decision, as their candidates had “not consulted with them” before stepping down. Brahman Mahasangh’s president, Govind Kulkarni, demanded sacking of their spokesperson, Dave, who had allegedly arranged for the meeting and made the announcement later. Kulkarni now insists that they are still in the race.



“It is true that we had discussed or demands and concerns (with BJP). However, the conversation was unsatisfactory. Also, there was never a dilemma about withdrawing the candidature. We have decided to contest and Dave — without seeking our permission — instead made a contrary announcement. Thus, he has been sacked,” Kulkarni said.



These claims were opposed by Dave, who said that he will continue to work for the Mahasangh. “I have chosen to continue working for the community. I am going to wait for their final decision, till Monday,” he told Mirror.



Sena rebellion continues



As a storm brews in Kothrud, thunderclouds gather at Shiv Sena’s end, where certain leaders have refused to give up their fight against BJP — their alliance partner — despite attempts to pacify them from state-level leaders. Some city leaders believe that BJP is trying to damage Sena and so, they see no point in working in an alliance. They have even demanded reasons from their seniors — as to why they should work hand-in-hand. The city unit fears that they will be left with nothing in their hands during the corporation elections, as BJP has already announced candidature from all eight city constituencies. To reinforce their demands, Sena leaders have taken several measures over the week. They visited the Sena bastion in Mumbai, Matoshree, and even protested on Pune’s streets on Thursday. It resulted in some of them filing nominations as independent candidates in five constituencies in the city.



Given the escalating situation, Sena’s state unit sent their sampark pramukh, Bala Kadam, to Pune to convince its members against “rebellious behaviour”. However, these attempts failed as the leaders have refused to retract their nominations. During the meeting, they displayed various video clips of candidates from a few constituencies, where they were seen and heard making statements against Shiv Sena.



A senior leader, who was present in the meeting, said, “The party workers highlighted their concerns. Even if the candidates withdraw their nominations, it appears that they will stay away from campaigning entirely.”



When quizzed about his stand, Vishal Dhanawde, a candidate from Kasba constituency, said, “I am the candidate of ‘Shivsainiks’ and I am going to contest for them. I will not withdraw in any condition.”



Tapkir joins Congress



In an interesting turn of events, Vilas Tapkir, cousin to sitting Member of Legislative Assembly and Khadakwasla candidate Bhimrao Tapkir and husband to BJP corporator Varsha Tapkir, has joined Congress. He was inducted in the party in the presence of the Congress’s Purandar candidate, Sanjay Jagtap. The husband and wife duo were unhappy as Varsha was not selected for Mayor’s post. Despite repeated attempts, Vilas could not be reached for the comment.


