Shehla Rashid, other activists to attend JNUSU protest against abrogation of Article 370, Kashmir shutdown today

Renowned leftist personalities and a few activists will be part of the discussion on abrogation of Article 370. (Picture for representation: Reuters)

Days after Union Minister Jitendra Singh visited Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) to put forward the government's stand on abrogation of Article 370, Jawaharlal Nehru University Student Union (JNUSU) is organising a protest on Monday (October 7) at the campus.

Renowned leftist personalities and a few activists are going to be a part of the discussion titled "64 days of shutdown: Abrogation of Article 370 and the reality behind 'stability, peace and development' in Jammu and Kashmir".

Shehla Rashid Shora, Annie Raja, Pradeepika Saraswat, Sanjay Kak and Aejaz Ahmed Rather are invited as speakers at the gathering which will take place around 4:30 pm at Sabarmati Dhaba on Monday.

The gathering will be held in the presence of Shehla Rashid Shora (political activist), Annie Raja (general secretary, NFW and member, fact finding team in Kashmir), Pradeepika Saraswat (journalist and researcher on Kashmir issue), Sanjay Kak (national award winning filmmaker) and Aejaz Ahmed Rather (former JNUSU general secretary).

JNUSU vice president Saket Moon told India Today that the event is being organised for two major reasons. "A few activists and researchers visited the Valley 15 days ago, both in urban districts and rural areas have captured the true picture of the clampdown areas. The members from the fact finding team will present videos and reports to show the real picture of Kashmir after the abrogation," he said.

"A few days ago JNU had invited minister Jitendra Singh to paint a peaceful picture of the restricted areas according to the government's set propaganda but these speakers are either from Kashmir or closely related to the Valley and will bring out a more holistic scenario," he added.

Earlier, Jitendra Singh was invited to the varsity by JNU administration and ABVP for a talk to deliver a lecture on 'Abrogation of Article 370: Peace, stability and development in Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh' on October 3. During the event, there was a clash between students from left and right wings where they resorted to sloganeering.

JNUSU had also released a statement on the seminar that said, "The Xenophobic Triumphalism of the Sangh Pariwar is on full display today at JNU... It is ironic that the administration which has wrecked the peace and stability of JNU is inviting a minister from a party which is destroying the peace and stability of the country."

"The only stability abrogation of Article 370 has brought is in the state of people confined to their homes due to a draconian security crackdown. Mainstream opposition leaders continue to be under house arrest and mobile phone and internet services continue to remain suspended. People are unable to access the outside world, unable to travel out and deprived of basic supplies," it said.
