[Ground Report] Aarey tree felling divides Mumbai

The hearing was announced after a group of law students. filed a special plea over the incident and sought intervention from the apex court. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The Supreme Court has asked the Maharashtra government to stop the cutting down of trees until the next hearing The apex court took suo moto cognizance of the case after protests turned violent The trees in Aarey are being felled to make way for a metro car shed

Mumbai: The hearing over the fate of Mumbai's green lungs took place today. The Supreme Court took suo moto cognizance of the matter yesterday and announced the hearing after protests intensified. A Mumbai Court also granted bail to 29 persons who had been arrested while protesting against the cutting down of trees in the Aarey forest.

Trees in the Aarey forest were being felled to make way for a metro car shed. The hearing was announced after a group of law students filed a special plea over the incident and sought intervention from the apex court. The next hearing of the case will take place on October 21.

While on one side, people across the country have been vehemently opposing the decision of the Bombay High Court, there are politicians who have advocated the government's stand. Chief Minister of Maharashtra Devendra Fadnavis said, "It is a misconception that trees are being cut and a forest is being destroyed. The Supreme Court has given a ruling that the government is doing right. Even I am an environmentalist and felling of every single tree pains me. "

Fadnavis supported his stand by saying that there must a balance between the environment and development. Meanwhile, Aditya Thackeray took to Twitter to condemn the administration's move. He said that the government should not have cut the trees in the "dark of the night". Meanwhile, he was criticised for taking a dual stance as the Shiv Sena rules in alliance with the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

Locals protested against the felling of 2,700 trees after the Bombay High Court gave its nod to the construction of a metro car shed which is a part of the government's metro project.

The Supreme Court has asked the Maharashtra government to stop the cutting down of trees until the environment bench hears the case. The next hearing is scheduled on October 21. The apex court took note of the plea and a special bench was constituted to hear the matter. In their plea, the law students urged the Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi to intervene in the matter without waiting for the technicalities to unfold.

The letter read, "As we write this letter to you the Mumbai Authorities continue to kill the lungs of Mumbai, that is, Aarey Forest by clearing of trees near Mithi river bank and according to news reports 1,500 trees have already been cleared by the authorities."
