Shortage of accommodation, waterlogged hospital; medical sector crumbles under pressure

The condition in the hospital is a clear violation of the guidelines given by the Medical Council of India (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Medical students have been living in the ENT ward of the Cooper Hospital in Mumbai The students were sent to the wards as the hospital does not enough rooms to accommodate them Meanwhile, a hospital in Hyderabad was inundated with rainwater Immediate evacuation was carried out to ensure that the patients are safe

Mumbai: The medical sector of the country has been in shambles for the last few years. A proof of the same came to light after the students of Mumbai's Dr R N Cooper Hospital were forced to live in abysmal conditions by the administration. The students have been lodged in the nurses' quarters and ENT ward due to alleged lack of accommodation. The angered parents of the students have decided to stage a protest outside the hospital.

Around 200 students have been living in the ward and the quarter for the last few months. The hospital has provided one mattress for every two students and two washrooms. The students have to stand in a queue as they wait to use the washroom. A total of 800 students are pursuing their MBBS course at Cooper.

Dr Pinakin Gujjar, Dean of the college said, "Every hostel is crowded. In fact, other medical colleges have asked the students to arrange their own stay. We took the financial background of our students into account and have special arrangements. "

The condition in the hospital is a clear violation of the guidelines given by the Medical Council of India. According to the rules, every college that offers an MBBS course must provide hostel facilities to the students. Two students can stay in one room that has bunk beds, a table and a chair. Not more than 20 students should be staying on one floor.

A student from Aurangabad said, "The hospital website talks about hostel facilities available for students. However, when we arrived we were asked to arrange our own stay. When we told the warden that we can't afford to pay for rented accommodation in this city, this is the arrangement that has been made for. " Tired of being subjected to negligence, the students have been boycotting classes for the last three days.

Another instance that has raised questions on the efficiency of the medical sector in the country surfaced from Hyderabad after heavy rains lashed the city. A ward of the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of Malla Reddy hospital in Hyderabad was flooded after heavy rainfall.

Ten patients were evacuated after the emergency ward of the hospital was waterlogged. After the ward was inundated, the patients were shifted to the other floors to safeguard them. The medical equipment was seen floating as the doctors and other staff of the hospital walked in knee-deep water.
