As alliance talks hang in balance, Congress to hold rally in Patna on Feb 3

After a long gap of 28 years, the Congress party will hold a rally at the iconic Gandhi Maidan in Patna on February 3, where party chief Rahul Gandhi will address the gathering. The event is billed as a show of strength for the party ahead of the Lok Sabha elections, and it is felt that the outcome of the protracted seat-sharing talks in the opposition camp in the state could also be dependent on the response it elicits.

As the Congress prepares for the 'Kisan Rally', where key Mahagathbandhan leaders, including Rashtriya Janata Dal's (RJD) Tejashwi Yadav and Rashtriya Lok Samta Party (RLSP) chief Upendra Kushwaha will be present to provide a picture of opposition unity in the state, there are worries about rising tensions within the alliance over sharing of seats.

While the Congress has demanded at least 12 seats to contest in the Lok Sabha elections, the RJD, which is the lead partner in the Mahagathbandhan, is learnt to be willing to offer the national party not more than eight seats. According to RJD sources, the party has even sounded out other allies on the possibility of going into the elections without the Congress as an alliance partner.

The RJD is also learnt to be upset about the Congress' plans to induct leaders such as Pappu Yadav and Anant Singh. On the other hand, the Congress is not very comfortable with Tejashwi's visit to Lucknow to meet Samajwadi Party leader Akhilesh Yadav and Bahujan Samaj Party supremo Mayawati after the two leaders announced an alliance without the grand old party for the Lok Sabha elections.

As tensions rise between the Congress and the RJD with regard to distribution of seats, the former feels that the rally on February 3 could be a turning point in the seat-sharing talks. The Congress is keen that the discussions on seat sharing are not concluded before the rally. The reason for this is that the Congress has planned the rally as a show of strength and it feels that if it gets a good response, it will bolster the party's claims for a bigger presence in the alliance than what the RJD is currently willing to give it.
