Telangana CM weakened TSRTC with an aim to privatise it alleges union leader

Telangana CM weakened TSRTC with an aim to privatise it alleges union leader

TSRTC Joint Action Committee co-convenor Thomas Reddy said that the government is conspiring to clampdown the protests by arresting the remaining JAC leaders.

news Protest

After the detention of Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC) Joint Action Committee leaders who were protesting against the government, JAC co-convenor Thomas Reddy on Monday alleged that the government was planning a clampdown. He claimed that the TRS government was conspiring to arrest the remaining JAC leaders.

Condemning the detention of the JAC leaders--Ashwathama Reddy, Raji Reddy, BS Rao and others, he said, “This is an atrocious move. We strongly condemn it. They have arrested our leaders illegally. They should be released immediately. There is a conspiracy to arrest the remaining 16 leaders. There is surveillance on us. We could be detained at any time,” Thomas claimed.

On Monday, police detained the JAC leaders who gathered at Gunpark in Nampally to pay homage to the Telangana martyrs.

Speaking about Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao’s decision to lay off the 48,000-odd protesting employees, Thomas said, “We consider the laying off of employees on Sunday as a black day in the history of TSRTC. We protested legally. We gave prior notice about our protest, but neither the management nor the Transport Minister called us for discussions.”

Thomas said that the government had the ulterior motive of privatising the TSRTC. “They are deliberately tainting our protest as undemocratic in the eyes of people. The government has pushed TSRTC into trouble with the intent of privatising it.” He added, “Since the beginning KCR neglected TSRTC. He imposed heavy taxes on the corporation. The government owes the corporation Rs 2,200 crores. Is it wrong to demand our remuneration?”

Thomas further said that the government hasn’t paid wages to the employees. He stressed that the struggle of the JAC is genuine. “The population of Bengaluru is the same of the twin cities--Secunderabad and Hyderabad, yet when they are plying 6,000 buses, we only have 2,200 buses. When we point this out, KCR is saying that we are doing drama and speaking against the government.”

The TSRTC JAC called for an indefinite strike on October 5, as the government failed to consider their 26 demands. The primary demand was to merge the TSRTC with the government. However, the government rejected their demands, and instead issued an ultimatum asking all staff to report to duty by 6 pm on October 5, else they would be dismissed. Despite the warning, 48,000-odd employees went ahead with the strike.
