Beti padhao, chunav mat ladwao: Haryana's mainstream parties deny tickets to women

While Naina Chautala (left) has been fielded by JJP, Babita Phogat is contesting the Haryana polls on a BJP ticket.

Haryana's mainstream political parties may have supported the 'Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao' campaign but they are a bit hesitant whenever it's about fielding women candidates. Parties like the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Congress and Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) have fielded a few female candidates in the Haryana assembly election 2019.

While the INLD has fielded only 15 women candidates in the upcoming polls, the BJP has given tickets to 12 female candidates. The Congress and the Jannayak Janata Party (JJP) has given tickets to nine and seven women candidates, respectively.

These parties had fielded more female candidates in 2014 as compared to the 2019 assembly elections. While the INLD had trusted 16 females in 2014 assembly polls, the BJP had fielded 15 and Congress gave tickets to 10 women.

This time for the Haryana assembly election, the BJP has refused tickets to three women, while the Congress has refused to give a ticket to one party worker. The INLD, too, did not give a party ticket to one of its party workers.

BJP party high command has dropped four sitting female MLAs including Ateli MLA and Deputy Speaker Santosh Yadav, Pataudi MLA Bimla Yadav, Mulana MLA Santosh Sarwan and Panipat city MLA Rohita Revdi.

The BJP party sources have said that the winnability of these sitting female MLAs was doubtful as they were facing opposition at the local level.

The saffron party has trusted two female celebrities - Babita Phogat and Sonali Phogat - who have been fielded from the Dadri and Adampur assembly constituencies, respectively.

Eight out of a total 15 female BJP candidates had managed to win the assembly elections in 2014. The daughter-in-laws of three former Haryana chief ministers Bansi Lal, Bhajan Lal, and OP Chautala - Kiran Chaudhary (Tosham), Renuka Bishnoi (Hansi) and Naina Singh Chautala (Dabwali) - had also won the elections.

Former Congress MLA from Hansi, Renuka Bishnoi has decided not to contest the Haryana assembly election on a Congress ticket this time.

Naina Chautala is contesting election on a Jannanak Janata Party (JJP) ticket from Badhda assembly constituency. Congress candidate Kiran Chaudhary is contesting from Tosham constituency.

Interestingly, the JJP and the Swaraj India, that are contesting their maiden elections, have also fielded seven and five female candidates, respectively. The AAP has given party tickets to three women candidates.

So far, most of the women MLAs who managed to win the assembly elections in Haryana were from Congress (44). Three independent women had also won the 2014 elections. What remains to be seen is how many of them will manage to win the Haryana assembly election 2019.
