Why Extinction Rebellion just embarked on a climate satyagraha, across the world’s major cities

I returned to Bengaluru in September after a gap of five years. I thought, before visiting, living standards must have improved. But it was shocking to observe poor infrastructure, bad air quality, high PM2.5 levels, and water shortages. I couldn’t grasp how this city could deteriorate so much. The poor air quality and increasing water shortage have made it unlivable.

I got involved with Extinction Rebellion (XR) in October 2018 when i was living in Bristol in the UK. The tipping point for me to get involved was the 2018 Kerala floods in which more than a million Indians became refugees and hundreds died. I was part of a group that created road blockades in London in November 2018. We captured five iconic bridges. Later i opened the XR India chapter.

While travelling for 40 days within India and giving talks on the climate crisis last month, i observed a lack of awareness among Indians around the issue. They fail to comprehend that massive deforestation leads to change in climatic conditions, then natural calamities, poverty and death. Whatever economic growth India achieves in a year is negated by continual droughts and floods.

If the trend continues, more than 50 million Indians might become climate refugees by 2030. There is enough evidence of increasing coastal flooding, sea storm and rainfall variation within India. This year we saw hundreds of deaths due to the floods in Bihar, UP, Maharashtra and MP alone.

Ironically, climate change is a much discussed topic among middle and upper class elites in India only. The majority of XR and Fridays for Future volunteers are from privileged families. But these movements won’t yield much positive result unless they include the struggles of millions of farmers and tribal communities which are suffering the most due to the consumeristic lifestyle of privileged people. That is why social activist Mayank Gandhi has recently joined our movement.

Recently, NITI Aayog said that 21 major Indian cities could run out of groundwater by 2020, affecting access for 100 million people. Chennai is facing dire water shortage already. All the four major reservoirs that supply drinking water to Chennai have dipped below zero. Today around 55% of India faces high to extremely high water stress. All of this paints a grave future.

On 20 September, Fridays for Future Delhi organised a protest at which more than 2,000 kids and adults turned up. This was a positive move and the first time in the history of Delhi or maybe in India, that so many people marched together against the climate crisis. Thanks to Greta Thunberg!

In the end, we were invited to meet Richa Sharma, joint secretary of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. We requested her ministry to declare a climate emergency in India. The next day i went to Prime Minister Modi’s office to submit a letter asking him to declare a climate emergency. We await his response.

The September 2019 IPCC report mentions that glaciers, snow, ice and permafrost are declining and will continue to do so. This will lead to landslides, avalanches, rockfalls and floods. Sea level will continue to rise for centuries. It could reach around 30-60 cm by 2100 even if greenhouse gas emissions are sharply reduced and global warming is limited to well below 2°C.

That is why today’s youth has no other option left than to come on the streets to demand a better future. During XR’s international rebellion which began yesterday many major cities like London, Berlin, Paris and New York will see road blockades, to push governments to listen and take radical decisions to cut carbon emissions to net zero.

In India and many developing countries, due to our social-political laws, we can’t create road blockades. But we can spread awareness through mass die-in acts, funeral marches, meditation, music and by giving talks on the climate and ecological crisis. More than ten Indian cities will take part in the October rebellion when we plan to share an open letter which will contain a citizen’s declaration of a climate crisis.

This year India is celebrating the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi. It was Gandhiji who started satyagraha (non-violent resistance). So, the climate satyagraha has begun and will not stop until our goal is achieved.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
