Aarey colony dispute: 2141 trees already cut, Mumbai Metro to go ahead with construction

MMRCL has said that it will go ahead with construction as the land required to build the car shed has already been cleared (PTI image)

After a whirlwind of court orders, protests and stays, Mumbai Metro Rail Corp says that it has got what it wants to build Metro car shed on the heavily forested land in the middle of Mumbai.



In a victory to Mumbaikars, who were strongly protesting against the felling of trees in Aarey Milk Colony, the Supreme Court on Monday stayed anymore tree-cutting in the region till further orders.



The order for status quo was given by a bench specially constituted after the apex court took suo motu (on its own) cognisance of a letter petition addressed to Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi by law student Rishav Ranjan seeking a stay on felling of trees in the colony.

However, it may not be a real win. The Maharashtra government and Mumbai Metro Rail Corp Ltd (MMRCL) have admitted that they have already cut enough trees to clear the land required for car shed and they will go ahead with construction.

"We respect the order of the Supreme Court passed today [October 7]. No future tree felling activity at the car shed site in Aarey Milk Colony will be undertaken," Mumbai Metro's spokesperson said, adding that other works, including clearing of already felled trees, will continue at the site.

The Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation started cutting trees on Friday evening, hours after the Bombay High Court refused to declare Aarey colony a forest and declined to quash the Mumbai municipal corporation's decision to allow felling of over 2,600 trees in the green zone to set up a Metro car shed.

Despite protests, the MMRCL cut 2,141 trees by next day.



"Following the decision of High Court on October 4, upholding permission of Tree Authority, the felling of 2,185 trees was undertaken on Oct 4 and 5, 2019 and as on date 2,141 trees have been felled. These will be cleared from the site and subsequent construction activities will be carried out," the Mumbai Metro spokesperson said.



The Metro authorities have defended tree felling by contending that it is restricted only to a small area in Aarey Colony, and is necessary to ensure a modern transport system for Mumbaikars.



As many as 29 protesters were arrested for allegedly obstructing and assaulting police personnel during the felling of trees. They were released from jail in the wee hours of Monday after being granted bail by a local court.

Protesters attempting to block felling of trees at Aarey colony on October 4 (PTI image)





What happened in Supreme Court



Solicitor General Tushar Mehta, appearing for Maharashtra and Mumbai's civic body, told the special bench of Justices Arun Mishra and Ashok Bhushan that whatever was required to be cut for the Metro car shed has already been done and they would not fell any more trees.

"We will decide this. Do not cut more trees," the bench said, adding, "Do not cut anything now".

It further said: "As undertaken, the status quo be maintained till the next date of hearing with respect to cutting of trees."

"Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General appearing for the state of Maharashtra, has stated that they are not going to cut any further trees till the next date of hearing. In the circumstances, the statement is quite fair," it said.

The court said its forest bench would take up the matter for further hearing on October 21.



Not a first for Aarey colony



This is not the first incident when the Aarey colony is being shrunk to make way for modern Mumbai. Establish in 1949 for dairy development, the colony was cut short by 200 acres to make way for Film City in 1971.



In 2010, Byculla Zoo was extended 40 acres into the Aarey Colony.



The Maharashtra government has argued that in the current plan for construction of the Metro rail car shed, only 30 hectares of about 1,300 hectares that make up the Aarey forest would be cleaned up. The Film City required nearly seven times more land.
