TSRTC employees JAC leaders held at Gun Park, fast plan put off

Hyderabad: TSRTC employees unions JAC leaders Ashwathama Reddy and K. Raji Reddy were apprehended by police today at Gun Park when they tried to pay tributes to Telangana martyrs as part of their strike. The TSRTC JAC leaders expressed their displeasure over their arrests when they had gone to pay tributes to the martyrs at the Gun Park memorial as a sign of protest.

Meanwhile, the employee’s unions have postponed their proposed hunger strike program. They said they had taken the decision to postpone the hunger strike as there was no permission from the police to hold the same. Although, the State government allowed private operators to serve the passengers and they were allegedly charging huge fare from them in violation of the rules.

The arrested JAC leaders were taken to different police stations. While Ashwathama was shifted to Mahakali Police Station in Secunderabad, JAC Co-Convenor Raji Reddy has been shifted to Saifabad Police Station. Police have been deployed to prevent the trade unions leaders from reaching the RTC union office. The arrested JAC leaders were later released by the police.

Tension prevailed as a large number of TSRTC workers gathered there to pay homage at the Gun Park memorial. As the TSRTC union leaders reached the place, police were called in to arrest the RTC workers. Police said they did not given permissions to conduct dharnas and protests leading to their arrests. The JAC leaders, who wanted to go on a hunger strike to achieve their demands, have postponed the fast after police refused permission. The city police had earlier denied permission for the RTC employees to organize protests at Indira Park.

Ashwathama said the JAC would discuss future plans of action. He expressed his displeasure against State government’s decision on sacking RTC employees who were on strike for the last two days.

Telangana Mazdoor Union General Secretary Thomas Reddy requested all civil groups and public to extend their support to RTC unions. “We will take up black badge protests to protest against the government’s decision’” he said. The Unions leaders said they have gathered at Gun Park to pay tributes to Telangana Martyrs, however, police detained them unlawfully. The strike called by trade unions leaders entered the third day and commuters continue to rely on MMTS, metro services, autos, and cabs while the authorities were running a limited number of city buses and private vehicles.

NSS
