RSS wants streaming platforms to nix ‘anti-India’, ‘anti-Hindu’ content

NEW DELHI: Representatives of the Rashtriya Swayamsewak Sangh ( RSS ) have been holding meetings with officials of online streaming platforms such as Netflix and Amazon to restrict ‘antinational’ and ‘anti-Hindu’ content on shows and urge them to show content that “represents real Indian culture and ethos.”RSS representatives have held over six such informal meetings in the last four months in New Delhi and Mumbai, an insider told ET. Incidentally, information and broadcasting minister Prakash Javadekar had recently said the government had sought suggestions from stakeholders on how to deal with the issue and the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal has scheduled a meeting on Friday to specifically discuss regulation and certification of content on online curated content providers (OCCPs) with stakeholders.The RSS wants to restrict content ‘critical’ of the Indian standpoint on Kashmir or defamatory to Hindu symbols and the Indian Army, an office-bearer told ET. He said that the organisation was in touch with representatives from most leading OCCPs to start a conversation around content. One such meeting with a Netflix official was held some days ago in New Delhi after protests over the series ‘Leila’. “We reminded them about the Twitter case when the issue of blocking rightwing handles was raised by Anurag Thakur in a parliamentary committee and officials summoned. We just want them to be mindful of Indian sensibilities when they commission or select content and not go by merely what sells. We also suggested to involve more Indians when they scout for content for India,” the RSS insider said. Netflix officials declined to comment on the matter.RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat too was informed about the issue in a meeting of office-bearers held recently in Rajasthan. “He is concerned particularly about the way acts of lynching were portrayed in many shows, linking it to Hindu nationalists. It only helps evil forces to exploit the minority sentiment,” the RSS insider said.Ministry officials told ET that it is exploring ways to address the issue without infringing on the freedom of video on demand (VoDs). A mechanism of having a dedicated body with a helpline to address complaints, so that every matter doesn't have to go to court, is being looked at, an official said. “Larger players may be ready for a tier 2 system with a TV-style regulation on online streaming platforms, as it may prevent legislation, but smaller players may oppose it because of economic implications. There are bigger divisions in the industry over this,” the official said. Panchajanya editor Hitesh Shankar said, “when the narrative of Kashmir is being set right after many years, we cannot let misconceptions and defence of terror spread to homes through handsets. It is the moral duty of the government to address this.”CEO of MX Player , an over the top media service (OTT) platform owned by Times Internet Limited, Karan Bedi, said OTT platforms have been responsible to a very large extent and that it was important to uphold that freedom in creativity.Atul Pandey partner at law firm Khaitan and Co said the government will have to approach the issue very carefully as there was already the Cinematograph Act and CBFC that certifies and regulates content meant for public viewing. “Multiple PILs have been filed with regard to content on VoDs and they have been dismissed every time. But more regulation is not the answer. Strengthening self-regulation could be better,” he said.The Sangh has also been in touch with platforms such as Zee5 and Ullu TV, demanding that certain content on the platform be taken off as it was not “appropriate for Indian viewing,” the RSS representative said. “The large scale of sexual violence in the videos is affecting minds of our youth, particularly in rural areas,” said Arun Anand, CEO of Indraprastha Vishwa Samvad Kendra, an RSS associate. “We are aware that there are corporate and economic interests and we want to make sure our ideological concerns are not exploited by big OTT players who are equally guilty of promoting obscenity or violence. We feel some legislation is needed for the global platforms to take our objections seriously,” Anand added.ET has learnt RSS has unofficially urged VoD service providers to also show content that brings out the “brighter side of India.” Two units of the RSS, the Bharatiya Chitra Sadhna and Sanskar Bharati have been actively reaching out to filmmakers, scriptwriters and also officials in OTT platforms to take this forward. Bharatiya Chitra Sadhana was formed three years ago by the RSS to promote a ‘Bharatiya’ view of cinema and get filmmakers to make short films on Indian culture and values, charity in the Indian way of life, the importance of family, social harmony, Indian folk art, environment, women, national security, valour and nation-building.Sangh representatives have earlier questioned depiction of women in the show ‘Four Shots’ on Amazon Prime and ‘Ghoul’, ‘Sacred Games’ and ‘Leila’ on Netflix, apart from two shows on Zee that allegedly portrayed the Indian Army in bad light. Panchajanya, a magazine associated with the RSS, too published a piece condemning some scenes in ‘The Family Man’ that were allegedly anti-India.
