Lecture marking 150th birthday of Gandhi comes to Coventry University

Shobhana Radhakrishna (centre) with Head of Academic Studies at CU Coventry Jackie Whitehouse (right), and the audience.

Shobhana Radhakrishna (centre) with Head of Academic Studies at CU Coventry Jackie Whitehouse (right), and the audience.

AN EXPERT on Mahatma Gandhi’s life and political activism has encouraged CU Coventry students to be “the change they want to see in the world”.

Shobhana Radhakrishna was giving a lecture at CU Coventry’s Mile Lane campus commemorating the 150th birthday of the influential Indian political activist and spiritual leader.

Ms Radhakrishna said: “Mahatma Gandhi was a truly inspirational person, and his non-violent protests against British rule in India still have relevance today.

“His compassion and ethics are qualities that everyone can aspire to, both in their jobs and their personal lives.

“I came to CU Coventry because of the great young minds the students have, and those I spoke to in my lecture at CU Coventry can be the change they want to see in the world.

“Our world leaders currently show no signs of solving modern day issues such as climate change and the displacement of refugees.

“I’d like to think Gandhi’s achievements show that change is always possible, and it can be achieved without the need for violence.”

The talk was part of a world tour sponsored by the Consulate General of India visiting 30 countries, with lectures on how lessons can still be learnt from Gandhi’s struggle.

At a packed event, students heard about Gandhi’s education in London, his protests against the British government in India at the time, and how he succeeded in making a transformational change through his approaches and philosophy.

Bhajan Aulak, management and leadership course leader at CU Coventry, who helped organise the lecture, said: “This lecture was fascinating, and gave all of the students in attendance something to think about as they left the space.

“I have to thank Shobhana for choosing to visit CU Coventry, and I hope the students who listened to her take a little bit of inspiration from her talk.”
