Protest against Navjot Singh Sidhu as train tragedy continues to haunt Amritsar even after a year

Protest against Navjot Singh Sidhu | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights This Dussehra is a grim reminder of last year's tragedy in which 59 people were killed The protesters carried out a candlelight protest against Sidhu Sidhu had promised financial assistance to the families of those who died in the accident

Amritsar: A year after the Amritsar train tragedy that claimed the lives of at least 59 people, scores of people staged protest in Punjab on Tuesday against Congress leader and then MLA from Amritsar (East) Navjot Singh Sidhu.

The protesters carried out a candlelight protest against Sidhu alleging the former Punjab minister failed to deliver on the promise of providing jobs and compensation to victims’ family. They were heard raising the slogan ‘Sidhu Murdabad’ (Down with Sidhu) while carrying placards.

Last month, 30 families had staged a protest outside the residence of former Punjab minister in Amritsar, demanding jobs for the kin of the deceased.

This Dussehra is a grim reminder of last year's tragedy in which 59 people were killed and over 100 others injured after being run over by a fast-moving train during a Dusshera celebration in Amritsar. The crowd was standing on the tracks to watch a Ravana effigy burn in the Joda Pathak area on the outskirts of Amritsar on October 19 last year when the train hit them.

The incident had triggered a widespread outrage with people demanding stern action against officials, train drivers and adequate compensation for the victims.

Sidhu’s wife Navjot Kaur, who was the guest of honour at the event, had claimed that she had left the site shortly before the incident.

Sidhu had also said that the celebration was held there every year and that the railway authorities were alerted in advance about the need to moderate the speed of train traffic on the route. The then Punjab Local Bodies Minister had also said that he would bear the costs of education and other expenses of the children who lost their parents in the tragedy besides promising to ensure government jobs for the kin of the dead.

Sidhu had also assured financial help to women who had lost their husbands in the fatal incident. He, however, allegedly did not fulfil any of his promises made to the families of those who died in the accident.

After the tragic incident, the Punjab government had announced a compensation of Rs 5 lakh to the kin of those who died in the accident. The Centre had also announced to give an exgratia aid of Rs 2 lakh to the family of each dead.

An inquiry into the incident was also ordered by Chief Minister Amarinder Singh. A 300-page report was submitted to the Punjab Home Secretary in November last year. Its findings or implementation of recommendations - if any - are not available in the public domain.
