Bill Gates Thinks We Can Fix Malnutrition In 20 Years, If We Understand How Our Digestion Works

Bill Gates was once defined by being the founder and CEO of Microsoft. In the years since his retirement however, he hasn't taken it easy. He's instead been using his money and clout to help save the world, and he has some very specific ideas about how.

Images courtesy: Reuters

Gates was presented with the Professor Hawking Fellowship by the Cambridge Union Society earlier this week, created to honor impactful contributions to the STEM fields. Addressing the attendees at the event, he talked about the progress he hopes to see us make in global health in the next couple of decades. And according to him, one of the biggest problems to solve there is malnutrition.

He's right of course, a lack of food contributes to the deaths of more than two million children under five each year. However, Gates believe we'll be able to significantly slash that number in the next 20 years. And the key, he says, is hidden within the human body.

Gates said at the event that he believes the clues we need to better understand nutrition lie within the human microbiome, i.e. the microcosm of bacteria in our bodies that serve various needs. Specifically though, he's talking about the bacteria in your gut and digestive tract.

Now, there's currently far too little research into this area, indeed there's no real proof that consuming probiotic milk and the like is helping you one bit. What doctors and experts have noticed though is that digestive bacteria in malnourished kids looks drastically different. And the theory is that, in dire circumstances, starving children might benefit more from food and treatment specifically tailored to target that digestive bacteria.

To demonstrate his point, Gates brought up previous work by a biologist Jeff Gordon at the Washington University in St. Louis. In 2013, he published a study about the microbiomes of young twins, specifically how sometimes one twin would be healthy while the other would develop a severe form of malnutrition. In those cases, he said, each of them had very different microbiomes despite them having the same genes and receiving the same foods.Additionally, when Gordon transplanted some of those gut bacteria from malnourished twins into mice, the animals also found it hard to absorb nutrients.

"So this study showed for the first time," Gates said, "that the microbiome is not just a byproduct of your health but also is a key component of your nutritional health."

Gordon and his collaborators have since continued to further their research in that area, and Gates believes they're on the path to effectively curing malnourishment. "These microbiome targeted therapies are still in early testing," Gates said, "but I believe we'll find a way to make them work."

And aside from being more effective, they should also be much cheaper and easier to distribute than currently-used medical treatment, so it should reach far more affected people. "That is as big a breakthrough as anything else we will do in health over the next two decades," Gates said.
