French President Emmanuel Macron vows 'unrelenting fight' against Islamist terror

French President Emmanuel Macron vows 'unrelenting fight' against Islamist terror | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Mickael Harpon, the accused had converted to Islam 10 years ago It was "inconceivable and unacceptable" - Macron further said

Paris: French President Emmanuel Macron vows 'unrelenting fight' against Islamist terror, news agency AFP reported. Earlier had held a meeting with Defence Minister Rajnath Singh earlier today, in Paris.

"We will wage an unrelenting fight in the face of Islamist terrorism," Macron said at a ceremony at the police headquarters. Macron paid a tribute to four Paris police staff who were stabbed to death by a radicalised colleague.

According to reports Mickael Harpon, the man who killed the police personnel, had converted to Islam 10 years ago. The 45-year-old computer expert working in the intelligence department of the police used a kitchen knife to kill one woman colleague and three male colleagues in a rampage that ended when a police officer shot him dead.

Macron said that it was "inconceivable and unacceptable" that Harpon carried out the attack "in the very place where we pursue terrorists and criminals".

Earlier, Indian Defence Minister Rajnath Singh called on Macron and the two leaders discussed the way forward for India-France defence and strategic ties during their 'very warm and productive' meeting.

"The meeting demonstrated the depth of India-France bilateral partnership, especially in the defence sector, that has significantly strengthened in recent times. Both leaders resolved to take the relationship to the next higher level," a statement issued by the Ministry of Defence said after a 35-minute meeting between the two leaders.

"Singh thanked President Macron for his strong support to further intensifying the strategic partnership between the two countries and for his support to the Make in India initiative," it added.

"We have a multi-dimensional relationship with France and the ties are progressing on all fronts. The talks today are part of a comprehensive defence dialogue between the two countries," said Defence Secretary Ajay Kumar.


