Delhi University teachers, students march against non-appointment of Hindi department head

Delhi University teachers and students on Monday protested against the non-appointment of Hindi Department Head of the University. The Post of the Head of the Department was vacant after the tenure of former Head of Department of Hindi ended on September 12.

The teachers and students claim that the University Vice-Chancellor, however, has on the same day completed the formalities of appointing the next HOD consulting the outgoing HOD. However, no communication or announcement about the appointment of the HOD was made to the department.

The protesting students and teachers also said that a memorandum and a letter were submitted to the Vice Chancellor’s office asking for the immediate appointment of the HOD yet no action has been taken. The protesting teachers and students have raised the question as to why the appointment has been delayed in spite of all the formalities to appoint Professor Sheoraj Singh Bechain was already completed.

Professor Sheoraj Singh Bechain is the senior-most faculty member of the department and is also one of the handful Dalit professors at Delhi University. He is also a renowned name in the anti-caste and Dalit literature. Professor Bechain was also awarded by the Hindi Academy of Madhya Pradesh and Delhi Governments. It has also been pointed out that in the past 70 years not a single Dalit faculty member has been appointed as the Head of the Department.

The students and teachers of Delhi University protested against the discriminatory inaction on the part of the university administration by marching from Arts Faculty to the Vice-Chancellors office demanding the appointment of Professor Bechain as per the seniority clause.

Delhi University will soon be introducing five new online undergraduate programmes. As per reports, the undergraduate online courses will begin in January 2020. The courses will be introduced for the BA, B.Com and Honours programme.

Also Read: DU to introduce five new online undergraduate courses from January 2020 onwards
