High on Article 370, BJP’s campaigning lacklustre in Maharashtra

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Shiv Kumar

Tribune News Service

Mumbai, October 9

With just over ten days left for the assembly elections in Maharashtra, the ruling BJP-Shiv Sena combine’s election campaign is still to get off the ground.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the combine’s star campaigner, will hit the campaign trail only on October 14—exactly a week before polling day. According to Bharatiya Janata Party sources here, Modi is likely to address nine rallies in different parts of Maharashtra over two or three days before campaigning in Haryana.

Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and party chief Amit Shah are already on the campaign trail and has been holding election meetings in different parts of Maharashtra.

Both leaders have been playing up the central government’s decision to abrogate Article 370.

“In one stroke, Prime Minister Narendra Modi solved a 70-year old problem and united Kashmir with the rest of India. People should vote with this achievement in mind,” Shah said at an election meeting on Tuesday at the Parli constituency where Pankaja Munde is contesting.

In Dhule district, Fadnavis too played up the abrogation of Article 370 as much as his government’s waiver of farm loans.

“We are better than the Congress and the NCP when it comes to fulfilling our election promises—whether abrogating Article 370 or waiving off farm loans,” Fadnavis said at another rally on Tuesday.



The Chief Minister also boasted that the Congress and the NCP have lost most of their leaders to the ruling coalition. “Sharad Pawar says his glass is half empty. It will be completely empty after this elections,” Fadnavis said at the rally.



State BJP leaders say their work has become easier after reports of former Congress president Rahul Gandhi’s holiday in Cambodia appeared in the media.

“At local level meetings we are already telling people that Rahul Gandhi has run away,” a BJP leader from Mumbai said.



On the other hand, the Congress-NCP combine’s campaign is depending entirely on Pawar who has been holding rallies across the state.



”The BJP’s strategy of campaigning on the basis of the removal of Article 370 will not work in Maharashtra,” Maharashtra Congress president Balasaheb Thorat told reporters here.

“The Congress party is playing up issues like growing unemployment and farmers’ issues,” says

Thorat.
