CM trying to loot RTC lands worth Rs 50,000 crore, says Revanth

Hyderabad: The Congress has alleged that TRS government is trying to loot RTC assets worth Rs 50,000 crore in guise of RTC strike. The party leaders alleged that Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao is trying to hand over the RTC to a corporate company by privatising 50 per cent of the RTC.

The Chief Minister is behaving in favor of capitalists instead of protecting the interests of the poor, said Cong leaders Revanth and Bhatti

On Monday, Congress leaders A Revanth Reddy, Mallu Bhatti Vikramarka, Ponnala Laxmaiah and others alleged that KCR is behaving in favor of capitalists instead of protecting the interests of the poor.

Revanth Reddy alleged that KCR insulted the RTC employees by making them to participate in discussions with antiTelanganite Transport Minister Puvvada Ajay Kumar. He said that KCR has ‘Mega’ plan behind it. He alleged that KCR is preparing plan for the last four years to loot the thousands of crores of RTC assets. “KCR tried to privatise the RTC through Goldstone Company four years ago through Electra buses”, he said.

He alleged that KCR’s relatives have taken thousands of crores of worth RTC lands for lease in Hyderabad and Karimnagar. He said that the KCR relatives constructed Prathima Hospital in Karimangar in RTC lands by taking them for lease.

Revanth Reddy alleged that KCR had reduced VAT from 16 per cent to 1 per cent on petrol to be used in Aero plans to help the GMR Company, and had increased the VAT from 22.25 per cent to 27 per cent for RTC intentionally. This led the RTC to pay Rs 700 crore to the government.

The TRS government is also collecting taxes about Rs 150 crore from RTC on spare parts. The government is also not giving Rs 700 crore for the bus passes of students, employees and others. KCR government is burdening the RTC with a total of Rs 1500 crore. CLP leader Bhatti alleged that KCR is behaving like a dictator saying that more than 45000 RTC employees are not employees of the RTC.

He demanded the state government to fill loses facing the RTC by the revenue coming from liquor sales and other sources. He said that RTC employees’ demands are justified demands and the government has to fulfill their demands.

Former Minister Ponnala Laxmaiah has alleged that KCR handed over the RTC land to his followers by shifting the retrading system located in Warangal. He alleged that KCR has given a chance to his followers to run the private buses in RTC.

Authored by Mohammed Hussain, mohammedhussain.reporter@gmail.com Twitter: @writetohussain
