Girl student walking to school for exam - abducted, raped in Noida hotel

In the hotel register, the manager did not mention the real names of the victim and the accused to avoid detection. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Girl student abducted and raped while she was going to school Police arrest prime accused and his friend, a hotel manager Both accused have been sent to judicial custody

Noida: The Delhi-NCR seems to have no plan in place to fight back the tag of 'dangerous for women' as crimes against women show no sign of abating. In a shocking incident, a girl student, who was on her way from home to take an exam at school, was allegedly abducted and raped at a hotel in Greater Noida in Uttar Pradesh on Friday.

Police have now arrested the prime accused and his friend, a hotel manager, for allegedly helping the accused to perpetrate the crime.

According to a report, the main accused has been identified as Deepanshu. While his hotel manager friend has been identified as Sakib.

A police officer said they received information that a student was abducted and raped at a hotel associated with Oyo Rooms.

Later, the victim's family approached the police and an FIR was filed against the accused. Both the victim and the accused hail from different areas of the city.

"We came to know that the accused, a motorbike mechanic, kidnapped the girl and took her to a hotel after booking a room online. We found that the hotel manager was also a part of the crime plan. During the interrogation, the two accused confessed to their crime and both have been sent to judicial custody," the report quoted the SHO as saying.

According to police, the main accused spotted the girl when she was going to school to take an exam. In the hotel register, the manager did not mention the real names of the victim and the accused to avoid detection.

In a statement, an Oyo spokesperson clarified that they are collecting details about the incident and assured any help to the police to investigate the matter.

In a similar incident, an MBBS student escaped an attempted rape after an intruder entered her hostel room at Gandhi Medical College in Bhopal on Saturday (October 5). However, the accused managed to flee after the victim put up a strong defence.

The incident occurred in the early hours when miscreant held the victim by her neck from behind and asked her to remove her clothes.

The girl student kicked the intruder forcing him to fall down on the bed. The victim also managed to wrest away an 18-inch screwdriver from the intruder's hand. Stunned by the girl's fightback, the accused managed to escape as the victim screamed for help.

As the news of the intruder's entry spread in the hostel, students staged a massive protest demanding better security.
