Congress drags Draupadi into EVM controversy, BJP demands apology from Rahul Gandhi

Congress

Draupadi

BJP

Election Commission

Hyderabad

Asaduddin Owaisi

Rahul Gandhi

A poster released by the TelanganaCommittee in which they have compared the failure of Telangana's democracy to the disrobing ofin Mahabharat has drawn sharp criticism from rival parties including theand Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (MIM).The Congress held a massive protest against theof India at dharna chowk at Indira Park on Thursday. The invitation and poster released for the event had a picture of Draupadi (democracy in Telangana) being stripped by the Election Commission of India while Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao, and MIM party chief andMPare spectators to the episode.The Election Commission Coordination Committee of the Pradesh Congress Committee brought out the poster.BJP spokesperson Krishna Sagar Rao raised an objection to the poster saying, “The poster is hurting the feelings of Hindus. Does the Congress have no other comparison than this religious example that hurts crores of people of India?” He demanded an apology from Congress Presidentand the PCC President N Uttam Kumar Reddy.Owaisi asked, “Will the Congress tolerate if someone makes such comparisons on Sonia Gandhi or Priyanka Gandhi? Of course, I will not do. But someone may do.”Congress Election Commission Coordination Committee Chairman Marri Sasidhar Reddy rejected the BJP’s demand for an apology. “Forget Rahul, even I will not apologise. The BJP should not think it is the only custodian of Hindu dharma. We all respect and follow it,” he said.Owaisi did not agree with the demand of the Congress and many other parties for replacement of the EVMs with ballot papers. “What I want is to let the VVPats (voter verified paper audit trial) be made 100 percent compulsory. Count both the votes polled in the EVMs and the VVPATS,” he said.Apart from the Congress, the Telugu Desam Party has been campaigning for the replacement of EVMs with ballot papers.
