Maharashtra: Massive jolt for Shiv Sena, 26 corporators resign to support rebel candidate

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray

Key Highlights 26 Shiv Sena corporators and around 300 workers of the party send their resignation to the party chief Uddhav Thackeray Unhappy with seat-sharing formula, they resigned to support party’s rebel candidate This resignation of Sena leaders might cause trouble for the alliance ahead of the Assembly polls

Mumbai: In a big jolt for the Shiv Sena ahead of the October 21 state Assembly elections, 26 Shiv Sena corporators and around 300 workers of the party sent their resignation to the party chief Uddhav Thackeray citing their “unhappiness over the distribution of seats” for the upcoming polls.

Unhappy with the seat-sharing formula, they resigned to support the party’s rebel candidate. Ganpat Kalu Gayakwad is contesting from the Kalyan East Assembly seat and his name featured in the first list released by the BJP.

While the BJP-Shiv Sena combine is not going to face any challenge from the Congress or the NCP in Maharashtra, this resignation of Sena leaders might cause trouble for the alliance ahead of the Assembly polls.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is the biggest campaigner for the BJP in the poll-bound states and will hold four rallies in Haryana, followed by nine rallies in Maharashtra.

Out of the nine rallies in Maharashtra, two key rallies will be on October 17 at Satara and Pune. BJP president Amit Shah will hold 18 rallies in the western state.

In Haryana, Modi will kick off his campaign trail from October 14 and will address crowds in Vallavgarh, Dadri, Thanesar and Hisar.

Shah will hold rallies and meetings on the same day in Ratia, Jind, Panchkula, Kalka, Tosham, Dadri among other Assembly constituencies.

Disgruntled former Congress' Mumbai unit president Sanjay Nirupam has said that he won’t campaign for the grand old party after his request for a candidate from Versova was rejected by the party leadership. Former Haryana Congress chief Ashok Tanwar also tendered his resignation from the party, thereby making things easier for the BJP in the state.

Talking to news agency IANS Nirupam said, “For Mumbai, I had recommended only one name of a potential winner, Muslim candidate from Versova, but that has been rejected without assigning reasons. This means the party has no need for me. I shall sit at home during elections.”

Tanwar, on the other hand, said a conspiracy was going on in the Congress to “politically assassinate” people close to former party president Rahul Gandhi.

In the 2014 elections, the BJP got 15, the Shiv Sena secured 14, the Congress five, while the Samajwadi Party and the All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeeen (AIMIM) got one seat each.

Similarly, in the 2014 and 2019 Lok Sabha, the BJP-Sena alliance obliterated the opposition from all the six Lok Sabha seats in the city, giving the alliance an advantage over the Opposition.
