BSNL workers urge PM Modi to grant revival package to prevent shutdown

At a time when several reports indicate that the government is looking to shut state-run Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL), the employees of the ailing telecom firm have urged Prime Minister Narendra Modi to approve a revival package to rescue the company.

BSNL employees urged the government to approve the bailout package prepared by the Department of Telecommunication (DoT) and suggested that the company can be revived. Employees of BSNL have exuded confidence that the company can be revived in three to four years as per the DoT's estimate.

Speaking to Business Standard, K Sebastian, general secretary, Sanchar Nigam Executives Association, said he recently wrote a letter to PM Modi and urged him to approve the bailout package without delay.

However, the government is not keen on approving the revival package and is looking to pull the shutter on both the companies, according to several reports.

BSNL has asked the government for help by converting its existing debt into a sovereign guarantee, a pay revision and a voluntary retirement scheme (VRS) apart from allowing the state-run telco to get 4G spectrum across India through equity infusion of Rs 7,000 crore.

The company said that the proposed VRS package could be funded by a bond issue over 10 years. Sebastian's letter also suggests that senior officials are not on board with the bailout package but employees of BSNL are confident that the telco can be revived.

BSNL has over 1.70 lakh employees and almost half of the company's employees are set to retire over the next five to six years. These are the only people who will get a VRS while the rest of the bailout package can be used to turn around the fortune of BSNL.

The state-run telco has suffered an estimated loss of Rs 14,000 crore in 2018-19 and it is likely to further increase as it fails to compete with new-age telecom providers like Reliance Jio, Airtel and others. Its total loss over the past four years has been pegged close to Rs 32,000 crore.

A few days ago, a report on Financial Express indicated that the government will soon take a call to close loss-making telcos BSNL and MTNL.

The government had also ruled out strategic divestment of these two telecom companies as the sector is currently under immense pressure and both the state-run telcos are unlikely to get any bids.

Meanwhile, both BSNL and MTNL Unions are planning nationwide strikes as their salaries have been delayed. They have planned to go on a strike even before Diwali if they do not get their salaries for the month, according to a report.

However, the government is likely to look for ways to reduce the cost of closing both the telecom companies including redeployment of some employees while only a fraction of employees redeployed from other PSUs and government departments need to be offered a VRS package.
