Mumbai: Aarey protesters demand charges against them be dropped

MUMBAI: More than a dozen of the 29 people who were arrested over the last weekend for protesting against the felling of trees at Aarey Colony in Mumbai have demanded that all charges pressed against them by the police be immediately dropped.One of the many charges the protesters have been booked under is Section 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty) of the IPC. The protestors said that for their attempts to enquire and understand the sudden cutting of trees at Aarey Colony, the authorities treated them as hardcore criminals, pushing them and bruising them.Many of those who were arrested gathered together on Thursday and shared their experience of being dragged to various police stations and having to spend the night in the jail as well.Shruti Nair who runs her design studio said that there were policemen who pushed them and she still had bruise marks on her. "We were detained like criminals and even stripped in prison. We demand an inquiry to know on what basis were the arrest made considering that there were several who were taken to the police station but a handful were arrested," she said.Sandeep Parab, a stock trader, said that on the night he found that it was those who wanted to go back home that were arrested. "The police had completely barricaded the area owing to which people were unable to leave as well. However, those who were trying to leave the area were picked up and taken to the police station. The authorities have forgotten to differentiate between the protesters and criminals," said Parab, adding that it was the common Mumbaikar, from a teacher to an IT professional, a filmmaker and local adivasis who came to protest.Siddarth Anbhave recounted last Friday night after they were taken to the police station. "At Aarey when we reached on Friday night it was a sad state to see several trees cut, nests of birds scattered all around and chicks from those nests whose eyes too had not opened up yet. At the police station we were informed that we would be left in the morning. However, in the morning when the morning duty officers arrived they said that we were being taken to court and then to Thane jail. There were kept with those pressed with charges of murder and gangrape. All this only because we came out to protest against the trees," he said.Delhi law student Rishav Ranjan, whose letter sent to the CJI on the issue led to a Special Bench to be constituted to hear the matter in the Supreme Court on October 7 earlier this week, said that he had again written to the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Ltd authorities demanding that no kind of construction work be carried out at the proposed Metro 3 car depot."The matter is now under litigation and tomorrow if the area is tagged as an ecologically sensitive zone then the construction taking place there would need to be pulled down. Therefore, the authorities need to respect the soul and spirit of the order which says no felling of trees should be done and not stick to the exact words. We are looking forward to the next hearing on October 21," he said.
