AU sets ball rolling for student council polls

Allahabad: Having dissolved the erstwhile students’ union, Allahabad University is now gearing up to conduct the maiden election of the new student council before Diwali.The poll process will begin on October 12 with nomination forms being made available on the AU website. Voting for class representatives will be held on October 21 and the same for office-bearers of the council on October 22. Results will be announced on the same day.According to returning officer professor RK Singh, the application form for filing nominations for the post of class representative will be available on the website from till October 15.Nominations can be filed on October 16, between 9am and 2pm at the union hall. A list of candidates for the post will be published on the website on the same day around 5pm. Nominations can be withdrawn by October 17 and the final list of candidates in the fray will be announced on October 20.Polling for the 70-member electoral college, half of which will be female students, will be held on October 21 from 8am to 2pm. Among these 70, there will be 14 members each from arts, science and institutes and centres. There will also be 16 members from the law faculty and 12 from commerce. Counting will commence from 4pm and the results announced on the same date.The elected members will then contest for the five main posts of the student council — namely, president, vice-president, general secretary, joint secretary and publishing secretary.Those interested can fill in nomination forms on October 22, between 9am and noon, and will thereafter get an hour to withdraw their name. The final list will be announced the same day at 1.30pm.Voting will take place from 2pm to 4pm at the central library. Counting will start from 4.30pm and the results will be announced the same day, returning officer Singh said. Swearing-in will be held at union hall at 5.30pm.Apprehensive of large-scale protests amid simmering resentment over dissolution of the students’ union, AU has sought security cover from the district administration.The varsity’s fears are not unwarranted. Sanyukt Sangharsh Samiti, an outfit of disgruntled student leaders, has already started hosting public speeches against the student council polls. A signature campaign is also on the cards.
