Sena jams spanner in outsourcing plan

PCMC proposal for newly-built Bhosari hospital has ruffled feathers



After opposition from social workers, the proposal to outsource Bhosari Hospital has now run into roadblocks by politicians from Pimpri-Chinchwad, who are at odds with the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation’s (PCMC’s) decision. A Shiv Sena leader has written to Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis to look into the issue. The leader has also decided to take the issue to state public health minister Eknath Shinde.



The PCMC has recently completed work on the 100-bed hospital in Bhosari. The four-storey building is waiting to get functional and is expected to benefit lakhs of families living within the PCMC municipal limits and its surrounding areas. But ever since the local body considered outsourcing the facility the move has been strongly opposed by social workers and activists from the twin city. Now Shiv Sena leader Sulabha Ubale has opposed the idea.



Ubale said, “PCMC has outsourced some of the facilities at the Yeshwantrao Chavan Memorial (YCM) hospital to a private player and the experience has been bad. Even though the space and machinery were provided by the local body, the poor people were not provided treatment at the discounted rate. In fact, the private entity there has made huge profits. Despite this experience, PCMC still wants to outsource the Bhosari hospital claiming the local body does not have doctors for the facility.”



The Sena leader added, “If the PCMC is not able to run the facility they can hand it over to the state government who can run it better. If the local body is not capable of running the facility it makes no sense in building such big facility using huge public funds. There is vested interest in this due to which they are outsourcing it to a private firm. We have written to the chief minister to look into this and we will soon meet the public health minister Eknath Shinde and request him to probe this.”



The Bhosari hospital, once functional, will also ease the pressure of the overburdened YCM hospital in Pimpri. The local body has decided to outsource the facility claiming lack of experts and possible loss in running the facility. This has been strongly opposed by social activists who claim that the aim of the local body is not to make profit but to provide facilities to citizens. Earlier, the proposal was put up in the General Body meeting on January 19 at which several social workers and health activists held a protest at PCMC forcing the meeting to be adjourned.



PCMC chief, Shravan Hardikar, said, “Currently no decision regarding the outsourcing of the hospital has been taken. We have put up a proposal before the general body about different ways to run the facility. Outsourcing the facility is just one of the ways. The major problem PCMC has in running the facility is getting expert doctors. We can create multispecialities in other hospitals run by PCMC once the medical college at YCM gets functional and we are able to get doctors.”


