Aarey, Nanar stall BJP-Sena manifesto

Nanar refinery

electricity tariff

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray

(Top) Uddhav Thackeray, Aaditya and Devendra Fadnavis are the key players in the alliance; Congress and NCP release their joint manifesto

Motor Vehicles Act

(L) Green activists had given a spirited fight to save the trees in Aarey Colony

In Photos: People hold protest as tree cutting begins at Aarey, security heightened 1 10 2,141 trees felled Having cut all the trees it wanted to fell for the metro car shed in the Aarey Colony, Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Monday (October 7) said it will abide by the Supreme Court and will not chop any more trees for the project in the city's green lung. The corporation, which is executing the 33.5-km long Colaba-Speez Metro 3, has already cut as many as 2,141 trees at the disputed site. "We respect the order of the Supreme Court. No further tree felling activity at the car shed site in Aarey Milk Colony. As on date 2,141 trees have been felled (sic)," MMRCL tweeted again," Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL The Fallen Though the Supreme Court restricted MMRCL from cutting any more trees, the damage had already been done as 2,141 trees were felled by that time. "Other works, including clearing of logs of already felled trees, will continue at the site," MMRCL said in a tweet. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Aarey Adivasis mourn Over 100 Adivasi residents of Aarey Colony held a candlelight march on October 8 at Naushacha Pada to mourn the axing of over 2,000 trees for Metro-3 car shed. Several of them broke down while speaking of being jailed for saving the environment. "We have lived here for generations. The face of Aarey has changed for the worst in the past five years," said one resident. Residents begged the government to leave their neighbourhood untouched. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL 'Don't cut any more trees' After the authorities starting hacking trees in Aarey Colony in north Mumbai on Friday night, the Supreme Court on Monday ordered the authorities from cutting any more trees to set up a Metro car shed. "Don't cut anything now," a bench comprising justices Arun Mishra and Ashok Bhushan said. The apex court directed that if anybody is still under arrest for protesting the cutting of trees, they should be released forthwith on furnishing of personal bonds. Photo by Raju Shinde/BCCL Prohibitory orders continued on Sunday Prohibitory orders continued to be in force in Aarey Colony and surrounding areas for the second day on Sunday, as the felling of trees was under way to make way for a Metro car shed. Heavy security was deployed at Aarey Colony’s five entry points, including the key connecting road near Western Express Highway. Most of the shops, restaurants and roadside stalls remained closed on Sunday. Most of the shops, restaurants and roadside stalls remained closed in the area in view of the imposition of Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC), banning unlawful assembly, since Saturday. Photo by Raju Shinde/BCCL Aarey agitation Hours after the Bombay High Court dismissed petitions opposing tree-felling in Aarey Colony in north Mumbai, a prime green lung of the city, for Metro work, authorities started hacking down trees. At least 200 trees had been cut by Friday night, activists alleged. Protestors gathered at the spot asking why can't the authorities wait until a petition can be filed in the Supreme Court regarding the matter. "What is the hurry that they are cutting down trees in the middle of the night," said one of the protestors. The site also had heavy police deployment as hundreds of people have gathered in the area to stop trees from being hacked. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Protestors hug Aarey trees Protests continued during the wee hours of Saturday as authorities began cutting down trees at Mumbai's Aarey Colony for a metro car shed, merely hours after the Bombay High Court dismissed all petitions against the move. "It is saddening to see that the trees which provide life to others are being cut. This is happening when the government itself is urging people to plant more trees," a protestor said. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL How dare you? The entire Aarey Colony was cordoned off by Mumbai police Saturday morning after hundreds of green activists tried to stop the felling of trees in the area. "There is a heavy police deployment in the area. No one is allowed to enter Aarey Colony. Even tourists are being stopped," an activist said. "This matter is going to be heard by the NGT on October 10, and we hope to get some respite from there. But it seems like the authorities want to eliminate the entire green patch before the hearing," Stalin D, one of the activists, said. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL 'Aarey Vaachva' Shiv Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray, who is contesting the October 21 assembly election from Worli, extended his support to the protestors. "A project that should be executed with pride, the Metro 3, @MumbaiMetro3 has to do it in the cover of the night, with shame, slyness and heavy cop cover. The project supposed to get Mumbai clean air is hacking down a forest with a leopard, rusty-spotted cat and more," he tweeted. "Cutting trees at night is a pathetic attempt at trying to get away with something even those doing it know is wrong," Bollywood actor Farhan Akhtar tweeted. Aam Aadmi Party spokesperson Preeti Sharma Menon said cutting the trees was "a violation of the model code of conduct". "The order was uploaded by the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation only today, so it is deemed as an order today. They can't issue such orders when the code of conduct is in place," she told PTI. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Section 144 imposed After activists launched protest opposing tree-felling in Aarey Colony here for metro work yesterday, the Mumbai police on Saturday imposed Section 144 of CrPC near the metro construction site. The Section prohibits public gathering. Aarey Road has now been temporarily closed for traffic with heavy police deployment in the area. Police have booked 38 protestors under various sections of the IPC since late Friday night, the official said. Another official said over 60 people protesting against the felling of trees have been detained. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL

Thorny issues have driven a wedge between the two parties who, with polling just 10 days away, are now thinking of releasing their manifestos separately.The Shiv Sena and the BJP seem to be so busy tackling rebels and holding rallies that they haven’t had the time to release a joint election manifesto even 10 days before polling.According to senior leaders from both parties, there were some differences on the promises in the manifesto, so it was decided that there won’t be a joint public declaration of policy and aims.“The BJP wants us to tweak the manifesto so that issues such as declaring Aarey a forest and scrapping of thein Ratnagiri are not highlighted. Though these issues are contentious, they are important for us and we will include them in our manifesto,” said a senior Sena functionary.He also said that the party will most likely bring out its manifesto this weekend. The state assembly elections are slated for October 21 and campaigning ends on October 19.Senior Sena leader Subash Desai is coordinating with the BJP but so far there has been little communication on this front. If the BJP continues to insist on Aarey and Nanar, then Sena will release its own document, said a leader of the party.The Sena announced a series of election sops and freebies, including a 30 per cent reduction infor up to 300 units for residential users, Re 1 health check-ups all over the state, full meals for Rs 10, and free bus services in rural Maharashtra for school students at its annual Dussehra rally in Mumbai on Wednesday.also promised a complete farm-loan waiver. “I do not like the word “maafi”, I will give a complete loan “mukti” to the farmers after coming back to power,” he had said.A Sena functionary pointed out that since the two parties are in an alliance, there should have been a joint manifesto just like the Congress and the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP). But too many differences are creating roadblocks.Last week, the Congress and the NCP in its manifesto promised a blanket farm loan waiver, a monthly unemployment allowance of Rs 5,000, free education for students from KG till graduation, insurance for everyone and 80 per cent job reservation for locals. The alliance also promised a loan waiver within four months of coming to power. The manifesto also promises a special allowance of Rs 1500 to senior citizens without any income.State Congress chief Balasaheb Thorat and senior NCP leaders, including Supriya Sule and Jayant Patil released the joint 51-page manifesto that promises to increase the minimum wage to Rs 21,000. It also talks of doing away with property tax on homes less than 500 square feet. It pledges to bring down the electricity rates for industries and give better price to milk producers. Interestingly, the manifesto has also promised to bring down the hefty penalties in the new. Maharashtra hasn’t levied the new penalties so far.Sena MP Anil Desai said that the party’s manifesto is ready. However, another senior Sena leader said that it was delayed due to design errors.Meanwhile, Madhav Bhandari, head of BJP’s manifesto committee said, “We will release ours at the right time. Voters will get enough time to make an informed decision.”A senior BJP leader said, “After the BJP-Sena alliance was formed in 1990, both parties used to publish joint manifesto for assembly elections till 2009. It was called Vachannama. However, this practice was discontinued in 2014 when both parties contested assembly elections separately.
