‘Amit Shah a murder accused’: Rahul Gandhi pleads not guilty in defamation suit, gets bail

File picture: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The criminal defamation suit was filed by BJP corporator Krishnavadan Brahmbhatt The court has fixed December 7 as the date for the next hearing The lawyer representing Rahul Gandhi also moved an application for personal exemption of his client in the case

Ahmedabad: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Friday pleaded not guilty in a defamation suit filed against him for calling Union Home Minister Amit Shah a “murder accused”.

The court of additional chief metropolitan magistrate RB Etaliya granted Rahul Gandhi a bail on a bond of Rs 10,000.

The lawyer representing Rahul Gandhi moved an application for personal exemption of his client in the case after the court recorded the Congress leader's not guilty plea.

The court has fixed December 7 as the date for the next hearing. On the same day, the court will take up his personal exemption application.

Yesterday it was Surat, today it’s Ahmedabad - to attend a hearing in yet another politically motivated case filed against me.



It was good to connect with members of my Congress family here in the city and to have a meal with them at a local restaurant. I thank them all pic.twitter.com/A0sgcjYVEF — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) October 11, 2019

Rahul Gandhi was slapped with the criminal defamation suit for calling Amit Shah a "murder accused" at an election rally in Jabalpur six months ago.

"Murder accused BJP chief Amit Shah. Wah, kya shaan hai (how glorious)," Gandhi had said.

The suit was filed by BJP corporator Krishnavadan Brahmbhatt.

The metropolitan magistrate had in May issued summons seeking Gandhi's appearance in the case.

The complainant described Gandhi's jibe as defamatory because Amit Shah was given a clean chit in the Sohrabuddin Shaikh fake encounter case in 2015.

Rahul Gandhi arrived in Ahmedabad today for appearing in local courts in connection with two criminal defamation suits against him.

The other case in which Rahul Gandhi appeared before a court was filed by the Ahmedabad District Co-operative Bank in which Amit Shah holds the position of a director. The Wayanad Lok Sabha MP had claimed that the bank was involved in a scam of exchanging scrapped notes of Rs 750 crore with valid currency within five days of announcement regarding demonetisation in 2016.

Following Gandhi's appearance before additional chief judicial magistrate NB Munshi in the ADC Bank defamation suit, his lawyer called for the personal exemption from appearance in this case too. The court will hear the plea on December 7.

On Thursday, the former Congress president appeared in a Surat court in another defamation case.

In the case filed by Surat MLA Purnesh Modi, after Rahul Gandhi, in one of his speeches, asked "why all the thieves have a Modi surname", the Congress leader pleaded not guilty.
