Overseas Congress's U-turn: Now Claims 'told UK MPs To Lay Off On J&K'

Taking a U-turn after meeting United Kingdom's Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn over Kashmir issue, the Indian Overseas Congress (IOC) on Saturday said that they have opposed the resolution of the Labour party. In a press note, the IOC has said that its representative Kamal Dhaliwal and the team expressed concern on the Kashmir resolution. The official note also added that the party has clarified that Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India and the country rejects any intervention in the matter. The note said that concerns of Indian communities living in the UK were raised in the meeting with Corbyn. Moreover, the press note also said that the Congress party has urged Corbyn to put pressure on Pakistan to stop funding terrorist groups.

READ: Rahul Gandhi's aide led Cong delegation meeting Corbyn over Kashmir

Here is the press note by IOC

READ: Malaysian PM Mahathir Mohamad clarifies his statement on Kashmir

BJP slams Congress

Slamming the Congress party over its delegation meeting the UK's opposition party leader Jeremy Corbyn and discussing Kashmir issue, the BJP has said that it is appalling. Expressing its disregard, the BJP has said that India will give a befitting reply to the Congress for attempting to internationalise the Kashmir issue. The Congress party has been opposing the move of revocation of Article 370 since August 5. The Congress party's statements on the issue have been quoted by Pakistan, more than once. Now, UK's opposition party leader Corbyn said that it was 'productive meeting with UK representatives from the Indian Congress Party.'

A very productive meeting with UK representatives from the Indian Congress Party where we discussed the human rights situation in Kashmir.



There must be a de-escalation and an end to the cycle of violence and fear which has plagued the region for so long. pic.twitter.com/wn8DXLohJT — Jeremy Corbyn (@jeremycorbyn) October 9, 2019

READ: China blinks, says 'Kashmir is bilateral' as Imran Khan & Bajwa arrive

Jammu and Kashmir situation

The Centre has claimed that the situation in Jammu and Kashmir, after the abrogation of Article 370 is restoring to normal. It has also claimed that the people of Kashmir have accepted the decision. The communication blockade still prevails in the valley, while landline connections have been restored in some parts of Kashmir. Schools and universities have reopened, however, there is a lack of attendance, as per reports. Meanwhile, the Congress party on Wednesday decided to boycott the Block Development Council polls in Jammu and Kashmir, over the detention of mainstream political leaders. Congress became the fourth party, after CPI(M), National Conference and PDP to boycott the Block Development Council polls to be held on October 24 in the state.

WATCH: Much-anticipated PM Modi-Xi Jinping handshake in Mamallapuram, watch
