Modi-Jinping meet Day 2 Updates: Chinese Pres leaves for Nepal, no mention of 'Kashmir' during talks

China-US should respect, coexist peace with each other: Xi tells Biden at virtual summit

After being left out of democracy summit, Putin-Xi to meet

Modi-Jinping meet Day 2 Updates: Chinese Pres leaves for Nepal, no mention of 'Kashmir' in talks

India

oi-Madhuri Adnal

Chennai, Oct 12: Chinese President Xi Jinping on Saturday left for Nepal around 24 hours after he arrived in India for bilateral talks. Modi and Xi agreed to set up a new mechanism for issues relating to trade and investment and felt the two countries should cooperate on important regional and global issues.

President Xi has said that China is ready to take concrete measures to reduce trade deficit, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale told reporters at a briefing on the outcome of the second informal summit between the two leaders in this coastal town. Building on the 'Wuhan spirit', the prime minister spoke of "Chennai connect" for a new era of cooperation between India and China, he said. Gokhale said a new mechanism will be set up for issues relating to trade and investment. President Xi has assured that India's concerns over Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) will be discussed, he said. Both Modi and Xi emphasised on importance of having rules-based global trading system

On Saturday, both leaders were in Kovalam, Tamil Nadu where both leaders held 'one-on-one' meeting followed by delegation-level talks. The Chinese president leftg for Nepal from Chennai around 2 pm.

Modi-Xi Summit: Importance and why Mahabalipuram was chosen as the venue

Stay tuned for live updates on 2nd Day of Modi-Xi Jinping mmeting in Tamil Nadu:

Sightseeing, cultural programme at Mahabalipuram:

Day 1: Modi will take him to the famous world heritage site of Shore temple complex in Mamallapuram and both of them will have a meeting at the site. The prime minister will take Xi to major sites in the temple town before both leaders witness a cultural programme. Modi will also host a dinner for the Chinese leader.

Day 2: he second day of talks will be held at the Fisherman's Cove, run by the Taj group.

Xi will be accompanied by Foreign Minister Wang Yi and a polit bureau member of the Chinese Communist Party. Since the talks are informal, there will be no formal ceremony, or any signing of documents.
