Swara Bhaskar joins the ranks of Deepika Padukone, Priyanka Chopra, Anushka Sharma – here’s how!

Swara Bhaskar has never been the one to follow the herd, nor keep mum on issues she feels strongly about. This has garnered for her a lot of love and fan-following in the process. Swara, one of Bollywood’s much-appreciated and exciting young actresses known for her powerhouse performances, and her unafraid stances on social issues is all set to break new ground. Swara has joined hands with her entrepreneur brother Ishan Bhaskar to flag off their new venture, a production house titled Kahaaniwaaley.

Swara’s unconventional and bold choices as an actor including Anaarkali Of Aarah, Nil Battey Sannata and Veere Di Wedding among others have certainly left a lasting impression with the audience, especially writers and producers who often approach her for interesting and compelling stories. Swara has never held back making tough and often tricky decisions that have always paid off.

This is not the first time Swara has tried doing something away from acting. Last year the actress had mentioned that she was working on a script for a love story. She told reporters then, “The script is a love story. It is a love triangle. It is a messy story with lot of melodrama. It has a lot of typical Hindi film conflicts. It is a story of one girl, two boys.”

Considering this, the powerhouse performer has consciously decided to set up her production house, Kahaaniwaaley in association with her brother Ishan that aims to create and support such entertaining and hard-hitting cinema. Swara says, “The idea of Kahaaniwaaley has been in the works since the last year and a half. At Kahaaniwaaley, the aim is to support good scripts and filmmakers that have these fresh and powerful stories but they don’t get the right platform to showcase them.”

Ishan Bhaskar adds, “There was a very popular Amrita Sher Gil painting – the Ancient Story-Teller at our house in Delhi which served as an inspiration for Swara and me. The core idea of the painting is to tell stories which are compelling, fresh, raw and very different from the rest. Both Swara and I share a driven desire to make striking stories. Hence, when the opportunity came to set up Kahaaniwaaley, it fit our vision perfectly.”
