Highway Safety: Chennai: Contractors refuse to take up highway safety work, Auto News, ET Auto

CHENNAI: National Highways Authority of India ( NHAI ) wants to develop incident management services along the Chennai-Bengaluru highway by deploying 40 ambulances, tow-away vehicles and patrol vehicles, but there are no takers for work tenders.Contractors, given the tender, are expected to provide all these facilities besides maintaining incident management centres near toll plazas for Rs 4 lakh per month. Prospective bidders say the amount is too low for the services expected by the highways authority.A portion of NH-4, between Maduravoyal in Chennai’s suburbs and Walajapet in Vellore district, is an accident-prone zone dotted with what officials call ‘blind spots’. Nazrathpet junction, which is one such place, has recorded 520 road accidents in the past five years. This makes it the second deadliest road junction in the state. “We’ve been trying to take measures to reduce the blind spots with the help of local authorities,” said an NHAI officer.The authority last month floated three tenders to improve incident management services along the stretches of Maduravoyal-Sriperumbudur, Sriperumbudur-Karapettai and Karapettai-Walajapet by introducing 45 utility vehicles. Of these, 36 will be put to use along the 28km stretch between Maduravoyal and Sriperumbudur.Tow-away vehicles will help authorities remove vehicles that have broken down or have met with accidents, to the nearest police stations. Route vehicles are given the task of not only patrolling the highways round the clock, but also removing obstructions including dead animals and inform the incident management centres that have been set up near toll plazas.Ambulances with basic facilities, trained paramedical staff, a nurse and a driver will also be stationed near this centre. The contractor is expected to take photographs and videos of accident spots, restore normalcy at the earliest and prepare a report on major accidents within 24 hours.Contractors said besides the “low returns,” NHAI has put forth a condition that the contractor would be fined Rs 10,000 if a vehicle or an animal involved in an accident is not removed within the stipulated time. “No private firm has expressed interest though we floated tenders twice. We are planning to go for a third call soon,” said the official.
