Telangana RTC driver sets himself ablaze in Khammam

With over 80% burns, he was shifted to a local hospital, later to Hyderabad

A driver of the TSRTC Khammam depot allegedly attempted suicide by setting himself ablaze here late on Saturday afternoon on the eighth day of the indefinite strike by employees of the public transport entity.

Another driver attempted self-immolation during a protest late in the evening but alert demonstrators foiled his bid.

The twin incidents sparked outrage among the striking employees of the TSRTC, who staged a massive protest demonstration here, accusing the TRS dispensation of showing “callous indifference” and “vindictive attitude” towards their seven-day-old strike.

In the first incident, the driver identified as D Srinivas Reddy, 55, of Raparthinagar allegedly doused himself with petrol before setting himself on fire near his house here. He suffered around 80% to 90 % burns and was rushed to the District Headquarters Hospital by his family members. He was subsequently shifted to a hospital in Hyderabad as his condition worsened, hospital sources said.

As the news spread, dozens of striking TSRTC employees, including drivers, flocked to the hospital.Slogans against Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao rent the air during the demonstration.

Some aggrieved protesters alleged that Srinivas Reddy took the “drastic step”, apparently distraught over what they called “insensitive statements” on the strike made by persons at the helm in the State capital earlier in the afternoon. Tension mounted when an aggrieved driver Venkateshwarlu tried to douse himself with petrol in full public view during a demonstration in front of the hospital. Some demonstrators intervened and foiled his self-immolation attempt.

Late in the evening, a group of infuriated demonstrators stopped a hired bus near the Collectorate, damaged a windowpane and chased away its temporary driver.

The authorities stepped up vigil to prevent untoward incidents and ensure smooth operation of the bus services with temporary crew as the TSRTC-JAC called for a series of agitations, including rasta roko and dharna in support of the strike from Sunday. The JAC with the support of various Opposition parties called a State bandh on October 19.

In a statement, CPI (ML-ND) State assistant secretary P Ranga Rao alleged that the TRS government was playing with the lives of 48,000 striking employees of the TSRTC in utter disregard of their invaluable contribution to the statehood movement.

(Roshini – Suicide prevention helpline: 040-66202000)
