BNP says over 100 party activists held during rally

Logo of Bangladesh Nationalist Party

The Dhaka Metropolitan South Unit of the party organised the rally seeking cancellation of the prime minister's recent treaty with India, and for justice of Abrar Fahad murder

Police arrested over 100 leaders and activists of the BNP when they were gathering in the Naya Paltan area in the capital to join a protest rally.

The Dhaka Metropolitan South Unit of the party organised the rally seeking cancellation of the prime minister's recent treaty with India, and for justice of Abrar Fahad murder, reports UNB.

BNP Joint Secretary General Habibun Nabi Khan Sohel said police detained their activists when they were coming to attend the rally and demanded their immediate release.

The detention took place since 2pm on Saturday amid chase and counter-chase with the police.

Police took their position in Naya Paltan at 9am. After BNP leaders and activities arrived at the venue, they engaged in chase and counter-chase with the police around 12pm.

The rally started in front of the party's central office in Naya Paltan, around 2pm yesterday.

BNP claimed that it had taken a verbal permission from the police to conduct this rally.

Abdus Salam Azad, the assistant organizational secretary of BNP, said they informed Dhaka Metropolitan Police (DMP)'s Additional Commissioner Monirul Islam about the rally and he gave them permission to hold the rally.

However, DMP's Additional Commissioner (Motijheel zone) Mishu Biswas said: "BNP does not have any permission to hold a rally in front of their office. We have not been informed of any such event."

When asked, Paltan police station officer in-charge Abu bakar Siddik said they detained some of the activists in front of the BNP party office.

Meanwhile, speaking at a rally yesterday, BNP senior leaders alleged that the government has signed 'anti-state' deals with India only to hang onto power by appeasing the neighbouring country.

They also urged people to wage a united movement to protect the country's interests and sovereignty by ensuring the fall of the current government and thus value the blood of slain Buet student Abrar Fahad.

"We think the deals with India on withdrawal of Feni River water, use of Chattogram and Mongla ports and providing LPG and a Coastal Surveillance System are against the national interests," said BNP standing committee member Khandaker Mosharraf Hossain.

As part of its two-day program, BNP arranged the rally in front of its Nayapaltan central office protesting the murder of Buet student Abrar Fahad and demanding the cancellation of 'anti-state' deals with India.

As the citizens of the country, Mosharraf said they have the right to register their protest against the 'anti-nation deals'.

He further said the deals with India are not only against the country, its independence and sovereignty, but also a move to establish imperialism in Bangladesh.

He said Abrar was killed by Bangladesh Chhatra League men as he took a stance in favour of the country and its people and sovereignty through a status on Facebook.

"You not only killed Abrar, but also buried the interests of the country's people."

BNP standing committee member Moudud Ahmed said the current government has plunged into corruption, and it will not be able to get rid of it.

He said: "I think the fall of the current government is now just a matter of time. People can't tolerate such a regime for a long time."

Protesting the murder of Abrar, he said Chhatra League has set up torture cells at halls and hostels in all the educational institutions across the country. "The killing of Abrar has seriously hurt the country's people."

Another BNP veteran Mirza Abbas said Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina unilaterally gave India everything in a recent bilateral meeting without bringing anything for the country's people.

"As long as the government follows a knee-jerk foreign policy, it won't be able to realise anything (from India) except sacrificing the country's interests," he added.




