Protests to ban Bigg Boss 13, Privika's first wedding anniversary celebration - A quick TV roundup of the week

Here's a quick TV roundup of this week. | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights People were protesting outside Salman Khan's house demanding a ban on Bigg Boss 13 Prince Narula and Yuvika Chaudhary celebrated their first wedding anniversary on the sets of Nach Baliye 9 Here's everything that grabbed headlines this week

Bigg Boss 13 has been in the new this week for all the wrong reasons. The show started off on the wrong foot with the audience when makers announced that men and women in the house will be sharing a bed with the person assigned to them, irrespective of the gender. Of course, they lifted the rule and let housemates pick their own bed mates later on but this resulted in a massive outrage from viewers of the show. Prince Narula and Yuvika Chaudhary had the most beautiful week as they completed a year together. They celebrated their first wedding anniversary on the sets of Nach Baliye 9.

Here are the top newsmakers of the week.

Ban Bigg Boss 13

Viewers have been demanding a ban on Bigg Boss 13, so much that they even protested outside Salman Khan’s house. 20 protestors were allegedly arrested, too.

Prince and Yuvika’s wedding anniversary

The makers of Nach Baliye played a prank on the two and made them think that they are going to be evicted but only to give them the best anniversary surprise on the sets of the show. The two also performed a puja with family later on to ring in another year together.

Nupur Alankar opened up about her financial crisis

The Swaragini actress also became a victim to the PMC Bank Crisis and has been going through a tough time. She told a daily, “I am facing a major financial crisis. I had accounts in other banks, too, which I transferred to this bank a few years ago. Little did I know that my family members — mother, sister, husband, sister-in-law and father-in-law — and my life savings will be frozen like this. The Reserve Bank of India first curbed the withdrawal limit for account holders to `1,000 and later increased it to `10,000 and then `25,000 per person. But that amount can be withdrawn only once in six months. How am I expected to survive without money? Should I mortgage my house now? Why is there a cap on my own hard-earned money? I have been diligently paying income tax, so why am I suffering today? A circular was recently released that we can withdraw `50,000 to one lakh in case of children’s education or medical emergency. A family member was critical, but we couldn’t afford to hospitalise her. We have now hired a home nurse to tend to her. Besides, none of our credit or debit cards are working.”

Kundali Bhagya actress Anjum Fakih opened up about her struggles

The actress spoke about leaving her home to become an actor and not talking to her parents for over a year. She told ETimes, “My father wanted us to be well educated. So, in 2009, when I told them about my decision to quit studies and pursue modelling, they were very upset. It was almost like there was an earthquake in my house, and they said that I would have to leave home if I wanted to enter showbiz. I put away my burqa, packed my bags and left home.”

Stay tuned with us for more updates.
