Choppy waters: Why small-scale fishermen fear a new law will do them more harm than good

Karanja Fisheries Cooperative Society

Ganesh Nakhawa, 31, is determined to modernise the fishing industry (Photo by Sachin Haralkar)

Marine Products Export Development Authority

Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman

Marine Fisheries

fishing community

A protest in Mumbai, in 1999, to draw attention to depleting fish stocks

Fish Finger Seductions

Damodar Tandel was arrested for protesting against the construction of a Shivaji statue off Mumbai’s coast — he said it would impact the livelihood of over 80,000 fishworkers (Photo by Sachin Haralkar)

An aerial view of Mumbai’s Sassoon Dock, in 1972

Akhil Maharashtra Macchimar Kruti Samiti

Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute

A recent image shows the development in and around Sassoon Dock

According to data released by the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, the catch in Maharashtra state in 2018 was 2.95 lakh tonnes, down from 3.64 lakh tonnes in 2013

Already reeling from the impact of climate change and civic projects, fishermen now have one more cause for concern — a new law, which, they say, favours corporatisation and threatens to wash them away.Ganesh Nakhawa was always drawn to the sea. Ever since he took his first fishing trip, from Mumbai to Ratnagiri at the age of 12, he’s been hooked to the profession. Today Nakhawa, 31, whose last name means ‘boatman’ in the ‘koli’ language, is a director with the— a collective of 600 registered boats that operates out of Karanja, Raigad, where Nakhawa lives. Standing on his boat at Sassoon Dock, the jeans-clad, foreign-educated Nakhawa seems out of place in a sea of traditionally-attired fisherfolk, pushing cartloads of ice or carrying the day’s catch in plastic baskets on their heads. Most of them also appear to be at least twice Nakhawa’s age. “The people I grew up with don’t work in the industry any more. Many have taken up careers in hospitality, some work at banks,” says Nakhawa. Thanks to pollution, civic projects that have cut into the sea and climate change, fishing stopped being a profitable business years ago, with rapidly-declining fish stocks.The Centre, however, appears to take a different view. According to the annual report of the, India exported seafood worth $7.08 billion in 2017-18, and in a press release, MPEDA chairman Dr A Jayathilak says, “With a string of initiatives and policy support, we intend to achieve an export target of $10 billion by 2022.”’s announcement of a new ‘Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying’ in the 2019 Budget, was a step in this direction.The(Regulation and Management) Bill, announced shortly after the Budget earlier this year, was meant to provide a fillip to the industry. But small-scale fishermen believe that, in its current form, the bill — now in the public domain for discussion — threatens their very existence.Seventy-year-old Damodar Tandel, who heads a Cuffe Parade fishermen’s cooperative society, says as much: “It shows that the government is determined to corporatise the industry and drive out smaller players.” Tandel’s concerns are shared by the National Fishworkers Forum (NFF), which represents small-scale and traditional fish workers in all the coastal states (Maharashtra, Gujarat, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and West Bengal) of the country.On September 30, the group issued an open letter calling for a protest against the MFRM bill on October 15. “We welcome a law to govern fisheries, but the views of all stakeholders must be taken into consideration,” says T Peter, secretary of the Kerala-headquartered NFF. “This [MFRM bill] is an attempt to dupe the,” adds Tandel, who has 40 years of experience in the industry. “The government has not incorporated any of the issues that affect the livelihood of fishermen in it.”Sharing some of the NFF’s concerns about the bill in an email to Mirror, general secretary T Peter says: “They have neither defined the intent of the Act, nor spelt out the rights of fishermen and fisherwomen. There is also no provision to ensure their safety. And, while resource management is the need of the hour, the bill takes a top-down approach to it, instead of a participatory one. Management plans should involve stakeholders, rather than administrators.” The NFF is also deeply concerned about “the dilution of the restrictions outlined in the Coastal Zone Management Notification”. Peter says that across the country, wherever these guidelines may apply, proposed changes favour builders, infrastructure developers and the tourism industry. “We seek protection from incursion by these sectors,” he says. “Marine areas should not be taken over for their purposes without permission from fishermen.”Tandel couldn’t agree more. He says that he was arrested in 2016 — along with his sons, who work in the banking sector — when he protested against the proposal to build the 210-metre Shivaji statue off Mumbai’s coast. In addition to hoisting black flags on their boats, Tandel and his supporters had also filed a petition with the National Green Tribunal stating that construction of the statue would disrupt the natural aquatic ecosystem for about 110 km of Mumbai’s coast, and affect the livelihood of over 80,000 fishermen. More recently, Mumbai’s fishing community moved court against the construction of the Coastal Road — work on which was in full swing until July 2019, when the court ordered a stay.While this has brought temporary relief to the community, it’s impossible to halt urbanisation as population continues to grow. So, Indian fishermen are going to come up against such problems on a regular basis, says filmmaker Sarvnik Kaur, whose 2019 film,, focuses on the clash between fishermen who employ traditional methods and those, like Nakhawa, who use modern techniques. “They live in villages they’ve occupied for generations, yet they’re asked to move to make space for flyovers. Mumbai is no place for fishermen,” adds Kaur.Kaur’s film touched upon an important subject. While they stand largely united against external onslaught, one issue that has divided the community for decades is the matter of who gets to fish where and how. This may be settled once and for all by the MFRM law. But, says Tandel, since the bill already leans towards large operators, there won’t be an equitable distribution of rights. He refers, specifically, to a point in the bill that states that the Centre may issue licenses for fishing in the hitherto unregulated EEZ or Exclusive Economic Zone. Under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which India ratified in 1995, the sea is divided into three zones: Internal Waters (IW), which includes gulfs and bays; Territorial Sea (TS), which extends out to 12 nautical miles from the shoreline; and the EEZ, which extends out to 200 nautical miles. Currently, coastal states govern all resources — including fishing — within the IW and TS zones. But the EEZ, says Nakhawa, “is like the Wild West”.According to Dr Jujjavarapu Balaji, joint secretary (fisheries), “India is one of the few countries in the Indian Ocean region which does not have a legislation to govern its fisheries in the EEZ — and the proposed legislation is to address this long-felt need.” (But neither Balaji nor fisheries department secretary Rajni Sekhri Sibal, responded to Mirror’s queries about the bill).Nakhawa, who studied business and finance at the University of Edinburgh, says the absence of regulations not only leads to clashes between local fishermen, but it also leaves room for fish stocks in this zone to be exploited by fishermen from other states as well. Tandel agrees, and adds that the forthcoming regulations will make it impossible for small-scale fishermen to secure licenses from the Centre, and they will ultimately have to quit the profession. “It would require them to travel to major metros, and complete numerous formalities to fish in their own backwaters,” says Tandel, who heads the, which, he says, has over 10,000 members across the coastal districts of Palghar, Thane, Mumbai, Raigad, Sindhudurg and Ratnagiri. “The new rule [outlined in the draft bill] to seek permission from the Centre for fishing beyond 12 nautical miles, will snowball into a disaster for small-scale fishing communities,” adds Peter.In a bid to allay the fears of local fishermen, Maharashtra Fisheries commissioner Rajeev Jadhav says that while he cannot comment on the Centre’s policies, he can assure local fishermen that they have the support of the state government. “Fishing is a concurrent subject,” says Jadhav, “so irrespective of laws framed by the Centre, the state has powers to create additional laws to govern fishing here.” Just two months into office, Jadhav has already started meeting fishermen regarding their concerns about the bill. He also has meetings lined up with Oil and Natural Gas Corporation officials to discuss the impact that the seismic blasts (which occur during offshore drilling) have on marine life — another issue that has hit the livelihood of fishermen.Currently, states issue licenses for fishing within the TS, and this is unlikely to change. In fact, traditional fishermen are not supposed to operate outside the 12 nautical mile limit, but depleting stocks pushes them further and further out to sea. It doesn’t help that the boundaries between maritime zones are unclear — variations in geography affect where these zones end and begin — says Tandel. He explains that fishermen sometimes inadvertently cross this “vague line” in their attempts to tap the ‘golden bed’ — “at 40 ‘vav’ or fathoms, where we find the most abundant catch”. According to data released by the, the total catch in Maharashtra in 2018 was 2.95 lakh tonnes, down from 3.64 lakh tonnes in 2013 — a drop of almost 19 per cent over the years. The institute has also found that marine fish landings in the country declined from 3.83 million tonnes in 2017 to 3.49 million tonnes in 2018. Speaking from personal experience, Nakhawa says, “Since 2017, we have been feeling the pinch of climate change.”Fishermen, thus, want a resource management strategy in place, to create some uniformity. “Gujarat should not have 15,000 trawlers compared to only 3,000 from Maharashtra. As it stands, there’s no clarity on how all of this will work,” says a researcher who has studied the industry for over a decade. He concedes, however, that it will be a challenge to create a fair national bill, given that every state has its own financial policy. “Some states like Tamil Nadu have a focus on fisheries, so they extend low-interest loans and provide vessels fitted with better technological equipment, giving their fishermen an advantage,” adds Hemant Gaurikar, a youth leader from a fishing community in Raigad.Many fishermen today are trying to maximise their catch with technology. They fit their boats with LED lights, which attracts the fish, or use sonar-based ‘fishfinders’ to locate schools of fish. Gaurikar, therefore, stresses on the need for a national marine fisheries council, with representatives from all states and key fishermen’s organisations, as well as from government and scientific institutes. “This would ensure a participatory approach to policy making, and will help iron out the issues that arise because of conflicting and overlapping laws in each state,” he says.“We need a law that takes a holistic approach,” adds Nakhawa, who has observed how the industry functions in Europe and the US. He adds: “For instance, there must be stringent laws to not only prevent people from catching juvenile fish, but also to prevent people from buying such catch, if we want to create a sustainable model.”Nakhawa is also in talks with tour operators to offer people a closer look at the industry — both to create awareness and to generate supplementary income for the community. For many like Nakhawa, quitting the line is not an option. But until they set an arguably faulty system right, the pragmatic fishermen have little choice but to start building safety nets around themselves.
