PM Narendra Modi to hold rallies in Maharashtra today; praises CM Fadnavis for 'stellar work' on Twitter

PM Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights PM Modi will be in the state from October 13 to October 18 and after Sakoli and Jalgaon, he is scheduled to attend three programmes at Akola, Panvel and Partur On October 17, the PM will conduct public rallies in Pune Satara and Worli Rahul Gandhi will also address election rallies in Maharashtra starting today

Mumbai: Prime Minister Narendra Modi will launch the party’s campaign in Maharashtra by addressing rallies in Jalgaon and Sakoli.

Praising Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis the PM said that the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) is going to the people on the basis of stellar work of the BJP government led by the “youthful and visionary CM”.

The Prime Minister further asserted that BJP will be seeking five more years to serve the state.

PM Modi will be in the state from October 13 to October 18 and after Sakoli and Jalgaon, he is scheduled to attend three programmes at Akola, Panvel and Partur.

On October 17, the PM will conduct public rallies in Pune Satara and Worli and will arrive in Mumbai on October 18.

Maharashtra will go to the single-phase Assembly polls on October 21 and results will be announced on October 24.

Ahead of the PM’s address, a Maharashtra minister issued a bizarre directive to his supporters encouraging them to break traffic rules to collect huge crowds for the PM’s rally.

Minister of State Parinay Fuke - a PhD. holder - told the workers present at the gathering "not to worry" if they did tripling on two-wheelers.

The MoS gave this statement while addressing a rally in Sakoli.

"If the police stop you, simply give them my name, tell them that you are my man and also say the vehicle belongs to me... If they still catch you for riding triple-seat or even five-seat, I will get you out.. You rest assured," Fuke thundered.

Once the video of the incident went viral, Fuke was slammed by the opposition with BJP ally Shiv Sena demanding his resignation for making such “blatant statement”.

Fuke who is Member of Legislative Council is now a BJP candidate from Sakoli.

Meanwhile, former Congress president Rahul Gandhi will also address election rallies in Maharashtra starting today. However, he will only be addressing two rallies in the poll-bound state.

In Maharashtra, BJP is on a strong wicket while the Congress-NCP alliance is facing infighting with many leaders jumping ship.

The saffron party is banking on development agenda, revocation of Article 370 in Jammu & Kashmir and Balakot in both Haryana and Maharashtra.

Home Minister Amit Shah in his election rallies in Maharashtra has been talking about the Centre’s historic move in J&K praising PM Narendra Modi for the landmark decision. Shah has also cornered the Congress over statements made by Rahul Gandhi on clampdown in Kashmir forcing the grand old party to issue a clarification.
