Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019 live updates Time to re-elect Devendra Fadnavis: PM Modi at Maharashtra’s Jalgaon rally

Those who fool people, can they bring back Article 370 in Kashmir: PM

Can these leaders, who’re trying to fool the people with their crocodile tears, bring back Article 370 in Kashmir?

Will the people of India allow them to? Will the people of India accept it?: PM Modi

J&K, Ladakh crown of India: PM Modi

“J&K and Ladakh isn’t just a piece of land for us, but is the crown of India.

Looking at the security needs, we took the necessary steps. We have also tried our best to ensure normalcy in the area, amidst all the negative powers in and around the area,” said Prime Minister in Maharashtra.

Four months ago, all of you voted for a capable and empowered India: PM

“Four months ago, all of you voted for a capable and empowered India. You voted for an India that earns its place on the global map. You voted for the Govt that takes all possible steps to complete the dreams and aspirations of 130 crore Indians,” said PM Modi at the Jalgaon rally.

Time to re-elect Devendra Fadnavis: PM Modi at Jalgaon rally

While addressing a public meeting in Maharashtra’s Jalgaon, PM Narendra Modi appealed to people that it is time to re-elect a government under CM Devendra Fadnavis’s leadership.

PM Modi in Maharashtra’s Jalgaon

PM Narendra Modi is in Maharashtra’s Jalgaon to address a public meeting. He is accompanied by chief minister Devendra Fadnavis.

Rahul Gandhi’s first rally after Lok Sabha poll defeat

Rahul Gandhi’s rally in Maharashtra will be the first one after Congress’s defeat in the Lok Sabha polls held earlier this year.

Rahul Gandhi to launch Congress campaign in Latur, Mumbai

Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi will launch the party’s election campaign in Maharashtra today. He is scheduled to address rallies in Latur and Mumbai.

PM Modi, Amit Shah to address rallies in Maharashtra

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and all home minister Amit Shah will address multiple rally in Maharashtra today. PM will be in Jalgaon in the morning and will later head to Bhandara.

Amit Shah has multiple programmes scheduled across Kolhapur, Satara, Pune and Aurangabad
