TSRTC Driver Srinivas Reddy Dies, Tension In Khammam

Hyderabad: TSRTC driver D Srinivas Reddy set himself afire on Saturday at Khammam, died while undergoing treatment at the Apollo Hospital in Kanchenbagh in Hyderabad, on Sunday morning.

Tension prevailed at the hospital after striking employees and leaders of opposition parties staged protests, blaming Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) government for the driver's death. Police were called in and arrested the protestors.

CPI secretary Chada Venkatara Reddy, CPM secretary Thammineni Veerabhadram, RTC JAC convenor Ashwathama Reddy and Professor Kodandaram reached the hospital. They gave a call for bandh in joint Khammam district tomorrow (Monday), following the death of Srinivas Reddy.

They said Srinivas Reddy was depressed after losing his job. Devireddy Srinivas Reddy belonged to Ramachandrapuram village in Nalakondapalli Mandal in Khammam.

The ongoing indefinite strike by the employees of Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC) on Saturday took a new turn on the eight day triggering violent protest by others in Khammam district and driver Srinivas Reddy attempted self-immolation at his residence by pouring petrol on himself. His son was also injured while trying to save him. The driver's condition turned critical and he was taken to Apollo Hospital in Kanchanbagh where he passed away.

Also Read: Agitating TSRTC Employees Call For State-wide Bandh On October 19

Joint Action Committee (JAC) of TSRTC employees unions on Saturday decided to further intensify the strike. It called for statewide shutdown on October 19.

Tension prevailed in the district following incidents of stone pelting on the TSRTC buses at few places. Unknown protestors stopped buses being operated by temporary drivers, forced the passengers to get down and then attacked the vehicles. No one was injured in these incidents.

The incident triggered protests by striking employees in Khammam town and other parts of the district. Protesters near Khammam district collector's office damaged the window panes of a RTC bus and attacked the temporary driver.

Chief Minister K. Chandrashekhar Rao has announced that 48,000 striking employees dismissed themselves by not joining the duty before the expiry of the government deadline. He ruled out taking back these employees into TSRTC. The chief minister rejected all the demands of the striking employees including the main demand for merger of TSRTC with the government. He also ruled out talks with them.

Also Read: CM KCR Master Plan Against TSRTC Workers
