Telangana: TSRTC bus driver who attempted self-immolation dies at Hyderabad hospital; oppn blames KCR

A bus driver who allegedly attempted to commit suicide during a strike by employees of Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC) succumbed to his injuries at a hospital in Hyderabad on Sunday.

The Telangana Police on Sunday shifted the body of Srinivas Reddy to his home district of Khammam amid high security.

On Saturday, Reddy, who was among the 48,000 TSRTC employees on strike against the Telangana government, had allegedly tried to end his own life after he poured kerosene and set himself on fire at his residence in Khammam.

He succumbed to his injuries earlier today. The post-mortem examination was conducted by a team of doctors.

There was a heavy police presence outside the hospital premises to maintain law and order. The TSRTC employees have been protesting since October 5 seeking the merger of the corporation with the government.

Their protest intensified after the state government led by Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao issued a statement with regards to sacking over 40,000 employees because of the protest.

The protest entered its ninth day on Sunday.

Srinivas' kin contended that he took his life as he was depressed over the KCR government's attitude towards the TSRTC employees.

"The patient, Srinivas Reddy, who was admitted to DRDO Apollo Hospital yesterday with severe burn injuries has passed away today while undergoing treatment," the hospital said in its bulletin.

Earlier, Khammam Commissioner of Police, Tafseer Iqbal had said, "The driver Srinivas Reddy, poured kerosene oil on himself and set himself ablaze. He has received 80 per cent burn injuries and has been shifted to Hyderabad for better medical attention."

"The family of Srinivas have alleged that he took this step because he was depressed at the state government's behaviour against RTC employees. A case will be registered in the incident," he had added.

CPI urges KCR to talk with agitators

Lashing out at the TRS government, CPI leader K Narayana asked KCR to hold discussions with agitating workers immediately and resolve the matter.

"KCR is so adamant to hold talks with the TSRTC employees. He simply removed the existing employees and recruited new ones. He brought unemployed youths in place of RTC workers. He is instigating a civil war. Srinivas Reddy could not digest that and committed suicide. In fact, it is not a suicide but a murder by the government," he said.

"CM KCR killed him. A case under Section 302 of IPC must be filed against him. KCR is feeling that he is their successor and acting like a dictator. He cannot escape the wrath for a long time. I warn KCR that this agitation will throw him down. At least now he must hold talks with the RTC workers, hold discussions and resolve the matter. Otherwise, this agitation will see his end," the CPI leader added.

Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao has said that there is "no question" of having any talks with the agitating 48,000 RTC employees.

Narayana said he visited Srinivas Reddy at Apollo Hospital. "He immolated himself. What led to such a dangerous situation? RTC workers are agitating legally and democratically," he added.

Telangana Jana Samithi chief Professor Kodandaram and Congress leader V Hanumantha Rao had also visited the hospital and met the bus driver earlier in the day.

Various political parties including BJP, Congress, TDP and CPI have also come together in support of the RTC employees and are demanding the state government to take them back.

Since October 5, the RTC employees have been protesting in Telangana against the statement issued by the state government in regards to sacking over 40,000 employees.

Telangana High Court had on Thursday posted the RTC matter for October 15 and asked the state government to submit a detailed report on the issue.

(With ANI inputs)
