HAL workers' 'indefinite strike' from Monday after talks with management fail

The workers of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) will start their "indefinite strike" on Monday as the employee unions' talks with the management over demands including wage revision did not yield any result.

The employee unions of the HAL have served notice at all locations of the PSU to go on the indefinite strike from October 14 with regard to settlement of wage revision effective from January 1, 2017, Bengaluru-headquartered company said in a statement.

The state-owned company said that "despite management's concerted efforts towards bringing an amicable/early wage settlement, unions unfortunately have adopted a recalcitrant approach and did not accept the offer and decided to resort to indefinite strike."

In spite of management's appeal not to resort to an indefinite strike and resolve the issue in a spirit of accommodation, it said.

The HAL said that its management conducted meetings with the representatives of the employee unions on Saturday and Sunday, which were 11th in the series of meetings held so far.

"Management has also offered to enhance allowances under Cafeteria system @22% for workmen in Scale-1 to 10 & 20% for workmen in special scale as against uniform rate of 19% offered earlier and also assured that all the workmen will stand benefitted in terms of allowance on account of introduction of cafeteria system," it said.

It added that on the 2nd day of the negotiation the management offered revised rate of fitment benefit at 11%. "During the negotiations the wage negotiations committee also apprised the unions the ill-effects of resorting to any strike/agitation jeopardizing the interest of the employees/organisation and the nation at large," the HAL statement said.

An apex body of the employee unions, on the other hand, claimed that the HAL management 'refused' to consider their "fair and reasonable demands".

PTI reported that the decision to launch the strike was taken at a meeting of All-India HAL Trade Unions' Co-ordination Committee (AIHALTUCC), held under the chairmanship of the Committee chief convenor Suryadevara Chandrasekhar.

The AIHALTUCC "took stock of the situation arising out of the management's refusal to consider the fair and reasonable demands of the unions in regard to wage revision" and resolved that all workmen in all the HAL divisions will be commencing their indefinite strike from Monday as decided earlier.

AIHALTUCC, which comprises nine recognised unions of HAL employees, said a resolution adopted at the meeting appealed to all workmen to fully participate in the indefinite strike and make it a "historical success."

Earlier in June, about 500 employees of HAL had gone on an indefinite relay hunger strike, demanding settlement of wages and also salaries on par with other public sector undertakings.

The company had then said that there was no justification and rationale in the demand of the unions to extend the benefits such as fitment benefit and allowances, on par or more than executives, when salary revision of executives was effected from January 1, 2017, after the stipulated 10-year period, as per a PTI report.
