Embassy of India hosts Khadi show to mark Gandhi’s birth

Ambassador of India to Cambodia Manika Jain opens the Khadi Exhibition in Siem Reap on Saturday. APSARA NATIONAL AUTHORITY

Embassy of India hosts Khadi show to mark Gandhi’s birth

The Embassy of India to Cambodia held a Khadi Exhibition at the Mekong Ganga Cooperation Asian Traditional Textiles Museum (MGCATTM) in Siem Reap town to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the birth of Mahatma Gandhi, the ‘Father of the Indian Nation’.

The exhibition, which started on October 12, will end next Monday.

Ambassador of India to Cambodia Manika Jain said that Gandhi changed the fate of 383 million people of different races, languages, cultures, castes and classes over a vast territory during his fight for independence.

Khadi – known as the Fabric of India – is India’s only indigenous fabric that has been popular in the country for centuries and is sought after in contemporary fashion trends worldwide.

Khadi is spun and woven by hand, and was not only a means of liberation but also the ultimate goal towards swadeshi, or “made in India”, and swaraj, or “self-rule”, Jain said.

“The shift brought about by the technological and industrial production of the cloth, combined with the strategic address and replication of cultural preferences of the masses by the British for economic gains, was countered by Gandhi’s revolutionary resolution of each citizen’s participation in spinning and weaving of Khadi,” she said.

The Indian Embassy’s press release said the exhibition would give a good opportunity to local textile importers to think of importing Khadi and use it for garment manufacturing for export and domestic use.

Textile stakeholders are encouraged to visit the event to discover future trade cooperation with Khadi producers and exporters.

“MGCATTM has offered visitors access to the exhibition and museum free of charge during three days of the event.

“Manufacturing one metre of Khadi requires just three litres of water, as against 56 litres of water for mill fabric. It has a zero carbon footprint because it is hand spun and handwoven,” said the press release.

Apsara Authority spokesman Long Kosal told The Post on Sunday that the exhibition was hosted by the Embassy of India and the Ministry of Industry and Handicraft. Apsara participated in the exhibition as a cooperating partner with the MGCATTM.

Gandhi was a peaceful, non-violence movement leader who influenced the world.

He protested against British rule through hunger strikes and advocated for the civil rights of the Indian people.

He organised the non-violent boycott of British rule through civil disobedience, ultimately gaining independence for India and the admiration of the world.
