Odisha government takes action against officers over complaints of negligence on duty

BHUBANESWAR/ROURKELA: Odisha government on Sunday suspended Chief District Medical Officer (CDMO) of Sundargarh Pankaj Patel and issued show cause notice to collector Nikhil Pawan Kalyan for lapses in implementation of Mo Sarkar initiatives. Chief minister Naveen Patnaik warned such actions will continue over negligence on duty in government offices like police stations and hospitals.The actions were taken following complaints from patients during visit by a team from state government headed by secretary 5T initiatives V Kartikeyan Pandian to the District Headquarter Hospital (DHH), Sundargarh on Sunday.“Based on feedback received from public under Mo Sarkar, Sundargarh CDMO Pankaj Patel has been placed under suspension with immediate effect for negligence and district magistrate Nikhil Pawan Kalyan also issued with show cause notice for the lapses in implementation of 5Ts,” the chief minister tweeted.Naveen also tweeted that “Such action will continue to be taken against negligence in duty and harassment to public in Government offices like police stations and hospitals. In our democracy where people are the true masters, the Government machinery must strive to serve people professionally and ethically."During his tour to the DHH to review healthcare facilities, Pandian interacted with patients and collected feedback on quality of services and facilities provided at the government-run hospitals.According to sources, Pandian enquired about the quality of food served in the hospital and found irregularities. Patients at the kidney dialysis unit of the hospital complained that they were asked to conduct different tests in privately-run patho labs while the facilities and instruments were available in the hospital.Sundergarh collector Nikhil Pawan Kalyan confirmed that patients had some complaints about the facilities in the hospital. “I acknowledge the complaint and also look forward to take necessary remedial measures. I am yet to physically receive the suspension order of CDMO and show cause notice to me but I have heard of the same,” Kalyan added.In-charge CDMO Pankaj Patel denied any lapses or negligence in the duties on his part. “I have not neglected in my duties. Probably there could be some lapses that had happened without my knowledge,” he said.The three member team also visited the Rourkela Government Hospital where a lady lodged complaint in front of Pandian that a doctor on duty was busy in mobile phone and did not attend her child.“The 5T secretary has ordered Panposh tehsildar to conduct an enquiry into the allegations against the doctor and submit a report,” a senior government officer said.The immediate suspension of CDMO without conducting enquiry was opposed by the Odisha Medical Service Association (OMSA). “We are welcoming 5T and Mo Sarkar initiatives. At the same time OMSA is requesting the government to be judicious while taking actions on any random complaint. A committee should probe the matter before taking action,” said general secretary of OMSA, Punyasloka Dash.Besides, Sundargarh district BJP workers along with members of Sundargarh Citizen Forum staged a protest in front of the hospital alleging the action against CDMO and collector as politically motivated. They demanded withdrawal of the suspension order.On the fourth day of surprise visits by Pandian to different district hospitals, he also visited Baripada and Keonjhar apart from Sundergarh and Rourkela. His team also had lunch at a state-run orphanage Manoj Manjari Sishu Bhawan in Keonjhar on Sunday.Three other teams headed by senior officers of chief minister’s office conducted surprise visits in district headquarters hospitals in Puri, Dhenkanal and Jajpur as part of successful implementation of Mo Sarkar initiatives.
