Rahul in Mumbai, invokes Rafale deal, PMC scam

Rajnath Singh

Manmohan Singh

Nirav Modi

Xi Jinping

After facing criticism that he went abroad in the run up to the assembly elections in Maharashtra and Haryana, former Congress president Rahul Gandhi kick-started his party’s poll campaign from Latur on Sunday and addressed two meetings in Chandivali and Dharavi assembly constituencies in the city.Addressing the rally in Chandivali, Gandhi raised the issue of Rafale deal, questioning the ‘purpose’ of Defence Minister’s ‘unprecedented’ visit to France to receive the first Rafale fighter jet, saying BJP leaders ‘have a feeling of guilt for making ‘mistakes’ in the controversial deal.He also raised the alleged fraud in the Punjab and Maharashtra Cooperative (PMC) Bank which has led to restrictions on withdrawal of money by depositors.Attacking the BJP, he said that one must go to the roots of the PMC Bank scam, and find out whose relatives are directors, hinting that a BJP MLA’s kin were on the board.Speaking at an election meeting in Chandivali in support of Congress MLA Naseem Khan, Gandhi said the country was going through the worst slowdown in the last 40 years, and the situation would aggravate in the next six to seven months. The youths, farmers, the elderly don’t see a future, but Modi has novel ways of deflecting attention, he said.During the tenure of former PM, the US presidents used to say that the economic progress of India can match their country’s, he said, adding that now no one wants to invest in India.He said that Modi did not utter a word when scamsters such asand Mehul Choksi ran away with people’s money from the country. He said that small and medium businessmen have been rendered jobless.He likened the BJP to the British, and said how they divided the country and also looted the poor to pay the rich.Gandhi said that entire country knows that there is a scam in the Rafale deal. He raked Sunday raked up the Rafale deal issue to target the BJP government, days after Union Defence report Defence Minister Rajnath Singh received the first fighter jet from France. "It seems the Rafale deal is still hurting the BJP.why Rajnath Singh went to France to receive the first fighter jet?" he asked the audience. Later speaking in Dharavi, he said that Dharavi is only place which can challenge China.He said that industrialists were allowed to privatise anything. He slammed the NDA government for not reviewing the GST, and said the pro-poor schemes were being wrapped up.Earlier in Ausa, Gandhi slammed the BJP government for various reasons. “Á common refrain I hear from small-scale businessmen in Gujarat’s textile industry is ‘Modi-ji ne barbad kar diya, satyanash kar diya’,” Gandhi said. He began his campaign tour from Ausa and accused PM Modi of ‘deflecting’ the core issues and asking youths to ‘watch the moon’ when they are demanding jobs.Taking a dig at the recent meet between Chinese Presidentand Modi, Gandhi said, “The government has already bid Tata bye bye to the Make-In-India scheme. Every product is made in China.”
