HAL workers start 'indefinite strike' after employee unions' talks with management fail

The workers of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) commenced their "indefinite strike" on Monday as the employee unions' talks on Sunday with the management over demands including wage revision did not yield any result.

The resolution letter by the All India HAL Trade Unions' Co-Ordination Committee (AIHALTUCC) states that "all the workmen in all the HAL Divisions will be commencing their Indefinite Strike w.e.f. 14.10.2019 has decided earlier and served the Indefinite Strike notice on 30.09.2019." The AIHALTUCC also appealed to all the workmen to fully participate in the Indefinite Strike and "make it a historical success".

Suryadevara Chandrasekhar, General Secretary HAEA, Bengaluru and Chief Convenor of AIHALTUCC stated that under his chairmanship, the union has taken stock of 'the situation arising out of Management; refusal to consider the fair and reasonable demands of the Unions in regard to Wage Revision unanimously resolved' in the decision.

The letter by the Chief Convenor of the Union stated -

"In the Wage Revision negotiation meeting held by management with AIHALTUCC has given an offer of 11% fitment benefit & 22% perks for 1 to 10 Scale & 20% perks for SS 1 Scale & told that final offer will be given by Chairman & Managing Director provided all the 9 unions come to an agreement that we will agree for whatever CMD gives finally the figures of fitment/perks & withdraw the indefinite strike commencing on 14.10.19 for which AIHALTUCC have not accepted the management conditional offer, then AIHALTUCC had a post co-ordination committee meeting where a resolution is passed unanimously that all the 9 units of co-ordination committee will go for indefinite strike commencing on 14.10.19 for Fair & Early wage revision settlement."

An apex body of the employee unions, on the other hand, claimed that the HAL management 'refused' to consider their "fair and reasonable demands".

PTI reported that the decision to launch the strike was taken at a meeting of All-India HAL Trade Unions' Co-ordination Committee (AIHALTUCC), held under the chairmanship of the Committee chief convenor Suryadevara Chandrasekhar.

Earlier in June, about 500 employees of HAL had gone on an indefinite relay hunger strike, demanding settlement of wages and also salaries on par with other public sector undertakings.

The company had then said that there was no justification and rationale in the demand of the unions to extend the benefits such as fitment benefit and allowances, on par or more than executives, when salary revision of executives was effected from January 1, 2017, after the stipulated 10-year period, as per a PTI report.
