Mizo National Front to withdraw ties with NDA if the Centre do not revoke CAB

Guwahati: The Chief Minister of Mizoram Zoramthanga said that the ruling party Mizo National Front (MNF) will not think to break alliance with the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) if the Centre would not withdraw the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

The Chief Minister while addressing the party workers at Aibawk village said that the government is trying hard to ensure the defeat of the bill and that the ruling party would withdraw its support to the NDA if any such situation arises.

The Chief Minister also said that the state cabinet adopted a resolution opposing the proposed legislation and that he has met both the Prime Minister and the Union Home Minister to inform about the opposition that made to the legislation. "The party will be at the front position of the movement against the Citizenship bill," added Zoramthanga.

He said that the bill should not be enacted as it does not value the Mizo accord signed between India and the erstwhile underground MNF in 1986. The Mizo National Front which was formed in the 1950s was to protest against the inaction of the central government towards the famine situation in the Mizo areas in the state of Assam.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, passed by the Lok Sabha on January 8, seeks to grant Indian nationality to non-Muslims who fled religious persecution from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan and entered India before December 31, 2014.

Meanwhile, the entire state of Mizoram has been protesting against the controversial bill demanding the central government to withdraw the same or else there will be massive agitation across the state.

The six religious minorities from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan were earlier given a special dispensation for grant of long term visas.

People belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhism, Jain, Parsi and Christian religions from Pakistan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan will have to prove they belonged to any of the three countries and were persecuted on religious lines among other things for granting Indian citizenship.

A large section of people and organizations in the Northeast have opposed the Bill saying it will nullify the provisions of the Assam Accord of 1985, which fixed March 24, 1971 as the cut-off date for deportation of all illegal immigrants irrespective of religion.

Also Read: Zoramthanga meets DoNER Minister in Delhi
