K’taka deputy CM requests BBMP to consider relocating waste processing plant in E-City

K’taka deputy CM requests BBMP to consider relocating waste processing plant in E-City

The residents have been complaining about the plant for several months due to the overwhelming stench it emits in the area.

news Civic Issues

In a welcome move for residents of Bengaluru’s Electronic City, Deputy CM Dr Ashwathnarayan CN has requested for the relocation of a BBMP-run waste management plant in the area. Residents have been urging authorities to shut down or at least regular the plant due to the overwhelming stench caused by the plant.

According to a statement from the minister’s office, “Since the solid waste processing unit established in Chikkanagamangala by the Palika has been having an adverse impact on the health of the neighbouring residents, in the interest of the public, he has requested to move it to some other place.”

The Chikkanagamangala plant, run by BBMP, had started functioning in April 2018 in full capacity. Since December 2018, residents of Doddanagamangala and Chikkanagamangala have held multiple protests and have approached the authorities regarding the stench emanating from the plant.

While the plant was meant to work as a composting unit for organic waste, it has instead been receiving mixed waste over its sanctioned capacity.

As the efficiency of the plant reduced with the presence of mixed waste, the BBMP started using the plant as a dumping ground, making life unbearable for neighbouring residents due to the stench. Despite multiple protests against the authorities, no action was taken. While some residents want the plant to be shut down as it was not part of the city's 'Master Plan', others have demanded that the standard operating procedure be followed for handling waste.

They had even threatened to boycott the Lok Sabha elections as part of their protest.

“Nothing has changed here. It’s stinking day and night. Even the inspection by the State Level Committee of the National Green Tribunal led by Justice Adi had substantiate our complaints. But we have not seen any improvement,” Pranay Dubey, an activist part of Electronic City Rising said.
