'Can we replace his absence?': Pawan Kalyan responds on Telangana RTC employee's death

'Can we replace his absence?': Pawan Kalyan responds on Telangana RTC employee's death

Srinivas Reddy, who set himself ablaze in Khammam town and sustained critical injuries, breathed his last at the Apollo DRDO Hospital in Hyderabad.

news Politics

Actor-politician and Jana Sena Party (JSP) chief Pawan Kalyan on Sunday responded to the ongoing strike by employees of the Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC), after a driver, Srinivas Reddy, succumbed to injuries after setting himself ablaze.

Srinivas Reddy, who set himself on fire in Khammam town and sustained critical injuries, breathed his last at the Apollo DRDO Hospital in Hyderabad. The driver had resorted to the extreme step during a protest by TSRTC employees, whose indefinite strike entered the ninth day on Sunday.

Stating that the death was 'heartbreaking' and 'unfortunate', Pawan said, "His life would have been saved if the people's representatives intervened and spoke to him. It is disheartening to note that he died in front of his wife and children."

Videos of Srinivas undergoing treatment have also emerged on social media, where he can be heard saying, "All the labourers who are working for 40 years should get welfare, tell me where are my sister and mother."

"It indicates how he is so worried about the threat of losing job and also indifferent attitude of the government. The incident is unfortunate even after the much anticipated formation of Telangana state. We can provide a compensation but can we provide him to his family? Can we replace his absence? The leaders in the government must think of it," Pawan wrote, while commenting on the video.

"The Telangana government must act immediately and set right the thing. It must take steps to instill courage among RTC workers. It is the responsibility of the government as well as the people's representatives to ensure that not even a life is lost further. The government must call the RTC unions for deliberations to withdraw their strike. I appeal to all the RTC workers not to take any extreme steps," he added.

Employee unions have alleged that the driver was depressed over losing his job as Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao had announced that over 48,000 employees dismissed themselves by not joining duty before the deadline set by the government. The Chief Minister has ruled out taking back the employees into TSRTC and has asked the officials to recruit new staff.

Tension prevailed in Khammam district as incidents of stone pelting on TSRTC buses were reported since Saturday evening.

Amid tight security, Srinivas Reddy's body was shifted to Khammam town, where his last rites were performed on Sunday night. TSRTC employee unions have called for a shutdown in Khammam on Monday to protest the death.

Meanwhile, depressed over losing his job over the ongoing strike, a conductor, Surender Goud, also killed himself at his house in Karwan area in Hyderabad.

IANS inputs

Read:

Another Telangana RTC employee kills self as strike continues, state refuses to budge

Video: Temporary TSRTC driver attacked in Khammam, allegedly by striking employees

CM KCR warns TSRTC against intensifying protest, extends school holidays till Oct 19
