PMC Bank scam: Account holders protest outside Mumbai court, ask govt, RBI for help

Around 200 Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative Bank (PMC) Bank account holders on Monday protested outside the Mumbai court at the time when the accused in the PMC Bank scam-- Housing Development and Infrastructure Ltd. (HDIL) directors Rakesh Wadhawan and Sarang Wadhawan and former PMC Bank Chairman Waryam Singh-- were produced before the court for hearing.

Many who were account holders in the PMC Bank gathered at the Esplanade court in Mumbai to hold protest against the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the government. They shouted slogans against the accused and demanded some clarity regarding when they will be able to withdraw money from their accounts and when the directions placed on the bank will be relaxed.

The prime accused--Rakesh Wadhawan, Sarang Wadhawan and Waryam Singh were produced in the court on Monday afternoon.

The prosecution demanded their custody remand be extended for two more days to which the defense counsel said that they did not object to the remand but there's should be some substantial development in the case.

The Investigating Officer informed the court that everyday some new developments come to light and that nine to ten properties of former PMC Bank Managing Director Joy Thomas bought in Pune have been found. "We have to find out about the money trail," the counsel said.

Hearing both the sides, the court then sent the accused trio to police custody till October 16.

Meanwhile, protesters kept shouting slogans against the accused. They raised slogans of "No Bail, Lambi Jail, No to Banks" outside the court gate.

In order to control the situation, police security was beefed up and only a few representatives of protesters were allowed in the court.

Nikhil Vora, an account holder with Oshiwara branch of the PMC Bank said, "Our only mistake is that we are depositors of the bank for which the RBI had given license. The regulator RBI has failed. More than the accused who are currently behind bars, we are the one suffering everyday. Please do justice and bail us out of the situation."

Another account holder Mahendra Doshi said, "I am a CA and have Rs 21 crore in the bank. But now, we don't even have Rs 5,000 to run the family. There is no clarity on the issue. Sometimes they say Rs 6,500 crore loss has happened and then shift to say that Rs 4,355 crore loss has happened. But there's has been no clarity."



"I would like to ask the government to save the bank in the present scenario. You take your time but infuse funds and save the bank or else the complete banking system will collapse," Doshi said.

Several distraught PMC Bank account holders have been reaching various locations across the city where protests are being held.

The purpose behind the protests is to seek some respite from the RBI so that the account holders could access their accounts.

Account holder Chander Purswani, who was also present in the protest, said that if bank doesn't restart its operations, they will die. "There are current account holders and senior citizens who are on a standstill. Whatever it takes, please bail us out of the situation. Around one crore people have been affected," Purswani said.

"Whether it is PM Modi [Prime Minister Narendra Modi], Finance Minister [Nirmala] Sitharaman or RBI Chief Das babu, they have to do something."

Minal Patil who had travelled from Thane in Mumbai for the protest said, "I met [Maharashtra] Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis who has assured us that our money is safe." However, Fadnavis told Patil that he can do nothing because of a code of conduct.

"He [Devendra Fadnavis] has promised us that he is going to arrange the money. I request the BJP government and our Prime Minister Narendra Modi to infuse some money as we cannot wait for liquidation and it's a not a very big figure. I have faith in our government and judiciary," Patil said.
