Protests against Bigg Boss 13 increase for ‘Vulgar’ Content

"We have increased vigil outside the actor’s residence”

Demonstrations seeking a ban on the reality show Bigg Boss 13 have been taking place outside Salman Khan’s Mumbai residence.

After Salman performed outside the bungalow, Mumbai police have increased security measures to protect his residence from protestors.

They have described themselves as activists, including members of Karni Sena and women. An official said:

“Police detained protestors from the spot and increased security outside the residence.”

As a result of this uproar, 12 protestors were taken into custody by the police.

The protestors have accused Bigg Boss 13 of promoting obscenity through a new concept on the reality show.

Typically, on the show contestants referred to as ‘housemates’, are isolated from the outside world.

As they are confined in the house they are constantly monitored by television cameras and personal microphones.

During their time on the reality show, they are seen performing a series of challenges.

Yet, on Bigg Boss 13 a new concept was introduced called, ‘Bed Friends Forever’. This sees housemates having to share beds with fellow contestants.

The official continued to highlight why protestors demanded an end to Bigg Boss 13. He said:

“The concept was heavily criticised by several organisations, including Karni Sena, which claimed that it was promoting vulgarity and is against Indian culture.”

The increase in tension resulted in tighter security for Salman Khan’s house. The official continued to state:

“To avoid any untoward incident, we have increased vigil outside the actor’s residence.”

He went on to add that the situation is under control.

The Central Government has requested a report from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. The report will outline the controversy associated with Bigg Boss 13.

According to Union Minister Prakash Janadekar, the full report will entail the details of what has been aired on the reality show. A week will be taken to prepare the report.

In addition, a BJP (Bharatiya Janata Party) MLA (Member of Legislative Assembly) from Uttar Pradesh complained of pornography on the reality show.

Salman Khan has also come under fire for promoting pornography as contestants are being made to share beds.

Due to the unacceptable nature of Bigg Boss 13, a protest was held in Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh. As an act of retaliation, an effigy of Salman Khan was burnt.

The vulgar content on the reality show has not been taken lightly. Audiences will have to await the fate of Bigg Boss 13.
