Cong sees Sukhbir’s role in SGPC tender

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Sultanpur Lodhi, October 14

Congress MLAs Navtej Singh Cheema and Harminder Singh Gill today said the SGPC had allotted the Rs11-crore tender for the 550th Parkash Purb celebrations to a “non-deserving company on the recommendations of SAD chief Sukhbir Singh Badal to loot Guru Di Golak.”

Addressing a press conference here at the PWD rest house, both alleged, “It was Sukhbir Badal who ordered the SGPC to scuttle the efforts of the Punjab government for joint celebrations as the SGPC floated the tender for functions on September 13. While doing so, he even ignored the fact that a meeting of the joint committee had been fixed on September 17 on the directions of Jathedar, Akal Takht.”

They alleged that the SGPC had allotted the tender to a Noida-based company, which had a meagre capital share worth Rs 5 lakh and 20 employees. Raising questions, both MLAs alleged that the company submitted its bid on September 23 and the tender was allotted to it just two days later. “The SGPC has also paid them 50 per cent of the amount in advance, which has never happened earlier,” they alleged.

They said that on the directions of its political masters, the SGPC even ignored that many of the applicants even offered to organise the function for Rs 2 crore.

Reminding SAD leader Harsimrat Kaur Badal about the organisation of functions during the 300 years of Khalsa Installation Day at Anandpur Sahib during the SAD tenure, both Congress leaders said at that time the main stage was arranged by late Cabinet Minister Capt Kawaljeet Singh where late PM Atal Bihari Vajpayee was also present.

Both MLAs urged the Jathedar of Akal Takht Sahib, Amritsar, to order the SGPC to cancel the tender to save the money of the Sikh sangat.

SGPC chief Gobind Singh Longowal rubbished the allegations. “The state government should refrain from indulging in such politics and let the Sikh body hold religious functions,” he said.
