Rahul Gandhi launches a tirade against the BJP govt in Bhubaneswar

BHUBANESWAR: Launching a tirade against the BJP government at Centre and ruling BJD in Odisha, the Congress president Rahul Gandhi here on Friday said prime minister Narendra Modi has kept the state chief minister Naveen Patnaik in a leash as the CBI sword is hanging over the heads of several BJD leaders, allegedly involved in mega chit fund scams. Rahul said the BJP government at Centre and BJD in Odisha function in a similar way with a common thinking.Rahul, while addressing a public gathering at Tamando mini-stadium, said Naveen is dancing to Modi’s tunes as the prime minister holds the remote control to make the Odisha chief minister act on his whim. Throwing ‘chowkidar chor hey’ barb at Modi, Rahul said: “Since Naveen Patnaik is indulged in corruption, the remote control of Odisha has gone into the hands of the corrupt chowkidar, who sits in Delhi. Whenever the chowkidar pressed button, Naveen Patnaik meekly surrendered and supported different bills in the parliament, GST and demonetisation.”Rahul lashed out at Modi and Naveen for allegedly doing precious little for farmers. “Narendra Modi sheds crocodile tears for farmers. So is Naveen, who is Modi’s junior partner in Odisha. They have little compassion and commitment for farmers. They give priority to industrialists. Industrialists fund the elections of the candidates in exchange for profitable projects, whereas state is run by key bureaucrats,” said Rahul, who also slammed Modi on Rafale deal. Rahul’s remark on the similar way of functioning between BJD and BJP assumes significance as Congress state president Niranjan Patnaik said “If you vote for BJP, it will in fact go to BJD. Both parties have secret understanding.”Going ballistic against Naveen, Rahul said the chief minister has pushed Odisha into poverty and unemployment in last 19 years. “Your chief minister does not listen to common people. He has a big heart for industrialists only. His bureaucrats run the show. State’s health, education, agriculture and women safety have been neglected,” Rahul said.Saying that the Congress wants to form a “Janata Ka Sarkar” (people’s government) in Odisha, Rahul said the party, if voted to power in the state, will provide employment to the youth, protect the farmers, provide better healthcare and fill up thousands of vacant posts in different departments. “We will replicate the pro-farmer policies of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh in Odisha. Unlike Narendra Modi, I do not lie. I fulfil my commitments. In the run-up to elections in those three states, I had promised to waive farm loans within ten days if Congress comes to power. When Congress won the three states, we did not wait for ten days. We fulfilled our promises within two days. Congress will do it in Odisha if voted to power,” Rahul said, adding “If Congress comes to power in the Centre, the minimum support price of paddy will be hiked to Rs 2600.”BJD said it has been maintaining equidistance from the BJP and Congress. BJD spokesperson Sasmit Patra said Odisha had suffered the worst at the hands of Congress. “During Congress regime in Odisha, the state’s growth rate was restricted to 3%. Under BJD rule, the growth rate has reached 10% which is higher than the national average. Odisha has been marching on the path of development under the BJD rule,” Patra said.BJP leader and union minister Dharmendra Pradhan hit back at Rahul and said Congress is synonymous with corruption and conspiracy. “Rahul boasts of probity, but his party’s state president Niranjan Patnaik was summoned by Delhi police’s economic offences wing in a fraud case. Congress looted the country and Odisha during its regime in the past,” Pradhan said.
