BJP plans 100 rallies in Bengal with PM Modi, Yogi Adityanath as star speakers

Narendra Modi and Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath will be the star speakers in these rallies. (Photo: PTI)

Bengal BJP unit on Friday (January 25) announced that PM Narendra Modi will be addressing three public meetings in the state next month.

The prime minister will attend two rallies on February 2 - one in Bongaon in North 24 Pargana and the other in Burdwan district.

PM Modi is likely to hold another meeting either in Darjeeling or Jalpaiguri in north Bengal.

Meanwhile Bengal BJP president Dilip Ghosh said the party plans to hold 100 sabhas or public gatherings across the state over the next two weeks.

Prominent leaders like Rajnath Singh, Dharmendra Pradhan, Giriraj Singh and Tripura CM Biplab Deb are expected to attend the rallies.

India Today TV has learnt that Narendra Modi and Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath will be the star speakers in these rallies as the party looks to build momentum ahead of the Lok Sabha elections.

Aditynath is slated to address four public meeting across the state next month. On February 3, he will be attending talkies in Bankura and Purulia.

Meanwhile, he will be addressing BJP workers in Raiganj and Balurghat in Dinajpur district.

With the fresh SP-BSP alliance in Uttar Pradesh and the show of strength by opposition parties at a mega rally organised by West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, the BJP is looking to fish for some additional Lok Sabha seats from the East.

Senior BJP members have mentioned that West Bengal will be significant state in terms of increasing its vote share in the upcoming general elections.

Senior leaders from the party have faced difficulties in holding rallies in the TMC-ruled state.

BJP president Amit Shah had skipped his Jhargram rally a couple of days ago after the state administration denied permission for landing his chopper.

An all-out war seems to have broken between the BJP and TMC in West Bengal after the Supreme Court had stopped the BJP from holding rath yatras in the state.

The top court, however, later allowed the BJP to hold rallies across West Bengal.
