Days before PM Modi's visit, fully-grown trees axed at Pune's SP College

Sir Parashurambhau (SP) College in Pune (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights At least 10 fully-growin trees were chopped off on Monday evening Permission to cut the trees was sought from Pune Municipal Corporation Officials have denied that the felling of trees is in any way linked to the PM's visit

Pune: Visuals are coming in from the Sir Parashurambhau (SP) College in Pune where a number of fully-grown trees have been axed ahead of the Prime Minister's visit to the campus. The PM is visiting Pune on Thursday as part of his campaign in favour of incumbent Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis ahead of the state Assembly elections. It is still unclear exactly how many trees have been chopped off to clear the way for the PM's convoy to the event.

Reports from ground zero suggest that at least 10 fully-grown Subabul trees were chopped off at the SP College campus on Monday evening. PM Modi's visit to the college's Tilak Road campus is scheduled for Thursday this week. While reports claim that the green signal to cut the trees was issued by the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) ahead of the PM's visit, the same is yet to be confirmed.

However, both the college and local functionaries of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) denied that the axing of trees had anything to do with PM's visit. The trees were chopped because they 'pose danger to students', they claim. In fact, the civic workers assisting with the job furnished a document that shows how permission was sought from the BJP-controlled PMC by the college management for this purpose. Even as the trees were being cut on one side of the college area, a stage was being set for the Prime Minister on the other side of the college campus. An official statement in this regard is yet to be issued by concerned local bodies.

This incident comes barely days after citizens of Mumbai took to the streets in protest against MMRCL's decision to axe over 2,000 trees in the city's Aarey Milk Colony. Following widespread outrage and two urgent hearings in the Bombay High Court, as many as 2,100 trees were chopped off to make way for a metro car shed within 48 hours. Environmentalists argued that the MMCRCL did not explore alternatives for the metro car shed. However, a bench of the Supreme Court said that the BMC's tree authority granted MMCRCL the permission to fell trees only after it ascertained that they had exhausted all alternatives.

The incident had sparked a bitter battle between the BJP leadership in the state and their closest allies, the Shiv Sena. With Sena scion Aditya Thackeray taking the side of citizens protesting against the loss of green cover and the central government throwing its weight behind Maharashtra CM Fadnavis who side with MMRCL and its plans to expand the Mumbai Metro.
