Farooq Abdullah’s sister, daughter detained during protest in Srinagar

Night and weekend curfew in Jammu and Kashmir 2022: Know guidelines, rules: What is allowed, what is not

In a first, Amit Shah releases district-based Good Governance Index for Jammu and Kashmir

Farooq Abdullah’s sister, daughter detained during protest in Srinagar

India

oi-Deepika S

Srinagar, Oct 15: Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Farooq Abdullah's daughter, sister along with several women protesters were detained during a protest in Srinagar today.

It was one of its kind protest in the past 73 days against abrogation of provisions of Article 370 and bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories.

Omar Abdullah's sister Suraiya and his daughter Safiya, who were leading a group of women activists, were detained by the police.

Wearing black armbands and holding placards, the women protestors were not allowed by the police personnel to assemble and were asked to disperse peacefully.

However, the protestors refused to disperse and tried to stage a sit-in.

The women CRPF personnel rounded the protestors into police vehicles.

The police also tried to stop the protesting women from distributing a statement to the media covering the protest.

Tring! The sound of the mobile buzzes yet again in Kashmir

"We the women of Kashmir disapprove the unilateral decision taken by the government of India to revoke Article 370, 35A and downgrade and split the state of Jammu and Kashmir," the statement said. Demanding restoration of civil liberties and fundamental rights of the citizens, the women said they feel "betrayed, humiliated and violated as people".

They also demanded the immediate release of detainees and demilitarization of rural and urban areas.

"We express our outrage against the national media for their false/misleading coverage of ground realities in Kashmir," the statement added.

Hundreds of Kashmiri leaders including former Chief Ministers Farooq Abdullah, his son Omar Abdullah, as well as Mehbooba Mufti - have been placed under detention or house arrest since August 5.
