Here's Why Nobel Laureate Abhijit Banerjee Went To Tihar Jail For 10 Days In The 80s

Indian economist and now a Nobel Laureate, Abhijit Banerjee has made the entire country proud of the laurel he's got for us back home. While his contribution to Indian economics is a chapter in itself, not many are aware of the fact that he once served a sentence for 10 days in Tihar Jail back in 1983 when he was in college.

© Twitter/J-PAL

Abhijit Banerjee was in the final year of his masters in Economics in JNU in 1983 when he became a part of an ongoing protest in the University. The student union president was expelled and the student body was protesting continuously outside the then-vice chancellor's residence. In a piece published in HT back in 2016 by Abhijit, he recalled the experience and explained what went down. “It was the summer of '83 and we, the students of JNU, had 'gheraoed' the vice-chancellor in his house for the umpteenth time. The pretext was the expulsion of the president of the student union, the Kanhaiya Kumar of the day, for reasons that escape me now. We were beaten (I was) and thrown into Tihar jail, charged not quite with sedition, but attempt to murder and the rest. The charges were eventually dropped thank God but not before we spent 10 days or so in Tihar.” He also mentioned that the Congress government, which was in power during that time, backed the whole situation. "What it undoubtedly was is an attempt by the State to establish the lines of authority. We are the boss they were telling us, shut up and behave,” he added.

© Reuters

He is currently a professor of Economics in the coveted MIT and is known for his contribution to alleviate global poverty. His wife, Esther Duflo, has also been awarded the Nobel prize for her tremendous contribution in this field. Mr. Banerjee has also pointed out his concern for the alarming situation of the Indian economy right now in terms of its financial health. He mentioned that stability was not an issue but the discrepancy between the demand-supply ratio sure was a problem. He has also served on the UN Secretary-General's High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
