Who Is Abhijit Banerjee, The Indian-Origin Economist Who Won A Nobel Prize For Fighting Poverty

It isn't every day you find out that your name will go down in history for all the invaluable contributions you have made to society. When an individual decides to give back to society, the motivation lies purely in the desire to help those who have helped us to reach our true potential.

© Twitter/NISAU_UK

Things had been no different for Indian-origin Nobel Laureate Abhijit Banerjee who was one of the winners for 2019 Nobel Economics Prize. Abhijit won the Prize for his “experimental approach to alleviating poverty,” and the world can't help but take note of this 58-year-old development economist, who has been a trailblazer when it comes to meeting poverty head-on, and helping the needy rise above it.

© Twitter/CPKolkata

But there is a lot to this man you may not have discovered yet, so, here are all the reasons that make this man worthy of the great honour that is a Nobel Prize.

Down To The Roots

Abhijit was born on 21st February 1961 in Mumbai to Dipak Banerjee, an Economics professor at the Presidency College and Nirmala Banerjee, who also happens to be an economist. Abhijit holds extensive bragging rights to his more than impressive academic background.

© Twitter/MIT

A 1981 science graduate from Calcutta University, Abhijit acquired his MA in 1983 from JNU, and eventually made it through to Harvard University from where he completed his PhD in 1988. His doctoral thesis was titled 'Essays in Information Economics'.

Fun Fact: Abhijit spent 10 days in Tihar Jail in 1983 while he was studying at JNU following his participation in student protests against the then JNU Vice-Chancellor, who had expelled their student union president.

Abhijit went on to become Ford Foundation International Professor of Economics at the prestigious Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he teaches with his wife and fellow Economics Nobel Prize winner Esther Duflo.

Endless Achievements

© Twitter/KupadhyayINC

Back in 2003, Abhijit, along with fellow economists Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan, co-founded the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL), a global research centre that works tirelessly to reduce poverty.

Abhijit, along with fellow MIT professor and wife Esther, spearheaded the monumental study on remedial tutoring that changed the lives of millions of Indian kids.

An Award-Winning Author, Director & Self-Taught Cook

© Twitter/Akhalid_Khan

Abhijit has co-authored close to seven books on various aspects of economics, out of which two have been with Esther. One of their books titled Poor Economics that came out in 2011 was extremely well received and even went on to win the 'Goldman Sachs Business Book of the Year'.

That is not all, Abhijit has also donned the director's hat twice when he co-directed two documentaries titled The Magnificent Journey: Times and Tales of Democracy and The Name of the Disease, both films explored themes that impact the life of a common man.

© Twitter/ MIT

Additionally, Abhijit also loves to don a chef's hat, and cooks almost every day. In an interview with Telegraph India, Abhijit had confessed that he had been interested in cooking ever since he was a child, and his love for the craft has lived on overtime.

Honours Galore

Abhijit was named as one of the top 100 global thinkers by Foreign Policy magazine in 2011. He also served on the UN Secretary-General's High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. Abhijit was also a part of the expert panel of the UN which worked on updating the Millennium Development Goals in 2013.

© Twitter/PandaJay

A man of many talents, Abhijit Banerjee has been working tirelessly to fight poverty at a grassroot level, and this Nobel Prize is just the kind of recognition and honour the man deserved.
