Arrest of Botcha’s nephew in Vizianagaram causes uproar

YSRCP activists confiscate laptops from ‘survey’ team

The arrest of YSR Congress Party’s political coordinator Majji Srinivasa Rao, nephew of former Minister Botcha Satyanarayana, caused an uproar among the party leaders and activists on Friday. However, he was released in the evening.

Mr. Srinivasa Rao was arrested in the early hours of Friday on the charge of confiscating laptops and tabs from a group of youngsters who were conducting survey on the voters at Kumili in Nellimarla Assembly constituency. The team was reportedly verifying the voters’ list on the spot, seeking information from the residents about government welfare schemes.

Alleging that the survey was aimed at removing the YSRCP supporters from the voters’ list, the party activists allegedly confiscated laptops and tabs from the team. Acting on a complaint , the police arrested Mr. Srinivasa Rao, Pativada Appalanaidu, P. Aswhini Kumar, Venne Mahesh, B. Srinu and P. Sanyasi Naidu. Immediately after the arrest, the party activists staged a protest at Jami police station, 15 km away from the district headquarters, seeking immediate release of Mr. Srinivasa Rao. They also demanded that an inquiry be done into the ‘unauthorised’ survey of voters in several villages in the district.

‘Trivial issue’

YSRCP MLC Kolagatla Veerabhadra Swamy alleged that the arrests were made over a ‘trivial issue’. “The police did not feel necessary to question the youngsters who, in fact, are working against the YSRCP on the pretext of conducting survey,” he said.

Mr. Botcha Satyanarayana reportedly spoke to the party leaders over phone and asked them to take up the issue seriously, dubbing the episode as a ‘conspiracy’ to weaken the YSRCP in Vizianagaram district.

Meanwhile, Minister for Mines and Geology Sujay Krishna Ranga Rao objected the confiscation of laptops from the youngsters. “Manhandling of youngsters was nothing less than a crime and it should be viewed seriously,” he said.

‘Showing voter’s list no crime’

However, Vizianagaram former SP G. Pala Raju, now the DIG, Visakhapatnam Range, said it was not possible for anyone to remove names from the voters’ list as it could only be done by Election Commission of India. “Showing voter’s list on laptops is not a crime as anyone can do so by logging into the ECI website. It is people’s choice whether or not to participate in such surveys. Police Department takes action as per the procedure if anybody violates the law,” he said.

Leaders released

After a prolonged tussle, the police release the arrested YSRCP leaders in the evening. The party leaders said that they would continue to oppose such ‘unauthorised surveys’.
