Fact Check: No, this man did not burn the Indian national flag for Hindutva

A picture showing a man burning India's national flag has gone viral on social media. The claim with the photo says the man is a "Hindu terrorist" who burnt the Indian flag as he wants a saffron flag to be hoisted instead of the Tricolour.

The claim was made by Facebook page 'Islam Zindabad' in Hindi, which when translated, says, "This is Hindu terrorist Shri Krishna Lal burning the Indian flag. This terrorist believes India is a Hindu nation and here, only the saffron flag should be hoisted and not the Tricolour."



Though the post was first put up in August last year, it has been going viral time and again. Till the filing of this article, this post has been shared more than 29,000 times. The archived version of the post can be seen here.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the claim to be false. The man seen in the photo is a school teacher in Tamil Nadu who burnt the national flag as a mark of protest against the central government for not forming the Cauvery Management Board (CMB). The incident took place in April last year.

AFWA Probe

With the help of reverse image search, we found the viral photo in a tweet made by "Girish Bharadwaja". In the tweet, Girish claimed that the man in the viral photo is M Prabhu, an art teacher at a school in Tamil Nadu who burnt the national flag to protest against the government.

Meet Mr M Prabhu, a arts teacher at a school in Tamil Nadu. He protests against the government by burning the Indian flag.

Hate any government, but never hate the nation that gives you an identity! You might be a Tamil,Telugu,Marathi etc but you're an Indian first! pic.twitter.com/zOVhXWWYls Girish Bharadwaja (@Girishvhp) April 4, 2018

We also found the same information in a news article from April 2018. The article says that Prabhu had set the national flag on fire to protest against the Centre for not forming the Cauvery Management Board.

Prabhu had also posted the video of this act on Facebook, following which he was arrested by Tamil Nadu Police.

The incident was also covered by media groups such as The Times of India and Deccan Chronicle.

Tamil Nadu and Karnataka have been involved in a long-standing dispute over sharing of Cauvery river water. There was also a demand for constituting a Cauvery Management Board to resolve the issue.

Finally, as per a Supreme Court direction, the Centre on June 1, 2018, constituted a Cauvery Water Management Authority (CMA) to address the dispute over sharing of river water among Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala and Puducherry.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Hindu man burnt the Indian national flag as he wanted saffron flag to be hoisted instead of the Tricolour. Conclusion The man burnt the national flag as a mark of protest against the Centre for not forming the Cauvery Management Board. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
