UM reports student protester to police, and 9 news from yesterday

KINI ROUNDUP | Here are key headlines you may have missed yesterday, in brief.

1. Universiti Malaya has lodged a police report against one of its graduating students, Wong Yan Ke, for protesting against its allegedly racist Vice-Chancellor Abdul Rahim Hashim. Both also failed to turn up at a meeting meant to resolve the impasse.

2. Former Bar Council president Ambiga Sreenevasan urged Prime Minister Dr Mahathir Mohamad to take note of a media report claiming that the majority of IS sympathisers arrested in India were radicalised by Muslim preacher Dr Zakir Naik's videos.

3. The MACC is investigating 20 reports of bribery and abuse of power involving judges and judicial officers, most of which involve the lower courts.

4. Pakatan Harapan has told off Sembrong MP Hishammuddin Hussein for supposedly pushing for a government that would exclude DAP and Amanah. Earlier, PKR president Anwar Ibrahim had made veiled references to such attempts.

5. Mahathir justified that the government’s move to lower the floor price for properties sold to foreigners does not invalidate his past criticism of the Forest City project in Johor. Malaysiakini readers have rated the new policy as the most unpopular item in Budget 2020.

6. In a candid interview, Mahathir revealed that he used to get bullied in school by one of his neighbours.

7. Kelantan Menteri Besar Ahmad Yakob disputed Finance Minister Lim Guan Eng’s claim that the federal government paid oil royalties to the state, saying the payment was a “goodwill payment”.

8. The government is consulting stakeholders on a move to decriminalise suicide attempts.

9. The government will decide on the mechanism for disbursing targeted fuel subsidies for the M40 income group by March next year.

10. Australia is heading the largest-ever task force assembled to fight organised crime in Asia, in a bid to take down the suspected kingpin of a crime syndicate that dominates the Asia-Pacific drug trade.
