India blocks SMS services in held Kashmir after trucker killed

SRINAGAR: Text messaging services were blocked in held Kashmir just hours after being restored when a truck driver was killed by suspected militants and his vehicle set ablaze, authorities said on Tuesday.

Indian security sources said the decision to cut text messaging services was taken to reduce the ability of militants to communicate.

Authorities had only restored call and text services for mobile phones on Monday, following a 72-day blackout in the restive northern territory imposed after New Delhi scrapped the region’s semi-autonomous status.

The seven million-plus people of held Kashmir — the main hotbed of resistance to Indian rule — are still cut off from the internet, however.

Authorities said SMS services were cut again on Monday night following the attack on the driver of a truck carrying apples in Shopian.

Former CM Farooq Abdullah’s sister and daughter detained for holding ‘anti-India protest’

Residents said two masked gunmen told the driver to use his truck to block the road, but it skidded and got stuck.

“The gunmen then fired at the truck and set it on fire,” a witness said.

Apples are a sensitive issue in held Kashmir, which exports vast quantities of the fruit to markets across India.

Many orchard owners say they are refusing to harvest this year to protest against the government’s move to scrap Kashmir’s autonomy.

The latest death from Pakistani artillery fire over the Line of Control dividing Kashmir brings the number of fatalities on the Indian side to three in the past four days, the Press Trust of India reported.

Two Indian soldiers were killed in two separate incidents on Friday and Sunday, PTI said.

Also on Tuesday, police arrested 13 women activists in Srinagar after they staged a protest calling for civil liberties and the release of detainees.

The women, wearing black armbands, were arrested for “breaching the peace” and for contravening a ban in place since early August on public gatherings of more than four people, police said.

They included the sister and daughter of former chief minister Farooq Abdullah, one of several hundred local politicians, lawyers and others in custody since early August, mostly without charge.

Abdullah, 81, was formally arrested in mid-September under the highly contentious Public Safety Act (PSA) that allows someone to be held for up to two years without charge, and which has been used widely in Kashmir in recent years.

Rebels have been fighting for three decades some 500,000 Indian soldiers deployed in the territory, demanding independence or to join Pakistan which also controls part of the region and, like India, claims it in full.

Published in Dawn, October 16th, 2019
