Left parties blame Centre for current economic crisis

New Delhi: The Left parties held Wednesday a protest rally at Jantar Mantar here and blamed the Centre for the current state of economic crisis and unemployment in the country. They said that its ‘negative policies’ has affected the economy.

Left leaders like CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury, AIPWA secretary, Kavita Krishnan and CPI general secretary D Raja along with the party workers led the protest and marched towards the Parliament street police station, where barricades were placed.

The Left parties alleged that the government was ‘plundering’ the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and banks to bailout corporates, instead of boosting demand by raising minimum wages, old-age pension.

Sitaram Yechury, while addressing the demonstration, pointed out that the economic slowdown in the country is a direct result of the ‘negative policies of the government’. He said this includes demonetisation and faulty implementation of GST, that have adversely affected the economy.

“India’s economy was already reeling under increasing unemployment, price rise, retrenchment and livelihood issues. The Modi government has been ignoring the high rate of unemployment, contract system, low wages and agrarian crisis. This has put huge burdens on the vast working sections of the country,” Yetchruy said.

The parties also alleged that the government has withdrawn Rs 1.76 lakh crore from the RBI and instead of using it for public expenditure, which can generate new jobs and increase domestic demand, it wants to compensate the fiscal deficit of Rs 1.70 lakh crore, which was a result of demonetisation and Goods and Services Tax (GST).

“Corporates are being benefited in the name of combating economic slowdown. The Modi government is using pseudo-nationalism and polarisation to divert the attention from the basic economic issues,” Yetchruy alleged.

D Raja slammed the BJP government for mooting Bharat Ratna award for VD Savarkar instead of trying to solve the e, Raja said instead of addressing economic crisis, the government was proposing to accord Bharat Ratna to Savarkar.

“Soon, the party may even propose Bharat Ratna for Mahatma Gandhi’s killer Nathuram Godse,” the CPI leader said.

“The economy is in shambles. The Modi government has failed to manage the economy in all spheres. Unemployment has become a worrying issue. Farmer suicides have increased,” Raja pointed out.

All the left leaders appealed to the activists and the masses to continue the campaign against the anti-people policies of the government and take it forward to its logical conclusion.

PTI
