Campaigning in Maharashtra, Haryana reach a feverish pitch

Leaders of all political parties hold back to back rallies





AMN / WEB DESK



With elections in Maharashtra, Haryana due on Monday, Campaigning has reached at the feverish pitch as leaders of all political parties hold back to back rallies.

Addressing an election rally in Navi Mumbai’s Khargar, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said Narendra in Delhi and Devendra in Mumbai is the equation that will contribute to making a new India and in the process take Maharashtra to new heights.

Prime Minister said Maharashtra is the engine that will propel India’s dream of becoming a five-trillion economy.

Stating that Konkan region and its rich coast can play an important role in the state’s economic development, Mr Modi said his government is working towards strengthening the fisheries department and loans are now available for fishermen who wish to modernise their boats. He said fishermen while ensuring that safety of sea resources and the coast, must now play an active role against inappropriate disposal of single-use plastic items along the coast.

Mr Modi said Maharashtra has been a major beneficiary of start-up programme and FDI in the last five years. He said infrastructure development has taken place with projects like Navi Mumbai Airport, trans harbour link road and expansion of metro network being implemented at a much faster rate. He said the housing and real estate sector has been made corruption-free so that the poorest of the poor can be provided with a home. The Prime Minister lauded the state BJP’s resolve to provide housing for all by 2022. He informed that about two lakh houses are being built in Panvel under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana.

Stating that the Mumbai Metropolitan Region, including Panvel, Belapur, PEN, Airoli, Kalyan, Dombivali and Thane are fast developing as new business centres, Mr Modi said the government is committed to providing all support so that these centres are able to create more employment and revenue.

With elections due on Monday, Mr Modi urged voters to refrain from going out for a long weekend. He asked them to vote in large numbers and break all previous poll percentage records.

This was Mr Modi’s third rally in Maharashtra today. The other two were held in Akola and Jalna districts.

NCP chief Sharad Pawar has alleged that farmers in Maharashtra are not getting Minimum Support Price for their produce. He was addressing an election rally in Beed district of Marathwada region today.

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray campaigned at Kankavli in Sindhudurg district of Konkan. He cautioned the BJP over the inclusion of former Maharashtra Chief Minister Narayan Rane.

Yesterday, Rane had merged his Swabhiman Party with the BJP. His younger son Nitesh is contesting from Kankavli on a BJP ticket.

In Haryana, senior Congress leader and candidate from Tosham, Kiran Chaudhary today addressed public rallies in various villages of her constituency, including Alampur, Daryapur and Dangkhurd. She alleged every section of society is suffering under the BJP rule. She also alleged that the BJP government in the state is involved in various scams but is presenting itself as a clean dispensation.

She said the political scenario in Haryana is changing and claimed that Congress will form government in the State. She also accused the BJP government of making false promises to the people of Haryana and said that if her party is voted to power, all the promises will be fulfilled.

BJP President and Home Minister Amit Shah addressed a poll rally at Tigaon near Faridabad. He attacked the Congress over Article 370, triple talaq and the NRC, accusing it of not taking a stand on nationalism for the sake of its vote bank.

The BJP president repeated his assertion that each illegal migrant in the country will be sent home before the next Lok Sabha polls in 2024. Amit Shah also targeted former Haryana Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda, alleging that he had usurped farmland for the son-in-law of the Gandhi family, an apparent reference to Robert Vadra.
