After Aarey row, over 12,000 trees axed in Karnataka to widen NH-4A; HC takes cognisance

Meanwhile, until the court further announces order in the matter, no more trees will be chopped in the area | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The Karnataka High Court has been informed that a total of 12,258 trees have been axed in the forest area near Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary. The court has asked the authorities to submit a copy of the permission granted to cut those trees Until the court further announces order in the matter, no more trees will be chopped in the area

Bengaluru: After authorities successfully chopped off over 2,000 trees of Aarey in Maharashtra's Mumbai, now the Karnataka High Court has been informed that a total of 12,258 trees have been axed in the forest area near Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary. This massive green cover was chopped off for improvement works undertaken on the National Highway 4-A connecting Khanapura with Londa.

Taking cognisance of the statement, the court has asked the authorities to submit a copy of the permission granted to cut those trees. According to a report, the authorities now have to submit the number trees which have been chopped after February 28, 2019.

Meanwhile, until the court further announces order in the matter, no more trees will be chopped in the area, said the bench headed by Chief Justice Abhay Shreeniwas Oka. Reportedly, a Public Intrest Litigation in the matter was filed by environmentalist Suresh Heblikar and others, seeking court's intervention for the indiscriminate felling of trees. Petitioner cited media reports regarding felling of about 22,000 trees to wide the NH-4A. They further contended that the 14 km stretch is a thick green cover under the Dandeli elephant reserve and is home to elephants, tigers, leopards, black panthers and king cobras.

Similarly, despite widespread protest by green activists in Maharashtra's Mumbai, the Bombay High Court had paved the way for Metro car shed in Aarey resulting in chopping off over 2,000 trees. A massive crowd of 'Save Aarey' activists had gathered outside the gates in the first week of October. Tempers were high, with the protesters hitting the walls of the Metro site and a crowd of nearly 200-strong storming back to the site yet the over 1000 trees were axed overnight.




