‘One nation, one Constitution’: Modi lashes out at previous governments, says ‘nobody dared to remove Art 370’

Prime Minister Narendra Modi. | @narendramodi | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights PM Modi said the echo of a ‘new India’ can be heard far and wide across the world, thanks to the massive mandate the people of India gave the Bharatiya Janata Party in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections The Prime Minister also assured the people that he will not rest until each and every penny that has been looted from the poor and the middle class is returned to them

Pune: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday hit out at the Opposition in the run-up to the crucial Maharashtra Assembly elections and said that the previous governments of India never dared to remove Article 370 from Jammu and Kashmir that stood in the way of ‘one country, one Constitution’.

Speaking at an election rally ahead of the October 21 state polls, PM Modi said the echo of a ‘new India’ can be heard far and wide across the world, thanks to the massive mandate the people of India gave the Bharatiya Janata Party in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections and gave the country a stable central government.

“Article 370 had been a big hurdle in the way of having ‘one nation, one Constitution’. There was a lot of talk about removing the hurdle, but no one dared to do it,” news agency PTI quoted Modi as saying.

He added that the decision to abrogate Article 370 was not easy, but ‘new India’ of the 21st century was not afraid of remarkable changes.

PM Narendra Modi, in Pune earlier today: It has not even been 5 months, and we have the time of 5 years in hands. We have already drawn a blueprint of the next 5 years. #MaharashtraAssemblyPolls pic.twitter.com/V0yxXNtt9i — ANI (@ANI) October 17, 2019

The Prime Minister also assured the people that he will not rest until each and every penny that has been looted from the poor and the middle class is returned to them. “Is it the first time that a government got the majority? No. But, they didn’t do it,” Modi hit out at the Congress in a veiled manner.

The PM, in his rally, addressed the youth and told them that their coming years will be filled with opportunities with the promise that India was one among the FDI (foreign direct investment)-friendly nations.

“Every business leader I have had a discussion with globally is keen to come to India. The growth in investment in India in the last five years has been five times,” Modi said at the rally.
