Kerala: Vatican backs expulsion of nun who protested against Mgr Mulakkal

Sr Lucy Kalappura was expelled from the Franciscan Clarist Congregation last August. For her superiors, she broke the rules of the community. The Apostolic Nuncio, Mgr Giambattista Diquattro delivered the note. Mgr Franco Mulakkal is on trial charged with the rape of a nun.

Mumbai (AsiaNews) – The Vatican has rejected the appeal of a nun expelled from her congregation in Kerala for failing to uphold the rules of her order.

Sr Lucy Kalappura was expelled from the Franciscan Clarist Congregation (FCC), i.e. last August. According to her superiors, she broke the rules of community life by taking part in protests against Mgr Franco Mulakkal, the former bishop of Jalandhar (Punjab), who was accused of rape by a nun and is currently on trial in Kerala.

Sr Lucy is a familiar face in India after she publicly criticised the bishop and the alleged support he is said to have received from Church leaders in the case of the Sister of the Missionaries of Jesus. The latter, whose identity is protected for privacy reasons, filed a complaint of sexual harassment that she alleges took place between 2014 and 2016 at the convent in Kuravilangad, Kottayam (Kerala).

According to the Vatican, Sr Lucy failed "to give a satisfactory explanation for her lifestyle in violation of FCC laws” and was issued "proper canonical warnings”. Her breaches include publishing books and songs, gaining monetary benefits from it, buying and driving a car, and publicly speaking and protesting in support of a nun who had made sexual allegations.

At present, Sr Lucy still lives at the convent in Wayanad, isolated among the other Sisters because of her role in the campaign against Mgr Mulakkal. Apostolic Nuncio Mgr Giambattista Diquattro delivered the Vatican note to nun.

Speaking to NDTV, Sr Lucy said that “Most of the communication is in a language I don't understand.” For this reason, “I will wait for a clear letter from [my] superiors in the congregation, with any deadlines for the second appeal. I am also looking at possibilities of legal recourse. Under no circumstances am I willing to leave the hostel and go." (N.C.)
