Sonia Gandhi picks up prestige battle in Haryana, to address her first rally on Friday

Congress

Sonia

Haryana

Congress suspends 15 Mumbai office-bearers for 'anti- party' activities The Congress, which has entered into an alliance with Sharad Pawar's NCP, is contesting 29 of the 36 assembly seats in Mumbai.

Bhupinder Hooda

Rao Narbir Singh

Congress has drifted from national integration ideology, says Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil Maharashtra Housing Minister Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil has said the Congress' opposition to abrogation of Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir shows the party has deviated from its ideology of national integration.

Manmohan Singh on PMC Bank crisis: Prime Minister's National Relief Fund should be used to help ailing depositors Former Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh on Thursday urged Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman to help the PMC Bank depositors who's savings have been impacted by the crisis they suddenly find themselves in.

After becoming interimPresident,Gandhi will address her first election rally in's Mahendergarh on Friday.Gandhi will probably be holding her only rally at Mahendragarh, just two days before the campaign ends for the state assembly election, in the last efforts by the party to regain ground in the state.Gandhi will address a public meeting at Government College Khel Parisar, Mahendragarh (Haryana) at 3 pm. The Congress chief is unlikely to address a rally in Maharashtra.Party sources said Mahendragarh will be a prestige battle in more than one ways. That’s because the Congress candidate from the seat is Rao Dan Singh, a party veteran who has served as MLA for several terms. He is close to former Haryana CMand that is possibly why he managed to get Sonia Gandhi to campaign for him.Sources said his son, Rao Akshat Singh is married to the daughter of Haryana Cabinet Minister,. The BJP denied Narbir Singh a ticket as he did not get along well with Chief Minister Khattar. It remains to be seen if Sonia’s campaign turns the tide for Rao Dan Singh. He also faces a probe in a land deal case .Haryana BJP leaders felt Mahendragarh may have been picked by the Congress as Prime Minister Modi is holding a rally in Rewari on Saturday. "Rewari, Mahendragarh and Gurugram all fall in the same line. Mahendragarh is much closer to Rajasthan border. It is possible that the Congress may have thought of shoring up its morale bringing crowds from neighbouring state,"said a BJP source.Sonia Gandhi has not campaigned in 2019 general elections due to ill health. She had confined herself to Rae Bareli.
