Narendra Modi: India on course to be $5 trillion economy by 2024

Kasa kai Punekar?

PM Narendra Modi on Thursday asserted during his Maharashtra poll campaign that his government was on course to make India a five-trillion-dollar economy in the next five years despite apprehensions being expressed by experts and the opposition."Unlike them (experts), it is not just a figure for us. It is our resolve. We are aware of the reality but we have the confidence," Modi said at a rally in Pune.The PM, who had articulated this aspiration during his Independence Day speech , said, "For the initial 60 years, we were just a one-trillion-dollar economy. During the tenure of our government, India has become a three trillion-dollar economy."I am banking on this track record and the support of the younger generation who have great capabilities. Our foreign policies are being well appreciated. The entire world is looking at us as a major industrial destination," Modi said, adding that the bigger the economy, the easier it was to eradicate poverty and fulfil the aspirations of the youth.The PM said India's economy was full of opportunities for the youth and the recent policy decisions, including tax reforms and allowing foreign direct investment, would further boost its growth. The government is also planning to pump in over Rs 100 lakh crore in infrastructure projects, he said."The nature of employment is changing. Skill upgradation is the key," he said. Modi tried to strike a chord with the crowd in Pune by opening his speech with remarks in Marathi, "" (How are you, Punekars?).At all three public meetings -Pune, Satara and Parli - the PM questioned the opposition leaders for protesting against the defanging of Article 370 . Speaking at Parli in Beed district, he took exception to the statement of the opposition that the decision on Article 370 had destroyed democracy.Modi said everything was fine in Kashmir and arrangements would be made for people wanting to visit there. Though he did not mention Sharad Pawar in his speech in Pune, he took a dig at the NCP chief during the Satara rally when he said, "Pawar avoided the Satara bypoll as he knew which way the wind is blowing."
