Praises for citizen support, dvpt plans top Narendra Modi’s speech

PRIME MINISTER MODI RALLIES IN PUNE



Untitled Carousel 71640562

Who is ‘Champa’?



Untitled Carousel 71640545

71574131

Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s speech at Sir Parshurambhau (SP) College on Thursday was meant to be musical for the crowd. Tailored for the locals, Modi began his speech in Marathi and went on to invoke Pune’s historical leadership that, according to him, “gave a direction to the country”. The latter part of his narrative elaborated on the development agenda — a pitch he used to garner votes. He maintained a pleasing tone for the citizens, who he credited for the strength he has achieved to accomplish the proposed development.He spoke about the happenings of the last five months since the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) rose to power for a second term. “You have chosen us for five more years and there will be many more to come. Did you find new India is creating an impact in the last 125 days? Do you see a clear agenda? Do you know we are doing this for the benefit of the country? These blessings that come from you, give me the energy to work,” he said.The discourse on the “achievements” included the response he received during the United States event, ‘Howdy! Modi’. “India is being celebrated on the international platform and it is not because of Modi. It is because of the citizens of this country. When the global leaders shake my hand, they don’t see me, they see the 120 crore Indians,” he said.~~71639225~~After praising the crowd, he went to unravel the “changing conditions” by steering the topic to the much-controversial abrogation of Article 370 and the whispers of an economic slowdown. Firstly, he addressed the issue of Kashmir’s autonomy, saying, “Many political parties and leaders spoke about revoking Article 370. But no one actually tried. Is it happening for the first time that a party has come to power with full strength for the first time? It is the willingness that mattered.”^^71625016^^Secondly, he stated that some people were being negative about the economic conditions — reiterating that citizens will have to alter their habits to fit the transforming scenario. “We will have to prepare for the new economy of a new India. Even if some people have been pessimistic, I want to assure that coming years are full of opportunities and possibilities. Many global leaders are willing to invest here. We have taken decisions for improving the state of the economy. We will also do whatever is needed to improve the situation of investments,” he said.Towards the end, he once again spoke of the development, citing facts. Modi highlighted that the country is spending Rs 100 crore on infrastructure development and even promise action against those who have stolen the taxpayers’ money. “During Lok Sabha elections, I had mentioned that those who have thieved on country’s money, will be sent to jail. I will not keep quiet till we get every single penny back,” he said.Interestingly, Modi made no reference to Sharad Pawar throughout the speech, despite the latter’s Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) flaying him at every opportunity.~~71639233~~The rally was met with protests from two SP College students, who denounced the hacking of trees on the campus to accommodate the event. These students, who are from the political science department, lodged their displeasure by silently sitting outside the main gate. They were rushed by the Pune police after a few moments.Sitaram Gosavi, who was a part of this silent protest, said, “We are not agitating against any political party, but are simply generating awareness about the green cover.”Apart from the students, two environmental activists from Extinction Rebellion Indian Group were protesting outside the campus with an oxygen cylinder — in a mark of criticism with regards to the recent tree cutting.However, this issue was taken up by MLA Madhuri Misal on the dais, who asked the activists, if they have planted a single tree in the city. “They keep recalling the biodiversity plan and have enabled slum development at these spots. We have instead built a compound wall around the forest area and planted trees,” she said.BJP state president Chandrakant Patil took a jibe on NCP leader Ajit Pawar and MNS leader Raj Thackeray. He said, “Ajit Pawar has started calling me Champa (a reiteration of his name in Devnagri script that comes from joining initials of his first and last names). Now, Thackeray — the person I used to think is intelligent — too has chosen to call me by that name. Is this what you have stooped down to? ”
