‘Forest Rights Could Influence Votes In 70% Of Assembly Seats In Maharashtra’

New Delhi: The Forest Rights Act (FRA) could be a deciding factor in more than 70% (211) of the 288 Assembly constituencies in the 2019 Maharashtra elections, according to an analysis by a group of independent researchers. This is because the number of voters eligible for land rights under the FRA is more than the margin of victory in the last election in 87% of the 211 seats considered FRA-sensitive.

Analysing the results of the 2014 assembly elections in the 211 constituencies that have a large proportion of tribal dwellers, the researchers concluded that any political party that promises effective implementation of the FRA and other laws protecting land rights of tribespeople could defeat the incumbent Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in these constituencies.

FRA, which offered formal recognition of forest-dwellers’ land rights in 2006, is critical to the livelihoods of at least 25.4 million people in Maharashtra--equivalent to Australia’s population. Of these 25.4 million, 21.7% (5.5 million) belong to Scheduled Tribes, the constitutional term for government-recognised indigenous tribes.

FRA definitely has the potential to change the election outcome, Pravin Mote, an activist from the All India Forum for Forest Movements (AIFFM), one of the research groups that undertook the analysis, told IndiaSpend.

Elections in Maharashtra will be held on October 21, 2019, and the results declared on October 24.

The BJP lost the 2018 Assembly elections in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh, partly due to the FRA, according to the Assembly election analysis by Community Forest Resource-Learning and Advocacy (CFR-LA), an NGO network.

Hotbed of land conflicts

In Maharashtra, FRA has been a point of contention between forest-dwellers and the government ever since its enactment, resulting in conflicts in over 26,475 hectare of forest land (twice the area of the union territory of Chandigarh). These conflicts affect the lives of more than 50,900 people, as per data collected by Land Conflict Watch (LCW), an independent network of researchers and journalists that maps land conflicts in India.

In Maharashtra, thousands of farmers protested against the slow implementation and wrongful rejection of claims under the FRA in 2018. These are major issues in parts of northern Maharashtra including in Nashik, Nandurbar, Yavatmal, Amravati, Gadchiroli and Dhule. Yet, no political party is actively addressing forest rights while campaigning.

In a recent affidavit filed in the Supreme Court, the state accepted that it had wrongly rejected 22,000 claims under the FRA. The state has now recognised claims over nearly two-fifths of its potential forest area, or 1.3 million hectares, becoming one of the top states in the country in implementation of FRA.

Yet, this makes for roughly one-third (37%) of its total FRA potential of 3.6 million hectares. The state had approved 50% of the 374,539 FRA claims by January 2019.

Voting patterns

More than 20% of the electorate in 211 constituencies is affected by the FRA, especially by one provision of the law--community forest tights (CFR) that give gram panchayats the power to govern and manage forests--found Tushar Shah and Archana Soreng, who analysed the data.

To break down the number of seats against the degree of influence FRA could have in the election results, the researchers have divided the seats into four ‘value’ categories: critical, high, good and medium. In critical value seats, the most number of voters is affected by FRA, a high proportion of the population is tribal, and a large area comes under forests. Those categorised under medium value have a comparatively lower population of tribespeople and area under forests.
