Who was Kamlesh Tiwari, the Hindu Samaj Party leader killed in broad daylight in Lucknow?

Kamlesh Tiwari was shot and then his throat was slit in Lucknow today. The incident happened in his office in the Uttar Pradesh capital. Kamlesh Tiwari was the president of Hindu Samaj Party, a little known right-wing outfit.

He was with the Hindu Mahasabha earlier and after he developed differences with the leadership of the organisation he floated the Hindu Samaj Party. He, however, claimed in his interviews that Hindu Samaj Party was an older organisation, he had only revived it.

Kamlesh Tiwari hit the national headline in December 2015, when he made objectionable remarks about Prophet Mohammad. Kamlesh Tiwari was booked under the National Security Act (NSA) by the then Akhilesh Yadav government of Uttar Pradesh.

The remarks by Kamlesh Tiwari led to protests by various Muslim groups at many places with some of the protesting outfits calling for his head. Protesters at Muzaffarnagar in Uttar Pradesh and Tonk in Rajasthan demanded that Kamlesh Tiwari "should be beheaded".

Javed Ansari, then Samajwadi Party spokesperson, too called for capital punishment for Kamlesh Tiwari for insulting Prophet Mohammad. The call for punishing Kamlesh Tiwari evoked sharp response from Hindu outfits which said the Muslim groups were trying to bring the Islamic law of blasphemy in India.

The protest by Muslim groups at Kalichak in Malda district of West Bengal turned violent in January 2016, when the protesters clashed with police and the Border Security Force (BSF). Thousands of protesters (some reports claimed presence of 2.5 lakh people) took part in the Kaliachak protest.

The protesters attacked the Kaliachak police station and set it on fire. Dozens of vehicles were torched. Train services were disrupted. Some reports claimed that some temples were vandalised. The protesters demanded hanging of Kamlesh Tiwari for his remarks on Prophet Mohammad.

Kamlesh Tiwari, on his part, said he was responding to earlier comments made by Azam Khan, the Samajwadi Party leader and then a minister in the Akhilesh Yadav government. Azam Khan had said that the leaders of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) were homosexuals as they did not marry.

Azam Khan was responding to comments made by late Arun Jaitley, then Union minister, who had supported decriminalisation of consensual sexual intercourse between individuals of the same gender.

Arun Jaitley had made the comments in the view of the Supreme Court verdict decrinalising homosexuality declaring the Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) unconstitutional for making sexual intercourse between consenting adults of the same gender a crime.

After spending months in jail for his remarks on Prophet Mohammad, Kamlesh Tiwari was released on bail after the Lucknow bench of the Allahabad High Court quashed the NSA charge slapped on him in September 2016.

Kamlesh Tiwari was in news again in 2018, when he declared to organise a karseva (volunteer service) for construction of Ram temple at the disputed site in Ayodhya. The case was pending before the Supreme Court, which incidentally has concluded hearing in the matter only on Thursday (October 17, 2019).

He was known for his controversial views on Hindutva. In an interview with a local media outlet in 2018, Kamlesh Tiwari slammed Prime Minister Narendra Modi for praising Prophet Mohammad. Tiwari said it was wrong to call PM Modi a Hindutva leader as he wanted to govern India on the ideals of Prophet Mohammad.
