Bengaluru's Mahadevapura residents rise against elected representatives over infrastructure and bad roads

Silicon Valley

Hundreds of residents and school students march from Marathahalli bridge to the MLA’s office demanding resignation of the authorities

Mahadevapura residents stage a silent protest at the Marathahalli bridge bus stop. @WFRising, which issued the cal… https://t.co/vChaeFjKcl — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1571378156000

Mahadevapura is an outer area with heavy traffic movement. We have widened the roads but that is not enough –Arvind Limbavali, MLA

Bangalore

"The elected representatives are not delivering on their promises," says this resident of Mahadevapura.… https://t.co/W6alpPDQBB — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1571379053000

.....

If the residents want their issues to be addressed, they need to approach me. I will come anywhere and anytime –PC Mohan, MP

The appalling condition of roads is one of the main complaints. @WFRising #MahadevapuraDemands https://t.co/VN8SjNaPw5 — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1571378360000

Residents protest against elected representatives over infrastructure and bad roads in Bengaluru 00:29

Residents want the tech corridor to be at par with, demand hiring national and international contractors for infrastructure workOn Friday morning, hundreds of residents and school students from Mahadevapura marched to MLA Arvind Limbavali’s office, holding placards, to demand the resignation of the officials. “We want all eight corporators, the MLA, and the MP to resign as they have failed the IT corridor,” said the residents.Zibi Jamal, a member of Whitefield Rising, said, “Elected representatives have not done their jobs. Injuries from falling into potholes has become so common. The MLA is responsible to utilise the allotted funds efficiently, but that is not happening.”MP PC Mohan said that this protest should have happened three years ago as the constituency has been neglected by the previous government. “The new government has allocated Rs 700 crore for Mahadevapura. Tenders have been called and the work will begin in a month or so,” he said.Citizens have been demanding that the quality of infrastructure in Mahadevapura should match the Silicon Valley. To achieve this, they want only national or international contractors to be hired. A letter was submitted to MLA Arvind Limbavali demanding suburban rails, halt stations, doubling and electrifying tracks on the Outer Ring Road (ORR), Unified Metro Transport Authority (UMTA) for unifying public transport in the city, traffic police station in Mahadevapura a separate municipal corporation for Mahadevapura, among others. “We have been demanding suburban rails for 30 years, but the authorities always say that it’s coming soon,” added Zibi.Arvind Limbavali said, “The previous government was neglecting the area, but we have grants now. Mahadevapura is an outer area with heavy traffic movement. We have widened the roads but that is not enough to sustain the traffic. We are also rejuvenating the lakes. Metro is the permanent solution and we are trying our best.Water Supply and Sewerage Board’s (BWSSB) Cauvery water pipeline and underground drainage (UGD) work has put us in a spot as we cannot lay the roads until the work is completed. I do agree that there are issues, but we need to see all sides of the story. We are also testing bus lanes but we need to deal with certain issues like traffic movement at the intersections of bus lanes and roads.”“I have been fighting for suburban rail for seven to eight years and Rs 17,000 crore has been earmarked for the project by the Centre. Now, I am trying to get a clearance from the state government and it will hopefully be done in two to three months. We have also introduced automatic signaling. I have used the Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) fund to build the Hoodi station. If the residents want their issues to be addressed, they need to approach me. I will come anywhere and anytime,” added PC Mohan.A number of citizen groups participated in this mass protest. Sadashivam, a member of Bangalore Apartments Federation, said, “Bellandur residents are among the highest tax payers. But the MLA seeks CSR funds for building a skywalk. Where is the tax payers’ money being used? There are no roads at AET junction and you can see only slush whenever it rains. There is zero coordination among the agencies. They once dig up the roads for UGD and then again for the Cauvery pipeline.”
