Rahul Gandhi's Chopper Makes Emergency Landing In Rewari's KLP College

New Delhi:

A chopper carrying former Congress president Rahul Gandhi made an emergeny landing in KLP college, Rewari due to bad weather. The incident took place when Gandhi was returning to Delhi after addressing a rally in Mahendragarh district of Haryana. According to reports, he later left for the national capital by road.

Earlier, Congress president Sonia Gandhi was scheduled to address the Mahendragarh rally. Hours before the schedule, the state Congress announced that she will not be able to attend the public meeting due to ‘unavoidable reasons.’

Haryana: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi's chopper made an emergency landing in Rewari's KLP College today, due to bad weather while returning to Delhi from Mahendragarh after addressing an election rally. He later left for Delhi by road. pic.twitter.com/DMV3f2Xtuj — ANI (@ANI) October 18, 2019

The rally on the penultimate day of poll campaign end would have been Sonia Gandhi's first election campaign address after becoming interim party chief.

“@RahulGandhi ji will be addressing a public meeting at Mahendragarh today, at 2 PM. @INCIndia President Sonia Gandhi ji will not be able to attend the meeting due to unavoidable reasons," the Haryana Congress said in a tweet.

This was Rahul Gandhi's second rally in Haryana. He had addressed the first one on October 14 in Nuh in the Mewat region. He has already held rallies for the October 21 assembly polls in Maharashtra and Haryana.

Addressing the rally, Gandhi slammed Prime Minister Narendra Modi for the poor state of the economy and alleged that he has no understanding of it. The former Congress president also said that the world is mocking India due to his government's divisive politics that pitted people against each other.

"The world is mocking India. The country which used to show the way to the world, used to live with love, used to progress fast...Today one caste is fighting the other, one religion is fighting the other and the country's pride, its economy, Narendra Modi has destroyed it," Gandhi said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
