Cong-NCP didn’t act after terror attacks, says Modi

Bandra-Kurla Complex

Prime Minister Narendra Modi

NCP leader Praful Patel

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray greets Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and union minister Piyush Goyal on stage at BKC on Friday evening (Photos by Raju Shelar)

chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis

Untitled Carousel Aaditya Thackeray: Violence has no place in Shiv Sena anymore Leader of what many are calling Shiv Sena 2.0, Aaditya Thackeray speaks to Mirror on his relationship with ‘friend’ CM Fadnavis and frenemy BJP, and what made him take the plunge into electoral politics.

Untitled Carousel Those who ruined banking system are in jail now, no threat to earnings of poor: Modi addresses at campaign rally in Mumbai Modi also took a jibe at NCP leader Praful Patel over his alleged links to D-gang's aide Iqbal Mirchi in a money-laundering probe involving alleged deals between Millennium Developers promoted by him and his wife Varsha.

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray

Untitled Carousel Home Department receives a letter threatening to kill Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis When the office staff of the home department went through the letter they found that the letter was threatening the chief minister of the state to kill him.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressing BJP - Shivsena joint rally at BKC ground, in Mumbai on Friday evening.

From Chandrakant Patil to Amit Deshmukh, Deepali Sayed, candidates start campaigning for elections 1 26 Shiv Sena's Vishwanath Mahadeswar stars his campaign Shiv Sena candidae and BMC Mayor Vishwanath Mahadeswar is contesting from the Bandra East constituency in the Maharashtra Assembly elections. Mahadeshwar’s other main contenders are former Congress MLA Baba Siddique’s son Zeeshan and Maharashtra Navnirman Sena candidate Akhil Chitre. The Shiv Sena candidate said school employees and former students of the Raje Sambhaji School were campaigning for “Mahadeshwar sir”. “I have been a corporator for 15 years,” Mahadeshwar said. “My wife has also been a corporator for five years. I was a school teacher before being appointed as principal. I opted for voluntary retirement before I became the mayor. I have never indulged in any irregularities. People know my work.” Photo by Satish Malavade/BCCL Eknath Shinde campaigns in Thane Shiv Sena leader and a minister in the outgoing Maharashtra government on the campaign trail in Thane. He is contesting from Kopri-Pachpakhadi. Photo: PTI BJP candidate Chandrakant Patil campaigns from Kothrud BJP has fielded state president Chandrakant Patil from the prestigious Kothrud seat. He has been replaced by sitting MLA Medha Kulkarni who won the seat in 2014. Currently, a member of the Maharashtra Legislative Council, the 60-year-old politician is contesting his maiden assembly election. Patil is pitted against Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) candidate Kishor Shinde, who also has the backing of the opposition Congress and NCP. The BJP leader also saw dissensions in the party ranks with some calling him an 'outsider'. BJP candidate Abhimanyu Pawar from Ausa constituency in Latur Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis is an engine and I am a coach. I will go wherever the engine takes me," said Abhimanyu Pawar, 47, a BJP candidate from the Ausa constituency in Latur. Pawar was the personal assistant (PA) of CM Fadnavis. "I am a political worker first and then a PA. There is nothing wrong in having political aspirations," he said. After working for Fadnavis for close to five years, he resigned two months back and launched a full-fledged campaign. Earlier, he used to visit Ausa twice in a month. Pawar's farmer-grandfather was an active member of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). He is pitted against two-time MLA, former minister and Maharashtra Congress working president Basawraj Patil. Photo by Alka Dhupkar/ BCCL Congress' Ganesh Kumar Yadav from Sion-Koliwada constituency Ganesh Kumar Yadav, who is congress party's official candidate from Sion Koliwada constituency, started his campaign from the seat. He is pitted against CPI's Vijay Dalvi and BJP's R Tamil Selvan who is the sitting MLA from the Sion Koliwada seat. Sharing photos of his campaign, he wrote on Twitter, "Glimpses of today's ward 174 padyatra where I received a warm welcome from thousands of #SionKoliwada residents." Mukund Kirdat campaigns from Pune seat Aam Aadmi candidate from Shivaji Nagar, Pune, Mukund Kirdat and his family, friends and party volunteers have started campaigning and raising funds through door-to-door reaching out to people. A mechanical engineer by profession, Kirdat is an active participant in social work for the past 26 years. He was one of the first few men in Pune to fight for women's rights. He founded a group called ‘Purush Uvach’ (Male Speak) that works for gender equality and edited a book titled ‘Breaking the Mould’, to raise awareness among men about the role women can play in our society.

Communist Party of India candidate Abhay Taksal on the campaign trail A lawyer by profession, Abhay Taksal is fighting his first election from the Aurangabad Central constituency. Taksal's father is a member of the Communist Party of India, while he himself has been a general secretary of the All India Students Federation (AISF) for three terms. Talking about his campaign, Taksal said, “Even if the Jayakwadi dam is filled we have a drinking water crisis. The solid waste management is another hot topic in my constituency. Government-aided schools are shutting down due to private schools. All these are important issues for me." JNU student leader Kanhaiya Kumar had promised to join Taksal's election campaign. He is pitted against AIMIM candidate Naser Siddiqui. Deepali Sayed campaigns from Mumbra-Kalwa constituency Shiv Sena's new joiner and Mumbra-Kalwa candidate Deepali Sayed campaigned from this the constituency. The Kalwa-Mumbra constituency is among the key bastions of the NCP. She is pitted against NCP leader and sitting MLA Jitendra Awhad. MNS's candidate Akhil Chitre with party chief Raj Thackeray launches election campaign MNS chief Raj Thackeray launched his party's election campaign with two rallies in Mumbai on Thursday (October 10). Akhil Chitre, who is the MNS candidate from Bandra East, was also present in the rally. Addressing the rally, Thackeray took swipe at the state government and local administration over poor condition of roads. "Today, the state doesn't have a powerful opposition. I am asking you to make the MNS a powerful opposition in the state, which can ask questions of the government," he said in the rally. Photo by Ramesh Sable/TIL BJP MLA Atul Bhatkhalkar campaigns in Malad East Sitting MLA from Kandivali and contesting the election from Kandivali East Atul Bhatkhalkar campaigned in Makrani Pada, Malad East. He is pitted against Congress' Ajanta Yadav. NCP's Jitendra Awhad starts his campaign Sitting MLA of the Mumbra-Kalwa constituency Jitendra Awhad from NCP started his campaign from his seat. Awhad won the Mumbra Kalwa seat twice in 2009 and 2014. He is pitted against the newest member of Shiv Sena and Marathi actor Deepali Sayed. Congress' Amin Patel campaigns in Mumbadevi Sitting MLA and Congress leader Amin Patel started his campaign. Tweeting some photos of the campaign, Patel wrote, "Mumbadevi, you brought energy today! I'm overjoyed after witnessing the response and enthusiasm from you." He filed his nomination form at the election commission office in Mumbadevi on October 3. Patel is among few known faces of the Congress party that are in the fray in Mumbai in this election. Devendra Fadnavis campaigns in Solapur Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis addressed two campaign rallies in Solapur district, one at Mangalvedha and another at Natepute. He said in his speech that Solapur has benefitted after implementing the Jalyukt Shivar initiative to tap and save water. He also said the alliance is committed to making Maharashtra drought-free. Addressed 2 public meetings at in Solapur district. BJP's Pankaja Munde campaigns in Raimoha, Beed Senior BJP leader Pankaja Munde is contesting from Parli constituency in Beed district. She will be fighting the elections against her cousin Dhananjay Munde of NCP. Aaditya Thackeray starts his campaign from Worli Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Uddhav Thackeray is contesting the Assembly elections from Worli constituency. Thackeray junior is the first in his family to take the electoral plunge. He is pitted against NCP candidate Suresh Mane. Currently, the Worli constituency is represented by Shiv Sena MLA Sunil. Before that, it was represented by the NCP's Sachin Ahir, who has now joined the Shiv Sena. NCP's Nawab Malik starts his campaign Four-time MLA and former Maharashtra Minister Nawab Malik who is contesting from the Anushakti Nagar constituency has started his campaign. Malik can be seen going door-to-door for campaigning in Panjrapole in Anushakti Nagar, Chembur. MNS candidate Avinash Jadhav from Thane Avinash Jadhav, who is MNS' official candidate from Thane constituency campaigned in the constituency with party workers. NCP's Subhash Desai withdrew his nomination from the Thane constituency at orders of the party leadership, supporting Jadhav. Congress' Amit Vilasrao Deshmukh campaigns in Latur city Former chief minister Vilasrao Deshmukh's son Amit Deshmukh is contesting from Latur constituency. The Congress candidate celebrated Dussehra in Babhalgaon with brother Riteish Deshmukh. He can be seen addressing the residents as a part of his campaign. Dhiraj Deshmukh campaigns from Latur rural seat While Amit Deshmukh is the sitting MLA from Latur city, his brother Dhiraj Deshmukh will try his luck in the state polls for the first time from Latur rural seat. Congress' candidate started his campaign and was also accompanied by Riteish Deshmukh in rallies. He addressed a rally in Murud village in Latur with party workers. Congress candidate Madhukar Chavan starts his campaign Former Congress MLA Madhukar Chavan, who won the Byculla assembly seat in 2009 election, is fielded from the same seat in the current elections. Chavan started his campaign by inaugurating Congress electoral office in Byculla. Mumbai Congress president Eknath Gaikwad also joined him at the inauguration. He will be fighting against AIMIM candidate and sitting MLA Waris Pathan and Shiv Sena's Yamini Jadav. Senior NCP leader Jayant Patil starts his campaign Former Finance Minister of Maharashtra, Jayant Patil, is contesting from the Islamour constituency in Sangli district. He was the first NCP candidate to file his nomination for the polls. BJP's Narendra Mehta campaigns from Mira Bhayander BJP MLA Narendra Mehta, who is the former mayor of Mira Bhayander, will be contesting from the same seat. As a part of his campaign, Mehta took part in a conversation with Temba hospital Union members at Bhayander west.

Independent candidate Rajiv Ranjan Singh talks to voters Former journalist Rajiv Ranjan Singh is fighting as an independent candidate from Nagpur West constituency. Counting his advantages over his competitors, Singh says, “I am more educated. I have no criminal or corruption charges against me. I don’t have to tow anybody else’s line and my connection with my voters is much stronger.” Singh was seen talking to voters from his constituency as a part of his campaign.

BJP candidate from Nagpur South Mohan Mate Mohan Mate, BJP's Nagpur South candidate, took out a rally in Ramana Maruti Nagar in his constituency. And he was welcomed in the rally by ex-Deputy Mayor Kishor Kumeriya. Kumeriya himself is contesting in the Assembly election as an independent candidate. Shiv Sena's Pradeep Sharma from Nallasopara Eyeing the Nallasopara constituency in Palghar district, former encounter specialist police officer Pradeep Sharma started his campaign. Sharma joined Shiv Sena just ahead of the election and was rewarded a ticket. Earlier, Sharma told reporters that he will conduct a door-to-door campaign and tell people his ideas. Balasaheb Thorat campaigns in Sangamner Chief of Maharashtra Pradesh Congress Committee, Balasaheb Thorat is contesting from the Sangamner constituency in Ahmednagar.

At his final campaign rally before next week’s assembly elections, at BKC, the PM accused the previous Congress-NCP government of being corrupt and soft on terrorism.At his final campaign rally before the Maharashtra Assembly elections, aton Friday evening,accused the previous Congress government of failing to act after the terror attacks in Mumbai. Without naming senior, Modi said, “Leaders from these parties were indulging in mirchi ka karobar (trade of chillies) and that’s why they were soft on terrorism.” He added, “During the Congress’s tenure Mumbai was targeted many times but this did not happen in the past five years. This is because perpetrators of terror have now realised that they will be taught a lesson if they do any mischief. Balakot and surgical strikes are not mere words; they show a policy of zero tolerance of this government towards terrorism.”Modi also spoke of the economic reforms brought in by the BJP-led central and Maharashtra governments, which he claimed had no “stain of corruption” on them. He said, “In the past five years we created a system of faceless tax assessment, which reduced human contact and corruption in the tax system to a great extent.” He added, “We respect wealth creators and job creators and we know their importance to the country. I would like to assure you that honest businessmen will not be harassed. But those who indulge in corrupt practices will not be spared.”Describing Mumbai as a “city of opportunities”, Modi said Maharashtrahad provided a stable government in the state. He said the Fadnavis government was focused on the city’s growth, unlike the previous Congress-NCP governments, which he termed “corrupt”. Speaking about the BJP government’s commitment to the development of Mumbai’s infrastructure he said, “Projects like Metro, Navi Mumbai Airport and Mumbai Trans Harbour Link (MTHL) were languishing for 15-20 years. They gathered momentum only during Chief Minister Fadanvis’s tenure.”He added, “There is not even a single stain of corruption on our government. We are trying to fulfill the dreams of all, from farmers to those launching start-ups. Most services have gone online, thus reducing corruption.” The previous governments, Modi alleged, tried to fulfill the dreams of the corrupt. “On the other hand, the Fadnavis government is fast- tracking Maharashtra’s development,” Modi said. He said the construction of the Shivaji Maharaj memorial off the coast of Mumbai would be expedited after the court’s green signal.On the abolition of Article 370 in Kashmir, he said, “I don’t understand the language of the Congress and its friends. Are they with nation or are they with the masters of terror in Pakistan?” Modi also targeted embattled former union minister P Chidambaram, saying, “Those who ruined the banking system are in jail now.”Fadnavis also spoke at the rally. He reiterated his commitment to making Maharashtra drought-free and building Mumbai’s infrastructure quickly. Taking a dig at Congress leader Rahul Gandhi, he said, “Gandhi claimed that in the past 70 years corruption has increased, unemployment has increased and so on. But I was wondering whether he was he referring to the Congress regime or our regime, as in the Congress had rules the country for 60 of the past 70 years.” Meanwhile,said, “There is going to be Diwali in November too, as the Supreme Court verdict on Ramjanmabhoomi is expected.”
