Protests over dirty water sparks ugly scenes in VMC

VADODARA: Protests by the opposition Congress in the Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) over supply of contaminated and insufficient water in the city took an ugly turn with mayor Dr Jigeesha Sheth being allegedly pushed during the protests. The mayor was trying to enter the VMC general board hall even as Congress members were lying down and squatting at its entrance.The general board was scheduled the meet at 5.30pm on Friday. The Congress had timed its protest over the water woes parallel to the meeting. When the meeting was about to begin, Congress members led by city unit president Prashant Patel and opposition leader Chandrakant Shrivastava blocked the door by lying down and sitting in front of it.Given the past instances of protests, few at the VMC had expected the Congress to become so aggressive. The Congress had come for the protests along with a ‘dhol-tasha’ troupe. Its members stay put outside the general board hall even when the final bell signalling the commencement of the meeting began. When Sheth came out of her chamber adjacent to the hall and tried to go to the meeting, she was not allowed.Sheth said that someone even pushed her from behind. “The behaviour does not suit the Sankarinagari. Will such behaviour lead to a solution for the water problem? We are already working on it,” she fumed.Congress, however, denied the charges. “This is an attempt to divert the issue. BJP councillors and the security were standing behind the mayor. They were even holding her hands. A BJP councillor is even seen slapping our workers in the video. We were just insisting that if she wanted she could trample us, but should ensure clean water supply. If their allegations are true, they should give proof. Even we have video footages of the incident that clearly show that she was not pushed,” said Congress city unit president Prashant Patel.The VMC was looking to register an offence regarding the incident. Police officers present at the VMC said that they would obtain footages and take action after an offence was registered.
