Telangana RTC shutdown: Cabs, autos and all buses off roads, normal life hit in Hyd

Telangana RTC shutdown: Cabs, autos and all buses off roads, normal life hit in Hyd

Police detained leaders of Opposition parties for staging protests along with the striking TSRTC employees at various places in the state.

news TSRTC Strike

Amid incidents of stone pelting in a few places, the day-long shutdown began in Telangana on a call given by the employees of the Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC), whose indefinite strike entered the 15th day on Saturday.

Transport services were hit as a majority of the TSRTC buses remained confined to depots in Hyderabad and 32 other districts with protesting employees staging a sit-in to prevent the vehicles from coming out.

Mahatma Gandhi Bus Station (MGBS), the biggest bus station in Hyderabad, wore a near deserted look as bus services to most of the destinations in Telangana and neighbouring states were suspended.

Adding to the woes of the commuters in Hyderabad, Ola and Uber cab drivers also went on an indefinite strike from Saturday to press for their demands to regularise the cab aggregator market. The drivers' association claimed that 50,000 cabs have gone off the roads.

The Opposition Congress, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Telugu Desam Party (TDP), Telangana Jana Samithi (TJS), Jana Sena, Communist Party of India (CPI), Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M), trade unions, various organisations of employees, teachers and workers, student bodies and people's groups have given their support to the shutdown call of the striking TSRTC employees.

Police detained leaders of Opposition parties for staging protests along with the striking TSRTC employees at various places in the state. TJS president M Kodandaram, TDP leaders L Ramna and R Chandrashekhar Reddy and leaders of the Left parties were detained by the police.

Protesters pelted stones at a few places in Nizamabad district and at Wanaparthy, damaging four buses. Police made elaborate security arrangements in Hyderabad and other towns to prevent violence. TSRTC was operating few buses with the help of temporary employees and under police protection.

CPI(ML) state leader Pottu Rangarao's thumb cuts off when police attempt to detain him in Hyderabad. His thumb was caught between the police van door, leading for it to be severed. He asks- is this how you treat a person who fought for #Telangana#TSRTCStrike#TelanganaBandh pic.twitter.com/aEWdFDzhxZ — TNIE Telangana (@XpressHyderabad) October 19, 2019

15 days of #TSRTCstrike-

15 days of expensive hired vehicles, crammed metro, buses

2 suicides

Over 4 heart attacks & deaths

7 days of extended school holiday

1 molestation case

3 fatal accidents, several minor

19 days with no salaries for 50,000 families

3 HC PILs

0 new buses — Donita Jose (@DonitaJose) October 19, 2019

Security deployed at bus depots in #Telangana. In key areas (where there is a scope for violence)- buses are being escorted by the Cops to the destination. How many days can they manage like this with cops and how long will this continue. #TSRTCStrike #Telanganabandh #Hyderabad pic.twitter.com/9g7DPXFaT9 — Rishika Sadam (@RishikaSadam) October 19, 2019

The shutdown was called by the Joint Action Committee (JAC) of TSRTC employees, who have been on strike since October 5 to press for their demands, the main being TSRTC's merger with the government.

The JAC has blamed the government for the situation, saying it was not inviting them for talks despite the direction of the Telangana High Court.

The government has not only ruled out talks with the employees, but declared that 48,000 employees as 'dismissed themselves' by not joining the duty before the expiry of the deadline. Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao has ruled out taking back these employees into TSRTC and has asked the corporation to recruit more temporary employees and hire more private buses.

The strike has seen two TSRTC employees commit suicide as non-payment of salaries for September has enraged the staff.

The government has come under flak from the Opposition for taking a tough stand on the strike.

IANS inputs
