Stage set for State Assembly elections as campaigning comes to an end in Haryana, Maharashtra

Stage set for State Assembly elections as campaign trail comes to an end in Haryana, Maharashtra | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights While PM Modi held as many as 25 rallies in both the states, Rahul Gandhi held seven public meetings In Maharashtra, BJP is contesting 150 seats while its ally Shiv Sena has fielded 124 poll candidates Congress fielded 147 candidates in Maharashtra while its ally NCP has 121 poll contestants Bypolls to 11 Assembly seats in UP, 4 in Punjab and in a few other states will also be held on 21 October

New Delhi: The stage is set for polling in Maharashtra and Haryana as campaigning for the elections came to an end on Saturday. Political leaders pulled out all stops during the campaign trail to woo voters through rallies and roadshows during the month-long campaign. Like any other poll season, political leaders traded barbs and harped on the predictable as the discourse was focused on mudslinging while developmental issues took a back seat.

On the last day, Prime Minister Narendra Modi held two rallies in Haryana’s Rewari and Ellenabad. Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis held roadshows in Nagpur while Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar held a public meeting in home turf Satara.

Congress party’s campaign for state elections remained lacklustre in the first direct contest between PM Modi-led BJP and the grand old party after 2019 Lok Sabha elections. While PM Modi held as many as 25 rallies in both the states, Rahul Gandhi held seven public meetings while Sonia Gandhi failed to make an appearance at the scheduled Mahendargarh rally in Haryana owing to ill-health. Congress' star campaigner Priyanka Gandhi Vadra who aggressively campaigned during the general elections wasn’t seen in any of the Congress rallies.

While Modi launched a blitzkrieg against Congress on its past record and blamed the Opposition of “nurturing” Article 370 which he said fomented insurgency in Kashmir, the Gandhi scion highlighted issues like unemployment and slacking economy. The Opposition tried to highlight the issues such as joblessness and a slowing economy, it failed to project itself as an alternative to the BJP.

In Haryana, BJP is the incumbent and in Maharashtra, it is in power in alliance with Shiv Sena. BJP yet again allied with the Uddhav Thackeray-led party in Maharashtra contesting 150 seats while the latter has fielded 124 aspirants for 288-member State Assembly. Congress which joined hands with NCP fielded 147 candidates while Sharad Pawar led party has 121 poll contestants.

Other notable players in the western state include Raj Thackeray-led Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) which has 101 poll contestants, the CPI 16, CPM 8 and the BSP has 262 candidates. As many as 1400 independents will also contest the elections.

In Maharashtra, a total of 3,237 candidates, out of which 235 are women, campaigned to woo state’s 8.9 crore voters which 4.28 crore women and 4.68 crore men.

It’s a multi-way contest in Haryana between the BJP, Congress, Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) and Jannayak Janta Party (JJP).

Out of the Haryana’s 1.83 crore electors, over 83 lakh are women who will cast their votes on October 21 in state’s 19,578 polling station out of which 13,837 are in rural areas. As many as 1,169 candidates, out of which 105 are women, will contest for the 90-seater Haryana Assembly.


