Detained politicians have been exposed before masses: Khanna - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Major jolt to PDP as senior functionaries join BJP

Excelsior Correspondent

JAMMU, Oct 19: Newly carved out UTs of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh are now all set for a massive transformation after October 31 as novel opportunities eagerly wait to greet the region, claimed Avinash Rai Khanna, BJP national vice-president and party Prabhari for Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh.

Avinash Rai Khanna along with MP (Rajya Sabha), Shamsher Singh Manhas, BJP State general secretary, Dr. Narinder Singh, former Minister, Chander Prakash Ganga, State president, Anusuchit Jaati (SC) Morcha Jagdish Bhagat, former MLC Ch. Vikram Randhawa, former MLAs Rajesh Gupta & Ashwani Sharma, Prof. Gharu Ram Bhagat and other senior leaders was addressing a party programme here today in which over 500 prominent political and social activists including prominent leaders from PDP into BJP at party headquarter, Trikuta Nagar.

Click here to watch video

Avinash Rai Khanna said BJP policies are accepted by one and all and as such all political and social workers have come forward to join BJP to serve the society better and we welcome them all with open arms. In last Assembly elections, no party was in a position to ignore BJP in the Government forming process. “We joined Government, but as soon as we felt that in the alliance Government, we couldn’t do enough according to our promises, we left immediately thereafter’’, he added.

BJP has kept progressing with its agenda of nation building, since inception of Jana Sangha and followed perfect synchronization between words and actions, Khanna said. “By taking decisive action on Articles 370 & 35(A), we have delivered on what we promised in our every speech’’, Khanna added.

Khanna, alleged that common Kashmiri has understood real intentions of detained politicians (in Kashmir) as they failed to be qualified as leaders and now they don’t enjoy any mass support, as only few members of few selected families came to protest for single day, who received direct or indirect benefits earlier. Nobody in Kashmir is supporting these politicians, who have looted the innocent on various pretexts. These leaders were totally exposed before the masses, Khanna added.

People taught lesson to parties like Congress, NC and PDP during their boycott call in Panchayat polls and in BDC polls too, these family based parties are being given befitting reply as the BJP has already registered win in 15 seats in Kashmir alone and we are going to witness heavy vote cast in BJP’s favour on 24th October.

PDP State general secretary, Faqir Chand Bhagat, G.R. Bhagat (Retd) IAS Officer, Kuldeep Khajuria (retd). Secretary, Bhagwan Dass Sharma, PDP zone president & Sarpanch, Bablu Sharma president, youth PDP Bishnah & district co-ordinator, Babadita Sharma (retd) BDO, Dr. Om Bhardwaj, Munish Gupta, vice-president Ware House Federation, Balraj Singh Charak secretary Youth Congress, Ram Lohaya Kashav Rajput Peer Mitha, Shamima NC leader, Ch. Latif PDP senior leader, Zulfikar Peer Mitha, Nazir Ahmed Shah from Banihal and other were amongst the prominent social and political activists who along with their supporters, joined BJP on the occasion.

BJP State secretary, Sanjay Baru, State spokesperson Balbir Ram Rattan, State office secretary, Tilak Raj Gupta, State press secretary Dr. Pardeep Mahotra, State general secretary SC Morcha, Dharminder Kumar and other party senior leaders were also present on the occasion.

Later Khanna also addressed a meeting of panches and Sarpanches at Sarore in Samba district of Vijaypur Assembly segment.

He said that Panchs and Sarpanchs are only link with masses at grass root level and they can play a tremendous role in developing rural India as per dreams of Prime Minister, Narendra Modi. He urged them to make the process of BDC elections a success and strengthen the party in the State so that Jammu and Kashmir do not lag behind in development from rest of the country.

Khanna urged them to vote and support nominated candidates of the party for BDC chairperson.

Former Minister and BJP senior leader Chander Parkash Ganga also addressed the party workers on the occasion.
