Shifting of women Commerce College from Dir protested

Haleem Asad

TIMERGARA: Workers of different political parties on Sunday blocked the Timergara Dir road at Rani for some time and held a protest demonstration against the proposed shifting of Government Commerce College for women at Rani to Thana Malakand.

The protesters threatened to stage a sit-in outside the Chief Minister Mehmood Khan’s house at Matta Swat if the decision was not withdrawn within a week.

Addressing the rally the PPP former MPA Muhammad Zamin Khan, JI’s Shad Muhammad Khan, president district bar Timergara advocate Jehan Bahadar, former tehsil councilor Saifullah and others said the people of Lower Dir would not let the government to shift the college from the district.

They said the college was sanctioned by the coalition government of the PPP and ANP in the province the building of which had been specified for the Timergara Medical College. They said the women of Dir deserved it to have a commerce college in the area.

The speakers criticized the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa chief minister for shifting development projects from one area to another.

They demanded of the government to clarify its position on the issue and withdraw its decision of shifting of the college from Rani Dir to Thana Malakand. They threatened to stage a protest sit-in outside the CM’s house at Matta Swat if the government did not withdraw its decision.

Meanwhile the PTI MPA from the area Azam Khan told local journalists that the building of the government commerce college for women Rani was to be utilized for the proposed Timergara Medical College which was approved by the previous PTI government.

He said the PTI local lawmakers would also not allowed the government to shift the college to somewhere else. The MPA said he would soon talk to Mehmood Khan who had nothing with the matter.

It merits mentioning that an official notification of the higher education, archives and libraries department Khyber Pakhtunkhwa duly signed by planning Officer Muhammad Sajid and addressed to the director general commerce education and management sciences Peshawar on Sept, 30 went viral on social media some three days ago. The notification regarding starting of government commerce college for women at Rani Lower Dir in the defunct building of government college of education for elementary teachers (male) at Thana district Malakand spread anger and panic among people of the Lower Dir. The summary in this regard as per the notification had been approved by the Chief Minister Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
