Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019: From Aaditya Thackeray to Devendra Fadnavis, key candidates in the fray

Counting of votes for 288 assembly constituencies in Maharashtra is underway to determine whether the Devendra Fadnavis-led BJP government will be able to maintain its stronghold in the state.

A total of 3,239 candidates contested in the Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019 and the key contest is between the BJP-Shiv Sena and Congress-NCP alliances.

While the tables are tilted in favour of the BJP-Sena alliance, there are several leaders who will be in focus including Shiv Sena's Aaditya Thackeray. He is the first member of the Thackeray family to contest an election and a win for him could redefine the party's politics in Maharashtra.

On the other hand, there is Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis, who is contesting from Nagpur South West. He is confident that the BJP-Sena alliance would paint the state saffron again.

Whether Fadnavis's confidence pays off or not will become clear on October 24 after the counting.

Meanwhile, here are some of the key faces who participated in the Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019:

DEVENDRA FADNAVIS (BJP)

Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis enjoys an impressive track record in past assembly elections held in the state. He has managed to retain the all-important Nagpur South West since it was formed in 2009.

The prestigious Nagpur South West constituency opted for the BJP and gave the party a lion's share of votes in the past two assembly elections.

Back in 2009, Fadnavis secured a victory on a BJP ticket and won by a margin of just over 89,000 votes against Congress candidate Vikas Pandurang Thakre. In 2014, Fadnavis retained his seat and won by a margin of over 1,13,918 votes against Congress candidate Prafulla V Gudadhe (Patil).

This time, Fadnavis is taking on Congress candidate Ashish Deshmukh, who is a former BJP MLA. He had earlier defeated Ashish Deshmukh's father and former Maharashtra Congress chief Ranjeet Deshmukh in 2004 from the Nagpur West constituency.

However, Fadnavis has hardly held any rallies on his home turf, signalling that he is confident of getting re-elected from Nagpur South West. Deskmukh, on the other hand, is hoping that the discontent among the youth in the state will create a window of opportunity for him.

While there is a fair bit of discontent on the ground, the chances of Deshmukh winning against the state's chief minister are slim, considering Fadnavis's stellar track record.

ASHOK CHAVAN (CONGRESS)

The Congress in Maharashtra is going to polls in disarray. There is significant infighting among party cadre. This makes the job tougher for former Maharashtra Chief Minister Ashok Chavan, who has been fielded by the Congress to fight from Bhokar constituency in Nanded district.

Chavan's wife Ameeta Ashokrao Chavan had won from the seat in 2014 and defeated BJP candidate Madhavrao Kinhalkar by a huge margin. This year, Ashok Chavan has decided to contest from the seat; the senior leader will go head-to-head against BJP leader Bapusaheb Gorthekar and Namdev Ailwar of the Prakash Ambedkar-led Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi (VBA).

It is a crucial battle for the Congress party in terms of repute. Despite the seat being a traditional Congress bastion, Chavan has acknowledged that infighting within the party has reduced prospects of securing a stomping victory. In a recent interview, he agreed that all is not well in the Maharashtra Congress, but added that the party is doing its job in Maharashtra.

Chavan, who suffered a crushing defeat in the Lok Sabha polls earlier this year, attacked the BJP and claimed that turncoats who have joined BJP have made matters chaotic for the ruling party in Maharashtra and added that it could favour the opposition parties. The senior Congress leader also said the party is looking to rebuild itself and look for newer faces to fill the void left by defected leaders.

The Maratha community's votes will be crucial in securing a victory from the Bhokar assembly segment. Bhokar being one of the most drought-prone towns in Maharashtra, issues of the farmer community are likely to dictate terms in this constituency.

PRADEEP SHARMA (SHIV SENA)

Cop-turned-politician Pradeep Sharma from the Shiv Sena, contesting from Nalasopara Assembly seat, is another face to reckon with. Sharma, who was booked for allegedly threatening poll officials during voting on Monday, became a prominent face after he resigned from his position as an inspector to contest in the polls. Sharma had earlier earned the tag of encounter specialist for gunning down several underworld operatives during his time with the Mumbai Police Crime Branch.

AADITYA THACKERAY (SHIV SENA)

He is Shiv Sena's man of the hour. Aadtiya Thackeray will be the first from his family to contest in an election on a Shiv Sena ticket from Worli constituency in Mumbai. A buzz has already been created by the entry of the Yuva Sena Chief. The Worli seat has historically been a strong Shiv Sena bastion that will see Thackeray take on NCP nominee Suresh Mane, who is a Dalit leader.

The 29-year-old Sena leader has been burning the candle at both ends to make his presence felt through roadshows, foot marches and even by hitting out against alliance partners BJP. Though Mane claims to be aware of the local issues in the constituency, it seems that Thackeray has already amassed the support of a large number of supporters.

His victory would be a turning point in Shiv Sena politics in Maharashtra as the party has demanded that he be made the deputy chief minister in case the BJP-Sena alliance retains power.

One of Thackeray's biggest advantages going to polls is the fact that he is a young leader and has connected with people by raising awareness about key issues like cutting of trees in Aarey Colony and other local issues.

CHANDRAKANT PATIL (BJP)

Maharashtra BJP unit president Chandrakant Patil is another key candidate participating in the assembly elections from Kothrud constituency. Chandrakant Patil will be going head-to-head against MNS candidate Kishore Shinde, who is backed by the Congress-NCP alliance.

Patil, who is close to Union Home Minister Amit Shah, is emerging as a key leader of the party in Maharashtra. Being the party's Maratha face, Patil has a huge responsibility on his shoulders to ensure a resounding victory from Korthud.

Reports suggest that Patil, who originally hails from Kolhapur, shifted to Pune to contest in the elections. Therefore, securing a creditable victory will be important for Patil to rise up the ranks in the BJP.

AJIT PAWAR (NCP)

Nationalist Congress Party leader Ajit Pawar is another formidable candidate contesting in the Maharashtra Assembly Elections 2019. Pawar recently resigned as MLA after being named by Enforcement Directorate (ED) in the Maharashtra State Cooperative Bank.

While there were talks of Ajit Pawar quitting politics for good after his resignation, the leader confirmed that he will seek re-election from the Pawar bastion of Baramati, which is a prominent constituency in western Maharashtra. While BJP is fixated on denting the Pawar bastion of Baramati, Pawar declared that he will "fight fire with fire".

Baramati is a particularly important constituency for the Pawars, who have maintained a stronghold over the region for the last decade. Pawar will be going up against Gopichand Padalkar, a Dhangar community leader, who secured a BJP ticket after jumping over from the Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi (VBA).

Though Pawars enjoy supremacy in the Baramati region in Pune, Padalkar could upset proceedings as he enjoys support from the Dhangar community in the region and is a young leader with powerful oratory skills. While he lost in the Lok Sabha elections from Sangli this year, he bagged over three lakh votes. It would be interesting to see whether Padalkar helps BJP make inroads into the Pawar bastion.

All eyes will be on the key leaders mentioned above when results for the assembly elections in Maharashtra will be declared on October 24.
