Article 370 Fallout: Pakistan Is No Longer Accepting Mail From India

New Delhi: In what has been called a violation of human rights and, at the very least, a signal of the irreparable worsening of relations between the two countries, Pakistan has stopped accepting and sending mails through post, from and to India.

According to a report by IANS, the decision came into effect on August 27, shortly after tensions heightened between the two countries amidst Pakistan’s vehement opposition to India’s decision to take away the special status of Jammu and Kashmir of August 5. Pakistan, which considers itself a party to the Kashmir case, has raised the issue with China’s help at the United Nations Security Council which took it up in a closed-door, off-the-record meeting. Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan also brought it up at the General Assembly recently.

Pakistani correspondence reached India through services provided by the Saudi Arabia airlines, said the report.

Indian postal authorities, on the receiving end of a unilateral decision by Pakistan, have been compelled to put mail addressed to the country “on hold.”

Indian Express has quoted the director of postal services (mail and business development) as having noted that this is “the first time that Pakistan has taken such a stand.”

Posts between the two countries range from personal to legal to literary.

Also read | UNGA: Imran Raises Spectre of Kashmir ‘Bloodbath’; India Hits Back With Questions

The Express report quotes the Foreign Post Offices superintendent at Delhi, Satish Kumar, as having said, “Most of the postal mails to Pakistan are dispatched by this [the Delhi] office and a majority of them are from Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir.”

The IANS report, through a quote by peace activist Chanchal Manohar Singh, highlights the setback such a fallout would have for the literary world. “People in Punjab were fond of reading Punjab Dey Rang, a quarterly magazine published in Gurmukhi script from Lahore and now it has stopped coming,” Singh said.

For residents of the two countries, the option of courier services still remains open.

Express, however, has also shed light on the fact that a lot of the official communication between the two countries is legally mandated to take place through postal services. Jatin Desai, member of the Pakistan India People’s Forum for Peace and Democracy, told the paper, “For instance, if an Indian fisherman is arrested, the power of attorney that has to be sent to his lawyer cannot be couriered. And courts do not accept emails.”

Notably, post has stood as a symbol of protest against the Centre’s decision on Jammu and Kashmir in India. Recently, students of St Stephen’s college wrote postcards to Prime Minister Narendra Modi as a unique way to protest the security clampdown and communication ban in Kashmir.
