Displaced PoK Persons To Observe 'Black Day' On Monday

PoK Displaced Persons are to observe "Black Day" on October 22, 2019, at New Delhi's Jantar-Mantar, Chairman of S.O.S. International - an organization for PoK Displaced Persons - Rajiv Chunni said. He said that on this date in 1947 tribals were hired by Pakistan Army to attack Hindus & Sikhs of Muzaffarabad district of J&K State. He also said PoK Displaced Persons were subjected to genocide, rape, abduction and plunder. Chunni added that the day is observed to pay homage and to remember all those who sacrificed their lives and were subjected to barbaric and inhuman acts and stated this day is marked as a Black Day in the History of mankind on October 22 every year.

"We observe black day on October 22 every year because Pakistan had attacked our state of Jammu and Kashmir on this date in 1947, many Hindus and Sikhs were attacked which led to the mass exodus of these communities from PoK. Around 13 Lakh people fled to save their lives from PoK to different parts of India. Out of 13 Lakh, 10 lakh were settled in Jammu & Kashmir and rest were settled in Delhi, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar" said Rajiv Chunni

370 NEVER BENEFITTED US

"We were really happy when article 370 was revoked, article 370 and 35A benefited only few political parties of Jammu and Kashmir. Under the garb of article 370, they always misused funds released by Government of India. These political parties have looted funds released for welfare of people of Jammu and Kashmir," added Rajiv Chunni.

CONGRESS NEVER ATTEMPTED TO TAKE BACK PoK

The Chairman of S.O.S International organization further added that Congress never made attempts to take back PoK.

"We have fought three major wars against Pakistan but we never even attempted to take back PoK. We had a golden opportunity when Bangladesh was formed because 90,000 soldiers of Pakistan were under our capture and we could have easily negotiated with Pakistan. In 1994, Narasimha Rao brought resolution also on this but after 1994 also Congress party formed governments in the centre but they were always silent on this issue."

READ | Centre announces compensation for PoK refugees outside Jammu-Kashmir

'HAVE FULL FAITH IN RULING GOVERNMENT ASSERTS RAJIV CHUNNI'

"See we have heard strong statements and now we are sure that when (Modi Govt) they can revoke 370 and 35A so easily then I am sure they will show strong political will in taking back PoK also"

It was Home Minister Amit Shah who had asserted in Lok Sabha that Pakistan occupied Kashmir is the part of India.

"We are ready to give our lives for it," said the home minister. After Amit Shah, defence minister Rajnath Singh also expressed the same sentiments where while addressing a rally, the defence minister said "if talks are held with Pakistan, it will now only be on the topic of PoK."

READ | Indian Army attacks terrorist camps inside PoK,4 launch pads destroyed

READ | Congress invokes China-PoK in response to PM Modi's 'revoke 370 dare'
