XLRI Summer Placements 2019-21: Process for 361 Students Over in 2 Days with Higher Average Salary

Xavier School of Management (XLRI), one of India’s premier B-Schools, concluded the summer placements for its largest ever first year batch 2019-21 in just 2 days. According to XLRI, the institute has achieved 100% placements for the batch of 2019-21 consisting of 361 students.

The Summer Internship Placement (SIP) process saw participation of 86 companies including 11 first time recruiters, offering roles across domains including consulting, finance, sales and marketing, operations, business development, Human Resource and Industrial Relations. Highest stipend of Rs.2.51 lakhs per month was offered in BFSI sector.

On the specular achievement, Fr. P. Christie S.J., Director, XLRI- Xavier School of Management said, “This has been a good year for summer recruitments. We are extremely grateful to all the recruiters for showing belief in the XLRI institutional brand and our students. The spectacular placements achieved this year is a testament to our diverse talent pool and the XLRI brand and has raised the bar for placements in B-schools in the country,”

Average & Highest Stipend Up

The average stipend saw an increase to Rs. 1.2 lakh per month for 2019-21 batch from Rs. 1.07 lakh per month last year. The median stipend also stood at Rs. 1.2 lakhs per month.

The highest stipend stood at Rs.2.5 lakhs per month offered in the BFSI sector.

Top recruiters include 11 New Ones

XLRI’s traditional recruiters have once again demonstrated their confidence in the students and hired in large numbers. The top recruiters on campus in terms of numbers included Amazon which made the highest number of offers amongst the regular recruiters; The Boston Consulting Group, Microsoft, P&G, Aditya Birla Group, ITC, Nestle, Hindustan Unilever, Mondelez, Mahindra & Mahindra, Citibank among others.

First-time recruiters included companies such as Bain & Co., Adani Group, Diageo, NIIF, Kornferry, PhonePe, Mars, Ola, Rupeek, Udaan, among others.

The flagship Business Management program continued to receive a very good response from the industry while XLRI maintained its dominance as the foremost recruitment destination for budding HR managers.

Sector & Function Wise Placements

The top segments based on roles offered were Consulting, Sales & Marketing, and BFSI. Consulting firms extended offers to 16% of the candidates. Sales & Marketing and BFSI constituted 40% and 17% of the roles offered to Business Management students respectively.

Other roles included functions in Analytics, Product Management, Business Development, Brand Management, and Strategy. Organizations from a wide spectrum of sectors participated in the process, including FMCGs, Consulting, Pharma, IT and e-commerce, Auto, Mining, Oil & Gas and Telecom.

Human Resources (HR)

Regarded as the best college in the country for HR, HR roles were offered by firms spanning the spectrum such as P&G, Mondelez, Nestle, RB, Colgate Palmolive, RPG, Accenture, ITC, Udaan, PhonePe, Reliance, Ola, Bajaj, Coca Cola, CISCO Mars and others. HR roles offered also included recruitment, HR consulting and HR analytics.

Consulting

Consulting was a big draw this year with firms such as The Boston Consulting Group, Bain & Co., AT Kearney, Accenture Strategy, EY, PWC, Kornferry, KPMG, Aon and others participating in the process.

BFSI

Finance did exceedingly well this year aided by the participation of firms such as Citibank, J.P Morgan Chase, Goldman Sachs, Standard Chartered, NIIF, RBS, DBS, Axis Bank & Axis Capital, ICICI and others. The roles offered were Front End Investment Banking, Global and Corporate Banking, Wealth Management, Global Markets and Retail Banking.

FMCG/Telecom/Media

XLRI has established itself as a campus preferred by FMCGs and the trend continued this year with top firms such as P&G, Hindustan Unilever, Nestle, Mondelez, ITC, RB, Colgate Palmolive, J&J, Asian Paints, Samsung, Philips, Coca Cola, Marico, Mars, Pidilite, GSK, Diageo, AbInBev, Dr Reddy’s and other participating. The process also saw participation from other firms in this segment such as Star, Airtel and Vodafone Idea. Roles in Sales & Marketing, Product Supply, Operations, Corporate Finance, IT and Human Resources were offered.

General Management

Roles in General Management were offered by conglomerates such as TAS, Aditya Birla Group, Mahindra, Reliance Industries, RPG, Capgemini ELITE, Bajaj Finserv, L&T, ACT and others.

Manufacturing and Automotive

Steel giants such as Tata Steel and JSW also participated in the process along with regular recruiters from the automotive sector such as Bajaj.

ITES/E-commerce/Analytics

E-commerce saw a massive jump in offers being extended led by Amazon. The firms in this segment include Microsoft, Amazon, Media.net, PhonePe, Flipkart, Oyo Rooms, Wipro, Microland and others. The diverse set of roles offered were Program Manager, Product Manager, Category Manager, Business Development and Operations.

XLRI-Xavier School of Management, Jamshedpur is a premier, private management institute in India founded in 1949 by Fr Quinn Enright, S.J. in the ‘steel city’ of Jamshedpur Over the last six decades, the institute has grown into a top-ranking business management school of international repute with a wide portfolio of management programs and research publications. Its alumni are spread around the globe and have demonstrated responsible business leadership in their organizations. XLRI has been awarded two prestigious International Accreditations, viz., AACSB - The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business and AMBA - Association of MBAs. XLRI has also earned the National Board of Accreditation (NBA) accreditation.

Admission in XLRI for the various PGDM programmes for 2020-22 batch is open. Candidates who wish to seek admission opportunity in XLRI have to appear in XAT 2020 on January 5, 2020. Apart from appearing in XAT 2020, candidates have to register and apply to XLRI separately.

Stay tuned to MBAUniverse.com for more updates on XLRI
