Yoursay: Ex-DAP man Hew scores own goal with comic book

YOURSAY | ‘This comic book should not have been circulated in our public schools.’

Bersatu man: DAP reps backing Hew represent M'sians or Communist Party?

Gerard Lourdesamy: Frankly, there is no need to publish and distribute the comic book entitled ‘Belt and Road Initiative for Win Winism’ in Malaysian schools.

The Belt and Road Initiative is a key foreign and economic policy objective of China. There is no need for our students to be educated about the policies of a foreign government even if they are our biggest trading partner and investor.

Direct or indirect support for the Communist Party of China is also not necessary because we are on friendly terms with all countries, irrespective of their ideologies and forms of government.

The ethnic problems in the Xinjiang province involving the Uyghurs is an internal matter of China but it has implications in terms of international law, human rights and humanitarian principles.

As a Muslim majority country, Malaysia has every right to comment on the issue so long as it is done within diplomatic limitations, norms and courtesies.

It is just like Malaysia’s support for the people in Palestine, Syria, Iraq, Darfur in Sudan, Kashmir in India, the Rakhine state in Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Mindanao in the Philippines and southern Thailand who are facing armed conflict, terrorism, ethnic cleansing and a humanitarian crisis. It is wrong to term such political and moral support as “radicalism”.

As a non-aligned country, our foreign policy is based on keeping a well-modulated distance from the major superpowers, both global and regional, while maintaining good relations with them for the mutual benefit of all sides.

This comic book should not have been circulated in our public schools whatever its origins and purpose since it has very little educational value based on our own history and national objectives.

I fully support the Education Ministry in withdrawing this book but I feel the investigation by the Home Ministry and police is unnecessary since the Pakatan Harapan manifesto clearly states in its promise Number 27 that the draconian Printing Presses and Publications Act 1984 is supposed to be repealed it its entirety.

The DAP should not defend this comic book since there was no cabinet decision or ministry approval to circulate the comic book in schools.

Pakatan 4 Life: Having been a staunch DAP supporter for a very long time, I am losing my faith in the party.

After working hard for the chance to govern the country, DAP leaders are not using their clout to reprimand their grassroots members or staunch followers from making silly mistakes such as the distribution of the “pro-communist” comic book in schools.

The fact that DAP ministers are keeping silent on the matter shows they are simply not cut out to lead the party. The party will struggle in GE15.

Wira: Some people don't understand that the information contained in the ‘Belt and Road’ comic book is to help Malaysians and their children understand better a key Chinese government position, exactly what the comic book writer Hew Kuan Yau, in his capacity as the Malaysia-China Business Council (MCBC) chief executive officer, is supposed to do.

After all, Prime Minister Dr Mahathir Mohamad had, on many occasions, voiced his support for the Chinese government’s position and their understanding of Malaysia’s financial position despite signing inflated agreements and contracts with the previous BN government.

Why are certain Malaysians being ungrateful and painting a very negative picture regarding China’s administration?

Do we need the Chinese ambassador to voice his displeasure again and remind Malaysia of the importance of the friendship between the two nations for us to take notice?

Freddie Mercury: Forcing the communist ideology on our schoolchildren is a big blunder. The school is not a suitable avenue for such publications. Do not involve schoolchildren for political gains.

Anonymous 1543386425: Seriously, are there any communists in present Malaysia?

It is already bad enough that politicians are using the race and religion card to garner support and tarnish the reputation of others, but now to resurrect communism for the same purpose leaves a bad taste in the mouth.

Some politicians tend to forget that youngsters nowadays, including Malay youths, have access to the internet and cannot be easily fooled anymore.

Gaji Buta: Bersatu Youth exco Mohd Ashraf Mustaqim Badrul Munir asked whether several DAP grassroots members hold on to Malaysian values with conviction and sincerity.

I think the real question is have Chinese Malaysians been treated in a manner that they should be loyal to this country?

Don't talk about their ancestors who were given citizenship during independence, but those born here and are being treated like second-class citizens and constantly being threatened with race and religion.

Anon: While Mohd Ashraf and other similarly-minded people are busy demonising DAP, thousands of Felda settlers and their families will be crying soon because India has decided to boycott palm oil from Malaysia.

Should the Bersatu leaders like Ashraf blame DAP as well for this problem mainly caused by Mahathir?

Cynical: If China follows India's lead and boycotts Malaysia's palm oil, Mohd Ashraf can drink the oversupply of palm oil in the country for breakfast, lunch and dinner.

VP Biden: Whilst what Hew did by distributing the book to schools was not exactly smart, DAP should know better in the first place not to let a loose cannon like Hew, who had already gotten into trouble with the party in the past, to promote a foreign country’s initiative.

Anonymous 1558056587379: Everyone should be made to understand that one’s own religion and faith is the person’s individual choice and way of life, and it should be kept personal.

There are religious extremists in almost every nation in the world, including Malaysia. But the voices and statements of these extremists should not be made out as if it is the discourse of the entire nation.

Malaysia remained a peaceful country because the general ethos is that of tolerance and acceptance. Diversity is our strength. Diversity rose in the Malaysia culture out of wisdom, not division.

We may be divided politically, but culturally we have always been one nation. Let’s cherish and protect this peace for generations to come.

Syed Saddiq should thank 'Superman' Hew

The above is a selection of comments posted by Malaysiakini subscribers. Only paying subscribers can post comments. Over the past one year, Malaysiakinians have posted over 100,000 comments. Join the Malaysiakini community and help set the news agenda. Subscribe now.

These comments are compiled to reflect the views of Malaysiakini subscribers on matters of public interest. Malaysiakini does not intend to represent these views as fact.
