Petrol pump strike: Fuel stations to shut operations for 24 hours in Rajasthan

Video of a MP petrol pump owner thrashing his employee with a whip goes viral

Ahead of polls, petrol pump dealers to challenge govt's decision to open 56,000 new fuel outlets

No data on demonetised 500, 1,000 notes used at petrol pumps: RBI

Explained: How FASTag-like technology will help you avoid queues at petrol pumps?

Prisoners to be employed in petrol pumps to be set up by Kerala govt in jails

Petrol pump strike: Fuel stations to shut operations for 24 hours in Rajasthan

India

oi-PTI

Jaipur, Oct 23: Petrol and diesel pumps across Rajasthan will be shut for 24 hours today to protest against the increased rate of Value Added Taxes (VAT).

Sunit Bagai, president of the Rajasthan Petrol Diesel Association (RPDA) said fuel pumps located in the border areas are on the verge of shutdown due to increased VAT rate.

"Petrol and diesel pumps located in the border areas of neighbouring districts are on the verge of shutdown due to increased VAT. Demand is continuously decreasing.

"We have apprised the state government about losses incurred by the fuel pump stations," said Bagai.

The shutdown has been called against increased VAT rate, he said, adding the RPDA has also demanded scrapping of road cess.

Bagai said if prices of petrol and diesel are compared with neighbouring states, it was Rs 5-9 higher in Rajasthan.

Terming it a corrective measure, the Congress government in July had reversed the previous government's decision to reduce the VAT on petrol and diesel by 4 per cent.

UP govt increases VAT on petrol, diesel

During the previous government, VAT on petrol was 30 per cent, which was brought down to 26 per cent while VAT on diesel was reduced from 22 per cent to 18 per cent.

In the general budget, the Centre had announced Rs 1 per litre in excise duty and Rs 1 as road cess.

Following the hike, the state government through a notification on July 6 increased VAT rate on petrol from 26 to 30 per cent and 18 to 22 per cent on diesel.
