Mumbai Police book 200 people for pelting stones at cops during shoemaker's funeral procession

Police deployment in the area was heightened on Tuesday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The altercation broke out during Rithadi's funeral procession on Tuesday In his suicide note, Rithadia blamed police inaction over his daughter's disappearance As many as 33 people have been arrested by Chembur police

Mumbai: Police in India's economic capital registered an FIR against 200 people in connection with a stone-pelting incident on Tuesday. Most recent inputs have revealed that as many as 33 people have been arrested and more are likely to be arrested in the coming days. The accused were protesting against alleged police inaction over the disappearance of a teenage girl whose father committed suicide earlier this month.

Aged 42, Pancharam Rithadia died after he jumped in front of a train on October 13. In a suicide note, he blamed the city police for failing to investigate the disappearance of his teenage daughter who has been missing since April of this year. The stone-pelting incident took place during his funeral in the city's Chembur area.

Police officials claimed that locals attending the funeral attacked police personnel, even pelting stones at them. As many as seven personnel were injured and police had to resort to lathi-charge to get the situation under control. Deputy commissioner of police Shashi Kumar Meena said that while the accused have been arrested, the girl is yet to be traced.

A resident of Thakar Bapa Colony, Rithadia lived with his wife and children and worked as a shoemaker. Rithadia had alleged that five men, including Bhagchand Fulwaria, should be held responsible for the disappearance of his daughter. However, neither Fulwaria nor his aides were arrested or even brought in for questioning. Following Rithadia's suicide, railway police registered a case against Filwaria and his aides for abetting the suicide.

Recalling the sequence of events that conspired on Tuesday, a police official told media outlets that the funeral procession initially reached Nehru Nagar police station where slogans were shouted. The body was then being transported for cremation when members of the procession got into an argument with police personnel along the Kurla-Chembur highway. Police personnel was allegedly attacked with stones, shoes and even paver blocks.

Police deployment in the area was heightened following the incident and a lathi charge was ordered to disperse the crowd. Shops in the area were also shut down to avoid any untoward incident. A case was then registered against 200 people and 33 people were arrested today. While those who pelted stones at police personnel have been arrested, Mumbai Police is yet to issue any clarity on the disappearance of Rithadia's teenage daughter, more than six months since she was last seen. At the time of this report, neither of the men accused by her father has been detained. In addition, no action has been taken against the policemen who refused to register the grieving father's complaint.
