Arundhati Roy – The traitor within

Arundhati Roy and people like her are physical humanoid manifestation of the monsters and evil intentions which can’t stand a free, progressive and rational world. The West championing these should understand better that our democracy and liberty has become hollow. If it can give space to the arch nemesis of democracy and free world, it is the West only where this lady is enjoying the maximum support. Scoundrels like her use our own ideals and principles to bring us down. Writes Akash Bhardwaj

From the history of mankind to the date, nothing has been more lethal and hostile for the western and rest of the progressive world other than religious extremism, radical Islamism and communism. But a trend which has become rampant and audacious since the end of the 20th century seems to differ it a bit and that trend is nothing else but the unholy and the evil amalgamation of religious extremism, radical Islamism and communism. And, this isn’t just limited to or around the fact that how Soviet Union created the ‘Palestinian identity’ for just countering the very foundations of Western Judeo-Christian civilization but rather, it goes far beyond to those individuals around the world who hold the perks of elitism and use the same commodities, rights and platforms that this free world has given them for annihilating or crippling it from within with their malicious and ‘anti-humanity agendas’. And, this lady – Arundhati Roy from a country of 1.3 billion people (India) is among the most classical and authentic example of that.

The lady is known to have come out often with the most brazen and preposterous statements against USA, Israel and India in particular. For example, she professes and often projects that how the ‘capitalist’ USA is responsible for each and every case of poverty in this world and that how the existence of Israel is the reason for all the problems in the Middle East. Also, she claims, should there have been no USA, Israel and India, radical Islamic terrorism wouldn’t have been there. She has been a staunch supporter and advocate for justification of Islamic insurgency in Kashmir, Maoism in the ‘red corridors of India, Pakistan instigated Khalistan separatism and terrorism, militancy in North East India and almost all other insurgents attacking the State of India. She has been shamelessly claiming that there is no hand of Pakistan in 26/11 Mumbai attacks which killed many foreign nationals including Jews and that it is a mere outcome of the ‘poverty faced by Muslims’ in India and South Asia. Her views are the same on the 2001 jihadist attack on Indian parliament and every other jihadist plot. Her despicable arguments and actions have no limits and are beyond imagination.

Let’s look at some of them.

2010 Sedition Case

On 21 October 2010, a seminar was held in little theaters (New Delhi, India) titled “Azaadi (freedom): The only way” which was organized and conducted by Arundhati Roy, Pakistan stooge Syed Ali Shah Geelani and all other leaders of Khalistan and North Eastern militancy outfits. Therein, the usual loads of venom was spat against India, Hindus and their culture and it ended with highly seditious and riot inciting statements by all of them particularly Arundhati Roy wherein, she narrated the abominable slogan of “bhuka nanga Hindustan, Jaan se pyara Pakistan”( hungry, nude India, dearer than life Pakistan). A complaint was lodged against Arundhati Roy and others in Lok Marg Police Station in New Delhi by prominent Kashmiri Hindu activist Sushil Pandit. But police refused to register it so a court case was filed against her for sedition in Patiala House court, New Delhi. It has been more than 8 years now but the rogue bureaucracy and judiciary in India have been hesitant in initiating any action.

Maoist insurgency

The Maoist infected regions of India are Chhattisgarh, Bihar, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand.

Arundhati Roy possesses this mind boggling perception that those who have taken up arms against India are ‘heroic revolutionaries’ fighting for rights of marginalized and oppressed. She has gone to the extent of saying that, the day constitution of India came into force was a tragic day. The reality is that this arms struggle of India with Maoist has been there since 1967, and due to this thousands of army and police personnel have been martyred and millions of Indians have been displaced from their native lands. And what is the role of each side of this conflict? India is building landways and developing infrastructure to include the tribal and other communities to mainstream and develop their regions. But the Maoist will never accept that because these red corridors are money making factories. Each year, thousands of crores of Indian Rupees are laundered out through various ways from these corridors which is primarily used in funding other militant outfits in and around the country. And also to find this nexus of individual and NGO’s who masquerade as ‘intellectuals’ and justice-seekers and actually run the same agenda but without using ammunition on their own and this is supposedly among the biggest source of income for Arundhati Roy and people like her. People of this nexus include actors, academicians, lawyers, judges, bureaucrats, activist and particularly politicians.

Support for Shahidul Alam

Arundhati Roy was among the most shouting voices from India who protested the legal actions taken against Shahidul Alam, a controversial Bangladeshi photojournalist with revealed connections with pro-radical Islamists, anti-Semites, pro-Pakistanis and Al Jazeera broadcast. She has addressed him in a letter denoting him as ‘dearest’ and writing for him that he isn’t alone in this (his activities involving schoolchildren in movements) and that “tides will change.”

What should people around the globe, and particularly the West, understand?

Arundhati Roy and people like her are physical humanoid manifestation of the monsters and evil intentions which can’t stand a free, progressive and rational world. The West championing these should understand better that our democracy and liberty has become hollow. If it can give space to the arch nemesis of democracy and free world, it is the West only where this lady is enjoying the maximum support. Scoundrels like her use our own ideals and principles to bring us down.

Radical Islamism and communism have a hell lot in common, neither believe in democratic laws – for example, Sharia and Maoist have their own kangaroo courts in India’s red corridor. They both promote barbarism such as brutal killings by jihadist, Maoists dancing upon the mutilated bodies of their targets which include children and women. This is what has happened with anti Maoist front Salwa Jedum and Indian National Congress leader Mahendra Karma on 25 May 2013. In 2004, Communist Party of India declared that Islamic upsurge is an anti imperialist, peaceful and liberating struggle directed against USA which they support. It has been found out that LeT (Lashkar-e-Taiba) has in fact colluded with Maoist in Jharkhand.

Communism isn’t dead, it is still breathing around the globe seeking to enslave world just like its radical Islamist ally. They both support each other when out of power and annihilate each other when one among them attains power like Khamenei butchered communist in Iran after becoming supreme leader of Iran and look at how Communist Party of China is thrashing Islam and Christianity to very core in China’s Xinjiang region. Unfortunately, there are few evangelical Christian groups taking advantage of this in India to attract more converts and that’s why Arundhati Roy is comfortable with them and vice versa. Evangelical Christians are of same mentality as Atallah Hannah which fortunately our rationalist brethren of Christians in West despise. Lastly, it is high time now to recognize the venomous kraits like Arundhati Roy who are against the foundations of the global free world which took millenniums for our ancestors to build!

Related Articles

Hindus need to be saved from missionary mafia
