Padma Bhushan awardee Nambi Narayanan responds to TP Senkumar

KOCHI: A day after the Centre announced the Padma Bhushan for former ISRO scientist Nambi Narayanan among the 14 recipients, Kerala former DGP TP Senkumar mocked at the development on Saturday. Responding to that, Narayanan said Senkumar is an accused in the case for compensation suit filed in the ISRO spy case that falsely implicated scientists, so he is making mean statements.In his remark, Senkumar mocked at Padma Bhushan for Nambi Narayanan saying that the Supreme Court had constituted a committee to enquire into the role of Kerala police in the arrest of Narayanan and others in the spy case and let them come out with their finding first. After that its fine, even if he is chosen for Bharat Ratna , he said.Responding to that, Nambi Narayanan told TOI that "Senkumar is an accused in the case for compensation suit filed. He is inconsistent in his remark and it shows that he can stoop down to any level."Nambi Narayanan was the first to focus on liquid propulsion technology and developed Vikas engine that propelled ISRO rockets including PSLV that took Chandrayaan-1 to the moon in 2008. A visionary, Narayanan was heading the cryogenic division of ISRO when he was falsely implicated in the infamous ISRO spy case that shattered his life and career.In September last year, the Supreme Court cleared all charges that falsely arraigned Nambi Narayanan in the spy case and directed Kerala government to pay Rs 50 lakh compensation. The state government led by chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan handed over the compensation at a public function in the secretariat durbar hall. In a lengthy speech honouring the scientist and aerospace engineer Nambi Narayanan, the chief minister said, the state had to redeem for failing to ensure justice to a great scientist in a befitting manner and that was the reason to honour him at a public function for handing over the cheque. It was 23 years after the infamous spy case in 1994. Then Nambi Narayanan told TOI that it was a great relief that the state led by the chief minister had honoured him after over two decades of struggle for justice.During his hey days, Nambi Narayanan with a 53 member team had left for France to develop the knowhow for liquid propellant engine, it was then fabricated in India and tested successfully in France. Thus the first liquid propellant engine developed by Nambi as a tribute to Vikram Sarabhai became the key propellant that fuelled ISRO rockets. In 1991 when Russia, France and the US had cryogenic technology, Nambi was instrumental in signing an agreement with Russian Glavkosmos for developing cryogenic technology for India. Despite the US resistance, Nambi got the required rocket hardware to develop cryogenic technology through Russian airlines via Pakistan to Kerala. He was in-charge of the cryogenics division in ISRO when in 1994, he was falsely charged with espionage and arrested. Due to the spy case, India went back by 15 years in development of the cryogenic technology.He was exonerated of all charges by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in 1996 indicating that it was a fabricated case. The Supreme Court of India declared him not guilty in 1998. It was clear that a patriotic scientist was implicated in a false spy case for the transfer of cryogenic technology to another nation, when such a technology was non-existent in India in 1994.On when would he would head for Delhi to receive the Padma Bhushan, Narayanan said, that will be informed shortly. These prestigious awards are conferred by the President of India at ceremonial functions held at Rashtrapati Bhavan , usually around March or April every year.
