Worli Election Results 2019: Aaditya Thackeray defeats NCP nominee by over 70,000 votes

Worli Assembly Election Results 2019, Aaditya Thackeray: Victory of the 29-year-old Thackeray scion has triggered talks of his candidature as the Chief Minister.

Worli, Maharashtra Assembly Election Results 2019: Making his political debut, Shiv Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray won from the Worli Assembly constituency in Mumbai. The Yuva Sena chief, who is the first member from Thackeray family to contest an election, defeated his NCP rival Suresh Mane by a margin of over 70,000 votes. In the run up to the polls, Aaditya Thackeray held several roadshows, foot marches and raised issues like cutting of trees in Aarey Colony and Mumbai’s nightlife.

Talks of his candidature as CM has been making rounds since initial trends began to come. “The family may not say this but the people Maharashtra want to see a Thackeray as the CM,” Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut said.

The young leader is pitted against the NCP candidate Suresh Mane, a Dalit leader. The Worli Assembly seat has been a Shiv Sena stronghold in the last three decades. Barring the 2009 elections, the Shiv Sena has won the seat continuously since 1990. In 2014 elections, Shiv Sena’s Sushil Shinde had won from Worli.

Aaditya, 29, is confident about his win from Worli. During the campaign, he went on foot marches in the constituency to seek public support and addressed several public meetings. The Shiv Sena bigwigs also held rallies in the Worli in Aaditya’s support.

If Aaditya wins from Worli, it would surely be a turning point for the Shiv Sena which time and again has projected itself as the big brother in the NDA in Maharashtra. The Shiv Sena had initially projected Aaditya as the chief ministerial candidate and claimed that the next CM will be from the Sena camp. Aaditya even openly said that he will accept whatever responsibility is given to him. The BJP saw this only as a pressure tactic from the ally to get the lion’s share in the distribution of seats. However, after rounds of negotiations, the Shiv Sena agreed to contest from 124 seats while the BJP and others were allotted the remaining 164 seats.

If reports are to go by, the Shiv Sena could pitch for the Deputy CM’s post for Aaditya Thackeray if the ruling dispensation retains power and the Shiv Sena improves its tally from the 2014 Assembly elections.

Ahead of the elections, Aaditya had also embarked on ‘Maha Janaashirwad Yatra’ across the state to garner support for the party and received overwhelming support. Most of the exit polls predicted Aaditya emerging victorious from the Worli seat.
