Dept orders closure of Adarsh School

editorial@tribune.com

Balwant Garg

Tribune News Service

Faridkot, October 23

The School Education Department’s order to close Government Adarsh School at Malla village of the district stirred a controversy on Wednesday.

As the department issued the order to shift all 590 students of this school to other government schools and end the services of around 50 employees, parents of the students and employees staged a protest.

Faridkot District Education Officer (DEO) Baljit Kaur along with the police reached the village to pacify the parents and teachers, but they were adamant on their demand of continuing the school that caters to five villages of the adjoining area.

In a letter to the DEO, the Director General School Education (DGSE) on Tuesday issued orders to close the school, saying the purpose of opening the school was not being fulfilled.

“The students studying in the school, running from a rented building, are to be transferred to other government school in the area and the teachers be asked to report to their original employer,” the letter read.

Under the PPP mode, 25 Adarsh Schools are operating in the state. The purpose of opening Adarsh Schools was to provide quality education to the students in the rural area with quality infrastructure. While 70 per cent of the expenditure to run these schools is borne by the state government and the rest is contributed by the management.

The Malla school was started by Balaji Education Trust on July 25, 2011. This management left the school without construction of the building, but appointed staff for the school. The school was again allotted to M/s Educomp Solutions Limited, New Delhi, on April 2, 2013, but the group did not take the charge. On September 4, 2013, the school’s administration was handed over to the Jaito SDM as a stopgap arrangement.

On March 28, 2017, the Shaheed Udham Singh Education Society took the charge of eight Adarsh Schools, including the Malla school. However, the department annulled the agreement with this society following allegations of fraud of over Rs 2 crore on August 13, 2019.

So far, no society has properly run the school and there is no reason to hand over the administration of this school to a private partner as the school doesn’t have its own building, reads the DGSE’s letter.

“There are two government schools which have enough land to improve the infrastructure and one smart school in the area where surplus rooms are available. English-medium sections have been introduced in this school and it has infrastructure facilities like digital education and sports, so these students can be shifted there,” said the DGSE.

“In the wake of protest by students’ parents, I have written to the DGSE to reconsider the decision to close the school,” said DEO Baljit Kaur.
