Results of Maharashtra, Haryana elections: What could save the day for BJP

Modi wave

Campaigning

Rallies

Nationalism

Double-engine governments

NEW DELHI: The BJP-Shiv Sena combine romped home to a second consecutive term in Maharashtra and emerged as the single largest party in Haryana. However, its seat share has reduced in both states in the present polls as compared with the 2014 assembly elections.In the 2014 Maharashtra assembly election, when BJP and Shiv Sena contested separately, the former won 122 of the 288 seats while Shiv Sena was victorious on 63. Together, they bagged 185 seats. However, they won lesser number of seats this year. While BJP was victorious on 105 of the 164 seats it contested Shiv Sena bagged 56 of the 124 it fought. Together they have 161 seats, down 24 seats than its 2014 tally.In the 2014 Haryana assembly election, BJP emerged a clear winner, registering victory on 47 of the total 90 seats. However, in this year’s election, BJP won 40 seats, down seven seats and six less than the majority mark.BJP seems to have faced troubles on certain fronts. Under Amit Shah, BJP experimented with caste equations in Maharashtra and Haryana. In Maharashtra where the Marathas dominate politics, Devendra Fadnavis, a Brahmin, headed the government. Similarly in Haryana, which is dominated by the Jats, Khattar , a Punjabi, led the government. Though the party appears to have got a large chunk of the votes of the non-Marathas in Maharashtra and non-Jats in Haryana, the Maratha and Jat vote in the respective states seem to have consolidated against BJP.However the party would have fared worse if not for these factors that favoured Prime Minister Narendra Modi and party president Amit Shah:In some respects, the 2019 assembly elections in Maharashtra and Haryana are similar to the 2014 elections in both states. These were the first two states to go to the polls after the 2014 Lok Sabha elections. The Modi wave was then still intact. Riding on the wave, BJP-Shiv Sena combine defeated the Congress-NCP government in Maharashtra and won a majority in Haryana.This election witnessed a similar phenomenon. BJP won a big mandate in 2019 Lok Sabha elections, bagging 303 seats overall. The momentum of that win seems to have impacted results in Maharashtra and Haryana.BJP launched a powerful campaign in both the states led by PM Modi and Amit Shah. Both addressed rallies till the last day of campaigning on October 19. They also had Maharashtra and Haryana chief ministers Devendra Fadnavis and Manohar Lal Khattar campaigning in their respective states.In contrast, Congress’s campaign was low key. Party president Sonia Gandhi did not hold a single rally in either state - her rally at Mahendragarh on October 18 was cancelled at the last moment. Her son and predecessor Rahul Gandhi addressed the rally in her place.BJP’s campaign was far more impactful than that of its rivals. The top BJP leaders addressed more rallies than their rivals. In fact, both PM Modi and Amit Shah had addressed rallies in both states even before the Election Commission announced the poll schedule on September 21.After September 21 when the dates were announced, while Rahul Gandhi addressed just two election rallies in Haryana and five in Maharashtra, PM Modi and Amit Shah held seven rallies each in the northern state alone. In Maharashtra, while Modi addressed nine rallies, Shah held 19. Altogether, they addressed 42 rallies in the two states against seven by Rahul Gandhi.Nationalism has been the mainstay of BJP’s campaign, with the party reaping rich dividends. While air strikes in Balakot in response to the terror attack in Pulwama helped BJP in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, nullification of Articles 370 and 35A of the Constitution bolstered the party’s chances in the Maharashtra and Haryana assembly elections. Besides, Amit Shah also announced that the Modi government would implement the National Register of Citizens (NRC) throughout the country by 2024. The unprovoked firing by Pakistan and India’s strong response on the eve of elections may have also played a role in weaning away votes in favour of the BJP.On the other hand, Congress relied on economic slowdown and jobs as its main election planks. As in the run-up to the Lok Sabha elections, Rahul Gandhi continued his attack on the Modi government over issues such as alleged corruption in the Rafale fighter aircraft deal and “undue favours” to businessmen such as Ambanis, Adanis, Vijay Mallya, Nirav Modi and Mehul Choksi, which failed to find favour with voters.For the 2014 assembly elections, both Narendra Modi and Amit Shah had sought votes on the slogan of “double-engine” governments -- a BJP-led dispensation at the Centre and in the state for faster growth. They claimed “double engine” or “double decker” governments had helped n “double engine growth”. The voters of Maharashtra and Haryana bought the argument in 2014 and it seems to have appealed to them this time round as well.
