More than 2500 Students Participate in ‘Gandhi Sankalpa Yatra’ in Udupi

More than 2500 Students Participate in ‘Gandhi Sankalpa Yatra’ in Udupi

Udupi: Udupi-Chikkamagaluru MP Shobha Karandlaje launched the ‘Gandhi Sankalpa Yatra’ to mark the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi in Udupi at the Bhujanga Park on October 24.

The Padayatra which was flagged off at the Bhujanga Park passed through Big Bazar – old Taluk office – Diana Circle – Court Road – KM Marg – Triveni Circle – Service Bus stand – Kidiyoor Hotel – City Bus stand – Kalsanka and culminated at the parking area of Sri Krishna Math. More than 2500 students from various schools participated in the ‘Gandhi Sankalpa Yatra’

Speaking on the occasion MP Shobha Karandlaje said that, the union government is organizing the Sankalpa Yatra from October 2 (Gandhiji’s birth anniversary) to October 30 (birth anniversary of Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel). A march that will be taken out in each assembly and parliamentary segments of the state. Gandhiji used the weapon of Satyagraha and the Swadeshi movement against the British and succeeded in inculcating patriotism among the people of the country. Gandhi gave a new direction to the freedom moment and reached every home with Satyagraha and Dandi march.

Mahatma Gandhi who was also called the Father of the Nation during the freedom movement fought against the British through non-violence. He launched a long march in various parts of the country to raise a mass movement against the British through non-violence. Gandhiji taught social values and respect for each other. This yatra is being held to propagate his teachings and values, she said.

Further, Shobha appealed to the students to avoid using plastic bags as they are dangerous to the environment. “I urge all of you to avoid the use of plastic polybags, they are very dangerous to the environment and our health. Everyone must carry a cloth bag while going out for shopping”, she said.

“It is the responsibility of everyone to make this campaign a mass movement as Prime Minister Narendra Modi has pledged to free the country from single-use plastic. The single-use plastic is not only harmful to humans but is also adversely affecting animals. We will move forward under the leadership of the Prime Minister in building a pollution-free clean India”, she said.

State fisheries, inland service and Muzari minister and also the district minister in-charge of DK Kota Srinivas Poojary, Udupi MLA Raghupathi Bhat, BJP District president Mattar Rathnakar Hegde and others were present.
