Why DKS release a good news for Deve Gowda family too?

Bengaluru, Oct 24: The return of Congress stalwart D K Shivakumar to Karnataka, who was granted bail by the Delhi high court is not only a good news for his own party, but also for Deve Gowda family which is facing rebelling from a section of Janata Dal (Secular) leaders.

Twenty-seven legislators, including 11 MLCs, have reportedly decided to quit the JD(S) in protest against the alleged autocratic style of functioning of the Gowda family. Sources say the disgruntled legislators have already held a secret meeting and are planning to meet again to firm up plans.

With midterm polls a distinct possibility, these rebel legislators are moving to safeguard their careers, especially given the JD(S)’ waning popularity even in the Old Mysuru region. Reports suggest the Congress think-tank including CLP leader Siddaramaiah is keen on weakening the JD(S) to boost Congress’ prospects of returning to power.

However, Shivakumar’s return to the state is expected to stymie those efforts as the Kanakapura strongman enjoys a fine rapport with the Gowda family these days. Moreover, he would not want to earn the wrath of the Vokkaliga community by supporting the mission.

“After mending relations with the Gowda family, Shivakumar is being seen as a future leader of the Vokkaliga community,” said a close associate of Shivakumar. “Going by Shivakumar’s unflinching support to Kumaraswamy during the coalition government regime, the Gowda family is obliged to support him. Therefore, Shivakumar will neither support nor indulge in any plan to weaken the JD(S).”

Moreover, the Siddaramaiah camp may focus on consolidating their position within the Congress. “With Shivakumar and G Parameshwara coming under the I-T scanner, Siddaramaiah was unquestionable in the state Congress. But that will not be so now. Siddaramaiah cannot take any unilateral decision overlooking Shivakumar’s views,” another Congress leader said.

However, Siddaramaiah camp followers denied claims that they are working to weaken the JD(S). “Why will JD(S) MLAs quit party and join Congress when there are no elections around the corner? This is mere speculation,” a Congress leader said.
