BJP manipulated result in Gangoh, says Priyanka Gandhi

RAE BARELI: Congress party accused ruling BJP government of manipulating election results on Gangoh seat of Saharanpur.Speaking to reporters in Rae Bareli, party national general secretary Priyanka Gandhi said that her party candidate Noaman Masood was winning from the very first round and sensing a possible loss, BJP government directed the district authorities to manage the situation.“Hamare pratyashi shuru se jeet raha tha… baad mein unko counting centre se nikala gaya… baar baar DM Sahab ko result badalne ke liye phone aa rahe, thay… maine chunav ayog se appeal ki hai is mamle ki nispaksha jaanch ho,” said Priyanka who had also tweeted the same.The party also sent a delegation to the election commission of India while party workers staged a demonstration outside ECI in Lucknow. UP Congress president Ajay Kumar Lallu said: “The ruling BJP has made a mockery of the democratic process. They have played with the public mandate which is sacrosanct in a democracy. We will launch campaign against them.”In Gangoh Congress had fielded Noaman Masood, the twin brother of senior party leader Imran Masood. According to Election Commission of India, Masood lost of BJP’s Kirat Singh with a margin of around 5,000 votes. While Masood secured over 62,000 votes, Kirat Singh got 68,000 votes.Congress national spokesperson Rajiv Tyagi said: “Noaman Masood was ahead of the BJP candidate till the 27th round. The way the Yogi government has manipulated the situation speaks for their realisation that time has come for them to leave. It was an act of sheer frustration,” he said.Meanwhile, on the last day of Congress Party’s training for newly appointed leaders, Priyanka Gandhi fixed the responsibilities of the leaders under specific heads.“The duties are related to organisational building, strengthening, increasing public connect activities and raising people’s issues,” said a senior leader who attended the three-day workshop. She also met block-level leadership from Rae Bareli and Amethi and instructed them to regain the lost members.In Amethi, Priyanka introduced the newly appointed district president Pradeep Jindal to the workers. Imposing faith in the new leadership, Priyanka said: “the task before all of us is to revive and strengthen our organisation for the 2022 elections. Everyone must work to achieve the goal.”
