Khattar's position as CM may be under threat if BJP reworks strategy after Haryana results

Manohar Lal Khattar | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights At age 24, Khattar began working as pracharak of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), and has remained loyal to the organisation since In becoming Haryana’s chief minister in 2014, Khattar became the first non-Jat to hold the position since Bhajan Lal’s first term in 1979 Khattar’s relationship with PM Modi is viewed as one of the chief reasons why the prime minister opted to begin his Haryana campaign in the Karnal constituency in 2014

As per the latest reports, the Bharatiya Janata Party is set to fall well short of its 75 seat target in the Haryana Legislative Assembly elections. In fact, the party now needs to contend with the idea that it may not even claim enough seats to win a majority in the state, opening up a number of new possibilities with regard to what the next Haryana government may look like. Even if the BJP does manage to reach the 46-seat mark, its poor showing in the 23 Jat-dominated constituencies suggests that a revision of strategy may be on the cards. The party made a bold move after the 2014 Assembly elections in approving the candidacy of Manohar Lal Khattar for the position of chief minister, opting to place the state's first non-Jat leader in twenty years, on Haryana's top seat.

The party's meteoric rise in Haryana in 2014 has been largely attributed to the Modi wave that swept the entire nation. Yet, the vote patterns this time around suggest the Modi effect may have its limits, especially in state polls. The tenuous position the BJP currently finds itself in may drive the party to seek an alliance with Dushyant Chautala's Jannayak Janata Party and perhaps even offer the 31-year old chief ministership, in a move to re-consolidate its status among the Jat community. If such a reality does materialise, it will be sitting Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar who would draw the short end of the stick.

Khattar's Journey

Khattar, 65, was born to a Punjabi shopkeeper who had moved to the Rohtak district in Haryana soon after the Partition in 1947. Khattar attended Rohtak’s Pandit Neko Ram Sharma Government College, and shortly after, set up a shop in Sadar Bazaar, Delhi. During this time, Khattar also pursued a bachelor’s degree from Delhi University. At age 24, Khattar began working as the pracharak of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and has remained loyal to the organisation since. In 1994, he joined the BJP as its organisational general secretary for the state of Haryana.

In becoming Haryana’s Chief Minister in 2014, Khattar became the first non-Jat to hold the position since Bhajan Lal’s first term in 1979, beating Congress candidate Surendra Singh Narwhal by a margin of 63,736 votes.

He is seen to be close to senior BJP leaders including Prime Minister Narendra Modi. It is believed that his skills as a strategist, which he honed while working initially with the RSS and then later with the BJP, are held in high regard by the party. In fact, Khattar’s relationship with PM Modi is viewed as one of the chief reasons why the prime minister opted to begin his Haryana campaign in the Karnal constituency in 2014.





Jat Agitation

In February 2016, Khattar faced his greatest test as chief minister when protests broke out in Haryana over OBC reservations. The Jat community, demanding to be included in the OBC quotas, began rioting in Rohtak, and other areas across the state. The entire state came to a standstill for ten whole days during the protests. Violence had escalated to a point that warranted the deployment of the Indian Army and paramilitary forces. According to some reports, 12 people lost their lives, with the value of property damaged estimated to have been just under US$3 billion. In collaboration with the Centre, the Haryana government under Khattar set up a committee to study the Jats’ demands, and consider the possibility of creating a separate agrarian class’.

Under Khattar’s leadership, Haryana has been rewarded for its efforts to improve state infrastructure and cleanliness levels. Yet what is clear is that the Jat community has spoken, and that may spell bad news for Khattar.
