[Orissa Lawyers' Strike] "We Have Little Doubt That The Conduct Of Lawyers Amount To Contempt";SC Summons HCBA President And State Bar Council Chairman

Stating that it had little doubt that the conduct of the lawyers at Orissa, who have been boycotting the Chief Justice's court, amounted to contempt, the Supreme Court today issued notices to the Chairman of the Orissa State Bar Council and the President of the Orissa High Court Bar Association, with directions to appear in person.



The Chairman of the Orissa State Bar Council and President of the Orissa High Court Bar Association will also appear in person", the bench of Justices S K Kaul and K M Joseph said.

The order was passed in light of the law laid down in Krishnakant Tamrakar v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2018) 17 SCC 27, wherein the Apex Court had held that "Since the strikes are in violation of law laid down by this Court, the same amount to contempt and at least the office-bearers of the associations who give call for the strikes cannot disown their liability for contempt."

The Advocates in Orissa have been on strike, protesting against the decision of Collegium clearing the names of some candidate who practice in the Supreme Court, and not clearing the name of other candidates.

The Supreme Court had taken note of this strike in a transfer petition filed by Petitioner, M/s PLR Projects Ltd., seeking transfer of its case out of Orrisa as the strike had rendered it impossible to present his urgent case which was listed before the Chief Justice of the high court.

In today's proceedings, the Supreme Court expressed its concern over the baseless strike initiated by the Advocates over Collegium's decisions and said "This can hardly be a ground for the lawyers to abstain from work". The Attorney General also cited the Law Commission's report in this behalf which revealed that a staggering number of working days were lost every year due to strike by Advocates, that too without any justifiable reasons.

In this regard, the bench asked the counsel appearing for the State of Orissa, Sibo Sankar Misra, to file an affidavit setting out the grounds for going on strike and abstaining from work in the year 2018-19 both in the High Court and in each of the district courts, giving a chart of the number of working days for each district and the number of working days lost.

On being informed that working of courts in Orissa had been brought to a stand-still, the Supreme Court had sought a report on measures for ensuring access to the court, from Advocate Misra in the last hearing.

In today's hearing, Advocate Misra submitted that all police assistance will be made available both for the High Court and for the district courts to ensure that egress and ingress in all court premises is available to willing advocates and litigants.

However remarking on functioning of courts without Advocates, the bench said,

"We will expect the courts to perform their task to the best of their abilities even if lawyers refuse to assist the courts. The litigants cannot be without access to justice and one wonders if an alternative would have to be explored in adjacent states for access to justice, if the advocates continue to be on strike."

Further, the bench issued notice to the Bar Council of India, requesting the Chairman to inform the court as to what steps they proposed to take in respect of the conduct of the advocates who had been violating the directions given in Krishnakant Tamrakar v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2018) 17 SCC 27.

The court also warned the Co-ordination Committee of the Orissa HCBA for taking adverse action against Advocatei Sibo Sankar Misra. Allegedly, the Committee had resolved to suspend Misra from the Bar Association, had written a letter to the Bar Council of Orissa to initiate action against him and had sent a letter to the State Government to remove him from the panel of lawyers apart from initiating contempt proceedings against him.

"In doing so, we have not the least doubt that the said conduct of the lawyers amounts to interfering with the proceedings of this court. As to what consequences should follow for this would also be considered on the next date.
