Telangana RTC strike: Osmania Uni JAC to go ahead with meet despite no permission

Extending solidarity to the protesting TSRTC workers, Osmania University Joint Action Committee, comprising several students’ organisations has planned for a public meeting with civil society members and intellectuals on Friday. Though the University has denied permission for the meeting, the OUJAC has asserted that the meeting would go ahead as planned.

Speaking to TNM, OUJAC leader, Ashappa said, “The meeting will be held as planned at any cost irrespective of whether the administration gives permission or not.”

Ashappa said that the meeting would be presided over by students, civil society members and several union groups, barring political leaders.

He said that the meeting is being held not just to discuss the plight of the TSRTC workers but also about the unemployment in the state and other failures of the government.

“It is extremely sad that the TSRTC workers have been struggling for almost 20 days, and yet the government has overlooked their concerns,” he said.

However, the University informed that they have denied permission to student organisations to hold any kind of public meetings in its campus.

Denying permission, the administration in a statement said, “The premier University in the State of Telangana and India, has been established for the purpose of imparting higher education and conducting research in various disciplines. The primary objective of the University is purely academic and research oriented. The University appeals to the student organisations, research scholars, students, teaching and non-teaching staff to maintain peace in the university and not to disturb the academic ambience.”

Meanwhile, following the intervention of the Telangana High Court, the government agreed to have talks with the protesting TSRTC JAC (Joint Action Committee) with the precondition of not having the proposal of merging the TSRTC with the government. However, the TSRTC JAC is firm on their stand, and have clarified that there won’t be any negotiation without the merger on the meeting agenda.

The TSRTC workers are on an indefinite strike since October 5 asking Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao to merge TSRTC with the government.
