Happy with results, says Priyanka Gandhi even as Cong fails to win any seat in UP bypolls

Despite failing to win even a single assembly seat in the Uttar Pradesh bypolls, Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra has expressed happiness over the results. She also accused the Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) of manipulating results in Gangoh assembly seat with the help of the district administration.

Speaking to the media outside the Bhuemau guest house in Raebareli, Priyanka Gandhi said, "We are happy that our vote percentage in Uttar Pradesh has increased. This is a small achievement for our organisation. On Gangoh assembly seat, our candidate was winning but he was told to leave the counting centre. We demand that the Election Commission should fairly investigate the matter."

Posting a statement on Twitter, she claimed, "The BJP is in so much arrogance that our winning candidate was made to leave the counting centre. A minister tried to change the mandate of the government and called the district magistrate five times to reduce the leads. This is an insult of democracy."

DM - Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) October 24, 2019



Meanwhile, a delegation of the state Congress leaders also protested outside the state election commission office in Lucknow, accusing the BJP of getting the results in Gangoh assembly seat manipulated by using the district administration.

From the Gangoh assembly seat, BJP candidate Kirat Singh defeated Congress leader Noman Masood by a margin of 5,362 votes. Noman had initially taken a good lead but lost in the final rounds of counting.

Speaking to India Today TV, UP BJP spokesperson Rakesh Tripathi said, "Out of the 11 assembly seats, Congress couldn't manage to win from a single constituency. This once again makes it clear that the grand old party has been badly rejected by people."

"The vote share of the party hasn't increased. However, their candidate from the Gangoh seat put up a good fight in his personal capacity. Congress only has one MP in UP. In the upcoming polls, the party will draw a blank because it has got no support from the people."

Meanwhile, after leading the three-day training session of the new team of the Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee (UPCC), Priyanka Gandhi Vadra also visited Amethi where she was welcomed by the party workers and locals at multiple places.

In the bypolls on 11 assembly seats in UP, the BJP won seven seats while its alliance partner Apna Dal (S) won from Pratapgarh seat. The Samajwadi Party also won from Rampur Sadar, Zaidpur and Jalalpur assembly seats. The Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) failed to win even a single seat in the bypolls.
