Karnataka: Fishing to commode, citizens protest in creative ways over state of roads

In Bengaluru, an individual placed a commode on a pothole in the centre of the road. (Photo: Twitter)

The state of roads in Karnataka has been playing a pivotal role in bringing out the lost creativity amongst the people of the state.

Talking about the roads in Bengaluru, apart from traffic, the potholes and craters are the next major issue for the citizens.

Fed up with the continuous apathy from the state authorities to deal with the problem, the people have resorted to unique ways of protesting and showing their discontentment.

In Shivamogga, where CM BS Yediyurappa hails from, due to the dilapidated condition of the roads, some citizens decided to step out and go fishing.

Instead of catching fish from a nearby river, the people were fishing from a water-filled pothole.

What should I say?

I'm happy I'm not the only one with potholes in my city #Bengaluru.

Friends from #Shivamogga also face the same everyday.#potholes pic.twitter.com/KglbJMBUvw Anushka Pandit (@anushkapandit12) October 25, 2019

In Bengaluru, an individual placed a commode on a pothole in the centre of the road in ST Bed Layout, Koramangala.

This image is an apt representation of Bangalore’s infrastructure right now. A pothole so large and dangerous, it had to indicated in a way nobody could miss - and what an elegant solution. pic.twitter.com/Gdxc9a1JTy aarthi parthasarathy (@aarthipartha) October 24, 2019

When it rains in Bengaluru, this is what happens to the roads in various parts of the city.

Tanisha Kannan, a student in the city, said, "Chances of people getting injured due to the potholes are a clear and present danger. With traffic being major issues, these potholes only add to the problem."

Anushka Pandit, another student, said that she cannot imagine counting on her fingers the number of accidents she has seen due to potholes in the city.

"I find myself many a times walking on these potholed roads filled with knee-deep water and its very dangerous since I do not know where I am stepping," she said.
