Karnataka: Students' body protest against government's inaction on civic issues; plant saplings in potholes

A protesting student added that the Yediyurappa-led incumbent government is not concerned about the development of the state. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The protest was staged by the members of Vidyarthi Sanghatane - a students' organisation in Shivamogga Protestors staged protest by planting saplings in potholes of the area A protesting student added that the Yediyurappa-led incumbent government is not concerned about the development of the state

Bengaluru: Criticising the civic body, members of Vidyarthi Sanghatane - a student organisation staged a protest against poor road conditions in Shivamogga area by planting saplings in potholes.

The protestors complained that the four-time Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa and now his son, a three-time Member of Parliament and senior Minister KS Eshwarappa all are from Shivamogga constituency but none of them has done anything to resolve the potholes menace.

A news agency reported, the president of Vidyarthi Sanghatane, Vinay Rajavath said that people are struggling to commute on the street every day. "Be it any party, all have ruined the youth's life as no constructive development has taken place in the area. I have written a letter in my blood stating the issues of Shivamogga including potholes," he added.

Karnataka: Members of Vidyarthi Sanghatane, a student organisation, staged protest against 'poor road conditions' in Shivamogga by planting saplings in potholes. (25.10.19) pic.twitter.com/zbQQFRGPh9 — ANI (@ANI) October 25, 2019

Meanwhile, a protesting student added that the Yediyurappa-led incumbent government is not concerned about the development of the state. He added that this four-time Chief Minister is less brilliant in administration. The students are protesting against the government, holding placards in hands and raising slogans against the BJP government in the state. Protestors are demanding an immediate solution to the pothole menace in the city and several other demands.

Earlier in June this year, a similar protest was staged by the environmental groups against the incumbent government's proposed plan to take water from Sharavathi River. Activists alleged that the proposed plan is unscientific and with these anti-environment projects, the government is causing more damage to the Western Ghats.

Protestors claimed that they are staging the protest to safeguard the river and its water should only be utilised for the people living near the river.
