Now, Congress infighting may be thing of the past

editorial@tribune.com

Sushil Manav

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, October 25

The spectacular performance of the Congress that won 31 seats in the Assembly elections has thrown a scenario that may mean burial of the infighting in the party in the state.

The elections have not only decimated former state party chief Ashok Tanwar, who quit the party after he was replaced with Kumari Selja, but the results also proved a major setback for another faction leader Randeep Surjewala, who lost from Kaithal.

A senior leader of the Congress admitted that one of the major takeaways of the elections was that now only the twin leadership of Kumari Selja and Bhupinder Singh Hooda would hold sway in the party in Haryana.

He said that though Kiran Choudhry has won her seat from Tosham, she is no more the CLP leader. Factionalism has always been a major malaise for the Congress for the past several decades. If the infighting was between the factions led by Bansi Lal and Bhajan Lal in the 1980s, the focus shifted to the Bhajan Lal faction and Bhupinder Singh Hooda faction in the 1990s, lasting till 2005 when the latter was finally named Chief Minister by the party.

Ever since Ashok Tanwar became state president of the Congress in 2014, the focus of factionalism shifted to the group led by him and the one headed by Hooda.

During the past five years when the Congress was in the Opposition, the infighting touched new heights with Hooda, Tanwar, Kiran Choudhry, Randeep Surjewala and Captain Ajay Singh Yadav heading different factions.

The fight between Hooda and Tanwar went to the extent where the latter got injured in an attack and lodged an FIR against close supporters of the former CM during an event in Delhi in 2017. These elections, however, have not only strengthened the position of the party in Vidhan Sabha but would result in the burial of the infighting.

When contacted, Hooda, however, said that infighting was never an issue in the Congress. When his attention was drawn towards the recent demonstration outside UPA president Sonia Gandhi’s residence by Tanwar, he said the former state party chief was now no more in the Congress so he wouldn’t comment on him.
