Shoddy campaign led to defeat in Konni bypoll: Adoor Prakash

Congress leader and Lok Sabha member Adoor Prakash on Saturday said that ineffectual campaigning and, perhaps, the choice of the candidate had helped the Left Democratic Front (LDF) wrench the Konni Assembly constituency in Pathanamthitta district from the United Democratic Front (UDF) after a hiatus of 23 years.

The segment, which had witnessed polarising anti-government protests against the entry of women to Sabarimala last year, had decisively tilted towards the LDF in the Assembly bypolls widely viewed as a litmus test of the acceptability of the Pinarayi Vijayan government.

K.U. Jinesh of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) had defeated P. Mohanraj of the Congress by a margin of 9,953 votes and pushed Bharathiya Janata Party leader K. Surendran, the face of the “Save Sabarimala” campaign, to the third place.

Interacting with journalists here, Mr. Prakash made no secret of his dissatisfaction with the Congress leadership for having chosen Mr. Mohanraj over his nominee, Robin Peter. He said he had backed Mr Peter above caste or communal considerations and solely on his winnability factor. However, Mr Mohanraj was a competent candidate and senior leader, he said.

Mr Prakash lamented about the erosion of UDF votes in a constituency long considered a Congress bastion. He had won the seat first in 1996, defeating A. Padmakumar of the LDF by a margin of 886 votes.

Mr Prakash has held on to Konni since and had steadily increased his margin to 20,749 votes in 2016 Assembly elections. Mr Prakash relinquished the seat after he was elected to the Lok Sabha from Attingal constituency this year.

He said the Congress should examine its loss in Konni and make necessary amends.

The MLA elect from Aroor, Shanimol Usman, who fought a robust campaign against the LDF in its bastion, also blamed shoddy electioneering responsible for the Congress failure in Vattiyoorkavu and Konni. She said the UDF had dominated the segments in the Lok Sabha elections. However, it had lost ground to the LDF, which had a headstart on the campaign.

Meanwhile, the Political Affairs Committee of the Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) has deferred its post-poll analysis meeting from October 27 to October 30.
