Haryana: BJP dumps Gopal Kanda after criticism; to have post-poll alliance only with JJP

File picture: Gopal Kanda | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Gopal Kanda had on Thursday evening extended his unconditional support to the BJP for the purpose of forming the Haryana government Gopal Kanda was a minister in the Congress-led Haryana government when he was accused of abetting his employee's suicide Congress had slammed the BJP, accusing the party of doublespeak

Chandigarh: Amidst the massive uproar over controversial Sirsa MLA Gopal Goyal Kanda’s backing to the BJP for the purpose of government formation in Haryana, the party on Saturday cleared that it would not take any support from the Haryana Lokhit Party leader.

“There is no question of including Gopal Kanda in the government, neither are we taking his support,” confirmed Haryana Health Minister Anil Vij, who won from his stronghold Ambala Cantonment seat in the October 21 Assembly Elections.

Later, Union minister Ravi Shankar Prasad also said that the BJP will not take Kanda's support.

"I want to clarify one thing that the BJP is not going to take the support of Kanda," Prasad told the media.

On Thursday night, the BJP had sealed an alliance deal with the less than 12-month old Jannayak Janata Party (JJP)-led by Dushyant Chautala. The JJP has won 10 seats.

The BJP had been facing a lot of flak after reports suggested that the party was enlisting Kanda’s support after falling short of the magical figure of 46 by six seats. The BJP won 40 of the 90 seats up for grabs in Haryana.

Soon after the results showed that the BJP has failed to get a majority on its own, Kanda, the businessman-turned-politician, extended his unconditional support to the party for the purpose of forming the state government.

However, Congress grabbed the chance to slam the BJP, accusing the party of doublespeak.

"I think you should look at the statements made by Narendra Modi and Amit Shah at the time when Gopal Kanda was a minister in the government in Haryana when we forced him to resign after registration of a case and also removed him from ministership,” Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala told reporters in Delhi.

Even BJP leader Uma Bharti tweeted to voice her concern over the matter and recalled the controversy in which Kanda was involved when he was Haryana’s home minister in Bhupinder Singh Hooda-led Congress government in 2012.

Geetika Sharma, an employee of Kanda's then MDLR airlines, was found dead at her residence in Ashok Vihar in northwest Delhi on August 5, 2012. 23-year-old Geetika had left a suicide note in which she mentioned that the reason behind her decision to end her life was "harassment" by Kanda and one of his employees.

The Delhi Police later booked Kanda in the case. He is currently out on bail.

Six months later, Geetika Sharma's mother had also allegedly killed herself and Kanda was once again accused of abetment to suicide.

The controversy forced Kanda to resign. Interestingly, the BJP, which was in the opposition in Haryana at the time, had carried out protests against Kanda, calling for his arrest.
