'Chaddi baniyan' gang members rob veda training school head in Hyderabad

Dacoits decamp with valuables worth over Rs 2 lakh. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights 'Chaddi baniyan' gang robs Veda training school head in Hayathnagar Dacoits decamp with valuables worth over Rs 2 lakh Robbers were carrying iron rods and sticks

Hyderabad: The terror of dacoits has gripped parts of Hyderabad. In a fresh incident of dacoity, armed robbers allegedly belonging to 'chaddi baniyan' gang looted Veda training school head in Hayathnagar area of Hyderabad.

The robbery took place on Friday between 1-2 am at Kuntloor Veda Pathshala.

According to a report, the police suspect that the robbers belong to the inter-state 'chaddi gang' as they were wearing shorts.

The armed robbers decamped with valuables worth Rs 2.2 lakh. The robbers broke into the Veda school in the night after threatening the students.

Hayathnagar Detective Inspector, CH Srinivas, said the robbers struck when the training school head Shankara Sharma was inside the facility.

As the five robbers entered the house, they tied the hands and legs of a 14-year-old student, who was sleeping in the hall.

Later, the dacoits woke up Sharma and his wife and asked them to hand over all the valuables.

The robbers, who were in shorts and vests, were carrying iron rods and sticks.

The victims said the robbers were speaking in Hindi and took away 60 grams of gold jewellery, and Rs 40,000 in cash.

In August this year, Rachakonda police arrested one of the most notorious criminal trios from the 'Chaddi' gang in Andhra Pradesh. Law enforcement officers managed to nab the trio consisting Bharath Singh, Ravoji and kingpin Badhiya at the Adibatle in Ranga Reddy district.

With the arrest of members of the 'Chaddi' gang who are natives of the Dahod district in Gujarat, police claimed to have solved 28 cases of burglary and one of dacoity.

At the time of the arrest, law enforcement agencies recovered a kg of silver, 100gm gold, and Rs 3,000 in cash. In addition, police also managed to secure information about three active gangs with a similar modus operandi.

Known for their bizarre antics, members of the gang had terrorised parts of Greater Hyderabad where they went on robbery sprees wearing merely a vest and underwear. While they were never caught, their movements were captured and tracked by CCTV cameras installed across the localities where they committed the robberies.

The gang was busted after multiple police teams spent six months looking for them in five states. Upon interrogation, members of the gang claimed to be labourers from Madhya Pradesh. However, post-questioning, they later confessed to being part of one of the Chaddi gangs hailing from Dahod in Madhya Pradesh.
