Out on bail DK Shivakumar given rousing welcome by Congress, says 'will fight for justice'

DK Shivakumar | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights DK Shivakumar received warm welcome from his supporters who had gathered outside the Kempegowda airport to receive him JD-S leader and former Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy was also present They have made me stronger and there is no question of weakening, he said

Bengaluru: After being granted bail by Delhi High Court in a money laundering case, senior Karnataka Congress leader DK Shivakumar said he will not surrender and will fight for justice.

They have made me stronger and there is no question of weakening, he said while talking to reporters in Bengaluru.

The Congress leader received a warm welcome from his supporters who had gathered outside the Kempegowda airport to receive him. Those present also included JD-S leader and former Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy.

Shivakumar was granted bail on October 23 after which the Enforcement Directorate (ED), which is probing the case, filed an appeal in the Supreme Court against the Delhi High Court order.

Giving clarification on supporters receiving Shivakumar, Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) President Dinesh Gundu Rao said he was welcomed for the work he has done for the people and the party of the state.

Earlier this month, a demonstration was held in front of Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman's residence by the Youth Congress alleging 'vendetta politics' against Shivakumar by the BJP.

The protesters, who were detained soon after they had launched the stir, alleged that the Centre is misusing central investigative agencies to target opposition political leaders. Later, they were released after a brief detention, reported IANS.

Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi also cornered the Narendra Modi-led BJP government accusing it of indulging in vendetta politics and using the investigation agencies to target individuals selectively.

“The arrest of DK Shivakumar is another example of the vendetta politics unleashed by the government, using agencies like the ED/CBI and a pliant media to selectively target individuals,” tweeted Rahul Gandhi.

Shivakumar was arrested after the agency started its probe under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) in September 2018 on the basis of an FIR filed by the Income Tax department against the senior Karnataka Congress leader. The senior Karnataka Congress leader filed a petition in the Karnataka High Court challenging the summons issued by the ED in December 2018; however, it was rejected by the court.

After his arrest, Shivakumar asserted that he was fully cooperating with the agency adding that he had done nothing wrong. The 57-year-old leader had at that time blamed the BJP for political vendetta.

The Income Tax department in its report has accused Shivakumar and his alleged associate SK Sharma of illegal transactions involving huge amounts of unaccounted money on a regular basis through 'hawala' channels with the help of other three accused.
