Black day in support of Kashmiris today in Punjab

LAHORE: The Punjab government in collaboration with the federal government is holding Black Day on Sunday (today) to express solidarity with Kashmiris and against Indian atrocities.

Chairing a meeting of Kashmir Committee Punjab, law minister and committee chairman Basharat Raja said the longest and worst curfew in Indian occupied Kashmir was extremely deplorable. He said the issue of Kashmir at Punjab level was being highlighted effectively worldwide under instructions of Prime Minister Imran Khan and Chief Minister Usman Bazdar.

The meeting was informed that a website created for the activities of the Kashmir Committee and a petition based on one million digital signatures in favour of Kashmiris would be inaugurated by Chief Minister Usman Buzdar soon.

The Kashmir Committee decided that the transport department would run buses in each district with banners and posters based on awareness messages of the same design.

Secretary to the committee Raja Jahangir Anwar said an awareness campaign on Kashmir would be carried out on cable networks in all districts. Raja Basharat set up an administrative committee headed by the secretary information to make arrangements for a Kashmir Conference in Lahore.

At the conference, the Kashmir experts, intellectuals and human rights activists would be invited. The committee agreed with the proposal to construct a Kashmir monument in Lahore and designate Kashmir park and Kashmir roads in every divisional headquarters of Punjab.

Committee members PML-N MPA Dr Mazher Hussain, MPA Mahendra Singh Pal, secretary information and culture Raja Jahangir Anwar, and other officers concerned attended the meeting.

PML-N: The PML-N will hold rallies across the country to express solidarity with the Kashmiris on Sunday (today).

PML-N secretary general Ahsan Iqbal has appealed to the party workers to observe a black day on Oct 27 against India for occupying Kashmir.

He said on the direction of party supremo Nawaz Sharif and its president Shahbaz Sharif, the workers would hold rallies in their respective districts against India to express solidarity with the Kashmiris living in the occupied valley.

Published in Dawn, October 27th, 2019
