At Least 63 Dead In Anti-Government Protests In Iraq As People March For Justice

Thousands of protesters have been taking to the streets in protests to demand jobs and better public services in Iraq.

According to Ali al Bayati, a member of the governmental Iraqi Commission for Human Rights, clashes broke out between protesters and police that killed 63 people and more than thousands wounded, the Efe news reported.

Security force members were among the causalities, the interior ministry said, while denying that police have used live ammunition against protesters.

An injured protestor is rushed to a hospital during a demonstration in Baghdad, Iraq, Saturday, Oct. 26, 2019. Iraqi protesters converged on a central square in the capital Baghdad on Saturday as security forces erected blast walls to prevent them from reaching a heavily fortified government area after a day of violence that killed scores. AP PHOTO

Late on Saturday, authorities cut power to the area of Baghdad that includes Tahrir Square and riot police moved in to dismantle the tents in which protesters had planned to spend a second night.

Around 30 people were hurt in the operation to clear the camp, an interior ministry official further said.

Early on Friday, hundreds of protesters rallied in the square on the eastern side of the Tigris River and tried to cross the nearby al-Jumhouriyah Bridge to reach the Green Zone, the administrative centre of the Iraqi government.

Protesters, most of them young people, waved Iraqi flags and chanted slogans such as “They are all thieves,” apparently referring to the country’s political class.

A demonstrator holds a religious flag during a protest over corruption, lack of jobs, and poor services, in Baghdad. REUTERS PHOTO

One of the protesters, an unemployed 26-year-old university graduate named Ahmed Abdalamir, said that Iraqis have run out of patience with the “lying” government and its poor management of the oil-rich nation’s resources.

“I live in a wealthy country and the wealth goes to the people in power and their parties. But the ordinary citizen has nothing, only the lack of everything,” he said.

Among the many people bringing food and drink to the protesters in Tahrir Square was Ebtisam Abdala, 23, who graduated from university three years ago and can’t find a job.

She said that she and her mother prepared food for the people in the square out of support for those “who demand the right of all Iraqis to leave in a worthy country.”

This week’s protests came days after influential Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr said that people had the right to take to the streets.
