Russia fills power vacuum in Middle East

As the United States withdrew its troops from Syria this week, Russia showed its presence in the Turkey- Syria border, with President Vladimir Putin seen as a coming kingmaker in the region, after what is seen as a major setback to the US.

The mood of the Syrian Kurds who were badly affected by the US pullout was seen by their throwing potatoes and stones at the departing US convoys, showing an ignominious close to US efforts in the region; following President Donald Trump’s original green light to Turkey to carry out attacks against the Kurds on the Turkey-Syria border.

With uncertainty remaining in the future for Syria, the Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Russian President Putin have filled a vacuum left by the US exit. The 120-hour Syrian ceasefire brokered by the US last weekend, ended just as Erdogan met with Putin in Sochi, Russia. Analysts see the agreement reached by them would leave the US on the sidelines and be to the detriment of the Kurds who fought alongside the US against ISIS.

According to the US deal with Turkey, Syrian Kurds will leave what had been a buffer zone of about 20 miles into northern Syria from the Turkey-Syria border. Turkey will maintain control of the area set aside in the ceasefire it reached with the Kurds, while Russia and the Syrian government will move into and secure the affected region.

While there is continuing criticism of President Trump’s move to support Turkey in attacking the Kurds, who helped the US troops infighting and defeating ISIS forces in the region, many lives being lost and over 300,000 people displaced from the Kurdish North Eastern region of Syria; President Trump has addressed the US nation stating the Turkey ceasefire as ‘permanent’ and stating the withdrawal of the sanctions imposed a week earlier on Turkish steel exports and key Turkish persons.

Historically, Turkey and Russia have been on opposite sides of the Syrian war: Moscow backs Syrian President Assad and Turkey has supported the anti-regime opposition. But they’ve been working together in the Astana process, a peace process between Russia, Iran, and Turkey.

The talks in Sochi saw Turkey’s and Russia’s interests aligned. Turkey wanted to secure the 20 km buffer zone and evict the Kurds. Russia wants to consolidate the territorial gains for Assad in the region and prove that it’s the powerbroker in the region. Erdogan and Putin have come emerged with a deal to secure a 20-mile buffer zone into northern Syria near the Turkish border.

Kurdish forces would be removed from that area, while Russian and Turkish forces will conduct joint patrols in the areas controlled by Turkey; and once the Kurds leave, the two sides will patrol the area jointly. Russian forces have already moved into the region.

The deal also says Russia and Turkey will facilitate the return of refugees to the area, which is Part of Erdogan’s motivation for the invasion of northern Syria, to carve out a safe zone to relocate some 3.6 million Syrian refugees currently in Turkey.

Trump’s move here is seen as fitting with his ‘America First’ doctrine, a campaign promise in 2016 to bring US troops home. Trump has now declared victory, and made it clear that Syria is not a region of US interest. “Let someone else fight over this long bloodstained sand,” he said.

Canada – Trudeau back

Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau lost the majority in the Canadian Parliament in this week’s election, but remained the leader of the Liberal Party having the largest number of members in the parliament. Winning a second term as Canada’s Prime Minister, his narrow victory means he will lead a minority government.

The Liberals must now rely on other parties to govern. A top Trudeau ally lost his seat and the Liberals were wiped out in two western provinces, putting more strain on national unity. Despite losing the popular vote to Andrew Scheer’s Conservatives, the Liberals ended up with more seats than any other party. The New Democrats, their most likely partners, are likely to demand action on a list of priorities such as increased social spending.

Political analysts see his future parliamentary activity moving on a case-by-case basis, possibly obtaining support most likely from the left-leaning New Democrats. Trudeau is expected to present his new Cabinet on Nov. 20 and has promised that a middle-class tax cut would be the first order of business.

Four years after the Liberal leader swept to power promising “sunny ways” after nearly a decade of Conservative rule, Trudeau struggled to inspire voters as he campaigned for re-election.

He was endorsed by Barack Obama in the last days of the campaign, but his standing as one of the few remaining progressive leaders in a major democracy was undermined by the emergence of black face images by him, and strong criticism of his handling of a major corruption inquiry, and concessions for an oil pipeline project.

In a country heavily reliant on natural resources, his efforts to strike a balance on the environment and economy have been criticized by the right and the left. His government brought in a carbon tax to fight the climate crisis – but also paid billions to rescue a stalled pipeline project, strongly opposed by voters in the affected areas.

UK: December elections?

After Prime Minister Boris Johnson saw his first victory in Parliament when the vote on the second reading of the Brexit Bill was passed with a majority of 30, he soon saw a huge defeat in the parliamentary time-table to discuss the Bill in detail.

Johnson’s Cabinet is now divided over how to proceed with Brexit, as the prime minister faces the stark choice of pressing ahead with his deal or gambling his premiership on a pre-Christmas general election. Boris Johnson sees increasing public support for his Brexit deal that has been supported by the EU, and wants to move for a quick election, even in December.

After an inconclusive meeting with Labour and Opposition leader Jeremy Corbyn on Wednesday, in an attempt to agree an acceptable timetable for parliament to consider the bill, the prime minister told MPs that he was awaiting the decision of the EU over whether to grant an extension before settling his next move on Brexit.

Some Cabinet ministers, including the Northern Ireland secretary, are cautious about asking for an election. Some Tory MPs have serious misgivings on an immediate election. The Conservative parliamentary party is split 50/50, and there are many concerns about a speedy election.

However, hard supporters of the Johnson Brexit deal fear that allowing Parliament to bring amendments to the Bill would lead to amendments that are unacceptable. They support Johnson’s thinking on a quick general election.

Members of the Eurosceptic European Research Group (ERG) are also nervous about the legislation being amended in a way that they would find unacceptable – such as obliging the government to seek a customs union.

After Johnson’s meeting with Corbyn on Wednesday, Downing Street briefed that Corbyn had “made clear Labour have no policy except more delays” and hinted heavily that Johnson’s next move would be to ask MPs to support a December election.

Israel – Netanyahu Out

Israel’s President has tasked the former military chief Benny Gantz with forming a government after Benjamin Netanyahu failed in his efforts following an inconclusive election last month.

Neither Gantz’s Blue and White coalition nor the incumbent Prime Minister Netanyahu’s Likud party came out with a clear majority, but the expectations are the opposition leader would find it easier to form a coalition through deals with disparate political parties.

“I promised that I would establish a liberal unity government and that is what I intend to do,” said Gantz at a formal ceremony at the president’s official residence on Wednesday evening. “The government that I will establish will serve all citizens of Israel.”

Gantz will have 28 days to try, after which parliament can nominate a third candidate. If no contender can end the political crisis, the country will face an unprecedented third election in a year.

This is the first time in more than a decade that anyone but Netanyahu has been given a chance to head the Israeli government.

An end to the Netanyahu era would be an extraordinary moment in Israeli politics, as he has led the country for a record-breaking total of more than 13 years. The move does not necessarily conclude his political career. However, the stalemate has wounded the prime minister, being deeply embroiled in three potential corruption cases. Israel’s attorney general is expected to announce in the coming weeks if he plans to indict.

India – State Polls

India’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has lost its majority in a key state election at Haryana, and has reduced its majority in Maharashtra.

In the northern state of Haryana, the BJP has won or is leading in 38 seats, eight seats short to have a simple majority to retain power in the state. The BJP with its ally, Shiv Sena, retains its power in the western state of Maharashtra, where they are expected to lose 26 seats earlier held.

These results are a setback for Prime Minister Narendra Modi who led the BJP to a resounding victory, with a huge majority in the national elections to the Lok Sabha in April this year. PM Modi led the BJP’s campaign in these states with the key issue being the decision to strip the autonomy earlier enjoyed by the Indian administered state of Kashmir, which remains the strongest political slogan of the BJP and its supporters. Many have seen these two polls as a referendum of the BJP’s and Modi’s Kashmir policy.

Both Maharashtra and Haryana saw aggressive campaigning by PM Modi and several federal ministers. Shiv Sena also held rallies across Maharashtra where it’s a key regional ally. The BJP used its Kashmir move to tell voters that the party had the ability to take tough decisions on national security. It largely relied on Mr. Modi’s policy of strong nationalism, with little talk of local state issues.

On Thursday this week, local elections were also held in the Indian-administered Kashmir. Results are not yet out, but it was generally a much questioned poll with most of the state’s political leaders in detention, and a continuing communications blockade in most of the state.

Many opposition leaders who are active called the Kashmir elections a ‘sham’ or a ‘joke on democracy’.
