Don’t misuse freedom of expression: U T Khader’s R-Day message to youth

Mangaluru, Jan 26: While decrying calls to bring out changes to the Constitution, Minister for Urban Development and Dakshina Kannada in-charge U.T. Khader on Saturday asked youngsters not to misuse right to expression to speak against the interests of the country.

Speaking at the Republic Day celebrations at Nehru Maidan here, he said the Constitution was framed on the principles of equality and social justice, and it protects the fundamental rights of every individual. However, he said, right to freedom of expression does not provide the right to speak against the nation and its interest. Youth should guard against speaking or writing in a way that will create unrest and disturb the secular fabric of the nation, he said.

Affirming the government’s commitment towards the all-round development of Karnataka, the Minister said short-term farm loans to the extent of Rs. 1 lakh taken by 13,117 farmers in Dakshina Kannada have been waived so far, at a cost of Rs. 105 crore. There are 67,626 beneficiaries in the district and Rs. 562 crore needs to paid to clear their loans. The government is spending Rs. 69 crore towards flood relief work in the district, he added.

Mr. Khader said 11 vented dams were being constructed at a cost of Rs. 265.25 crore, while Rs. 23.5 crore was being spent on four-laning and other roadwork in Dharmasthala for the upcoming Mahamastakabhisheka in February. Following the success of the Mangaluru River Festival held on the banks of Phalguni river, more such events will be held by the riverside, the Minister added.

Earlier in the day, Mr. Khader hoisted the national flag and received a guard of honour. There was march-past by KSRP, City Police, firemen, road safety teams, National Cadet Corps, Bharat Scouts and Guides, and Bharat Seva Dal volunteers.

The Minister presented the Sarvottama awards to Deputy Director of Women and Child Welfare Sundara Poojary and five other government employees. Home Guard Abdul Gafooor, police inspector Ganesh, and police SI Manjunath were among the six personnel felicitated for their work in Jodupala following landslips and flash floods. Six KSRTC drivers were felicitated for accident-free driving in past five years.

Students from Sharada Vidyalaya demonstrated their skills in Mallakhambha. There were cultural programmes by students of Canara CBSE School and Amurta Vidyalaya.


