Delhi: Accused Posing As Policemen Rob Three Foreign Nationals

Three foreign nationals on Sunday were looted by unidentified men near the China Market in Karol Bagh, Delhi. The accused robbed the French citizens of 47,000 Euros. According to the complaint filed, the accused were posing as policemen. The investigation is being conducted.

The incident took place at night at around 10.15 pm. The accused came in a White Swift Desire car with tinted windows and stopped the foreigners and forcefully tried to check their bags. When the foreigners refused to show their bag the accused snatched the bag and ran away.

According to the locals, the accused even attacked the foreigners with a blade, tearing their clothes. One of them tried to oppose the accused in the car but was dragged away as they dove their car and ran away. The locals then called the Delhi police and informed them about the incident. The accused reportedly belong to an Iranian gang in Delhi. The entire incident has been captured on CCTV. The police are searching for the accused.

Talking to the media the locals said, "The crime in Delhi has increased in larger numbers, especially with the traders and businessmen. Every day you can see the news in media regarding daily crime happening in the state."

READ | Weekend Plans: Things To Do In Delhi To Escape Boredom

Taxi driver dupes US man

Earlier on October 22, a taxi driver in Delhi has been arrested for allegedly duping a US national of more than Rs 90,000 by lying to him about shutdown the city due to festivals, the police said on Monday. US national George Vanmeter, who landed in Delhi on October 18, was allegedly convinced by the driver and his aides that there was a shutdown in the city due to festivals. He was even taken to a fake travel agency where he was made to re-book his tour plan.

In his complaint, the man alleged that the taxi driver offered to take him to a hotel in Paharganj, where he had a booking, but later stopped near a road blocked by police barricades. "He told the tourist that the roads are closed due to the festive season and took him to a fake tour agency in Connaught Place. The staff there told him that the city was closed and even connected him to a 'representative' of the hotel in Paharganj who told him that the property was closed," Deputy Commissioner of Police Eish Singhal said.

READ | Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal Kickstarts Festivities On Diwali

Not convinced by the driver, George Vanmeter boarded an auto-rickshaw. The auto driver also told him that there was a shutdown in the city. "The accused then took the tourist to another fake tour agency where the staff helped the man book hotels in Jaipur and Agra. He paid them the money and went to Agra," police said.

The fraud came to light after he reached Agra and called the hotel in Delhi to ask for a refund. Police have arrested the taxi driver and filed a case of cheating against him.

READ | Delhi & Noida: AQI Drops Post Diwali As People Defy Cracker Ban

READ | Delhi: 200 Fire-related Incidents Reported On The 'Festival Of Lights'

(With agency inputs)
