Under no circumstances will any vacancy for Divyangjan be filled by any other categories, says Railway Ministry

A day after the sit-in-protest at Delhi’s Mandi House by the persons with benchmark disabilities (PwBD) over alleged irregularities in railway recruitment exams, the Indian Railways on Monday assured that candidates would be appointed on merit.

The protests began over Railway Recruitment Board (RRB) Group D jobs in 2018. Several ‘Divyangjan’ (differently abled) students have been protesting since October 23 citing irregularities in the filling up of posts reserved for PwBD in the recent Level-1 recruitment exercise.

Indian Railways had issued a centralized recruitment notification in February 2018 for around 63,000 posts. The notification also included posts for persons with benchmark disabilities (PwBD).

“The qualified PwBD candidates would be appointed as per their merit/turn in their respective Railway zones as per vacancies notified for the different classes of Divyangjan. Any unfilled vacancies would not be filled by other non-PwBD candidates,” the railway ministry in a statement.

Based on the provisions of the revised PwBD Act that mandated 4% reservation for PwBD categories (including newly introduced multi disability category), an additional window was notified for candidates to apply. Followed by this a clear 1% distribution of vacancies for each of the four PwBD categories for the recruitment exercise was made increasing the total number of vacancies reserved for PwBD to around 2500, according to the Indian Railways.

The protesters had filed a complaint before the Court of Chief Commissioner For Persons With Disabilities (Divyangjan) about this revision in the vacancy percentage and specific grievances of some Divyangjan candidates in some railway zones as regards communication on qualifying marks and calling for document verification

“A detailed meeting with representatives of the protesters with senior Railway Board officers was also held in the office of Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice on October 24, to understand the grievances, explain the railways’ position and actions taken, and assure the protesters that all grievances would be examined and those genuine addressed in a time-bound manner,” the ministry said.

The ministry also said the recruitment process was still underway and more PwBD candidates, would come up for appointment in the coming weeks. “Under no circumstances will any vacancy for Divyangjan be filled by any other categories. In certain circumstances, where the vacancies of PwBDs are not filled up, the same is carried forward to the next recruitment cycle/notification,” the ministry added.

SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON
