Mysterious memory of Bengaluru

Mysore

Veerappan

Whichever way the eye turned, dead bodies were to be seen. During August the average number of dead picked up daily in the streets of Bangalore was twenty. From September 1 to 10 the number had increased to forty-one. When troops were marched to the shooting butts for rifle practice the soldiers were horrified with the sight of bodies of men, women, and children, lying exposed and partly devoured by dogs and jackals.”Found in The Famine Campaign in Southern India, 1876-1878, this horror scene from 1877 belongs to the terrible tragedy that the British government did little to avert. The famine deaths which wiped off a fifth of Bengaluru’s population would have hurt the city deeply. The amnesia about this mind-numbing episode in the popular imagination and even in historical discussions of Bengaluru among scholars however is mysterious and totally unforgivable.The outbreak of plague in Bengaluru in 1888, which took the lives of around 2,500 people is however remembered. The shrines of several deities who were beseeched for protection against plague still exist in the city. The attack of Spanish influenza in 1918, which took between 25 million to 50 million lives worldwide, left over 2000 dead in Bengaluru, is forgotten. (Historians suspect the official figure forto be an underestimate).The murder of Srinivas Iyengar, a high-profile lawyer, and seven members of his family in Bengaluru by three dacoit clients of his in 1954 lingered in popular memory for many years. Whereas the murder of nearly fifty poor women in Bengaluru by a serial murderer in the early nineties hardly registered in the popular imagination. The Venus Circus fire tragedy which claimed 92 lives, most of whom were children, and left close to 300 injured in February, 1981 and the death of 300 individuals in poor neighbourhoods a few months later, in July, from drinking poisonous hooch are still remembered. The assassination of Gauri Lankesh, the intrepid journalist and activist, by members of Hindu right-wing outfits in 2017 and the suicide of Siddhartha, the Bengaluru-based founder of Café Coffee Day, both of which left the city, and indeed the country at large, shaken, albeit in vastly dissimilar ways, are likely to endure in the popular memories of the city.A city that had not witnessed mob violence in the past, Bengaluru came to see two major riots in the 1990s. In 1991, in response to an interim water-sharing order of the Cauvery Tribunal, violence broke out against Tamil speakers in Bengaluru, which left over 20 dead and destroyed much property. And, in 1994, riots hit the city again when a news bulletin in Urdu was introduced in the state-run television channel. What started as protests by pro-Kannada activist groups became communalized with the involvement of right-wing Hindu outfits and turned violent in a few poor Muslim neighbourhoods, leaving 25 persons dead and nearly 350 injured. Both of these tragic episodes are living memories in Bengaluru.The abduction of the Kannada film superstar, Rajkumar, by, a smuggler, in July 2000 brought much tension into the city. The three months of his captivity in the forest saw intense political manoeuvring to secure his release and much animated media commentary the entire time. Newly arrived settlers and visitors to Bengaluru would have wondered how a city’s attention could be given over to the kidnapping of a film star. But the film star in question was Rajkumar. The kidnap of anyone else wouldn’t have mattered as much to Bengaluru. The episode is likely to endure in the city’s memory.Three years ago, in 2016, around a lakh and twenty-five thousand workers in garment factories, most of whom were women, took to the streets of Bengaluru. They were protesting a proposal of the Union government to freeze a portion of their Employee Provident Fund until they turned 58 years old. Theirs was a dignified and non-violent protest. The burning of buses and other acts of violence, which the police confirmed were done by outsiders, distracted attention away from their demands. Indeed, the police themselves had taken to force to disperse them in many places. This extraordinary event which saw much alarmist media commentary had made visible a large workforce which had been marginalized by the near takeover of the IT sector of the image of the city’s economic life. But the visibility was ephemeral: the moving protest episode didn’t go on to find space in the popular memory of the city.
