World News Quick Take

World News Quick Take

Agencies





AUSTRALIA

‘Savage’ killer jailed

An Australian man was yesterday jailed for 36 years for the rape and murder of Arab-Israeli student Aya Maasarwe in Melbourne. Codey Herrmann, now 21, is to spend at least 30 years in prison for the January murder that Victorian Supreme Court judge Elizabeth Hollingworth described as a “savage attack.” The body of 21-year-old Maasarwe was found by passers-by near a tram stop in outer Melbourne just hours after she was attacked on her way home. She was killed after getting off a tram near the university where she was completing a year-long exchange. There was an outpouring of grief among Melbournians, who held emotional vigils after the murder, with thousands of protesters taking to the streets calling for an end to violence against women.

INDIA

Toddler stuck in well dies

The body of a two-year-old boy trapped 26m down a well since Friday was recovered yesterday, authorities said. Sujith Wilson was the second toddler in four months to grab nationwide attention after falling into the 30cm diameter pipe while playing near his home in Tiruchirappalli District, Tamil Nadu State. A post-mortem examination would be carried out to determine the cause of death, district official S. Sivarasu told reporters. Rescuers said Wilson was unconscious but breathing until Sunday morning, but they had been unable to check his condition since then as he had slipped further down.

SINGAPORE

UK ex-headmaster jailed

A British former headmaster of an international school in China has been jailed for 10 months after admitting possession and consumption of methamphetamine, officials said yesterday. Damien Michael Charnock, 60, used to be the head of Dulwich College Shanghai, a branch of the exclusive London private school. Police arrested Charnock in March at an apartment and discovered bags containing the drug and a glass contraption for smoking it, court documents showed. Charnock pleaded guilty to three drug charges, and the attorney-general’s chambers confirmed he was jailed on Friday.

CAMBODIA

Search on for missing Briton

Police said they had questioned at least 20 people, but made no arrests as they continued the search for a 21-year-old British woman who went missing last week. Divers, land-based teams and police drones have been enlisted in the search for Amelia Bambridge, who was last seen on Thursday leaving for a beach party on the island of Koh Rong, which is popular with backpackers. Preah Sihanouk Provincial Police Chief Chuon Narin said at least 20 people had been questioned on whether they met Bambridge the night of the party. He added that he feared she might have drowned.

AUSTRALIA

Shark attacks two Britons

A shark yesterday bit off a British tourist’s foot and mauled another British tourist’s leg, as the men snorkeled on the Great Barrier Reef, officials said. The men aged 22 and 28 had been on a snorkeling tour in the Whitsunday Islands when they were attacked, tour organizer ZigZag Whitsundays said. They were brought 11km bo boat to the mainland town of Airlie Beach where paramedics were waiting for them, Queensland Ambulance Service spokeswoman Mel Mangan said. They were then flown by helicopter south to a hospital in the city of Mackay in serious, but stable conditions, RACQ CQ Rescue said.

EL SALVADOR

US extends stay for 190,000

The US has extended a measure allowing 190,000 Salvadoreans to remain and work legally in the country, President Nayib Bukele said on Monday. Temporary protected status was created in 2001 and granted to Salvadoreans already in the US following two devastating earthquakes in El Salvador. The status was scheduled to end on Jan. 2, but has been extended by a year. About 3 million Salvadoreans live in the US. Last year, they sent home almost US$5.5 billion in remittances to family members, accounting for close to 16 percent of GDP.

GUINEA-BISSAU

President axes government

The president on Monday announced that he is dismissing the government with immediate effect, throwing the country into further chaos and casting doubt over next month’s election. President Jose Mario Vaz’s decree, read out over national radio, said that the “serious political crisis” in the country “prevents the normal operation of some institutions” and led to his decision to dismiss the government. Vaz’s five-year mandate ended on June 23, but he is staying on temporarily under a mediation plan forged by the 15-nation Economic Community of West African States. The Supreme Court this month said that it had approved 12 candidates, including Vaz.

UKRAINE

Driver trades fares for songs

An Uber driver is offering his passengers rides for a song by refunding their bill if they appear on his YouTube channel performing their favorite tunes. Andriy Turko has fitted a karaoke system in his cab in a drive to discover new musical talent in his home city of Vinnytsia. Anyone who agrees to be filmed using it for his “Crazytaho Karaoke” channel gets their Uber fee paid back in cash. “They are people who sing songs, they are people who want to sing, but their talent is not discovered yet,” the 41-year-old former nightclub master of ceremonies said. “Maybe they used to write poems or compose songs. And I want to offer those people an open platform.”

UNITED STATES

People flock to ‘Joker’ steps

Move over, Rocky, there is a new stairway to climb. A set of outdoor steps in the Bronx has become a tourist attraction in the past few weeks since the release of the movie Joker. In the movie, lead actor Joaquin Phoenix dances as he goes down the steps, wearing a bright red suit and clown makeup. These days, residents using the steps are being joined by tourists trying to recreate the scene. The visitors have been taking selfies and some have even shown up in costume, but not everyone is thrilled with the upsurge in popularity. “We live in the neighborhood, it’s taking up all of our time, we’re all being inconvenienced,” resident Cathyrine Spencer said.

UNITED STATES

Bus extracted from sinkhole

A bus that was partially swallowed when a sinkhole opened during morning rush hour in downtown Pittsburgh has been removed from the hole. The Port Authority of Allegheny County said that the driver and a 56-year-old female passenger were aboard the bus when it plunged into the hole on Monday morning. The passenger was treated at a hospital and released, officials said. Pittsburgh Public Safety Department Director Wendell Hissrich said that the bus was sitting on three power lines, two of them 22,000-volt lines. There are also fiber-optic cables, damage to which could affect communications in the tri-state area, he said. The lines and pipes are to be assessed and repaired.
