PMC Bank scam: RBI officials asked us if we have lead about any bank interested in mergers, says depositor

Depositors of the PMC Bank display placards during a protest over the bank’s crisis in Mumbai. (PTI)

A SEVEN-MEMBER delegation of Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative (PMC) Bank depositors met Reserve Bank of India (RBI) officials on Tuesday while several other account holders protested outside RBI’s Bandra Kurla Complex (BKC) office. However, failing to get any assurance from the officials, the account holders decided to hold another protest at Azad Maidan on Wednesday.

“We put forth some points and sought some answers. We expected them to have a plan, but they seem to have just shrugged off the entire issue,” said Deven Oberoi, a depositor who attended the meeting. “They were asking us if we have any lead about any bank that might be interested in mergers. This is ridiculous,” he added.

The depositors claimed that the RBI officials maintained that they can give no assurance until the audit of the bank accounts is completed. “We asked them to release advertisements that they were open for other banks to approach them, in order to help assuage the situation. They said that they will take our suggestions to the top administration. We also requested them to introduce a stop-gap measure through the government. But they said that the government would have to take initiative on that,” Oberoi said.

In September, RBI had imposed restrictions on withdrawal limit of the depositors holding accounts in the bank after it found irregularities to the tune of Rs 4,355 crore. A case has been registered by the Mumbai Economic Offence Wing and five persons, including HDIL promoters Rakesh and Sarang Wadhwan and bank officials, have been arrested.

Since September, several protests have been held by the depositors and at least five persons have died because of stress related to the developments.

Jitsu Sheth, a depositor who attended the meeting, said, “They reacted positively to some of our suggestions. But it is clear that as of now, there’s no plan of action. The RBI has been unable to give us any assurance, any decisive plan.”

“We are planning a big protest in Azad Maidan on Wednesday. It is impossible for us to solve this issue if the government and other bodies don’t help us. We are not begging for money, this is our savings,” said Vrinda Bharat, a depositor.

Despite repeated attempts, RBI officials were unavailable for comment.
