Ex SSP arrested for police firing on protesters in 2015

Punjab Police Officer has been arrested today in a connection with the 2015 police firing of protestors at Behbal Khan in Faridkot on October 14, 2015, the incident killed two young Sikhs.

Charanjit Sharma the former SSP was arrested today in the connection in the case of Behbal Khan in Faridkot. He was arrested by the SIT (Special Investigation Team) of the Punjab Police in Hoshiarpur, this city is located 150km away from Chandigarh.

Officials said that the former SSP resisted the arrest, but later on, the SIT managed to bring him to Amritsar, he now being questioned by the officials there.

Inspector General Kunwar Vijay Pratap Singh said: “I can confirm the arrest. He was arrested early today from his residence in Hoshiarpur. We are questioning him. We cannot share more details at this stage.”

IG Kunwar said that he will be brought to a court on Sunday. He added that they got information that stated the former SSP was planning to travel abroad.

The arrest was made after the Haryana and Punjab High0Court dismissed the request by the former SSP and the other police officers who were looking for protection from the prosecution in the said case.

SSP Charanjit Sharma was on duty in the Moga District when the incident happened, during a protest that was done by Sikh activists against the back to back events of violating the Guru Granth Sahib Ji.

The SSP and three other officers who are Bikramjit Singh (then SSP Fazilka), Inspector Pardip Singh and sub-inspector Amarjit Singh were charged for the attempt of murder and murder by the retired Justice Ranjit Singh.

Former SSP Charanjit Sharma was suspended after the incident and he was forced to retire later on.

The Sikhs and other protesters blocked the roads and highways for days when the incident happened.

Dhian Singh Mand led the protests, he said that this is the first step towards those who covered the incident during the SAD-BJP Government rule in Punjab.

AAP (Aam Aadmi Party) leader Harpal Singh Cheema said that the arrest of the former SSP is a good step in the case, but it took the Congress government some time to take the action.
