PM Modi to present his government's report card in Patna rally on March 3: BJP

PM Modi will hold a massive rally at Gandhi Maidan in Patna on March 3.

BJP Bihar president Nityanand Rai on Sunday said Prime Minister Narendra Modi will present his government's five years report card during the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) rally in Patna on March.

The announcement was made in a joint press conference of the NDA in Patna by Janata Dal (United) state president Bashishtha Narayan Singh, LJP state president Pashupati Paras and Nityanand Rai.

Nityanand Rai announced that the NDA will hold a massive rally at Gandhi Maidan in Patna on March 3 where PM Modi will be presenting the report card of his government.

Nityanand Rai also said that PM Modi will address the rally along with Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and Union Minister Ram Vilas Paswan.

Pashupati Paras informed that BJP national president Amit Shah will also address the rally which will take place just few days ahead of the announcement of the 2019 Lok Sabha polls schedule.

Nityanand Rai also said that while PM Modi will present the report card of his government of four years, the Congress, too, will be asked to present its report card of 55 years to the people.

"NDA ki rally mein pradhan mantri saboot ke saath apne sarkar ka hisab denge aur Congress se 55 saalon ka hisab lenge [PM Modi will present his government’s report card with proofs and will also demand the Congress to show the report card of its 55-year government, Nityanand Rai said.

When questioned whether the BJP was the big brother in the alliance, Nityanand Rai said that the 2019 Lok Sabha polls will be fought jointly by BJP national president Amit Shah, JDU national president and Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and Union Minister and LJP supremo Ram Vilas Paswan.

"Amit Shah, Nitish Kumar and Ram Vilas Paswan will be fighting elections together to win and make Narendra Modi the prime minister again, Nityanand Rai said.

Bashishtha Narayan Singh said the alliance partnership is working together to ensure that the rally on March 3 turns out to be the biggest in recent history.

Interestingly, Congress, too, will be holding a Jan Akanksha rally on February 3 at the same venue which will be addressed by Congress president Rahul Gandhi.
