Rajasthan High Court orders quashing of cow smuggling FIR against Pehlu Khan, his sons and driver

Anguri Begum, mother of dairy farmer Pehlu Khan along with her family members stage a sit-in demonstration to demand justice for him in New Delhi | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights In August, Alwar sessions court acquitted all six accused in the case on benefit of the doubt The family of the victim had produced 44 witnesses in the court In 2017, the Rajasthan Police had given a clean chit to six people who were named by Pehlu Khan in his dying statement

Jaipur: The Rajasthan High Court on Wednesday dismissed the FIR against Pehlu Khan, his son and the driver of the vehicle filed for cow smuggling.

In August, almost two years after Pehlu Khan was lynched by cow vigilantes, the Alwar sessions court acquitted all six accused in the case on benefit of doubt.

The hearing of the case had ended on August 7 and nine people were held accused in the case which also included three minors who were out on bail, reported news agency IANS. The family of the victim had produced 44 witnesses in the court.

Pehlu Kahn (55), a resident of Haryana’s Nuh, was thrashed by 'gau rakshaks' when he was transporting cattle in a pickup van over suspicion of smuggling cows from Rajasthan to Haryana, which led to his death on April 3, 2017, in a government hospital.

The incident which was recorded on camera showed Khan being thrashed mercilessly by an aggressive crowd.

The court, however, was not satisfied with the video evidence.

In 2017, the Rajasthan Police gave a clean chit to six people who were named by Pehlu Khan in his dying statement.

After the acquittal of all the accused, Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot blamed former BJP CM Vasundhara Raje’s government for lapses in the Pehlu Khan lynching case. Gehlot also said that his government would form an SIT to investigate the case.

The previous BJP government had changed four investigating officers in the Pehlu Khan case.

The Congress government in the state also brought a law against mob lynching in Rajasthan, making it the second state to bring the law after Manipur.

Gehlot also announced the formation of Heinous Case Monitoring Unit which shall work under the supervision of Additional Director General Crime to ensure the serious cases are dealt with immediately with effective investigation.

The Congress government was heavily criticised after an FIR over cow smuggling was filed against Pehlu Khan, his sons and the driver. Launching a scathing attack on the grand old party, AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi said that the party’s double standards were exposed. He further said that the Congress had not learnt any lesson from its embarrassing defeat in the recent Lok Sabha elections, especially in Rajasthan.

Appealing to the Muslims of Rajasthan to stop supporting the Congress as it has always betrayed them, Owaisi said, "It betrayed you for 70 years. It will not come to your rescue."

He also called on the Muslims of Rajasthan to have an independent political platform instead of backing the Congress.
