‘Mess on Bannerghatta Road is irreparable’

Citizens say the bad condition of the road is made worse by the lack of proper civic infrastructure

Motorists, pedestrians and residents have come to fear Bannerghatta Road, especially the stretch between Gottigere and Jayadeva, which they say is ‘beyond repair’. The bad road is made worse by the lack of proper civic infrastructure, including pavements and street lights. “This has been going for years, with no relief,” say motorists.

Bannerghatta Road is dotted with educational institutions and hospitals.

“Students are compelled to spend half their time travelling. Hence, they are always tired. The government has failed to provide even basic facilities to citizens even though it is a question of quality of life,” said Balaji L., a lecturer in a private college on Bannerghatta Road.

Mahalakshmi Parthasarathy, a civic activist and resident, said it takes her an hour to drop her son to school, even though the commute is less than three kilometres. “Imagine the amount of stress on children, both physical and psychological. It impacts their productivity,” she said, adding that the mess is a result of the lack of accountability on the part of various agencies.

Ongoing metro work has exacerbated the problem. “The metro work is a long-term project. Why didn’t agencies like the BWSSB, BBMP and BMRCL plan for this? Suffering for a month or two for better facilities is understandable. Making people suffer for years is not acceptable,” Ms. Parthasarathy added.

‘Visit by Mayor, MP ineffective’

In the second week of October, Mayor M. Gowtham Kumar had taken a ride on a scooter on Bannerghatta Road, and had directed officials to fix the problems related to drains, roads and pavements. However, residents claim that the situation has not changed much.

In September, Member of Parliament from Bengaluru South Tejasvi Surya visited stretches of Bannerghatta Road with the heads of BBMP, BWSSB and BMRCL. “They had promised solutions to many of the problems within three months. However, nothing tangible has happened so far,” a resident said.

Keshava Kumar N., president of Bangalore Residents’ Welfare Association, said that adjoining roads and areas, too, are grappling with problems, and repeated requests and complaints to all agencies have gone in vain. “They have blocked one way of the Jayadeva underpass and the other part is used for commuting both to and fro, but there are no boards or directions. It is very dangerous,” he said.

Navya K., a resident of Belekalli, said that encroachments by temporary shops and eateries have become a nightmare for residents and motorists. “The authorities do remove encroachments, but the shops are back within no time. They do not just block roads, but also dump waste and garbage on roads and pavements. The recent rains have made it worse and black spots are all over the place” she said.

Protest

Residents staged a protest on Wednesday against the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) blaming the company for the pathetic condition of Bannerghatta Road.

"Metro construction has severely damaged the road and slowed down vehicle movement. They have cut down about 245 trees. This stretch has several hospitals, including Jayadeva, Apollo and Sagar. Every day, dozens of ambulances get stuck in traffic,” said Arun Prasad, environmentalist and activist.

Auto drivers claim that they spend more money on fuel because of the poor quality of the road. “The traffic police do as much as possible to ease congestion, but that doesn't help much,” said Javed Pasha, an auto driver.

"We hope our protest draws the attention of BMRCL, BBMP and our MLAs to the plight of motorists and pedestrians,” said Nanjesh Kumar, a member of Bahujana Maha Sabha.

In this series, ‘Road Rage’, The Hindu will highlight some of the worst stretches in the city. Readers can write to us or send their responses to: suggestions@thehindu.co.in
