City Inc’s clamour against trade deal grows

Ludhiana: Business owners and industrialists in Ludhiana have raised the banner of revolt against India’s plan to sign Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) on November 4, saying that the free-trade agreement (FTA) with 15 other countries would prove to be a double whammy for domestic businesses at a time when the country is in the midst of an economic slowdown.

The summit for sigining RCEP is to be held in Bangkok. Apart from India, the other 15 nations which are signing the FTA include China, Japan, South Korea, Australia , New Zealand, Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. According to business owners, they have got no assurance from the government that it would exclude products like bicycles & parts, sewing machines and parts, fasteners, plywood and others which are manufactured domestically, from the purview of RCEP. Recently, Ludhiana businessmen had organised a protest against RCEP and burnt an effigy of the central government.

Ludhiana Fastener Suppliers Association president Rajkumar Singla said they had already sent several representations to the central government to ask it to keep products manufactured by local micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) out of RCEP. “The meeting is round the corner, but the Centre has not given a clarification so far,” he said.

Some businessmen said they had also decided to support the Congress-sponsored nationwide protest against RCEP, which will start from November 5, a day after the RCEP deal is to be signed by India. “RCEP will destroy the entire MSME industry of Ludhiana. With our representations and requests on RCEP being ignored by Centre, we are now going to support the Congress’s protest,” Singla added.

Janta Nagar Small Scale Manufacturers Association president Jaswinder Thukral said the government’s silence on RCEP had revealed its “anti-businessman approach”. “If they are serious about solving our problems, why have they not even cared to clear the air on the issue of this proposed free trade agreement,” said Thukral.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
