PMC Bank depositors stage another protest: ‘Will approach PMO, Matoshree’

PMC bank depositors on Wednesday staged a protest at Azad Maidan against the bank’s management, the RBI and the government, demanding that they be allowed to access their accounts without restrictions as soon as possible.

The move comes after the RBI had, in September, imposed restrictions on the PMC bank after they found irregularities to the tune of Rs 4,355 crore in bank accounts. A case has been registered by the Mumbai Economic Offence Wing and they have arrested five people, including the promoters of HDIL Rakesh and Sarang Wadhwan. However, the RBI imposed restrictions on the withdrawal limit of depositors, which led to panic. Since September, several protests have been held by depositors and at least five people have died in cases linked to the bank’s situation.

The protesters, who raised slogans such as “chori se nahi chhupaai hai, ye meri mehnat ki kamaai hai”, were dispersed by the police by early evening. The depositors said they are now planning to knock on the doors of the Prime Minister’s Office and Matoshree, the residence of Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray, to seek a solution.

“I am begging my friends and relatives for money despite having lakhs in savings, all because of some people in the bank management. How is that my fault? Why am I being penalised? The government should step in to save us honest taxpayers,” said Ajay Sharma, a protester.

Another protester, Sanjay Giddu, said, “We don’t like to stand here in the sun, but we are in genuine trouble and no one wants to even hear us out. The ruling party kept saying wait for elections to get over. Now, what excuse do they have?”

Deven Oberoi, a protester, said that the government has not even made a statement on the issue yet. “We met a few officials at the BKC office of RBI and discussed the possible solutions on Tuesday, only to realise that they have absolutely no idea of how to get us our money back… I need money for my father’s dialysis and now even my credit cards are inching towards their limits.”

The protestors’ ire is focused on RBI officials, as they believe that the officials are not doing enough to solve the problem. “The RBI is the regulatory body. How did they not see the scam brewing?” asked 70-year-old Jeetu Shah, another depositor. RBI officials, meanwhile, have maintained that they can’t give any assurances until the audit at the bank is over.

“The cooperative banks always carry a certain risk, and in this case, there is little we can do. We placed restrictions to control the discrepancies. As of now, 77 per cent of the bank’s account holders will get their total money. But we can’t give any assurances,” an official said.
