EU delegation in Kashmir

Editor,

A delegation of 23 European Union MPs on a two-day visit to assess the situation in Jammu and Kashmir arrived on Tuesday to a complete shut down and clashes between people and security forces in several parts of Srinagar and the Valley. A convoy of security vehicles escorted the MPs, who were travelling in bullet-proof vehicles from the airport to their hotel where a traditional Kashmiri welcome awaited them. This is the first high-level foreign visitors’ delegation to J&K after it was stripped of its special status under Article 370 of the Constitution and split into two Union Territories bythe Centre in August this year. It was a woman named Madi Sharma who took the initiative to invite this VIP delegation.

The situation in J&K is still in a state of unrest as widespread protests and killings are continuing unabated. There is a small section of people whom Pakistan has roped in to protest against India. They have been trying to sabotage the administration in J&K. As a matter of fact, at a time when the law and order situation is tense, no foreign delegations should have been invited to visit J&K.

Virginie Joron, a EU parliamentarian from France who was part of the delegation said, “The visit is good and we have come to know about the situation in Kashmir. This is a first-hand experience and we loved the interaction with local public here.” So, their feedback should in no way go against India, and in fact goes against Pakistan. Another shocking incident is that as many as five non-local migrant labours were killed and another wounded in a military attack in J&K’s southern Kulgam district on Tuesday. This is the latest in a series of such attacks on non-local labourers and truck drivers by suspected militants in South Kashmir since October 14. These sort of barbaric incidents must not be repeated anymore. Through such killings the militants want to divide and separate J&K from India. An ideal remedy to such crooked policy of the militants is to allow large number of people from elsewhere in the country to settle in the state. And with gradual interaction with the newly settled people (non-locals) the mindset of the people will perhaps change and in due course of time everyone in the state will really feel they are true Indians.

Yours etc.,

TK Nandanan,

Via email

EU team visit a positive move

Editor,

The opposition parties have come out with scathing criticism on the Centre’s move allowing a delegation of EU lawmakers to visit Jammu and Kashmir .They have also come out in the open questioning the Government for not permitting their leaders to step into the valley after the repealing of article 370. But why they were not allowed has many reasons.

When the Government is making all out efforts to see that normalcy returns it is sad to see some leaders with vested interests trying to enter the valley to meet those who have only created walls among people and have indirectly helped the neighbour whose only motto is to create crisis in Kashmir. There are leaders in the Opposition who even today keep on criticising the repealing of Article 370 and are in favour of the special status given to the state.

The ” special status ” all these years was truly a sham as it benefited only a few political parties and their leaders who in the name of “dedication” ,”commitment” and “sacrifice” to the valley and it’s people were in fact only exploiting them. Most of these leaders had links with Pakistan and danced to the tune of some of the radicals and separatists fully backed by that nation. Many of these leaders and their followers wanted it that way as they needed a platform to survive. The historic move had put an end to the acting of such actor’s. Article 370 rather than helping and supporting the people of the state only empowered separatists and anti-nationals. Whenever efforts were taken to bring normalcy to the state it was opposed just because these leaders don’t gain anything. Foreign delegations visiting the valley is beneficial in many ways. It will give a good and clear picture about the current status of the valley to the world . The vile moves of Pakistan can be exposed and such visits will definitely boost the confidence of the people and encourage everyone to visit this beautiful region which in many ways will only benefit the people of Jammu and Kashmir.

Yours etc.,

M Pradyu,

Kannur
