Delhi: DTC bus driver fires in the air; tries to loot Rs 4 lakh from Sriniwaspuri depot

A country-made pistol and a cartridge were recovered from his possession. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights DTC bus driver tries to loot over Rs 4 lakh cash from depot safe Accused driver fired in the air to threaten depot staffers Other employees overpowered bus driver and handed him over to police

New Delhi: In a shocking incident, a Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) bus driver allegedly attempted robbery at Sriniwaspuri bus depot in South Delhi on Wednesday.

The driver, who was carrying a gun, fired shots in the air and tried to loot Rs 4.5 lakh from the depot's safe.

According to a report, other employees thwarted the driver's robbery attempt as they surrounded the accused and caught him.

The accused has been identified as Bharat Bhushan Tyagi. As the driver tried to flee after looting the money, witnesses said they mistook him for a criminal and chased him down. He was beaten up at the spot and handed over to the police.

The matter was reported to police at 9:45 am on Wednesday. According to DCP (South-East) Chinmoy Biswal, the driver entered the depot with a backpack and sneaked into the cashier's room.

The accused driver, who was wearing a face mask, held the cashier at gunpoint and ordered him to hand over all the cash kept in the safe.

As the cashier attempted to resist the robbery bid, Tyagi hit him on the head with the pistol's butt and snatched the packed currency from the cashier and fled from the spot.

Bleeding profusely, the cashier raised an alarm and alerted other staff in the depot premises.

Seeing himself surrounded, the accused driver threatened to shoot the staffers if they blocked his way. Tyagi later opened fire in the air when the staff did not heed his warning.

More depot staffers arrived at the scene after hearing the gunshot and overpowered Tyagi and disarmed him.

A depot staffer said the way Tyagi put up a fight seemed like he was a hardcore criminal. The accused was later admitted to a hospital after he sustained injuries during the scuffle.

A country-made pistol and a cartridge were recovered from his possession.

During interrogation, the accused driver told cops he committed the robbery as he was under huge debt and needed money urgently.

The accused was posted as a driver at Ghazipur depot.

According to cops, he had applied for an employee loan eight years ago to pay off his debts. However, the loan application was rejected and then he decided to rob the depot. A case of robbery has been registered against the DTC driver.
