Ilhan Omar Attacks Prominent Female Journalist and Defends Kashmiri Jihadists

Rep. Ilhan Omar’s recent activities have been very revealing of her agenda. Previously, we had shed light on her close relationship with Turkey’s Erdogan and her deafening silence regarding his terrorist activities in the Middle East; including her refusal to recognize the Armenian Genocide. Now, Mrs. Omar is actually behaving as though she is Kashmir’s lobbyist in Congress.

Mrs. Omar has been focusing on the conflicts in Kashmir and appears to be siding with the Pakistani-sponsored rebels that are fighting the Indian government. She claims to be concerned about Kashmiri Muslims and the ‘Oppression of a Hindutva Government’, whereby she willfully chooses to ignore the thousands of Muslims that voted for PM Modi in the last Indian elections. Indian areas with over 40% Muslim voters have voted for the BJP, yet Ilhan Omar rallied against the entire voting base, because in her books, those are not the right type of Muslims.

Character Assassinating a Female Journalist

Her latest attack was on one of India’s most prominent journalists, Aarti Tikoo Singh, who was invited to testify at the US House Foreign Affairs Committee hearing on Human Rights in South Asia on October 22, 2019. When Aarti began revealing facts regarding the conflict in Kashmir and the damage done by Pakistani-sponsored Islamist terrorists, Ilhan Omar began publicly questioning her journalism credentials; purposely ignoring the fact that Aarti is herself among the persecuted Kashmiris.

When Indian journalist Aarti Tikoo Singh accused world media of overlooking Kashmir’s terrorism problem, US Congresswoman Ilhan Omar questioned her journalism credentials. pic.twitter.com/p159ansjsC — Brut India (@BrutIndia) October 25, 2019

Aarti is a sophisticated prominent and senior journalist with a glowing reputation, who later stated that the entire US Congressional hearing was a setup against India and in favor of Pakistan, a state sponsor of terrorism.

An alumnus of Columbia University with a Master’s in international Affairs, Aarti has worked both at Columbia University and interned at the United Nations. She even worked at the BBC in New York. This woman spoke before congress with two decades of experience in conflict- reporting, writing, research and analysis, and currently serves as an editor with India’s largest English daily: The Times of India; as well as having worked for other major English daily news agencies of India and Hindustan Times.

Aarti is an expert in the affairs of her homeland, Kashmir. In recent years, she broke some of the biggest news stories and exclusives on Kashmir, which had major policy implications for both India and Pakistan. Her opinion pieces have been published in various national and international publications. Furthermore, Aarti has been the recipient of several awards for her remarkable research, reporting and editorial accomplishments.

Advertisement

Yet, Ilhan Omar set out to destroy this woman’s reputation and have it put on public record. That’s because Rep. Omar clearly felt threatened by Aarti’s caliber, and the fact that she too is a woman of color that primarily identifies as a dispassionate journalist.

Aarti Singh was invited to testify before US Congress, and professionally began her testimony stating: “Although, I am myself, one of the persecuted Kashmiris who grew up in destitution as a refugee, I do not speak here as a representative of my community, which was driven out and ethnically cleansed from Kashmir in 1990 because of our religious identity. I am here as a conscientious journalist who believes that the role of the journalist is to be a watchdog of society and to be a voice of the voiceless and the powerless. So, I will speak here nothing but the complete truth.”

Little did Aarti know that she was about to touch a raw nerve with Ms. Omar when mentioning Pakistan’s sponsored Jihadists. She went on to say: “So who are the victims of human rights violations in Kashmir? The victims are those 15000 Kashmiri Muslims who have been killed by Pakistan sponsored militants in the last 30 years, but no press and no human rights activist in the world thinks that it is their moral obligation to talk or write about them.”

Singh states that: According to former Pakistani Ambassador Mr. Husain Haqqani, the Pakistan-sponsored insurgency sought to cleanse Kashmir of non-Muslims to make the state entirely free of minorities. Many terror groups active in Kashmir today, such as Lashkar-eTaiba (LeT), Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), and Hizbu-ul-Mujahideen (HM) have rightfully been labelled Foreign Terrorist Organizations by the European Union, United States, and other countries. Yet these terrorists continue to receive safe harbor, medical care, and financial support in Pakistan–exactly like Al-Qaeda mastermind Osama bin-Laden who was killed in Abbottabad, Pakistan by US Special Forces in 2011. These groups have launched terror attacks throughout India, including the November 2008 Mumbai attacks that killed over 165 people, and the September 2016 attack on an Indian army base, which lead to an escalation in tensions between India and Pakistan.

Advertisement

Yet, instead of Ilhan Omar addressing the subject of the hearing or expressing disgust at the crimes of these terrorist organizations, she decided to justify the agenda of Kashmir’s Islamist rebels by attacking the credentials of Aarti Singh.

That’s right, Ilhan Omar didn’t launch an attack on the Jihadists, but on the senior journalist invited to congress to testify against terrorism in her own homeland. The US Congress was once an institution that fought terrorism, but somehow Ilhan Omar is managing to turn that around.

Aarti’s full testimony before the US Congress can be found here.
