Mutual funds investing in PSUs look attractive as govt firms up disinvestment plans

Representative image

New Delhi: Mutual fund investors looking for good returns can consider investing in PSU funds as a tactical play to their equity mutual fund portfolio, say fund managers.

Fund managers say PSU stocks may see rerating amid lower valuations, coupled with chances of a strategic sale or disinvestment in public sector units.

“Valuations are cheap, most companies have good corporate governance, and possible disinvestment or strategic sale leaves room for value unlocking,” a leading business daily quoted Taher Badshah, chief investment officer, Invesco Mutual Fund as saying. The government is in a strong position and there is better political will for disinvestment at this point of time, he said.

According to Badshah, the S&P BSE PSU Index is trading at a price-earnings multiple of 10.11, an almost 20% discount to its own 10-year average of 12.01 and on price-to-book, it is trading at 0.81, compared with the 10-year average of 1.61.

In comparison, the broader S&P BSE Sensex index is trading at 22.68. The PSU index is trading at a 55% discount to the latest Sensex level and a 38% discount to the benchmark’s 10-year average.

On price-to-book, the Sensex is trading at 2.88. This translates into a 72% discount for the PSU index at the current level and 45% discount based on the 10-year average.

Analysts say many PSUs have been restructured in the last one decade. Companies such as IRCTC, Midhani, MSTC and RVNL, are unique businesses with a virtual monopoly, say analysts.

The balance sheets of state-run oil marketing companies have improved post deregulation in the sector. Also, PSUs, more recently, have begun to allocate capital more efficiently through buy-backs and dividend payouts. Operating in cyclical sectors, PSUs have the potential to outperform in an economic recovery, the publication mentioned.

The government has initiated a bidding process to find out an asset valuer to estimate the fair value of Bharat Petroleum (BPCL) as it plans to sell its stake in the oil marketing company to a strategic buyer. Also, according to media reports global and domestic logistic players showing interest in Container Corporation.

Fund managers point out that disinvestment or stake sale of PSUs was an event closely tracked by the market. “If the government demonstrates its capability in doing one or two such sales, the entire PSU pack could be rerated,” the business daily quoted Vinay Sharma of Nippon India Mutual Fund as saying.

Financial planners said investors would be better off taking exposure in open-ended active PSU funds as compared to passive exchange-traded funds.

“Fund manager discretion can play a role in generating alpha here and hence better to go with an active fund,” said Rupesh Bhansali, the head of distribution at GEPL Capital. He recommended Invesco India PSU Equity Fund and SBI PSU Fund. Over the past one year, Invesco India PSU Equity Fund has given a return of 20.29%, while SBI PSU Fund has returned 12.3%. Bharat 22 ETF has returned 3.71%, while CPSE ETF has lost 2.08%, the publication mentioned.
