TN doctors’ strike enters 7th day, CM says protest carried out to defame govt

As doctors affiliated to the Federation of Government Doctors Association entered the seventh day of their hunger strike, Tamil Nadu CM Edappadi K Palanisamy Thursday claimed FOGDA is not a recognised organisation and is carrying out the protest to defame the government.

“The Health Minister held talks with Tamil Nadu Government Doctors Association (TNGDA), their association members didn’t participate in this strike, they believe that our government will fulfill their reasonable demands. The organization which is carrying out a protest is not a recognized one, they are carrying out the strike to defame the government,” the chief minister said while speaking to reporters.

Edappadi further said medical students spend Rs 67,500 for their five-year term in government colleges, while the government spends Rs 1.24 crore on each of them, adding that the students are pursuing their education with the help of a common man’s tax income.

Instead of suppressing the doctors with the police force, the government should consider the plights of the patients and fulfill the doctor’s demand, Stalin said. (Twitter/MK Stalin) Instead of suppressing the doctors with the police force, the government should consider the plights of the patients and fulfill the doctor’s demand, Stalin said. (Twitter/MK Stalin)

“We bear all the expenses and make them a doctor with the hope that they will join a government hospital and serve the poor and needy people. If they do not understand this and refuse to serve the people, the government will take appropriate action against them,” he added.

Close to 17,000 medicos launched an indefinite strike on October 25 pressing the government to fulfill their demand to implement a government order that envisages time-bound promotions and hiring doctors according to the patient’s strength, PTI stated. Apart from this, they also demanded to bring back 50 per cent quota for government doctors in PG speciality and super speciality streams and transparent counselling process for carrying out transfers.

After meeting the CM today, Health Minister C Vijayabaskar said, “A total of 16,475 doctors were part of the strike for the past few days. Based on our request, many of them have returned to work, only 2,523 doctors are still protesting. We hope they will also withdraw the strike and return to work soon,” he said.

In Rajiv Gandhi Hospital in Chennai, several doctors are holding placards to fulfill their demands else they will be carrying a hunger strike until death. (Express Photo) In Rajiv Gandhi Hospital in Chennai, several doctors are holding placards to fulfill their demands else they will be carrying a hunger strike until death. (Express Photo)

On Wednesday, Vijayabaskar cautioned doctors to return to work by Thursday else their absence will be considered taking a break in service, and their position will be declared vacant. He added that 10,000 qualified doctors are ready to occupy the vacant spots.

“Without any prior notification, few doctors are carrying out a strike at the entrance of Rajiv Gandhi Hospital, which is not a place to protest. They are causing inconvenience to all the patients and other doctors who are not part of the protest. Uninterrupted quality health service should be provided to the poor and needy people, the doctors should withdraw their protest, if they don’t report to duty by Thursday, their absence will be considered a break in service, and their position will be declared vacant,” Vijayabaskar said.

In response to Vijaybaskar, Convenor of FOGDA Lakshmi Narasimhan said, “This is not a protest against the government. Several doctors have joined in this protest on their own. The minister has said that we are causing inconvenience to the patients by blocking the hospital entrance, the barricades have been put around the area we protest, even if that is causing trouble, we are ready to go out and protest,” he said.

In some government hospitals, the doctors are only available for emergency surgeries and dengue OP. A case has also been filed at the Madras High Court asking the state government to intervene and bring an end to the indefinite strike.

Several opposition leaders including DMK leader MK Stalin visited the doctors on Monday at the Rajiv Gandhi hospital and requested them to withdraw their hunger strike. “Instead of suppressing the strike with the police force, the government should consider the plight of the patients and fulfill the doctor’s demand,” Stalin said.
