JKNPP protests against ‘demotion of J&K State to UT’

JKNPP protests against ‘demotion of J&K State to UT’

# Oct 31 a ‘Black Day’ in history of Dogra State: Harsh # People deprived of democratic rights: Mir # Union Territory, constitutional blunder: Bhim

JAMMU, Oct 31: Peeved over, what it said, “the loss of status of State of J&K and its conversion, demotion as a Union Territory”, Jammu and Kashmir National Panthers Party activists held a protest demonstration at Exhibition ground in Jammu today.

Describing the decision of transition of State to UT as “authoritarian and perverse”, the protestors raised the slogans of “Tanashahi nahin chalegi, nahin chalegi, “Hitler Raj nahin chalega nahi chalega”, “Lt. Governor go back, go back” and “State ka darja bahal karo, bahal karo”etc.

Addressing the gathering, Harsh Dev Singh described October 31 as a ‘Black Day’ in the history of State when around 200 year old Dogra State was dismantled and converted into Two Union Territories. He said the government move amounted to a cruel joke with the people of the State besides it having dishonoured the pious decision of Maharaja Hari Sigh, the great Dogra ruler of the erstwhile State.

“A State that was governed and ruled by Maharaja, Prime Ministers, Sadar-e-Riyasat and the like had now been contemptuously entrusted to the charge of Lt. Governor holding the position of a Secretary in the Government of India. The destiny of the people of the State would henceforth be shaped by a junior bureaucrat in the centre belonging to Gujarat cadre. Does this not amount to demeaning and diminishing the people of erstwhile Dogra State who have the most chequered history of patriotism, valour and sacrifices?,” questioned Harsh, adding that demotion of State had invariably hurt the self respect and dignity of each and every individual of J&K.

Terming the NDA government decision as unprecedented, he said that never before in the history of the country had any state been converted into Union Territory. The step was as retrograde as totalitarian and the only motive of the central govt. in doing so was to demonstrate its authority and power even if it be at the cost of public outrage, he said.

He said that if the people were shying away from venting their anger against the dictatorial move of the government it was only due to fear psychosis and terror tactics of saffron party. “But BJP has surely penned down its obituary by taking such a sinister move,” observed Harsh Singh.

Jammu and Kashmir Pradesh Congress Committee president G A Mir, while referring to the current political developments, regretted that a historical state was disbanded and converted into UTs on this day.

“This is very unfortunate that a full-fledged state has been reduced and downgraded to UT. The people have been deprived of their powers and rights in an arbitrary and undemocratic manner. The party shall strive for seeking the full fledged status of the state and other constitutional safeguards for the protection of the rights of the people and youth of the state,” Mir said while paying rich tributes to the former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and first Deputy Prime Minister and Home Minister Sardar Patel in a function organised by state Congress unit at Indira Chowk Jammu today.

In the meanwhile, JKPP supremo Prof Bhim Singh described the Union Territory status for J&K as a “constitutional blunder.”

“The Parliament of India passed a law declaring that Jammu & Kashmir shall be converted to Union Territory status. The law cleared by both houses of Parliament made it clear that this resolution/law made by the Parliament shall be implemented vis-à-vis Jammu & Kashmir on the last day of October, 2019 which means that the Union status shall be accorded to Jammu & Kashmir by the midnight between October 31 and November 1st, 2019,” Bhim said.

“This is the declaration of the Parliament and no authority has/had any power or jurisdiction to amend or change the time determined by the Parliament”, this was the statement which Prof Bhim Singh, Chief Patron of NPP issued to the Press this afternoon at Jammu, the winter capital of Jammu & Kashmir when it enjoyed statehood status,” he said.

NPP Supremo questioned Narendra Modi the Prime Minister of India and his government to justify how and why and with what authority the government forced the outgoing Governor to Administer Oath to the newly appointed Lt. Governor in Jammu & Kashmir on 30th October, 2019, 24 hours in advance which violates the law and amounts to contempt of the Parliament which has passed the law that the State shall be converted by 31st of October, 2019 as a Union Territory. Naturally the new LG could have been appointed only on the midnight of October 31st, 2019. He expressed surprise rather shock how Oath was administered to new LG a day in advance and the outgoing Governor went missing 24 hours in advance.
