KTR inaugurates MSME Green Industrial Park

Hyderabad: IT and Industries and Municipal Minister K Taraka Rama Rao today inaugurated the MSME Green Industrial Park at Dandu Malkapur in Yadadri Bhuvanagiri district, along with minister G Jagadish Reddy and officials. KTR claimed that Telangana is the only state in the country to give permissions to industries in just two weeks time, under TS-iPASS scheme.



The local youth and talent will get jobs in the green industrial park through skills training, the minister said.



The scheme is first of its kind, and through TS-iPASS scheme, they have provided about 12 lakh jobs in five years of our government. The credit for giving such huge number of jobs goes to visionary chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao, he said.



KTR said that when he attended IT Ministers conference in Delhi on Thursday, Union Minister Piyush Goel has appreciated the State’s industrial policy and other states came forward to replicate it. They hailed the commitment and foresight of the chief Minister, he said.



Stating that the park will be expanded to 2000 acres, from the present 450 acres, he said that the centre has appreciated the TS-iPASS being replicated by other states to boost industrial growth. ‘We will promote industries with green and not at the cost of our environment’ he said. In addition to giving 24 hour power to farm sector, industries and domestic consumers, Telangana clinched number one position at national level in ease of doing business, industrial growth and GDP growth.

He alleged that earlier industrialists and traders had staged protests at Indira Park for power, and the Congress Government failed to provide power.

The state government is adopting measures to give waters, and get jobs, as part of statehood commitment. After insults and allegations, we achieved Telangana State and now giving priority for all round development, he added.



He said that the government is imposing Rs. 1000 penalty a day on officials who failed to give permission to new industries, within 15 days. On the 16th day of application, the industrialists can start production with self- declaration on allocation of land, he said. We also started mega textile park in Warangal, medical devices park at Medak, food processing units, plastic and micro processing park in the state, KTR added.

NSS
