RCEP trade deal will serve death blow to agriculture, say farmers; call for nationwide protest

Farmers across India have called for a nationwide protest on Saturday against a proposed trade deal during the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) summit since they believe the pact will be a big blow to their livelihood.

Farmers have demanded the government to withdraw from the RCEP since the trade deal, likely to be signed among 16 countries, will permanently bring down import duties on most agricultural commodities to zero. Even if the government goes ahead with the deal, in this case, farmers have asked them to keep agriculture out of the purview.

Tens of lakhs of farmers across the country are expected to participate in the nationwide protest to warn the government against going ahead with inclusion of agriculture in the RCEP free trade agreement, a media report quoted All India Kisan Sangharsh Coordination Committee (AIKSCC), a coalition of over 250 farmer organisations in the country, as saying.

Another report said that an AIKSCC convenor called for a halt on the RCEP pact. He said that the government should defer the signing of the agreement and speak to farmers, state governments and other stakeholders before taking a final decision.

The convenor further said that the RCEP will aggravate the agrarian crisis even as the input prices in India are heavily taxed and farmers are not given profitable prices, resulting in substantial losses and farmer debts.

Last week, key agricultural states such as Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Haryana witnessed protests by farmers over the RCEP deal.

On September 15, scores of farmers under the banner of Kisan Sangharsh Committee (KSC) held a protest at Amritsar-Delhi Highway against the Centre's decision to join the RCEP. They believe that the clause of tariff cut over imported items will impact them and demanded that the government must act tough and exit the deal.

"We are already not getting the right prices for our produce. Now, if the Modi government will allow the import of milk and seeds without putting tariffs, it will affect our business. If they import sugarcane, the mills will get closed. We all are against India becoming a part of the final RCEP deal," said Sarwan Singh Pandayer, General Secretary Punjab Kisan Sangarsh Committee Punjab.

However, Union Minister Piyush Goyal has stated that India will protect its national interest while signing RCEP."Not every industrial sector is opposed to RCEP Free Trade Agreement (FTA). The pharmaceutical and textiles sector have supported RCEP FTA. We will take care of concerns of certain sectors related to China in the RCEP FTA," he had said.

Meanwhile, India said that it has been engaged in finding a solution to some of the "critical issues" relating to the proposed trade deal.

"There are some critical issues still outstanding and efforts are being made to resolve them to provide a fair and transparent trading environment. These issues are extremely important for our economy and the livelihood of our people. It is, therefore, imperative that these issues are resolved satisfactorily. India remains engaged to find resolutions of these issues," said Vijay Thakur Singh, Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs.

The RCEP negotiations were launched by leaders from 10 ASEAN member states and six ASEAN FTA partners during the 21st ASEAN Summit in Phnom Penh in November 2012.

The objective of launching RCEP negotiations is to achieve a modern, comprehensive, high-quality, and mutually beneficial economic partnership agreement among the ASEAN member States and ASEAN's FTA partners.

(With inputs from PTI)
