Gujarat: 2 days after woman ‘killed’, kin protests ‘police inaction’

In the evening, a large number of residents of Mithi Khadi area gathered for the funeral procession of Nasrin. (Representational Image)

Protesting against police inaction two days after a 19-year-old Surat woman was murdered, family members on Friday refused to accept her body after post-mortem, demanding that the accused, who are known “notorious elements” of the area, be arrested first. Police claim the accused have gone underground.

Later in the evening, buckling under pressure from police officials, the family accepted the woman’s body and conducted her final rites.

Police said that Shaikh Shakir (25), his sister Nasrin (19) and father Sharif (50) attended a wedding in Limbayat area on October 30 and returned to their home on Hanuman street near Mithi Khadi in the same area at night. Shakir was standing alone outside his house when four youths, Salman, Sajju, Imran and Kadir, all “notorious elements” of the area approached him and abused him over some unknown reason, police said.

When Shakir told them to leave him alone, they beat him up with wooden staffs and attacked him with a knife. Hearing his shouts, his sister Nasrin and father Sharif rushed out of the house and tried to save him. The youths attacked them too. No neighbours or passersby dared intervene as the attack continued.

Once the attackers left, neighbours rushed the three injured persons to SMIMER hospital. Shakir required 35 stitches and his life was saved. His father Sharif was discharged on Thursday. However, Nasrin who was struck on the head with a wooden staff, was severely injured and was declared dead on Friday morning.

Shakir lodged a complaint with the police against Salman, Sajju, Imran and Kadir with Limbayat police station.

On Friday, Sharif and his family members refused to accept his daughter’s body and demanded that the police arrest the accused first. Limbayat Police Inspector V M Makwana and higher officials reached the hospital and told Nasrin’s family that appropriate action would be taken against the accused.

Economically weak and lacking any influence, the family members gave in to police pressure and accepted Nasrin’s body. “The police did not take any action against the accused who are noted criminals of the area,” Nasrin’s cousin Ikbal shaikh said. The family members of Nasrin are poor labourers. They are unhappy that no action was taken by the police even after registering an offence. The condition of Shakir is also critical. Our family members refused to accept the body but higher police officials turned up at the spot. The family came under pressure and accepted the body.”

In the evening, a large number of residents of Mithi Khadi area gathered for the funeral procession of Nasrin. Sources said that the local residents were unhappy with the police’s inaction and had decided to approach the Surat commissioner for justice.

Inspector Makwana said, “We are putting all our possible efforts to arrest the accused, as after the incident they have gone underground. We are carrying out a search operation at their relatives’ places to locate them.”
