Door open for Sena

“It all depends on (Sena chief) Uddhav Thackeray. If he demonstrates the courage to snap ties with the BJP, we can think of extending outside support,” a Congress politician told The Telegraph.

The majority of the Congress and Nationalist Congress Party legislators want to support a Shiv Sena-led government in Maharashtra — a coalition that might have been seen as unthinkable — to shatter the BJP’s “arrogance”.

“The mandate for us is to sit in the Opposition. But if the Shiv Sena decides to alter the mandate because of the BJP’s betrayal, we can’t close our eyes.”

The Congress and the NCP have decided not to issue any public signals unless and until the Sena dumps the BJP, but the developments have led to some serious political activity.

Sena leader Sanjay Raut met NCP chief Sharad Pawar on Thursday, and senior Congress leaders from Maharashtra rushed to Delhi on Friday to meet party president Sonia Gandhi.

There is speculation about an impending meeting between Sonia and Pawar over the next couple of days, probably Sunday evening. Such a meeting would be unlikely without a signal from the Sena leadership.

“The majority of the MLAs from the Congress and the NCP are willing to support the Sena in forming the government. It’s not about power — we want to smash the BJP’s arrogance,” a Congress MLA told this newspaper over the phone from Mumbai.

“We have conveyed our sentiments to our leadership. It all depends on the Sena now. If it means what it says, it should walk out. We cannot make any public commitment until the Sena divorces the BJP.”

Another party MLA said: “The last time (after the 2014 Maharashtra elections), the NCP had extended unconditional support to the BJP, allowing it to flex its muscle and goad the Sena into a surrender. This time the NCP is in a different mood. They know that the political momentum is with Pawar and that future elections will see a weakened BJP.”

He added: “Pawar has been humiliated by chief minister Devendra Fadnavis, who compared him to (the character played by comic actor) Asrani in the (1975) film Sholay, claiming his forces had deserted him just before the election. The NCP too is keen to teach the BJP a lesson.”

Maharashtra Congress chief Balasaheb Thorat met Sonia along with senior leaders Ashok Chavan, Prithviraj Chavan, Manikrao Thakre and Vijay Wadetiwar.

“The BJP has failed to keep its promises to its allies and this has led to the political crisis in Maharashtra. We are waiting and watching, we will take a decision at the right time,” former chief minister Ashok Chavan said after meeting the general secretary in charge of the party organisation, K.C. Venugopal.

Chavan’s refusal to rule out supporting an alternative coalition signalled a possible shift in the Congress position.

While the Congress high command would be taking into account the ideological incompatibility with the pro-Hindu Sena, many within the party are arguing that the immediate task is to weaken the BJP.

Party seniors Sushil Kumar Shinde and Sanjay Nirupam have openly opposed any association with the Sena, but others have contended that weaning Hindutva parties away from the RSS is key to India’s future.

“If a BJP ally is not lured away, how will we weaken them? Political positions are not cast in stone. We are not going to change our ideology; it’s the Sena that will have to accept our agenda,” a senior leader said.
