Heated debate on access to TB drugs at global meet

bedaquiline

tuberculosis

delamanid

Rifapentine

The 50th Union World Conference on Lung Health being held in Hyderabad witnessed another controversial day on Friday. A panel discussion on partnership to treatended in a heated debate between Mumbai-based chest physician Dr Zarir Udwadia and Dr Kuldeep Singh Sachdeva, Deputy Director General of Ministry of Health’s Central TB Division, over unavailability and unaffordability of improved tuberculosis drugs. Dr Udwadia slammed the government for giving only public sector patients the access to bedaquiline and, the drugs which are increasingly used across the world to treat multidrug resistant TB (MDR-TB). While Dr Udwadia said private doctors have to access the drugs from pharmaceutical firms which turns out to be very expensive for patients, Dr Sachdeva said private hospitals still need to fulfil government norms to access the drugs.The conference was inaugurated on October 30, with tuberculosis survivors and activists protesting against the unaffordability of improved drugs. A day later, biopharmaceutical giant Sanofi announced slashing the price of another key drugby 66 per cent. While the government says its mission is to eradicate TB by 2025, doctors say the target is hard to meet if private patients are expected to chase the key drugs and spend from their own pocket to access them.Talking to Mirror, Dr Udwadia said he diagnosed his first MDR-TB case in 1988. “No one I knew, even in other countries, had any knowledge of MDR-TB at that time. Today, I treat TB patients who are resistant to 11 to 12 drugs at the same time. The Centre’s promise to eradicate TB is not enough, as the project needs a resolve of another level which also needs to be practical,” he said. According to Dr Udwadia, Mumbai is the hub of DRTB but is not getting enough attention. He said Dharavi itself has plenty cases of DR-TB cases. He gave an example of a primary teacher who was diagnosed with extremely drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB). “She worked with 100 children in close proximity, was resistant to 12 drugs and came to us probably three months after she was infected. Think about the social cost of the disease and she can’t access the drugs because she approached a private doctor,” said Dr Udwadia.Dr Sachdeva, however, denied playing an unfair game. He said such example send out the wrong message. “I assure you that every private physician who fulfils the scientific guidelines can have access to both bedaquiline and delamanid,” he said without specifying the guidelines. He said though the government is bound by many limitations and restrictive legislations, it is the duty of public and private sectors to come together to eliminate TB. Dr Udwadia, however, said one of the guidelines is that underage patients cannot get the two new drugs. “I know an eightyear-old patient whose father begged a pharmaceutical firm for drugs, Moved by his plight, the firm gave him access to delamanid, the only drug she was responding to. It saved her life,” said Dr Udwadia.“I am angry at the struggle of patients and doctors to get to these drugs,” said Dr Udwadia and urged the government to wake up to the real scale of the disease. He said far too many patients fall between the public-private gaps. “We need to change the system as even a poor farmer wants private treatment but is forced to go to public hospitals where queues are endless. We need to change the system, which is already punctured,” he said.Dr Sachdeva said though he doesn’t want to challenge Dr Udwadia’s arguments, there is no denying that private doctors cannot try a nonapproved regimen for their patients and also must mandatorily report the progress to the government.“How do I access bedaquiline for my patients?” asked Dr Udwadia, adding that doctors have to first send their patients to public officials with a very pleading note that they are in urgent need of the drug. “In return, we get an answer ‘Not Recommended’,” he said, adding, “Then we approach the pharmaceutical firm, which provides the drug on compassionate grounds.”
