KRV members allegedly assault Bengaluru hospital doctor for not speaking in Kannada

KRV members allegedly assault Bengaluru hospital doctor for not speaking in Kannada

Members of the Karnataka Rakshana Vedike were at the hospital to protest after 24 patients developed severe reactions following cataract surgery at the hospital in July..

news Protest

Doctors at Minto Ophthalmic Hospital and students of Bangalore Medical College and Research Institute (BMCRI) held a protest against members of the Karnataka Rakshana Vedike for an alleged assault on one of the doctors at the hospital.

The incident occurred on Friday at 3:30 pm inside the premises of the hospital in Bengaluru when members of the Karnataka Rakshana Vedike confronted a doctor, who is also a post-graduate student at BMCRI, for not speaking in Kannada.

According to other doctors at the hospital, after the conversation became heated, the group members surrounded the resident doctor and held her by the arm and made her sit on the floor. They alleged that another doctor who was filming the incident was forcibly made to stop.

"The doctor spoke in English. She said that she speaks Kannada with patients but pointed out that there is no rule asking her to speak in Kannada," said Dr Nitin, a fellow doctor.

Police officials at VV Puram Police Station filed an FIR against unknown members of the Karnataka Rakshana Vedike after a complaint was filed by Dr HS Satish, dean of BMCRI, to which Minto Hospital is affiliated to.

In the complaint, the doctor alleged that 30-35 members of the Vedike stopped a resident doctor from working. Charges were filed under sections 341 (wrongful restraint), 506 (criminal intimidation), 504 (intentional insult), 149 (unlawful assembly), 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant), and 323 (voluntarily causing hurt).

Members of the pro-Kannada outfit were at the hospital to support a protest held by 24 patients who developed severe reactions following cataract surgery at the Minto Ophthalmic Hospital. Two of the patients also lost their eyesight due to the incident.

Read: Cataract surgery goes wrong: Bengaluru hospital alleges eye gel was contaminated

The surgery was held on July 9 and Dr Sujatha Rathod, director of Minto Eye Hospital, earlier told The News Minute that a gel used in the surgery was found to be contaminated. The Drugs Controller Department had begun an investigation into the incident.

However, Praveen Shetty of the Karnataka Rakshana Vedike condemned the actions of its members. "It was true that the incident occurred because the doctor did not speak in Kannada but it was wrong of the members to disturb the doctors. No one has the right to attack doctors. There are ways to register a complaint", Praveen Shetty said.

The incident occurred on Karnataka Rajyotsava, a day marking the formation of Karnataka state.
