India must become vishwa guru: V-P

Mangaluru: “There is a need to regain the past glory of India as ‘ vishwa guru ,’ and it can be achieved only through quality education through institutions,” said M Venkaiah Naidu Vice-President of India, while addressing young engineering graduands of NITK Surathkal , on Saturday.Vishwa guru means a reformer and teacher to the entire world. Venkaiah Naidu was addressing the Diamond Jubilee Year Convocation (17th annual convocation), held at the premier technical institution. As many as 1,545 engineers , who were both undergraduates and postgraduates and 116 Phds were awarded by the Vice-President.Remembering the founder of NITK Surathkal— U Srinivas Mallya—he said that Indian engineers have demonstrated to the world our technical prowess in several areas. “India has transformed into a technology exporter from technology importer. However, there is much to be done. There is a huge potential for India to become a world leader in various technological domains, given the advantage and the presence of highly-talented educated youths. There is also a need to convert the pool of educated manpower into a highly-skilled workforce, in tune with the requirement of a digitally-driven, knowledge-based 21st century,” he said. “Educational institutions have a major role to play to make the country a global hub of knowledge, innovation and skilled manpower,” he said, stressing that India, once home to Nalanda University, where students from across the world studied, and a country which was formerly a ‘Vishwa Guru,’ needs to regain its lost glory.‘Let’s drive away graft with innovation’Naidu said that the government is striving hard to take digital technology to the next level to tackle corruption and transform governance to make it transparent. “We want to stop under the table hand in business (refers to bribing) by going in for digital payments. Around 1.2 lakh village panchayats are connected by optical fibre network and more than 21,000 startups have been recognised since the inception of Startup India. Further, we want to make everything in the future digital. Let’s drive away corruption with innovation,” said Naidu.Naidu told young graduands not to take any tension as it results in taking away attention.
