ATM with Rs 23L gone in 20 minutes

Ludhiana: It was almost a child’s play for three miscreants who just took 20 minutes to uproot an automated teller machine (ATM) containing Rs 23 lakh cash, load the same in their vehicle and vanish into thin air.

The criminals targeted the locked kiosk of SBI’s Pakhowal branch and chose to strike in the early hours on Saturday.

Though the act was captured in the CCTV camera installed inside the ATM, cops have not been able to identify the men, who were masks.

According to the police, bank officials used to shut the ATM kiosk in the evening as they didn’t have any night guard for the purpose.

On Friday, bank manager Gurcharan Singh Mahi did the job by closing the kiosk and bank at 6.30pm.

Bank guard Amarjeet Singh was the first one to notice the crime at 7am next morning. After being informed, the branch manager rushed to the bank and found that ATM machine stolen. Later, cops from Sudhar Police station also reached the spot and started the investigations.

Sub-inspector Jagroop Singh, additional SHO, Sudhar police station, said preliminary probe suggested involvement of three persons in the crime. The accused, who seem to have done recce of the area before committing the crime, were carrying a gas cutter.

They first cut the locks of the ATM booth with the gas cutter. Cops said the accused uprooted the machine, loaded it on their vehicle and sped away. Police said even as the miscreants damaged the wires of two CCTV cameras — one in the booth and other installed outside, they apparently did not notice that there was another CCTV camera in the kiosk. In the footage, three accused with covered faces and gloves were seen entering the ATM.

Bank manager Gurcharan Singh Mahi said of the seven CCTV cameras installed at the bank complex, two were in the ATM booth, one was on the main road and remaining cameras were installed inside the bank. “The accused destroyed CCTV cameras on main road and inside ATM, but could not notice third one which was inside the ATM,” he said.

Mahi said Rs 24 lakh was loaded in the machine on Friday evening, of which just Rs 30,000 was withdrawn by customers.

Police said the accused seemed to be in their 40s, who seemed to have used a Swift, Indica and or Indigo car in the crime.

A case has been registered under Sections 380 (theft in dwelling house, etc), 427 (Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees) and 457 (Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment) of the IPC.

Box: Swift task

The CCTV footage suggested that the three miscreants entered the ATM kiosk at 2.40am and they were gone before 3am

Box: No more a rare crime

June 4 | Criminals made an unsuccessful attempt to loot ATM of a private bank on Heera Singh road in Jagraon

May 11 | A group of miscreants decamped with an ATM of a private bank at Kishanpura Chowk on Hambran Road after holding the security guard hostage at gunpoint

Jan 11 | Miscreants struck at an ATM in Sunder Nagar area in Ludhiana and tried to break open the machine



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
