In-Pics: DionX, an e-car that promises to surpass the Tesla model S range in 2019

The name Laureti Motors may not ring a bell immediately. Although Laureti may sound Italian, it is nowhere closer to popular Italian auto-majors such as Ferrari, Lamborghini, Maserati, and Fiat.

But wait until August, and probably that perception might change. There might be better awareness about the EV car-maker.

Laureti Motors, for the uninitiated, is a British company manufacturing electronic vehicles. The company claims that DionX, their latest offering, can drive 540 kilometers on a single charge.

The Tesla Model S, for comparison, had tested an average of 539 km on a single charge in 2017. At a time when other EV brands such as Renault, Tata, Hyundai etc have been frenetically trying to cobble up a model serving a decent 300-400 km range, claims of 540 km certainly sounds like a steep target.

Emmanuel Laurent, Managing Director at Laureti explains in an interaction, "Using a combination of specific battery technology and power systems gave us the key breakthrough results to bring forth DionX. This enables Laureti to produce highly efficient long range EVs that come with battery life guarantee up to 100,000 kms."

Besides the long range, Laureti claims that it would also focus on demonstrating its safety standards.

"Laureti will also be known for its safety aspect especially in the Indian market. We sourced a lot of data and research on road conditions and traffic behavior in building our technology solutions to achieve top mark in safety standards. We are looking forward to publishing further test results and demonstrating them live in the 'Endurance Trip' this year." added Marcus Paleti, CEO at Laureti Automotive Corporation.

The company in a press release said that it would demonstrate the performance of the DionX on the 'Laureti Endurance Trip', an event slated to begin in August 2019.

This endurance trip would involve a 6000 km journey in less than 12 charge cycles.

The starting point of the journey is set from Leh, Kashmir to Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu covering 7 major cities in between which are Delhi, Ahmedabad, Pune, Mumbai, Bangalore, Hyderabad and Chennai.

Laureti will display the live dashboard data, drive status and highlights of the journey in real time on all major online networks as well as specially built digital display-boards in various city centers. The live dashboard data will publish vehicle location, mileage, battery status and charging performance.

"The brand guarantees its battery life up to 100,000 km on all of its vehicles. DionX is expected to roll down the assembly line before the end of 2021," reads a press-release of this British company that has offices in Bengaluru and in the Andalusian city of Estepona in Spain.

There is no word on the technical specifications such as engine-specs nor have Laureti officials dropped any pricing hints. The Tesla Model S, at an exchange rate of Rs 70 per USD, and 100% import duty, had worked to a price of Rs 50 lakhs in 2017. In India, the Tata Tigor EV sells at an approximate range between Rs 12-14 lakhs. A single charge on the Tigor EV achieves a range of 80-100 km.

Although it is not right to compare a vehicle on the basis of just one number, but in a country crazy of "Kitna Deti Hai" [How much mileage does it offer?], range indeed is an important indicator.

In August, if the DionX achieves the 540 km target, it will not be surprising to see it price itself at a range of Rs 12- 30 lakhs. The Tesla Model S itself is priced at $35,000 in the US [Rs 25,90,000 at Rs 74 per Dollar]. The Tesla S is costlier in India owing to a 100% import duty.

Indian customers should be glad to know that the DionX would be a made-in-India product and hence there may not be a customs duty. In a Vimeo interaction, Paleti, the CEO said that DionX would be manufactured at a base in some part of South India. He also said that the company had identified land for assembling and manufacturing.

News agency ANI confirmed that the British Design with plush luxurious interiors and futuristic advancements would be manufactured in Puducherry.

Do you think the DionX will achieve its 540 km target? Do let us know your thoughts in the comments section below.

Text: Sify

Image Courtesy: Laureti Motors
