Lucknow confidential: Arm Tactics

As a photograph of Ravi Kishan, the BJP MP from Gorakhpur, flexing his biceps in front of the statue of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel went viral last week, the Bhojpuri actor-turned-politician received huge flak for disrespecting “Iron Man of India”. Since the photo was taken after the ‘Run for Unity’ concluded in Gorakhpur on the occasion of the birth anniversary of Patel, the Opposition slammed the BJP MP for making a “joke out of a serious event”. Kishan later gave a new twist to the story to attack the Opposition. He said the photograph was taken when he was shouting ‘Bharat Mata Ki Jai’ and “since the Opposition parties have a problem with the slogan they made it viral on social media”.

Cop Out

Last week, a directive was issued to all police personnel to “give respect to a public representative” and avoid any kind of misbehaviour with them, and anyone not adhering to it would face action. The genesis of the latest directive was an incident in Bijnor where two sub-inspectors on duty at an event attended by BJP MLA Kamlesh Saini forgot to stand up to greet the MLA. According to police sources, the MLA did not like it and complained to district Superintendent of Police Sanjeev Tyagi who immediately sent the two “erring” cops to police lines.

Performance Monitor

After revamping its UP unit with a new chief in Ajay Kumar Lallu, the Congress has decided to organise protests over the economic slowdown across the state over a period of 10 days. This will be a litmus test for the new team, formed by party general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, as well as Lallu, who was primarily selected because of his active participation in single-handedly undertaking agitations and protests on public issues in the state. While no one doubts that Lallu would take part in each of the protests, all eyes are set on how will he be able to motivate his team and cadres to make the programme a success. Sources in the party said that every member of the new team, which includes largely youth leaders, has been told that their performances would be regularly monitored and those not active in undertaking party activities would be replaced.
