Out to protest Delhi govt's Odd-Even 'political gimmick', BJP leader Vijay Goel slapped with challan

Out to protest Delhi govt's Odd-Even 'political gimmick', BJP leader Vijay Goel slapped with challan | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Vijay Goel flouted the norms of Odd-Even scheme deliberately to protest "political gimmick" of Delhi government The scheme will be in effect from November 4-15, between 8 am till 8 pm, except Sundays

New Delhi: The Delhi Police on Monday slapped a challan on Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Vijay Goel who deliberately flouted the norms of Odd-Even scheme by travelling in an odd-numbered car.

Goel left his house in a saffron-coloured Toyota Fortuner car Monday afternoon to protest “political gimmick” of Aam Aadmi Party (AAP).

“This scheme is just a gimmick, they (Delhi Govt) themselves say pollution is due to stubble burning, then how does this scheme help? I am ready to pay the fine for violation,” he told media persons.

At a day when the citizens of Delhi are gasping for breath amid a spike in pollution levels, Goel broke the law meant to curb pollution levels.

AAP’s flagship car-rationing scheme was first introduced in Delhi in 2016 and this is the third time that the scheme has been implemented.

Pollution levels in parts of Delhi reached a three-year high with Air Quality Index (AQI) touching 999 at several places of the city.

Goel dubbed the scheme Delhi government’s “political gimmick”, saying “that it has been proven that the majority of pollution is caused by stubble burning”.

A study by University of Chicago suggested that previously the scheme reduced pollution by 15%.

Congress leader Ajay Maken slammed the BJP Rajya Sabha MP for breaking the law despite being a lawmaker himself.

Vijay Goel MP-A LawMaker!



Is deliberately driving an odd number car on an even numbered day!



As a LawMaker-How can he deliberately break the law?



I’ve been most vocal critic of Kejriwal-

But,I will never ‘contribute to air pollution’ as a way of protest!



Grow up Vijay Goel! — Ajay Maken (@ajaymaken) November 4, 2019

“Vijay Goel MP-A LawMaker! Is deliberately driving an odd number car on an even-numbered day! As a LawMaker-How can he deliberately break the law? I’ve been most vocal critic of Kejriwal. But,I will never ‘contribute to air pollution’ as a way of protest! Grow up Vijay Goel!” said Maken in a statement on Twitter.

The scheme will be in effect from November 4-15, between 8 am till 8 pm, except Sundays. Two-wheelers, vehicles driven and occupied only by women, vehicles of VIPs, vehicles driven by persons with disabilities, emergency vehicles are exempted. Unlike last time, CNG vehicles are not exempted.
