Watch: Two days after Tis Hazari violence, cop thrashed by protesting lawyer outside Delhi court

Two days after a scuffle broke out between Delhi Police and lawyers at Tis Hazari court, an on-duty policeman was allegedly manhandled by a protesting lawyer outside the Saket district court Monday.

A video doing the rounds shows a policeman riding a bike being confronted by a small group of protesting lawyers, one of whom hits him with his elbow and flings a helmet on him as he rides past.

Advocates in the Delhi High Court and all district courts in Delhi have abstained from judicial work for today protesting against the clash between lawyers and police in the Tis Hazari court complex on Saturday. The lawyers are not participating and appearing in proceedings and only proxy counsel are taking dates.

Agitating lawyers also cornered a litigant outside the Saket court, blocking the court staff from entering the court premises. In the vacant court rooms adjournments were sought and lawyers gathered in huge numbers shouting slogans against police. A video showed lawyers assaulting a litigant outside the district court.

Lawyers corner a litigant & assault him on the street outside Saket district court. Litigrants and court staff not allowed to enter the court. In the vacant court rooms adjournments were sought & lawyers gathered in huge numbers shouting slogans against police. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/UrhSjhntEl — Anand Mohan (@mohanreports) November 4, 2019

In the aftermath of the violence at Tis Hazari court Saturday, with lawyers alleging their colleague was shot at and police claiming three senior officers were beaten up, the Delhi High Court has ordered a judicial enquiry, suspended two ASIs and transferred two senior police officers.

Six cases have been registered since the clash. Four of these were registered on the day of the clash. These include two cases filed by advocates, including a woman, one by a district judge and one by a constable. On Sunday, two advocates registered cases against the police team on charges of assault and attempt to murder. All six have been transferred to the Crime Branch SIT, which will further probe the matter.

According to police, around 2 pm Saturday, an argument took place between advocates and a sentry of the 3rd battalion, posted outside the lock-up for inmates at Tis Hazari court. It soon snowballed into violence after a large gathering of advocates allegedly assaulted police officers. Eight advocates sustained injuries and at least 20 police officers were beaten up.
