Man kills Tehsildar in Hyderabad by setting her ablaze in her office

Man kills Tehsildar in Hyderabad by setting her ablaze in her office

Investigating officials said that there had been a fallout between the two over 7 acres of land near Bacharam village.

news Crime

In a horrific incident that happened in broad daylight, a man killed an on-duty Tehsildar by setting her on fire. The incident happened on Monday afternoon at the office of the tehsildar in Abdullapurmet in Rangareddy district, just beyond Hyderabad’s Outer Ring Road (ORR).

According to reports, Vijaya Reddy, Tehsildar or Mandal Revenue Officer (MRO), was alone in her office when she was attacked by the stranger, who set her on fire.

A preliminary investigation by the police later identified the man as K Suresh. Officials said that there had been a fallout between the two of them over 7 acres of land near Bacharam village.

Visuals of the incident shared on social media show Vijaya running out of her office screaming for help and collapsing outside the door after she was set ablaze. Though the staff in her office tried to douse the flames using a thick blanket, she succumbed to her injuries.

While Vijaya’s body was shifted to Osmania General Hospital as per procedure, the assailant’s condition is also said to be critical as he was injured in the incident too.

Speaking to media, Rachakonda Police Commissioner Mahesh Bhagawath said, “There will be a thorough investigation. The accused has also suffered about 60% burn injuries.”

“We learnt that dispute over a land was ongoing in the High Court,” he added, suggesting that this may have been the accused’s motive to carry out the attack.

He further added, “We will see what all has led to this incident. The man is already in our custody. We are also probing if anyone had provoked him. We will finish the investigation in a limited time and take it to a fast track court for swift punishment.”

The incident also triggered protests by employees of the Revenue Department, who briefly blocked the Hyderabad-Vijayawada highway demanding justice, until the police were called in to disperse the crowd.

Several senior police officials and Ranga Reddy District Collector also visited the spot. Meanwhile, state Minister Sabitha Indra Reddy also arrived at the spot. Condemning the murder, she told media, “If there is any problem with the functioning of tehsildars, people should take it up with the higher officials… setting someone ablaze is inhumane.”

The minister urged the District Collector and the Police Commissioner to look into the matter and investigate what had led to such a heinous crime.

(This is developing story)
