NHM employees stage protest, demand regularisation

Srinagar

National Health Mission (NHM) employees on Monday again staged a protest in Srinagar to press the government for regularisation of their services.

Hundreds of employees from different districts under the banner of All J&K National Health Mission Employees Association assembled here at Pratap Park in Lalchowk Srinagar and staged a protest demonstration in favour of their long-pending demands.

The protesting employees said that most of the employees working in the department have passed half of the age but were not regularised till date.

They said that they have been discharging their duties for the past thirteen years and many employees have crossed the age-bar.

“I have been working as an NHM employee from last three years on low wages. There are employees who have worked for 10-15 years and they are treated the same” said one of the protesting NHM employee.

While talking to reporters,Altaf Ahmad Bhat who is a lab technician and senior vice president for NHM Kashmir division said, “we have been protesting from three years now and the government does not pay any heed towards us. We demand the government of J&k to listen to our demands and take immediate action in favor of NHM employees.”

Bhat said, “We are not begging rather demanding as it is our right to demand. We have dedicated our lives to function the department smoothly and neatly.if doctors and the rest can demand their regularization then why can’t we NHM employees have been neglected from time and back.”

“Today we have the best of the maternal health all over India and it is only because of the NHM employees that they work very hard and it has proved our hard work and dedication towards NHM. We are proud to be part of NHM,” said Bhat.

The employees demanded the formation of a regularization policy, immediate implementation of Supreme Court directions of equal pay to equal on the analogy of SRO 384, the benefit of 7th pay commission implementation, full leave package, removal of disparity, full medical cover, and to issue social, financial security.
