Telangana: Woman officer burnt alive in office over suspected land dispute

A woman tahsildar was allegedly burnt alive by a man in her office in Telangana ‘s Abdullapurmet in broad daylight on Monday over a suspected land dispute, Police and Revenue officials told PTI.

While Vijaya Reddy, in her 30s, died on the spot, two other staff trying to rescue her were injured, a Revenue official said. The assailant too suffered burns in the incident. All the three injured were admitted to a hospital nearby, said the police.

According to Ibrahimpatnam Revenue Divisional Officer Amarender, around 1.30 pm, when Vijaya was alone in her chamber, a local named Suresh entered her chamber, poured petrol on her and set her afire. An eyewitness said a loud sound was heard following which some staff rushed to Vijaya’s chamber. “We heard a loud sound from Madam’s chamber and ran towards it and saw madam in flames. We tried to save her,” PTI quoted an eye-witness as saying. This led to chaos in the office. When the body of the Tahsildar was being taken to hospital for postmortem, a number of revenue employees staged a protest demanding justice.

Telangana Education Minister P Sabita Indra Reddy and senior police officials then reached the spot. “If there is any grievance people should approach appropriate authorities. Officials also work for the welfare of the people only. They (people) should not resort to heinous acts. This is not the correct way,” Sabita Reddy said.

“This is the first time that such an incident happened in a government office. The man, involved in the attack, also suffered burns and undergoing treatment in a hospital. He is in our custody. He suffered 50-60 per cent burns. Initial probe revealed that the attack is linked to some land dispute. Why he did it or whether somebody provoked him to do this will be known during the investigation. Who gave him entry into the government office is being looked into,” PTI quoted Rachakonda Police Commissioner Mahesh Bhagwat as saying.

He also assured of a thorough investigation and fast-track court trial in the “murder and attempt to murder case”.
