Lawless lawyers on loose in Delhi: Advocates on beating, ransacking spree days after Tis Hazari clashes

The protesting lawyers stopped traffic at different places and manhandled auto drivers and other people who tried go past them. (Photo: PTI)

Days after the Tis Hazari showdown between the Delhi Police and the lawyers in the court complex, advocates in the Delhi High Court and all district courts went on strike on Monday.

The lawyers even refused to present in front of the judges at Delhi High Court.

The lawyers said they would not participate in any of the judicial work and only proxy counsel would appear in the courts to take dates in various matters.

Moreover, lawyers not only protested on roads by stopping vehicles but also beat up journalists and the common people.

Show of might

Monday's strike by lawyers seem less like an effort to protect their rights and more like a show of might.

The lawyers began their strike around 10 am and it's side effects could be felt across the city.

With the commencement of the odd-even scheme in Delhi, people were already facing difficulty in commuting, the strike added to their troubles.

The protesting lawyers stopped traffic at different places and manhandled auto drivers and other people who tried go past them.

The lawyers were also seen damaging police property in the city, according to various videos of the protest doing rounds on social media. They even cornered a litigant and assaulted him on the street outside Saket district court.

Lawyers corner a litigant & assault him on the street outside Saket district court. Litigrants and court staff not allowed to enter the court. In the vacant court rooms adjournments were sought & lawyers gathered in huge numbers shouting slogans against police. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/UrhSjhntEl Anand Mohan (@mohanreports) November 4, 2019

Police mere spectators

Police stood as mere spectators outside Tis Hazari Court to the prevalent anarchy by the lawyers.

While lawyers were misbehaving and beating people up, all police did was watch from a distance in case things went out of hand.

Further, an on-duty policeman was allegedly thrashed by advocates outside Saket Court on Monday, officials said.

In a video of the purported incident, lawyers were seen beating up the policeman who is riding a bike. One of the lawyer was also seen slapping the policeman.

When the policeman was leaving the spot, the lawyer also hit his bike with his helmet.

This is utterly shameful. Lawyers targeting, beating up and assaulting a policeman on duty outside Saket Court over what happened in Tees Hazari Court is unfortunate. @CPDelhi @DelhiPolice take strict action against these advocates. pic.twitter.com/Nq3T8M8CaV Munish Pandey (@MunishPandeyy) November 4, 2019

Purpose of strike

India Today TV tried to talk to the lawyers to enquire about the purpose of their strike.

In response, the lawyers said that they want the arrest of those policemen who attacked their colleagues on Saturday.

The Delhi High Court has already constituted a judicial investigation committee, headed by a retired judge Justice SP Garg, which will give its report in six weeks.

However, the lawyers want immediate arrest of policemen.

The bar association election has also been suspended due to the violence at Tis Hazari court on Saturday.

Elections were due to take place on November 5.

Six cases registered

Six cases have been registered in connection with the clash between police and lawyers at Tis Hazari Court complex in which at least 20 police personnel and a number of advocates were injured while many vehicles vandalised or set on fire, a Delhi Police spokesperson said on Sunday.

The cases were registered on separate complaints of the district judge of Tis Hazari court, four advocates, and a Delhi Police constable who was injured in the incident, additional PRO of the Delhi Police Anil Mittal said.

WHAT HAPPENED

Lawyers and police personnel clashed at the Tis Hazari Court complex on Saturday afternoon, resulting in injuries to at least 20 police personnel and several lawyers while 17 vehicles were vandalised, according to officials and eyewitnesses.

The high court took suo motu (on its own) cognisance of media reports of the incident on Sunday and said Justice (retd) S P Garg, a former judge of the court, would hold a judicial inquiry into the matter.

It directed the Delhi police commissioner to transfer Special Commissioner Sanjay Singh and Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police Harinder Singh during the pendency of the inquiry and made it clear that no coercive action would be taken against any lawyer.

READ | Cops, lawyers clash at Delhi's Karkardooma court 2 days after Tis Hazari violence

READ | Delhi: Lawyers, cops clash at Tis Hazari

WATCH | Delhi: Lawyers, police clash outside Tis Hazari Court, vehicle set on fire
