Top news of the day: Kerala on the edge a day after two women pray at Sabarimala, SC revives govt’s case against Nestle's Maggi, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

Live: Kerala on the edge a day after two women pray at Sabarimala

A dawn to dusk hartal was observed in Kerala on Thursday in protest against the entry of two women of menstruating age into the temple of Lord Ayyappa in Sabarimala in the early hours of Wednesday.

Kerala Governor Justice (Retd.) Sadasivam has sought a law and order report from Kerala Chief Minister Office following the incidents of violence and destruction of private & public property.

Parliament updates | Rajya Sabha passes amendment to RTE Act

On the second working day of 2019, Lok Sabha saw the suspension of 19 members — 7 from the AIADMK and 12 from the TDP — for storming into the Well of the House. The Rajya Sabha took up the debate on resolution to impose President’s Rule in Jammu and Kashmir, and approved the move by a voice vote. The House also passed the the National Council for Teacher Education (Amendment) Bill.

SC to hear on Jan. 8 TN's appeal against NGT order to reopen Sterlite plant at Thoothukudi

The Supreme Court on Thursday agreed to hear on January 8 the appeal filed by Tamil Nadu government against the decision of the National Green Tribunal (NGT) to reopen the Sterlite copper plant at Thoothukudi, which was ordered to be closed due to environmental pollution.

Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi agreed to list the appeal on the day when Vedanta Limited, which owns the plant, made an urgent mentioning for an early hearing of the State appeal.

Main accused in instigating December last Bulandshahr mob violence arrested

More than 70 persons, some of them allegedly having links with VHP and Bajrang Dal, were booked for the mob violence that followed allegations of cow slaughter in a village.

Judges, officials under watch after Centre’s computer surveillance order, claims lawyer in SC

Advocate M.L. Sharma sought an early hearing of his PIL plea challenging the Dec. 20 Govt. notification as a violation of the fundamental right to privacy.

SC revives govt’s case in National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission against Nestle India

The Supreme Court on Thursday revived the government’s case in the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC) against Nestle India seeking damages of Rs 640 crore on charges of unfair trade practices, false labelling and misleading advertisements.

India reminds U.S. that it sends soldiers abroad only for UN Peacekeeping Operations

In response to Donald Trump’s jibe about India building libraries in Afghanistan, an official source said that Indian assistance to Afghanistan is part of a bilateral arrangement with the Government of President Ashraf Ghani.

Bangladesh President invites Hasina to form government

Sheikh Hasina was on Thursday invited by Bangladesh President Abdul Hamid to form the next government, hours after she was elected as the Awami League’s parliamentary party chairperson.

Two militants in Tunisia blow themselves as security forces storm hideout

Two militants in Tunisia blew themselves up on Thursday after they exchanged fire with security forces who stormed their hideout and encircled them, the interior ministry said.

Another Pujara master-class gives India day 1 honours at SCG

Cheteshwar Pujara played the anchor’s role yet again with his third masterful hundred of the series, helping India dominate Australia on the opening day of the fourth and final Test in Sydney on Thursday.
