Karnataka Industrial Security Forces to stand guard for medical college

BMCRI

Karnataka Industrial Security Forces

Medical College

Victoria Hospital

Minto Eye Hospital

Security measures to be enhanced atafter a PG student was assaulted by a mob, highlighting the loopholes in campus safetyThe Department of Medical Education has decided protect medicos and patients from assaulters by deploying(KISF) in BangaloreResearch Institute (BMCRI) campus, which housesand also. This comes after a post-graduate student of the hospital was assaulted by a mob.The BMCRI officials, who have been bogged by the poor security measures in the campus, on Monday, requested the Deputy Chief Minister and minister for medical education CN Ashwath Narayan for a centralised security system.Dr S Balaji Pai, special officer of BMCRI Trauma Centre said, “The security force in the campus is not up to the mark. We have asked the minister to set up a centralised security system that will not only use CCTV cameras but also have regular vigilance. This security system should suffice for Victoria and Minto Eye Hospital as well.”In the medical colleges’ general body meeting, the minister decided to bring in KISF to secure these colleges. Ashwath Narayan said, “We have decided to bring in KISF to improve security measures in the college so that the entire campus will be provided with CCTV cameras and all systems will be available. This was a long-pending initiative that needed to be taken up in our medical colleges but we had not done it. But it will be done as soon as possible so that the safety of the medical fraternity can be ensured.”Recently, after the attack on PG students by Karnataka Rakshana Vedike, the students of Minto and BMCRI protested against it. Ashwath Narayan said, “In the month of July, around 10 patients lost their vision during cataract surgeries due to an illegal drug. An action is being taken in that regard. But, this assault took place because of the same issue after a group of people entered the hospital. We have decided to give Rs 3 lakh to every patient who lost their vision. They will also be given free medication anytime they visit the hospital.”“What happened to the students is condemnable and an FIR has already been registered. The police have taken up the matter. We are abiding the law and the police will do their duty. Seven students met me and I have addressed them. I have requested them to call off the protest,” he said.He also said that all medical colleges and hospitals run by the state government will have KISF security forces. “We will soon have tight security in all our hospitals in the state and not only in these colleges because an incident has occurred here,” added Ashwath Narayan.
