Economic slowdown: Congress to hold nationwide protests starting today

Congress will hold a countrywide protest against the BJP government from November 5 to 15. (Source: Twitter/Congress)

The Congress, beginning Tuesday, is holding a nationwide protest till November 15 to highlight the economic slowdown, unemployment rate, farm distress, RCEP, among others.

Senior Congress leader Manish Tewari on Monday claimed that economy was in “intensive care unit” as the BJP government was “mismanaging” it.

“The Indian economy is in ICU and the BJP-led government is responsible for the same. They have completely mismanaged the economy, adversely affecting lakhs of jobs in the country,” Tewari told reporters in Chandigarh.

He said the country-wide protests will be organised to “shake” the government “out of its sloth”, adding that, “The BJP government has turned India’s demographic dividend into a demographic disaster.”

Drawing attention to the unemployment rate, Tewari said, according to the National Sample Survey Office, the unemployment figure was at a 45-year-high and still rising.

Underlining the subject of the protest, he said the Indian economy was “sinking” as the GDP growth was slowest in the last six years.

“Despite the data jugglery, GDP growth in the first quarter of the 2019-20 fiscal is at an abysmal low of 5 per cent,” he said.

Last week, Congress General Secretary KC Venugopal said the party will carry out the protest through all state capitals and district headquarters. He further said the agitation will raise issues surrounding the “Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), current economic crisis, mounting unemployment, spiraling price rise, bank frauds, job losses in public and private sectors, and farm distress”.

In the last week of November, the protest will conclude with a “massive programme” in Delhi, Venugopal said, adding that at the state level, the PCC presidents, CLP leaders and senior AICC functionaries will provide the leadership, while central leaders will participate in the protest in the national capital.

“The Congress party workers and its volunteers will raise the voice of the people and try to make this insensitive central government accountable for the countless miseries and sufferings that it is causing,” the Congress General Secretary had said.

Reviewing the preparations for this nation-wide protest, Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi held a meeting on Saturday with AICC general secretaries, state in-charges, heads of frontal organisations and departments.

The Opposition party has decided to depute 31 senior party leaders as observers to various states and UTs to monitor the agitation. Senior Congress leaders will also hold press conferences in nearly 35 cities highlighting these issues.

with PTI inputs
