Karnataka: Woman engineer set for first job dies in pothole accident, police book her father

The young engineer was set to take up her first job this month in Bengaluru. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights The 23-year-old girl had recently completed her engineering The victim has been identified as Sindhuja K Angry residents protest against pothole menace in the city

Chikkamangaluru: In a tragic incident, a 23-year-old woman engineer lost her life after her father tried to avoid a pothole while riding a two-wheeler in Chikkamangaluru district of Karnataka. The incident took place at Chikkamangaluru-Kadur road on Sunday. The young engineer was set to take up her first job this month in Bengaluru.

According to a report, the victim has been identified as Sindhuja K, who recently completed her engineering in computer science from a college in Tumakuru. Sindhuja was in the process of completing her joining formalities when the accident took place.

After the girl's death, a huge protest was staged by the concerned citizens as police booked the victim's father for rash driving leading to the mishap. People have now launched an online campaign 'Fill potholes, Save lives' and asked the government to take appropriate steps in this regard.

The accident took place when the victim and her father were going to a police station for Sindhuja's passport verification and encountered a big pothole on the way. Sindhuja's father applied brakes as he tried to negotiate the pothole following which the victim fell from the vehicle and was seriously injured.

She was immediately taken to a local hospital from where she was referred to Hassan. The victim succumbed to her injuries before she reached the hospital. Her parents have filed a complaint about the potholed road.

Meanwhile, the local Congress leaders also staged a protest demanding the government and the National Highways Authority of India to repair the road on an urgent basis.

Other pothole deaths

In another tragic incident reported from Bhiwandi in Maharashtra, a 42-year-old man lost his life on Diwali as he rammed his bike into a divider while trying to avoid a pothole in Thane district.

The biker lost his balance and fell off the vehicle and subsequently died on the spot. This is the third death related to a pothole in this month on Bhiwandi-Wada road. This road is a highly used stretch for the people moving to and from Wada. The incident took place when the victim Rajendra Dongre was on his way to Wada to meet his relatives on Diwali. Earlier, the local residents had raised complaints of poor road conditions but all that fell on deaf ears. Neither any civic official nor any road contractor was booked for the death.
