We are punching bags: Cops protest outside police HQ, IPS officers condemn assault by lawyers on Twitter

The brawl between police officers and lawyers at Delhi's Tis Hazari Court on Saturday has now escalated into a full-blown row.

On Tuesday, a large group of police personnel gathered outside the Delhi Police headquarters at ITO to protest the Saturday violence and the assault on police officers by lawyers subsequently.

The police personnel, in uniform, were seen wearing black bands to condemn the attacks on their ranks.

A police officer on the spot told India Today TV, "We have simply come to meet the commissioner. We want justice. If those in the legal profession won't listen to us, who will?"

Follow live updates from the Delhi Police protest here

Another officer said that they had not gathered for a protest but were simply at the PHQ to meet their superior and present their grievances.

The police officers refused to comment on a video making the rounds on social media wherein a group of lawyers can be seen beating, slapping a lone police officer outside the Saket Court in the capital.

Commissioner pacifies protesting cops

As surging crowds of protesters gathered outside the Police Headquarters in ITO, leading to traffic snarls, Commissioner of Delhi Police Amulya Patnaik came out of his office to assure them that their concerns will be addressed.

"We have to behave like a disciplined force. The government and the people expect us to uphold the law, it is our big responsibility. I urge you to resume duty," Patnaik told the police personnel.

Delhi Commissioner of Police Amulya Patnaik addresses the police personnel protesting at the Police Head Quarters (PHQ) in ITO: In last few days, there have been certain incidents in the capital which we handled very well. The situation is improving after that. pic.twitter.com/5OWey3TimM ANI (@ANI) November 5, 2019

"The last few days have been testing for us. A judicial enquiry is underway and I request you to have faith in the process," he told the gathering.

The entire top brass of the Delhi police tried to pacify the police personnel who were chanting slogans demanding justice and wore black bands. Delhi Police has a strength of over 80,000 personnel.

Opposition targets government

The Opposition is now using the protest by policemen as an opportunity to attack the government. Taking to Twitter, Congress leader Randeep Surjewala said, "A new low in 72 years - Police on protest in National Capital of Delhi’. Is this BJP’s New India’?"

A new low in 72 years - Police on protest in National Capital of Delhi’.



Is this BJP’s New India’?



Where will BJP take the country?



Where is India’s HM, Sh. Amit Shah?



!!! pic.twitter.com/6irmEZ7Zam Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) November 5, 2019

Another Congress leader RPN Singh said, "Those responsible for the security of Delhi are themselves sitting on dharna. What kind of law and order is this? Where are the home ministry and the home minister? Such lawlessness can only be seen under BJP rule."

Meanwhile, Union Minister Kiren Rijiju in a tweet said policing is a thankless job but cops do it every day without any expectation. He later deleted the tweet.

IPS officers rage on Twitter

Meanwhile, several IPS officers took to Twitter to condemn the continued attack on policemen.

Former Jammu and Kashmir DGP Shesh Paul Vaid wrote, "Saddened to see such treatment meted out to Police officers who spend their entire lives protecting civil society and maintaining law & order."

Saddened to see such treatment meted out to Police officers who spend their entire lives protecting civil society and maintaining law & order @DelhiPolice https://t.co/RPyQplVcmO Shesh Paul Vaid (@spvaid) November 5, 2019

Karnataka IPS officer, D Roopa, said that the assault was a "mockery of the system". She said if the "strictest action" is not taken against the perpetrators, it will dampen the morale of officers and "embolden hooligans".

Mockery of the system. I only wish people at helm of affairs take strictest action. Else morale of the force suffers n will embolden hooligans to take law into their hands. https://t.co/Dz5Jnpuclw D Roopa IPS (@D_Roopa_IPS) November 4, 2019

Another IPS officer, Dependra Pathak also called for instilling the "fear of law" among "mischief-makers".

Lumpen elements in the garb of Black Coat are on total rampage endangering social orderliness in Delhi. Fear of law need to be instilled among these mischief mongers.@DelhiPolice need to interpose pending Police-Lawyer clash cases. Dependra Pathak (@Dependra_Pathak) November 4, 2019

Arunachal DIG Madhur Verma lamented that police officers don't have human rights. "I am sorry.. we are police ... we don't exist.. we don't have families...we don't have human rights !!!" he said.

I am sorry.. we are police ... we don’t exist.. we don’t have families...we don’t have human rights !!! https://t.co/ZqR7dEUFgy Madhur Verma (@IPSMadhurVerma) November 4, 2019

Echoing the sentiment, IPS officer Aslam Khan said police officers are "punching bags".

Other officers too said that Tis Hazari incident has shaken the "collective consciousness of society" and that even police officers deserve to be treated equally under the law.

No one is above the law...Hoolingans must be punished even if they are masquerading as lawyers. Tis Hazari incident has shaken the collective consciousness of whole society. Time has come lawyers read the law! @IPS_Association @CPDelhi @abhikr31873 @kpsingh20#tishazariclash Dr. Sagar Preet Hooda (@SagarHoodaIPS) November 4, 2019

The IPS Association, in contrast, called for a balanced view of the Tis Hazari violence. It did condemn the attacks of officers of the law.

Incident involving police & lawyers unfortunate. All should take a balanced view of it based on facts in public domain. Countrywide, police stands in solidarity with those police personnel subjected to physical assault & humiliation. Condemn all attempts to break law, by anyone! IPS Association (@IPS_Association) November 4, 2019

Lawless lawyers take to streets

On Monday, protest marches were held by lawyers all over the national capital. Lawyers at the six district courts in the national capital - Tis Hazari, Karkardooma, Saket, Dwarka, Rohini and Patiala House -- boycotted work throughout the day.

Photo: PTI

Around 200 lawyers marched from the Saket court to Saket police station raising slogans and several others marched from the Tis Hazari court to the residence of the Lt Governor Anil Baijal and sat on a dharna outside.

Moreover, lawyers not only protested on roads by stopping vehicles but also beat up journalists and the common people.

Monday's strike by lawyers seemed less like an effort to protect their rights and more like a show of might.

The protesting lawyers stopped traffic at different places and manhandled auto drivers and other people who tried to go past them.

The lawyers were also seen damaging police property in the city, according to various videos of the protest doing rounds on social media. They even cornered a litigant and assaulted him on the street outside Saket district court.

Lawyers corner a litigant & assault him on the street outside Saket district court. Litigrants and court staff not allowed to enter the court. In the vacant court rooms adjournments were sought & lawyers gathered in huge numbers shouting slogans against police. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/UrhSjhntEl Anand Mohan (@mohanreports) November 4, 2019

An on-duty policeman was allegedly thrashed by advocates outside Saket Court on Monday. In a video of the purported incident, lawyers were seen beating up the policeman who is riding a bike. One of the lawyers was also seen slapping the policeman.

This is utterly shameful. Lawyers targeting, beating up and assaulting a policeman on duty outside Saket Court over what happened in Tees Hazari Court is unfortunate. @CPDelhi @DelhiPolice take strict action against these advocates. pic.twitter.com/Nq3T8M8CaV Munish Pandey (@MunishPandeyy) November 4, 2019

When the policeman was leaving the spot, the lawyer also hit his bike with his helmet.

On Saturday, lawyers and police clashed at the Tis Hazari court complex here on Saturday during which at least 20 police personnel and several lawyers were injured while many vehicles vandalised or set on fire, according to officials.
