Policing a thankless job: Kiren Rijiju supports Delhi Police, deletes tweet later

Hundreds of Delhi Police personnel came out to protest attacks by lawyers on their colleagues in Delhi courts. (Photo: IANS)

Union minister Kiren Rijiju has come out in support of personnel of the Delhi Police who are protesting in the national capital against recent cases of police officers being manhandled by lawyers at various courts in Delhi.

In a tweet, Kiren Rijiju said, "Being a cop is a thankless job. But they don't do it for thanks. Police officers put their lives on the line every day. They are damned if they do, and damned even if they don't."

He said, "What gets lost in all the anti-police rhetoric is the family left at home while a policeman serves."

However, minutes later he deleted the tweet and issued a clarification saying, "It's not question of supporting any group. Just let's not take law into our hands."

It's not question of supporting any group. Just let's not take law into our hands. Kiren Rijiju (@KirenRijiju) November 5, 2019

On Saturday, a violent scuffle took place between lawyers and the Delhi Police at the Tis Hazari Court Complex in New Delhi. It started with a parking row but later escalated, leading to violence and arson at the Tis Hazari Court complex.

At least 20 police personnel and several lawyers were injured and many vehicles were damaged in the incident. The lawyers alleged that the police fired at them.

Let's not take law into our hands. https://t.co/l52elZ2cmm Kiren Rijiju (@KirenRijiju) November 5, 2019

Following this, on Sunday, the Delhi High court ordered a judicial probe into the violence by a team comprising a retired judge, Directors of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), the Intelligence Bureau and Vigilance.

On Monday, another police personnel was beaten up by lawyers at another court in Delhi and the video of the incident has gone viral on social media.

Hundreds of Delhi Police personnel have gheraoed the Police Headquarters at ITO today to protest against repeated incidents of violence against them by lawyers.

Tweeting the video of Monday's violence, Kiren Rijiju said, "Let's not take law into our hands but let law take its own course!"
