Delhi Police Commissioner appeals for peace as cops hold massive protest against attacks on policemen

Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Amid the ongoing row between police and lawyers in Delhi, a massive protest by cops is underway in the national capital on Tuesday outside the Delhi Police headquarters at ITO. Hundreds of cops, many of them in plain clothes, gathered outside the headquarters at ITO in Central Delhi and demanded stern action against lawyers who have been involved in violent incidents against them.

Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik met the protesting policemen and urged them to maintain peace. While speaking to media, Patnaik said, "In last few days, there have been certain incidents in the capital which we handled very well. The situation is improving after that."

"I appeal to all to maintain peace. It's trying time for us. We need to fulfil the responsibility of maintaining and assuring law and order. It is expected from us that we, the protectors of law, will continue to assure law and order in the capital."

Delhi Commissioner of Police Amulya Patnaik: I appeal to all to maintain peace. It's trying time for us. We need to fulfill the responsibility of maintaining&assuring law&order.

It is expected from us that we the protectors of law will continue to assure law&order in the capital https://t.co/7Mj5hKMsH8 — ANI (@ANI) November 5, 2019

The cops have been demanding to know who will protect them in the light of such incidents. Holding banners and placards, the protesting police personnel demanded to meet the Commissioner of Police, Amulya Patnaik.

Some of the messages on the banners and placards read: "Save Police", We are Humans too", "Protect The Savers", "How is the josh? Low sir" etc.

Police Commissioner Patnaik has been under fire for failing to visit the injured cops or meet with them after Saturday’s clash.

Despite assurances from top cops, the protesting police personnel have refused to vacate the road outside the police headquarters.

The Delhi Traffic Police has issued an advisory in view of the protest at ITO. “Traffic movement is closed in the carriageway from ITO towards Laxmi Nagar. Motorist are advised to use Delhi Gate & Raj Ghat roads,” the advisory read.

Meanwhile, the Ministry of Home Affairs sources today said the Delhi Police has submitted its report to MHA on the incident where clash broke out between police and lawyers at Tis Hazari Court on November 2.

#WATCH Delhi: Police personnel raise slogans of "we want justice" outside the Police Head Quarters (PHQ) in ITO. They are protesting against the clash that broke out between police & lawyers at Tis Hazari Court on 2nd November. pic.twitter.com/XFAbQn2gay — ANI (@ANI) November 5, 2019

The protest came a day after a video of lawyers roughing up a cop on a motorcycle outside the Saket court went viral. The video emerged just two days after violent clashes outside the Tis Hazari court between the police and lawyers allegedly over a parking row.

The lawyers had even indulged in arson at the Tis Hazari Court complex and set several police vehicles on fire.

In Saturday’s clash, at least 20 police personnel and several lawyers had sustained injuries. The lawyers have alleged that the police opened fire at them following the row over parking.

Taking cognisance of the matter, the Delhi High Court had on Sunday set up a judicial probe into the matter. A retired judge and directors of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), the Intelligence Bureau and Vigilance have been asked to conduct the judicial inquiry.

Meanwhile, following High Court’s order, the Delhi Police removed Special Commissioner (in-charge Law and Order) Sanjay Singh and replaced him with Special Commissioner RS Krishnaiya, who has been given the additional charge.

Also on Monday, lawyers at the Delhi High Court and all district courts stayed away from work in protest against Saturday’s clash.

Judicial work at Tis Hazari, Karkardooma, Saket, Dwarka, Rohini and Patiala House courts were affected in view of lawyers’ strike. Protest marches were also held by lawyers across Delhi.

Clashes were also reported between lawyers and police personnel at some of the district courts. There were also reports of lawyers abusing some journalists at the Tis Hazari Court premises.
