'It happened so quickly': Eyewitnesses recount murder of Tehsildar Vijaya Reddy

'It happened so quickly': Eyewitnesses recount murder of Tehsildar Vijaya Reddy

Vijaya Reddy was set on fire and killed on Monday at her office, reportedly over a long-pending land dispute, at Ranga Reddy district in Telangana.

news Crime

The usual calm at the Abdullapurmet Tehsildar Office on the outskirts of Hyderabad was broken by the sound of a small explosion on Monday afternoon. As those present quickly rushed to the ground floor to see what happened, a person was on fire and collapsed outside the door of Tehsildar Vijaya Reddy's office chambers.

Confusion prevailed on what to do next, but some bystanders quickly intervened and brought a blanket to put out the fire. It was only after the fire was doused that the employees realised that the victim was Tehsildar Vijaya Reddy herself.

Vijaya Reddy was set on fire and killed on Monday at her office by a man called K Suresh, reportedly over a long-pending land dispute. According to the staff who were present in the office complex, the explosion was soon followed by smoke. They identified Vijaya from her watch and bangles.

Two employees, including a driver, who tried to save the Tehsildar were also injured.

"It happened so quickly. We don't know how it happened and how he managed to smuggle the bottle of petrol inside. He came alone," the driver, who also received serious burn injuries, told reporters.

"I was waiting in line to meet the Tehsildar but I got a phone call and stepped just a little distance away. The next second I heard the sound of an explosion and thought it was a cylinder blast. As I saw, one man (Suresh) was on fire and running away from the office. Within seconds, the officer also came out of her chambers," a woman who witnessed the incident told reporters.

Videos that have surfaced also show several people breaking down after seeing Vijaya's body as they waited for the police and an ambulance to arrive.

"She was a very nice officer. She would always listen to us. If there was a disagreement, they could have argued, but what he did was totally wrong. He should be punished and we should ensure that this doesn't happen again," an eyewitness told a local channel.

Vijaya's body was later taken to Osmania Hospital for autopsy. Rachakonda Police Commissioner Mahesh Bhagwat said that the accused, who sustained 60% burn injuries, was also shifted to the same hospital, and was in their custody.

The explosion was said to have been caused by the fire coming in contact with an AC duct. The police have collected forensic evidence from the office chambers.

Family members in grief

Vijaya is survived by her husband and two children. Her family hails from Miryalaguda in Nalgonda district. Her husband Subhash Reddy works as a Degree College lecturer in Hyderabad.

The distraught family was seen breaking down at the hospital, unwilling to speak to the media or anyone else who had gathered.

The Abdullapurmet mandal was carved out recently and Vijaya was its first MRO. The incident has sent shock waves among government officials and evoked all-round condemnation.

Employees across the state staged protests, demanding security.

Vijaya's last rites will be held at her home in Hyderabad.

Read: Tehsildar burnt alive in Telangana: Was a land row behind ghastly murder?
