Protesting against lawyers, cops lay siege to area outside Delhi Police HQ; some want ‘Kiran Bedi as chief’

Placard calling for return of Kiran Bedi as Delhi Police Commissioner | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Despite being assured by their chief Amulya Patnaik, thousands of Delhi Police personnel who have been protesting outside their force’s headquarters in central Delhi since Tuesday morning, have refused to budge from their stand. The cops – both in uniform and plain clothes – have laid siege to the busy road outside the Delhi Police Headquarters at ITO demanding stern action against lawyers who have been involved in violent incidents against police personnel over the past few days.

While Delhi Police Commissioner Patnaik urged them to end the protest, disperse and resume their duties, the protesters have stood firm on concrete action against lawyers before they call off the agitation.

The row started on Saturday following violent clashes between police personnel and lawyers at the Tis Hazari Court premises, allegedly over a parking dispute. At least 20 cops and several lawyers were injured in the incident. Two days later, on Monday, another incident added fuel to the raging fire when lawyers roughed up a policeman outside the Saket court. The video of the incident has gone viral.

As thousands of police personnel gathered outside the police HQ at ITO this morning, causing the busy road to be blocked and leading to traffic snarls in the area, the Commissioner of Police came out to pacify his men and women.

Delhi Police personnel hold placard with a picture of former Delhi Special CP, Kiran Bedi that reads "We need you", outside the Police Head Quarters (PHQ) in ITO. They are protesting against the clash that broke out between police & lawyers at Tis Hazari Court on 2nd November. https://t.co/503H4UeQCF pic.twitter.com/EpNKvvrXsM — ANI (@ANI) November 5, 2019

“In the last few days, there have been certain incidents in the capital which we handled very well. The situation is improving after that. It is expected from us that we, the protectors of law, will continue to assure law and order in the capital,” Patnaik said.

“I appeal to all to maintain peace. These are trying times for us. We need to fulfill the responsibility of maintaining and assuring law and order,” he said further, while adding the incidents were an aberration. "We have to behave like a disciplined force. The government and the people expect us to uphold the law, it is our big responsibility. I urge you to resume duty," he added.

Later, speaking to reporters, Patnaik said the top police brass was trying to address the anger. “FIR has been registered in the incidents in which police personnel were assaulted. We are addressing the anger that men in uniform are expressing. I appeal to the media also to help in spreading my message to the rank and file of Delhi Police to have faith that justice will be done," he said.

The police chief denied that there was discontent in the force, while ejecting claims that there was a disconnect between the top Delhi Police brass and the lower-ranked personnel. "Delhi Police is a professional and disciplined force and we will discharge our duties. It is incorrect to say that senior officers are not with the rank and file of the force. We are looking after their welfare at all times,” he said.

It may be noted here that since the Saturday incident, it is the first time that Patnaik spoke to his force. He neither visited the spot of Saturday’s violent incident nor the injured personnel admitted at the hospital.

‘We need you, Kiran Bedi’

Meanwhile, even as the Delhi Police chief called on the personnel to end the protest and resume duty, many of them raised a demand for bringing back Kiran Bedi as the Commissioner of Delhi Police. Ex-Delhi Police chief Bedi is now retired and is currently serving as the lieutenant governor of Puducherry.

Some of the Delhi Police personnel could be seen holding a placard with a picture of Kiran Bedi. The placard read: "We need you".

Some of the men and women also raised slogans of "Hamara CP (Commissioner of Police) kaisa ho, Kiran Bedi jaisa ho".

Some of the protesters at the agitation site told reporters that while action has been taken against cops who were acting in self-defence on Saturday, no action had been taken against the lawyers involved. “When our safety is compromised, how do we ensure law is enforced?" one of the protesting cops was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

The protesters, wearing black bands, also held up placards with slogans such as "We are human in police uniforms", "We are not punching bags" and "Protectors Need Protection".

"Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal went to meet injured lawyers but did not meet our policemen who were also injured in the incident. Isn't it unfair to us," a protestor said.

Saturday's clash in which many vehicles were also vandalised or set on fire has drawn sharp criticism from top police officials.

"I am sorry.. we are police ... we don't exist.. we don't have families...we don't have human rights!!!" former Delhi Police PRO Madhur Verma, currently posted as Arunachal Pradesh's Deputy Inspector General (DIG), wrote on Twitter.

Delhi DCP Aslam Khan, now posted in Goa, posted a video of the attack on the cop outside the Saket court and said, "Khakhi going down to the worse".

Meanwhile, it was reported that two FIRs have been registered in connection with the violence outside Saket District Court on Monday. One FIR filed has been filed on the complaint given by the police officer who was thrashed by a lawyer and another on the complaint of a taxi driver who was hit with a steel rod.
