Delhi Police protest over clash at Tis Hazari court

It’s a Moment of ‘Pariksha, Apeksha and Pratiksha’,Says Top Cop as Jawans Shout’Police Commissioner Kaisa Ho, Kiran Bedi Jaisa Ho’





Staff Reporter / New Delhi

A large number of Delhi Police personnel today held unprecedented protests in the national capital against their senior officers, urging Commissioner Amulya Patnaik to take action against lawyers who attacked them in Tis Hazari court on Saturday.

Holding handwritten placards, the police personnel held the protest near old Police Headquarters at ITO.

Yesterday, a policeman was attacked by a lawyer in Saket Court complex.

Policemen ditched their Khaki and donned civilian clothes today as they gathered outside the Delhi Police headquarters to protest Saturday’s violence with lawyers and the subsequent assault on a cop outside a court in Saket on Monday.

Cops came out in large numbers demanding to meet the Police Commissioner and put forward their grievances as chants of “We Want Justice” reverberated across the premises. Several of them hoisted banners that read slogans like, “Save Police”, “We are Humans too”, among other messages.

Severe traffic congestion was reported and roads around the area were blocked after protesting cops sat down on a dharna.

Senior Indian Police Service (IPS) officers took to Twitter to express their dismay and anger following the incident.

Sharing a video of the Tis Hazari incident where a policeman is seen being dragged and beaten by over 50 lawyers in the court premises, senior IPS officer Aslam Khan posted on Twitter, “Any opinion? This was starting point of tussle what I could guess. For how long police will be at receiving end just because they have no support and leadership.”

Abhinav Kumar who is posted in Jammu & Kashmir, wrote on Twitter, “As a proud policeman serving in Kashmir, recent HC order in the clash of lawyers & police is demoralizing for police all over India. Lawless acts by lawyers are also clearly available in the public domain. Delhi HC, please take action on them too.” He tagged Delhi Police and the IPS Association.

Another IPS officer Sanjukta Parashar concurred, “This video is very disturbing on all levels. The protests after this are bizaree. We, of course, must maintain impartiality and equanimity. But can we call a spade a spade please. Its high time.”

Renuka Mishra, another senior IPS officer posted, “Precisely. Nobody can be above the law.

A political slugfest erupted over the protests with Congress’ Randeep Surjewala dubbing it as a “new low” in the country’s history and questioned Union Home Minister Amit Shah’s silence on the matter. “A new low in 72 years – Police on protest in ‘National Capital of Delhi’.Is this BJP’s ‘New India’? Where will BJP take the country? Where is India’s HM, Sh. Amit Shah?” he wrote on Twitter.

Police officers are asking for justice .



Lawyers are asking for justice.



When these both are supppose to help others in getting justice



Uprecedented things happening in @narendramodi & @AmitShah rule #DelhiPoliceVsLawyers https://t.co/FECzO9xxCH — Razzak (@rzk_ali) November 5, 2019
