Congress to start ‘Wake up Kumbhakarna’ campaign against Modi govt

MANGALURU: Jaiveer Shergill spokesperson of Congress said, the party will launch a ‘ Wake up Kumbhakarna ’ campaign and protests across the nation to 'wake up' the BJP government, which is 'sleeping'.Shergill told media persons here on Tuesday that the party leaders will hold campaigns across the nation creating awareness on failures of the Narendra Modi government, especially in reviving the economy.“BJP Government is solely responsible for the deep financial distress in the Indian economy bordering on financial emergency. GDP growth is slowest in last six years. India has dropped to the level of 7th largest economy from being the 5th largest in the world. New private investments have hit a 16 year low. Household Savings are at a 20 year low. India’s overall savings rate has declined to 30% from 34.6% earlier. Industrial Growth shrank to 1.1% in August, 2019, a 7 year low. Manufacturing Growth Rate at -1.2% (negative) is lowest since October, 2014. Core Sector growth is lowest in last four years. Exports are in a free fall. Banks’ NPAs are already Rs 8,00,000 crore. Five years of BJP Government have seen nearly 25,000 cases of bank frauds involving Rs 1,74,255 crore. Instead of punishing the guilty, shielding the bank fraudsters has become the new normal of the BJP Government,” Shergill charged.According to National Sample Survey Office (NSSO), unemployment is at a 45 year high and still climbing in India. According to Centre for Monitoring of Indian Economy (CMIE), unemployment rate stands at 8.19% as in August, 2019 which has further reason to 8.5% i.e. highest ever. Even globally, as per International Labour Organisation (ILO), the unemployment rate is 4.95%. It means that India’s unemployment rate is the double of world’s average, he said adding that Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman should resign and do internship with former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.Further, he demanded the BJP government to present a white paper on the economic crisis India facing and the Finance Minister should explain why all measures of the government failed. “A national Financial Emergency should be declared,” he urged.
