The Shillong Times

AP youths climb radio tower, demand job opportunities

Vijayawada (Andhra Pradesh): Some unemployed youths on Monday held a protest against the government at the All India Radio office (AIR) in Vijayawada. They also climbed over a tower inside the AIR office premises while raising slogans against the government. Some women protestors also threatened to set themselves on fire if their demands were not heard. The protestors demanded justice from Chief Minister Jaganmohan Reddy and also demanded employment opportunities. One of the protestors alleged that he has appeared for an examination for posts in the village horticulture department. “We received hall tickets, call letters and after all the process, we were to be selected for the jobs. But now with no jobs, we are left with no option but to commit suicides”, one of the protestors claimed. Later, Suryaraopeta police team also arrived at the protest spot and attempted to calm down the protestors. A fire department team was also deployed at the spot as a precautionary measure. (ANI)



Woman official set ablaze

Hyderabad: A woman official was burnt alive by an unidentified man in her office in the outskirts of Hyderabad on Monday, police said. Mandal Revenue Officer (MRO) Vijaya Reddy was in her chambers when the attacker walked in, poured petrol and set her ablaze. The official died on the spot while two employees who tried to save the MRO were injured. The condition of one of them is stated to be critical. Police said the incident occurred in Abdullahpurmet during lunch break when there were not many visitors in the office. The incident sent shock waves among government officials. The employees began protest, demanding security. Police have launched the hunt for the assailant. (IANS)



UP accident leaves over 25 hurt

Firozabad: At least 25 people were injured on Monday morning when a Volvo bus hit a truck on the Agra-Lucknow Expressway, police said. The accident took place when the bus, which was going to Lucknow from Agra, rammed the truck from behind in Matsaina area, they said. At least 25 people were injured, who were rushed to the hospital, the police added. (PTI)



Man kills wife, lynched by mob

Fatehpur (Uttar Pradesh): A man was lynched by an angry crowd here on October 30 after he had killed his wife with an axe. The video of the lynching went viral on social media. Three persons have been arrested and a case of mob lynching has been registered by police in the matter. “In the Ghazipur police station area, a murder took place on October 30. A person, Mohammad Nisar, murdered his wife with an axe. When he came out of his home, an angry crowd killed him. Three persons have been arrested based on the video of the incident which is viral on the social media,” Shripal Yadav, CO, Fatehpur Police said. “A case of mob lynching has been registered on the basis of the statement given by Mohammad Nisar’s brother on November 1. The task of identification of the accused is being done based on the video of the incident. Action will be taken against the accused once they are identified,” Prashant Kumar Verma, SP, Fatehpur said. Further investigation is underway. (ANI)
