Why protesting cops in Delhi is a rare sight; what cops can learn from it | Opinion

Tuesday, November 5, was no ordinary day for New Delhi, or, for that matter, rest of India. Viewed through the corridors of the history of democratic protests in India, Tuesday, November 5, was a rare day when police personnel in uniform took to the streets to protest and demand justice.

Yes, cops in uniform, raised slogans on roads, demanded justice and laid siege to their own headquarters. Let the scene sink in because there is a good chance you may not see this again for years, if not decades.

Mistake not, it wasn't a motley group of disgruntled cops complaining about routine affairs through a video on social media. The protest saw hundreds of cops, men and women, young and old, seniors and juniors, out in public expressing what they felt needed to be said. The number of protesting cops suggests that the event was well planned and coordinated.

It was organised to protest against the recent manhandling of some cops by lawyers - first at the Tis Hazari Court Complex on Saturday, and then at the Saket Court Complex on Monday.

Armed with banners and placards, the protesting cops raised slogans outside the police headquarters, requesting their seniors to come out and stand in their support.

Through much of Tuesday, the slogan 'We want justice' reverberated the protest site, while many cops held placards with messages like: 'Protectors need protection'; 'If crime is committed against us, who will protect you?'; 'Bebas khaki (helpless uniform),'; 'Police no scapegoat'; 'In today's scenario police itself need protection'; 'We are also humans, have right to equal justice, right to be heard'.

Delhi Police personnel holding placards during their protest on Tuesday. (Photo: ANI)

Repeated appeals by senior police officers, including Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik, failed to persuade the cops to end their protest and return to duties. When Patnaik was addressing them, he was even jeered at and booed at least twice.

ONE OF ITS KIND

The rareness of this protest is such that it is perhaps the first instance in independent India that personnel in uniform came out on the streets to publicly protest against a grievance in such a unified manner.

In October last year, some personnel of the Uttar Pradesh Police began a social media campaign urging their colleagues to wear black ribbons on their uniform to protest against the suspension of two cops in the Vikas Tiwari murder case. Issuing a stern warning against the planned protest against the department, UP DGP OP Singh had then said such "indiscipline" would not be tolerated at all.

Besides this, there have been a handful of instances in recent years when Army and paramilitary personnel in uniform released videos on social media to complain about mistreatment in service. But these were all individual cases and not like the collective protest by Delhi Police on Tuesday.

WHY UNIFORMED PERSONNEL DON'T PROTEST

During debates on human rights and their violations in India, a question that often crops up routinely is whether in a free democratic country people in uniform should also have the right to protest like other citizens do. There has also been recurring criticism about the lack of discussion and advocacy for human rights of security forces when they are attacked by unruly mobs etc.

Laws governing services terms of security forces and police specifically prohibit them from organising or participating in any form of protest against the State.

The underlying reason for this is the possibility of this power of protest being misused by vested interests to topple an elected government or undermine democracy by exerting pressure through protests. For instance, imagine the situation if the Army decides to go on a strike and abandons its duties in border areas to raise a demand?

Hundreds of police personnel participated in the protest seeking justice against lawyers who manhandled their colleagues. (Photo: PTI)

Right to protest is an integral part of the fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression that the Constitution confers upon all Indian citizens. However, when it comes to the armed forces, under Article 33 of the Indian Constitution, Parliament has the power to modify fundamental rights and determine to what extent they shall be applicable to members of the armed forces (Army, Navy and Air Force) or members of forces charged with the maintenance of public order (police and central paramilitary forces).

Besides these, Parliament can also modify rights of persons employed in any bureau or other organisation established by the State for purposes of intelligence or counter intelligence.

HOPES FROM THIS PROTEST

Though the protest by cops in Delhi may raise questions on its legality if read and interpreted strictly as per law, it still is a positive sign for the deepening of democracy in India and sensitisation of the same.

Through their protest, the cops have made their point clear that they can't be taken for granted. They have exerted sufficient pressure, political and public, to take the case to a logical conclusion.

Prior to the protest, the Delhi High Court ordered a judicial probe into the clashes between the cops and the lawyers, and on Tuesday the Delhi Police submitted its separate report to the Union Home Ministry.

But besides this, what this protest has also done is give the cops a rare opportunity to be on the other side of a protest i.e. to be a protester and raise a demand. It has given them a first-hand experience to know what it feels like when justice is denied, when no one is hearing your grievance, when you feel let down by the system, when protest, slogans and placards are your only allies.

One hopes that the next time university students or helpless farmers organise a protest, the same cops will be sensitive enough to treat them like humans...a demand many of them raised today for themselves.

One would hope that the haunting images of women, students and elderly being dragged, pushed and kicked by cops during protests are not seen again.

One would hope that while shouldering their duties of maintaining law and order during a protest, personnel of the Delhi Police would recall their training days when use of proportionate force was lectured upon.

One also hopes that by participating in Tuesday's protest, the cops would have sensitised themselves as to why protests are important in a vibrant functional democracy.

The protesting cops would recall that some years back, just like them, hundreds of Army veterans, who had served the nation for decades in uniform, were protesting in Delhi to demand One-Rank-One-Pension. Ironically enough, it was the Delhi Police that had manhandled them recklessly.

The list of instances of inhuman treatment of students, farmers and trade unions during several protests by the same Delhi Police (like here, here, and here) would be a long one, and it's pointless to recount them.

Unlike the protesting cops in Delhi on Tuesday, who were not facing anyone armed to chase them with batons, teargas shells and water cannons, ordinary protesters aren't as lucky. They generally have to put forward their demands while facing an entire police force.

Finally, one hopes that the protesting cops will get justice soon and in future when they are on duty during a peaceful protest, they will recall what it felt like being on the other side of a protest.

ALSO READ | Delhi Police protest: Angry cops refuse to leave as seniors try to end protest

ALSO READ | Police commissioner kaisa ho, Kiran Bedi jaisa ho: Delhi cops boo their boss Amulya Patnaik during protest

ALSO WATCH | Angry Delhi cops drown out senior officer's attempts to talk to them
