Thousands of Delhi Police personnel, families end 11-hour protest after bosses assure action against lawyers

Hundreds and thousands of men and women dressed in khaki took to the streets of Delhi demanding justice. (PTI photo)

Thousands of Delhi Police personnel, who were out on the streets of Delhi on Tuesday and put up an unprecedented protest demanding justice, have ended the high voltage agitation after 11 hours of non-stop protest outside the Police Headquarters.

The stalemate ended after senior police officials finally managed to convince their juniors that all their grievances will be heard and addressed.

Addressing the protesters, Special Commissioner of Police (Crime) Satish Golcha urged the policemen and women to end the massive protests and resume duty, while assuring them that a review petition will be filed against the Delhi High Court order in connection with a clash between cops and lawyers at the Tis Hazari Courts Complex.

Golcha also said that the policemen who were injured in the Tis Hazari clashes will get an ex-gratia of at least Rs 25,000.

The unprecedented protests were triggered by two attacks on their colleagues, one on Monday and another on Saturday after a parking dispute between an on-duty policeman and a lawyer which led to at least 20 security personnel and several advocates being injured.

The protesting Delhi Police personnel were joined by their families as well while police personnel from Haryana, Punjab and even Bihar joined their counterparts to show solidarity.

The protests were called off after the Delhi Police brass promised that action on the demands of the protesters will be taken. Lt Governor Anil Baijal on Tuesday reviewed the situation in the wake of an unprecedented protest by Delhi Police personnel following clashes with lawyers, and said it was imperative to ensure justice is done impartially in the matter.

Special Commissioner (Intelligence) Praveer Ranjan briefed the lieutenant governor on the prevailing situation and also on the related high court orders, according to a statement issued by the LG office.

The LG observed that advocates and police are important pillars of the criminal justice system and they should work in complete harmony, it said.

Two FIRs were registered against a lawyer, who was seen in a video hitting a uniformed policeman on a motorcycle with his elbow and slapping him outside the Saket District Court.

Shouting slogans like "We Want Justice" and "Go Back, Go Back" as their senior officers appealed for calm, the surging crowd of protesters, some in uniform and some in civvies, gathered outside the Police Headquarters in ITO in the morning itself and were unrelenting in their demand as the hours passed.

The protests soon gathered steam and brought heavy criticism for the ruling NDA government while it drew support from the civil society as well. Later in the evening protesters came out with candles and moved to the India Gate.

ALSO READ | Police commissioner kaisa ho, Kiran Bedi jaisa ho: Delhi cops boo their boss Amulya Patnaik during protest

ALSO WATCH | Angry Delhi cops drown out senior officer's attempts to talk to them
