No olive branch: jeers force Patnaik to abandon address

Wives and children of police personnel demand justice, hold up ‘protectors need protection’ placards

When Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik came out to address the protesters outside the Police Headquarters at ITO, his voice drowned amid unstoppable screams that forced him back inside.

This is a common scenario where many Joint Commissioners and Special Commissioners had to leave protest sites because the policemen refused to listen to them. “The Saket incident was the final nail in the coffin. Whether it was Mukherjee Nagar or any other incident, we have always been humiliated for vote bank politics. We need an association like the IPS and IAS officers to address our grievances,” said a constable, Naresh Phogat.

In March this year, a DCP-rank IPS officer had slapped a traffic inspector for stopping his private car, which was being driven on the wrong side in New Delhi. This incident too was one of the reasons behind the protest.

A senior officer, who will retire next year, said in his entire service tenure, he had never seen such a demonstration by the police. “We need to introspect and address resentment among lower ranks to avoid such a situation,” he said.

The protesters mainly comprised those from non-gazetted ranks who were furious at their seniors for asking them to “stay silent without any fault of theirs”.

“When BJP MP Manoj Tiwari held Deputy Commissioner of Police (North East) by his collar and the picture was published everywhere, no case was registered against the former. We need strong leaders who can stand with his men in crisis and represent them,” said Mukesh, another constable.

A protester said in the Mukherjee Nagar incident, the video clearly shows a Sikh man launching an attack on a policeman with his sword but in the end, six officers were suspended and three were dismissed from service. “The accused man is living happily,” he added. “If we act, we get suspended. If we don’t, then also we get suspended or face a departmental inquiry. In Mukherjee Nagar, an ACP-rank officer was thrashed by protesters but senior officers refused to register any case,” a constable said.

Incidents where any particular community or religion get consolidated against the police, the senior officers immediately take action the non-gazetted policemen without an investigation, the protesters said.

“We are humans in uniforms. We are scared to wear a uniform while travelling back home because we never know who will attack us. We are not punching bags,” said Kusum, a constable.

Protest gains support

The families of the protesters, who were present at an agitation at the India Gate, held placards reading: “Protectors Need Protection”. Delhi Police Third Battalion (Armed Unit), which transports undertrials and prisoners from jail to court, also staged a protest at their unit in Vikaspuri by wearing black bands.
