‘Govt., CPI(M) claim on UAPA wrong’

Allegation that govt. refused to give details of 42 cases registered under Act

A group of activists associated with the Janakeeya Manushyavakasa Prasthanam and Purogamana Yuvajana Prasthanam has accused the State government and the Communist Party of India (Marxist) [CPI(M)] of peddling lies in connection with the arrest of two youngsters from Kozhikode under sections of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA).

The claim that the CPI(M) was “against the UAPA” and that the Left Democratic Front (LDF) government had “reviewed 42 cases registered under the Act” was not factually correct, C.P. Rasheed, functionary of the Janakeeya Manushyavakasa Prasthanam, told the media on Tuesday. Mr. Rasheed claimed that the government had lodged four cases under the UAPA in March itself following an alleged encounter at Vythiri in Wayanad in which his brother C.P. Jaleel was killed.

Pasting of posters

The Pandikkad police in Malappuram district filed cases against C.P. Nahas and Sreekanth, activists of the Purogamana Yuvajana Prasthanam, accusing them of pasting posters protesting against the Vythiri incident. A similar case was filed against activists of the Janakeeya Manushyavakasa Prasthanam in Nilambur.

Luqman Pallikkandi, an activist from Iritti in Kannur district who is not part of the two groups, said the police had filed a case against him too under the UAPA for pasting posters. However, the High Court granted him bail saying that pasting posters should not be the ground for slapping UAPA, he claimed.

Mr. Rasheed also alleged that the government refused to give details of the 42 cases registered under the UAPA even after a query was raised under the Right to Information Act. He claimed that the committee under retired High Court judge P.S. Gopinathan was not meant to review cases as claimed by certain quarters. “But its mandate is to examine the cases and advise the government if permission for trial could be granted under Section 45 of the Act after police inquiry.”

The government would take a decision based on the recommendation. If permission for trial was given, the court would begin its proceedings. If it was not given, the case would not go forward, said Mr. Rasheed.
