Anarchy in entire country under PM Modi, says Congress’ Khera

NAGPUR: Launching a scathing attack against Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led NDA government, Congress spokesperson Pawan Khera, while referring to the violent clashes between lawyers and police in New Delhi, said there was a complete state of anarchy in the entire country.In an interaction with the media, Khera said the Congress party would be launching a nationwide protest against the government’s faulty policies which have led to record unemployment and dip in the economy.“In the last five and a half years of their rule, everything is going from bad to worse. In Delhi, the police are on a dharna and are not even listening to the police commissioner. People are losing out on jobs and crimes against women are rising every year. The Congress has been making efforts to highlight various issues of the people. The party has decided to take to the streets to protest against the government’s failure on all fronts,” said Khera.Flaying the NDA government over rising unemployment, Khera, who was accompanied by newly-elected West Nagpur MLA Vikas Thakre and party’s city spokesperson Atul Londhe, said the government was not ready to accept this fact. “The centre for monitoring Indian economy (CMIE) has stated that unemployment has touched an all-time high for the first time in 72 years and matched the pre-independence era due to Modi government’s wrong policies. Even the government’s own National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) came out with a figure that unemployment is at a 45-year high, but they’re disbelieving it,” said Khera.The leader, who earlier worked with former Delhi chief minister Sheila Dixit, said globally, unemployment was at 4.5%, but in India, it has jumped to 8.45%. “In Vidarbha and Marathwada, farmer suicides are at an all time high. They’ve fudged the National Crime Record Bureau (NCRB) figures and released it after two years so that the actual figures shouldn’t come out. Now, people have realized their actual face and are raising questions about their performance,” said Khera.Quoting senior BJP leader LK Advani, Khera termed Modi as an ‘event manager’, stating that the latter implemented GST at midnight in Parliament and imposed five taxes. “He always does this drama which Congress never did. Such kind of celebrations are taking place for the first time in the country. On the one hand, he’s busy with Mann Ki Baat, while on the other, private investment is falling, the lowest in the country in 16 years. Family savings, too, have dipped to a record low in 25 years. Modi has also failed to negotiate the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP),” said Khera.Explaining demonetization and GST, Khera said Modi’s predecessor, Manmohan Singh , had rightly predicted the fall in India’s GDP by 2%. “The entire economy is on the verge of collapse, and the PM must admit that demonetization was a big disaster and should apologize to the people,” said Khera.
