Supreme Court lawyer slaps notice on Delhi Police commissioner over demonstration outside ITO headquarters

Delhi Police personnel protest outside at the Police Headquarters at ITO over alleged incidents of violence against them by lawyers, in New Delhi on Tuesday.

Key Highlights Section 3 of The Police Forces (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1966, prohibits police forces to participate in any demonstration, communicate with the press for their own demands Though Patnaik had pleaded with the police personnel to end their protest, it was only after Joint Commissioner of Police (Southern Range) Devesh Srivastava said their demands have been accepted that the protesters dispersed on Tuesday

New Delhi: In wake of the ensuing fracas between lawyers and Delhi Police personnel that has lasted over three days, a Supreme Court advocate has slapped a legal notice on Commissioner of Police Amulya Patnaik for “not taking action” against the Delhi Police personnel who protested in front of the police headquarters at ITO.

“This legal notice is being served upon you for not taking any action against the Delhi Police forces and their officials, who actively participated in the demonstration on 5.11.2019 since 11 am in front of Police Headquarter, Main Road, ITO, Delhi. They also address to the media for their demands and create fears in the lawyers and in the civil society. The Delhi Police and their higher officers also address to the national media whole day and given derogatory statement for the advocates,” the legal notice sent by Varun Thakur & Associates read.

Further claiming that the demonstration was illegal, the lawyer said, “Such irresponsible activities of your police forces is the clear violation of the Section 3 (1) (a) (b) (c) and 3 (2) of The Police Forces (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1966. The demonstration was live telecast by the national media whole day. Section (3) prohibits the police forces to participate in any demonstration, communicate with the press for their own demands, but we seen whole days such illegal activities at public places.”

The conflict between the lawyers and police began when an argument broke out between a policeman of Delhi Police’s 3rd Battalion and an advocate outside the inmates' lock-up at Tiz Hazari court on November 2. The altercation escalated into a scuffle, with a group of lawyers assaulting police officers and injuring 20 cops and burning police vehicles.

Though Patnaik had pleaded with the police personnel to end their protest, it was only after Joint Commissioner of Police (Southern Range) Devesh Srivastava said their demands have been accepted that the protesters dispersed. The agitation was at last called off in the evening on Tuesday.
