Lawyers thrash cop at Alwar court in Rajasthan

On Tuesday, the Delhi Police held a massive protest outside the Delhi Police headquarter in New Delhi. (Photo: PTI)

A scuffle broke out between lawyers and police personnel at Alwar court in Rajasthan on Wednesday after lawyers allegedly thrashed an official from the Haryana Police in the court.

The incident was reported amid the ongoing tussle between lawyers and the Delhi Police officials in the national capital.

After the protest by the Delhi Police on Tuesday, the lawyers are continuing with their strike and holding protests outside the Patiala Court, Rohini Court, and the Tis Hazari Court on Wednesday.

A lawyer protesting at the Rohini Court on Wednesday said, "Our fight is against only those policemen who fired at us and lathi-charged us that day. We will protest till they are arrested."

Delhi: Lawyers strike enters third day in protest against the clash between police & lawyers at Tis Hazari Court on November 2. (Visuals from Saket Court) pic.twitter.com/wVULOeFsiF ANI (@ANI) November 6, 2019

On Tuesday, the Delhi Police held a massive protest outside the Delhi Police headquarter in New Delhi seeking justice and immediate inquiry into the matter.

Addressing the protesting cops yesterday, Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik said, "I appeal to all to maintain peace. It's trying time for us. We need to fulfil the responsibility of maintaining and assuring law and order. It is expected from us that we the protectors of law will continue to assure law and order in the capital."

"In last few days, there have been certain incidents in the capital which we handled very well. The situation is improving after that," Amulya Patnaik said.

The triggering episode in what has now been escalated to a larger scale dates back to Saturday when some advocates and police officials clashed outside the Tis Hazari court complex. At least 20 police personnel and a number of advocates were injured while many vehicles vandalised or set ablaze.

Protesting against the clash, advocates in the Delhi High Court and all district courts went on strike on Monday. The lawyers even refused to present in front of the judges at Delhi High Court.

Meanwhile, Special Commissioner of Police (Crime), along with other senior officers of Delhi Police, including Additional CP (Crime) will hold a meeting at Police Head Quarters for review petition that is to be filed in Delhi High Court today regarding Court's order on Tis Hazari Court incident.

According to the input, several advocates thrashed a police officer on Saturday after which the clash broke out. The advocates were striking against the Tis Hazari incident outside the Karkardooma court when the clash took place. Later on Monday, protesting lawyers targeted policemen outside Saket court in Delhi, while another clash broke out between cops and lawyers at Karkardooma court in Delhi's Anand Vihar area.

The coordination committee of the District Court Bar Associations on Tuesday termed the protest by police personnel over Saturday's Tis Hazari cop-lawyer clashes as "an attempt to shield senior officers who ordered firing on lawyers in the court premises."

As of now, a legal notice has been served by an advocate of Supreme Court to the Commissioner of Delhi Police, Amulya Patnaik for allegedly not taking any action against police personnel and officials who demonstrated at Police Headquarters, ITO here on Tuesday.

The notice seeks immediate action against all the police personnel and officials who staged demonstration yesterday, saying that their action was in clear contravention to the rules meant for police forces.
