EPF scam: UP power corpn ex-MD held

editorial@tribune.com

Lucknow, November 5

Former managing director of the Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited AP Mishra was arrested by the Economic Offences Wing (EOW) on Tuesday in connection with the investment of over Rs 2,600 crore of the state power employees’ provident fund in scam-hit Mumbai-based Dewan Housing and Finance Corporation Limited (DHFL).

His arrest came days after the state government recommended a CBI probe into the matter and Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath directed the director general of the EOW to investigate the case till the CBI took over the matter.

An EOW team led by DIG Hiralal arrested Mishra from his Aliganj residence. The police brought him to the Hazratganj police station from where he was moved to an unknown destination for interrogation.

Amid the controversy, the state government late last night shifted managing director and secretary energy Aparna U. She was one of the dozen trustees of the Power Sector Employees Trust that invested the PF money in DHFL.

She has been replaced by M Devraj who has just returned from Central deputation.

The state power department employees on Tuesday resorted to protest against the PF scam in front of the Power Department office in Lucknow as well as across the districts. They have also announced a two-day strike from November 18. — TNS

Akhilesh holds Yogi responsible

SP chief Akhilesh Yadav on Tuesday demanded a judicial probe into the UPPCL-DHFL scam. Yadav said the judicial probe by a sitting judge of either Supreme Court or High Court would reveal the truth behind the scam. Demanding the resignation of CM Yogi, Yadav denied "even a single paisa" being invested in DHFL during his regime, as had been alleged by state power minister Shrikant Sharma.

Priyanka questions BJP, govt’s complicity

Cong general secretary Priyanka Gandhi cited reports which claimed that the PF money was invested only after the BJP govt assumed office on March 24, 2017, and not during the SP govt. She also wanted to know the other departments whose money has been invested in defaulter firms. “Things will soon start tumbling out. You will have to answer. It is a question of people's hard earned money," she said.

Mayawati seeks immediate action

BSP national president Mayawati demanded immediate action against all senior officers responsible for this decision instead of delaying matters by ordering a CBI probe. She also said instead of charges and counter-charges, the BJP government should let the employees know how it plans to retrieve their PF money from the tainted company.
