Youth with 117 offences to his name caught

19-year-old had formed a gang who broke into people’s homes and so far has made away with loot worth crores



Seven years of crime, jamming in 117 house break-in and theft offences across Pune district — and the perpetrator is just a 19-year-old youth, who has been running a gang since he was a mere 12 years old.



Hadapsar police on Tuesday nabbed the notorious history-sheeter, identified as Paitarsing alias Pavitrasing Gabbarsing Tak, a resident of Ramtekdi in Hadapsar.



In an unusual twist, most of his family has a criminal background — his father has a record of 175 cases against him, while his brother has been pinned with over 100 cases of theft, robbery and dacoity.



Till he turned 17, Paitarsing had committed 86 offences of theft, robbery and house break-in — within two years, the tally quickly rose to 117.



According to the police, Paitarsing was groomed from an extremely early age to enter the world of crime. His father, Gabbarsing Tak, was a notorious criminal, while his brother Tilaksing Tak came out of jail just a month or so ago. While the father died a few years ago, the Tak brothers have since continued committing robberies and thefts.



The young criminal was arrested this week after Hadapsar cops received a tip-off that he would be found at Manjri along with two gang members, after the group has recently robbed Nakoda Jewellers. When the police squad laid a trap and swooped in to nab the thieves near the highway at the said location, the trio’s car tried to escape capture at the flyover. In this process, it also dashed into constable Pratap Gaikwad, injuring him. Fortunately, the cop team soon caught hold of Paitarsing, Tadiwala Road resident Nishant Nanaware (22) and Vadgaon Budruk resident Rushikesh Aatkar (20).



Cops also recovered stolen property worth over Rs 1 crore from the trio. Further, during interrogations, police recovered 13 four-wheelers, five twowheelers, 38 kg of silver, and 1,100 gms of gold jewellery worth Rs 1,19,70,000, also including gold and silver jewellery stolen from Nakoda Jewellers.



Interestingly, senior police inspector Raghunath Jadhav of Hadapsar police has known about Paitarsing since he was just a fledgling criminal at age 12. Elaborating on his profile of the prime accused, Jadhav shared, “The entire Tak family has a record of various property offenses. Paitarsing was not even a teenager when he committed his first theft, stealing a computer at Pragati School in Ramtekdi. Now, at 19, he has committed 117 robberies, thefts and dacoities. The gang sells stolen property outside of Pune and uses the money for food and alcohol.”



Elaborating on their modus operandi, Jadhav added, “Different gang members commit different offences, but the technique is more or less similar. They first identify locked houses that have no security guards. Then, they steal a car and use it to enter the area where the robbery is planned. Finally, they simply break the locks of the houses with sharp weapons and leave with the loot.”


