Delhi: Judicial work paralysed for 3rd consecutive day in six trial courts

A day after the strike of the Delhi Police personnel, the lawyers went on strike on Wednesday, shutting down the entire judicial system in all the lower courts in the national capital.

In the ongoing row between the Delhi Police and the lawyers, high voltage drama was witnessed at the Rohini court where two lawyers threatened to commit suicide demanding justice for their comrades injured during the clashes that broke out two days ago at Tis Hazari court.

Advocate Ashish Chaudhary, who hails from Amroha, poured petrol on his body and threatened self-immolation if an action wasn't taken against cops who allegedly fired at the lawyers. "The government must take action against the cops who fired upon the lawyers. We will not let the lawyer fraternity down. We will fight for justice," said Chaudhary after failed attempts of self-immolation.

The lawyers at all district courts did not allow litigants to enter the court premises virtually shutting down the entire judicial system of the lower courts of Delhi. They also vented out their anger on media persons and accused them of taking police's side in the controversy.

"The media reports are biased and totally against the lawyers. We are asking one simple question, why and how can a cop shoot an unarmed lawyer inside the court premises? Why isn't an attempt to murder case filed against the cops? Why should we not fear cops as they are threatening us with dire consequence?" said Sunil Pandey, a lawyer who practices at the Patiala House and the Delhi High Court.

Group of lawyers shut the gates of the court at Saket, Patiala House and Rohini and shouted slogans against Delhi police and the government. The lawyers demanded immediate revocation of the cases filed against their colleagues and compensation for the injured ones.

"If the government can announce an ex gratia of Rs 25,000 for injured cops, then why can't they announce the same for the lawyers who were shot by the cops and beaten up by the cops" This is gross injustice," said Amardeep Nagar, a lawyer at Saket Court.

The strike continued till the working hours of the courts were over on Wednesday. The strike will continue on Thursday, said advocate DS Kasana, Secretary of Co-ordination Committee of All District Courts Bar Association while asserting that they will not relent unless the Assistant Sub-Inspector who allegedly fired at a lawyer is arrested.

While lawyers on strike blocked gates and prevented litigants from entering the court premises, the BCI, apex body of advocates, came out with a press release, demanding arrest of the guilty police officials within a period of one week for the Tis Hazari incident.

Hours later, BCI Chairman Manan Kumar Mishra, addressed the reporters saying no incident of violence involving lawyers, the police and the public will be tolerated.
