Let us discuss release of relief funds with PM: Digvijaya Singh to Shivraj Singh Chouhan

BHOPAL: Senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh on Thursday shot a letter to former chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan requesting that for benefit of people of the state, they both travel to New Delhi and hold a meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi and urge for the release of funds to flood-ravaged Madhya Pradesh. “I remember that as chief minister on March 6, 2014, you sat on hunger protest in Bhopal against the UPA government,” Digvijaya Singh reminded Chouhan.“You had asked for Rs 5,000 crore as calamity fund. You have even called a day’s bandh . The present government of the state is demanding that Centre stop discrimination and release funds for disaster management and developmental works,” Digvijaya Singh wrote. “But it is unfortunate that the Centre is not releasing funds due to the state. Because you and myself are both former chief ministers of the state, we must stand and protect people’s rights,” he argued.The Rajya Sabha MP further said, “My request to you for benefit of people is to take out some time and we can both discuss this issue with the Prime Minister. I am sure he will not disregard your words, but if he still does not listen then for the people of Madhya Pradesh I and you can both sit-in protest outside the residence of the Prime Minister.”Digvijaya Singh’s letter to Chouhan said he wanted to draw attention that there has been excessive rainfall in the state and though the Congress state government promptly reached relief to affected areas, financial aid from the Centre has not been released yet. Singh said that the present Union government decreased financial aid for natural calamity to states from the previous 90% to 75%.The senior Congress leader also gave an account of the state’s dues pending before the Centre which it has not released. He said that Union government has not released Rs 1017 crore due for Bhavantar payments to farmers, another Rs 1,500 is pending as payment from the Centre for minimum support price for wheat and Rs 598 crore remain unpaid for the National Rural Drinking Water Programme. Digvijaya claimed that Centre is yet to pay its portion of Rs 498 crore from its road fund.Singh said that the Union government has adopted a discriminatory method by which it has paid relief fund for NDA and BJP ruled Bihar and Karnataka but has stopped funds for Madhya Pradesh. After a survey of the floods, the central study team recommended relief of Rs 6621.28 crore and another Rs 2258.88 crore for infrastructure reconstruction. But nothing has been sent from the Union government, he argued in his letter to Chouhan.
