Mumbai police arrest 6 for attempting bank robbery; search for another accused on

the arrests were made from Mumbai and Uttar Pradesh over a period of time. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The incident had taken place in the early hours of October 28 at the ICICI Bank branch The arrests were made from Mumbai and Uttar Pradesh over a period of time. The police have recovered all the items stolen by the gang from the bank

Mumbai: The Mumbai police have arrested as many as six robbers on Thursday who had tried to loot a branch of ICICI Bank in the commercial capital last month. In a failed attempt, the robbers fled with a laptop and some other items.

The incident had taken place in the early hours of October 28 at the ICICI Bank branch located at the Babasaheb Gawade Institute in the Agripada area of Central Mumbai. According to a news agency report, the arrests were made from Mumbai and Uttar Pradesh over a period of time.

When the incident happened at least seven robbers first beat up security guards of the bank and entered inside by threatening them. They reportedly tied hands and legs of two guards with nylon ropes, put cello tape on their mouths, blindfolded and confined them in a room inside the bank.

The police officials told media that the robbers tried to break open the vault room and ATM machine with the help of gas cutters, but they failed. Reportedly, before escaping from the bank they took a laptop, an instant banking machine and a mobile phone.

Later, the guards lodged a complaint at the Nagpada police station. During the preliminary investigation, the police arrested 23-year-old Arjun Choudhary and one of the gang members. Meanwhile, the arrested accused told police that they have got information that the other gang members had left by train to Gorakhpur and Lucknow.

Acting on a tip-off, the police officials sent a team to nab them. The other four accused were identified as Manukumar Prasad, Ravikumar Prasad, Sandeepkumar Prasad and Amitkumar Singh. However, later another one was arrested from Mumbai and was identified as Rohitkumar Choudhary. The police have recovered all the items stolen by the gang from the bank and launched a hunt for the seventh accused in the case.
