Ludhiana civic body conducts demolition drive in Naughara Mohalla

LUDHIANA: A high level drama was witnessed in Naughara Mohalla near ancestral house of martyr Sukhdev Thapar during demolition drive on Friday by one of the occupants where demolition was being conducted. The civic officials had gone to remove the illegal structure coming in way of direct access to the house of martyr Sukhdev Thapar from Chaura Bazaar. The civic officials had to move from the spot leaving the drive half way when situation become tense in the area. The alleged encroachers said that civic body had turned a blind eye towards major encroachments and they had come to take action against minor ones.The civic officials along with heavy police force reached the site for removing the illegal part in Naughara Mohalla. As soon as they reached the spot the demolition was immediately started by the labourers. However the alleged encroachers started raising hue and cry at the spot and kept on asking the civic officials to stop the encroachment drive. They claimed that they had filed application in the Punjab and Haryana high court and in the afternoon they were supposed to get stay orders against demolition so they should wait at least then. But the civic officials did not stop the demolition despite the fact that the alleged encroachers kept on arguing with cops.Meanwhile one of the alleged encroachers later identified as Deepak Bansal carrying a small can full of petrol in his hand ran towards the demolition spot. He put petrol over his body and threatened to immolate self in case the drive doesn't. The cops tried stopping him from taking any action. The heap of garbage was also burnt in the middle of the road. The cops took that person away.The alleged encroachers raised the slogans against the civic body and state government. Since the situation became tensed the civic officials stopped the demolition and moved back.However the alleged encroachers alleged that Ashok Thapar who claims himself to be cousin of descendants of martyr Sukhdev Thapar has built his house and other properties illegally. They alleged that one shop was constructed after covering a drain so first these structures should be razed.The assistant town planner Harvinder Honey said, "We razed the bathrooms and adjoining portion mentioned in the court orders but there was no clarity about boundary wall. When we tried to dismantle the boundary wall they created drama. I called up revenue officer at the spot but before he could reach there one of them tried to burn self."Ashok Thapar on being contacted regarding allegations against him said, "I have nothing to do with encroachment drive as MC had come to dismantle the structure. As far as properties are concerned I have all legal documents with me." He said it is since 1980s the matter to give direct access to the ancestral house of a great martyr is pending.Recently a local court had dismissed interim stay on removal of alleged encroachment to make passage from Chaura Bazar to Shaheed Sukhdev Thapar’s birthplace in Naughara Mohalla. MC had already issued demolition notices to the encroachers for removal of encroachments to make way to the house of Shaheed Sukhdev Thapar.Coal operation from various blocks of MCL was affected because of protest by the villagers over better rehabilitation and resettlement package and compensation.
