Tis Hazari Violence : NCW Urges BCI To Act Against Advocates Who Attacked Women Police Officers [Read Letter]

The National Commission for Women, in a letter addressed to the Chairman of Bar Council of India, Manan Kumar Mishra, has sought suspension of licenses of Advocates who were involved in the violence committed against women police officials during the violent clash between police and lawyers at the Tis Hazari Court on November 2.



" As revealed in the media reports, an audio of the women Personal Security Officer (PSO) and 1.40 minutes of live video captured on the scene of crime corroborates the incident. The video shows that woman officer faced with a tough situation when the group of lawyers tried to grab her collar and charged at her, who was later difficultly managed to be escorted and get out of the scene. "

As per the Commission there was sufficient material, obtained by way of media reports, to state that women police officers had in fact been manhandled during the brawl.

The Commission has taken suo moto cognizance against the affrontation and assault faced by women police officers and has asked the Council to take strong action against the erring Advocates and treat such abhorrent acts of manhandling women as "gross misconduct".

#WATCH : CCTV footage of DCP North Monika Bhardwaj pleading before the lawyers to stop violence when a clash broke out between police and lawyers at Tis Hazari Court in #Delhi on November 2. pic.twitter.com/xFWZBP3Swp





The Commission has also taken up the matter with the Commissioner of Delhi Police, Amulya Patnaik, asking him to take immediate steps to inquire into the matter and to take appropriate action at the earliest.

It has requested both the Commissioner as well as the BCI to hold an inquiry and to take apposite steps in the matter within 7 days.

A scuffle broke out on November 2 between the police officials and lawyers at the Tis Hazari Court, over a parking dispute within the court premises. The incident was aggravated as two lawyers got shot by the police and several others injured in the lathi charge.

In a special sitting of the High Court conducted on November 3, the bench of Chief Justice D N Patel and Justice C Harishanker directed a judicial enquiry into the matter, to be headed by Justice SP Garg, former judge of the Delhi High Court, with the assistance of CBI, Vigilance and IB, to be completed within six weeks. The high court also directed suspension of two erring police officials and transfer of two senior police officials.

Ever since then, reports of clashes between the two groups have been surfacing. Allegedly, an on-duty policeman was stopped by a few lawyers outside the Saket Court Complex who took his helmet and beat him unscrupulously.

Such incidents culminated into protests staged by Delhi police, demanding action against lawyers who were part of the violence in Tis Hazari. The Central IPS Association also issued a statement, seeking befitting legal action, including cancellation of their licenses of the erring Advocates.

The Delhi High Court today adjourned a plea seeking disciplinary action against Commissioner, Delhi Police, for not taking sufficient action against the police personnel who participated in the protests with a direction to take recourse to good office and settlement before seeking any directions.

Click here to read letter

[Read Letter Here]
