Doctors in Mysuru seek safety at work for medical practitioners

OPD services affected as doctors strike work protesting against the alleged manhandling of junior doctors in Bengaluru

Out-patient services were partially affected here on Friday as doctors in private hospitals struck work on Friday in protest against the alleged manhandling of two junior doctors at Minto Hospital in Bengaluru by some Kannada activists.

A delegation from the Indian Medical Association (IMA) met Deputy Commissioner Abhiram G. Sankar and submitted a memorandum to him. The members worked wearing black ribbons around their arms on Wednesday and Thursday in solidarity with the junior doctors who had been staging an indefinite agitation in Bengaluru seeking action against those who manhandled the doctors.

The doctors have since withdrawn the strike.

IMA Mysuru Chapter president Suresh Rudrappa told The Hindu that the OPD services in private hospitals had been suspended from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Friday in protest against the incident. But non-emergency services remained unaffected in some private hospitals, according to reports.

Meanwhile, resident doctors and interns of Mysore Medical College and Research Institute boycotted non-emergency services at the hospitals attached to the institute, including K.R. Hospital and Cheluvamba Hospital, protesting against the assault. They sat in a dharna at K.R. Hospital condemning the increasing attacks on on-duty doctors. But emergency services remained unaffected in the hospitals as junior doctors attended to their respective duties in the interest of patients.

The striking doctors resumed OPD work in the afternoon following reports on the surrender of those allegedly involved in the incident to the police in Bengaluru.

‘Dangerous precedent’

“The Bengaluru incident sets a dangerous precedent in the society and sends out a message that it is acceptable for mobs with apparent political clout to behave irresponsibly and disrespectfully with doctors and threaten them. It speaks of gaping lacunae in security at the workplace for resident doctors in the State,” said the junior doctors who included post-graduates and house surgeons.

Demands made

The doctors demanded that those behind the attack were permanently banned from entering the premises of hospitals attached to the BMCRI. They sought a public apology from those allegedly involved in the incident, and demanded establishing an immediate response team at hospitals to act against incidents like trespassing and nuisance caused by mobs and vigilante groups.

They also sought the deployment of armed guards 24x7 in hospitals to enhance the existing security arrangement and installation of surveillance cameras at all key locations of the hospitals.
