Protests erupt over new transgender bill, agitators in Kolkata term it ‘regressive’

The bill passed recently in the Lok Sabha stands directly in contradiction with the judgement passed by the NALSA (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Kolkata: Transgenders and LGBTQ activists took to the streets on Monday in order to protest against the Transgender Persons Protection of Rights Bill 2018 which has been passed in the Lok Sabha. Demanding their rights as a third gender, the members of this community flocked to the streets to show their disapproval towards the bill passed.

While talking to Mirror Now, the protesters termed the bill 'regressive' and claimed that this is not what they deserve as a community. They also stated that the bill which has just been passed, stands in contradiction to the judgement passes by the National Legal Services Authority (NALSA). The judgement passes by the NALSA identifies transgenders as a third gender recognised their fundamental and civil rights.

Also Read: RPF personnel at Mumbai railway stations now have segways for crowd control, patrolling

Demanding the withdrawal of the bill, the protesters claimed that the Transgender Persons Protection of Rights Bill 2018 has been drafted and passed without any consultation with the community. They stated that the bill is regressive and is incapable of providing a respectful status to the community in the society.

Owing to the constant protests against the bill, the community has been successful in detaining the bill from being presented in the Rajya Sabha. Continuous protests are being held all across the country to show the disapproval of the community towards the bill.

From being asked to get up from the ladies' seats in buses to being compared to beggars, members of the transgender community narrated their plight in relation with the treatment meted out to them. They stated that they just want to be recognised as a gender and as a part of the society, not as 'unwanted' people.
