Ghaziabad: Protests after student dies in crash

GHAZIABAD: A 20-year-old student was killed and two others were injured when the auto-rickshaw they were travelling in had a head-on collision with a roadways bus in Masuri area on Thursday.On Friday, the student’s relatives, friends and some students from his college held a protest and blocked NH9 in Masuri demanding that the administration built a foot over bridge or an underpass in the area. More than 50 people have been booked.Police said the deceased, Gaurav Singhal, a third-year BCA student at Sunder Deep College in Ghaziabad, was from Bulandshahr . “He was going to his house in Masuri area when he met with the accident,” a police officer said.Gaurav’s brother Vipul told TOI that around 1.30pm on Thursday, Gaurav took an auto from the college gate. “Around 2 pm, I got a call from one of his friends and he told me Gaurav was injured in an accident. We reached the hospital where Gaurav’s friend and police had taken him. There, the doctors asked us to take him to another hospital. We took him to Sarvodaya hospital but the doctors declared him dead at 10pm,” he said.“Accidents have become a regular thing on the stretch and no one is ready to take responsibility. The traffic police and other authorities are not taking any steps. We blocked the highway for over three hours and demanded justice for Gaurav,” said a student who took part in the protest.Naresh Kumar Singh, SHO, Masuri police station, said the driver of bus has been arrested and the bus seized.“An FIR has been lodged against the driver under IPC sections 279 (rash driving), 338 (causing grievous hurt by act of endangering life), 427 (mischief causing damage to the amount of Rs 50) and 304 A (causing death by negligence),” he added. “We’ve booked around 50 people, including students, under Section 147 (rioting) of IPC and under relevant sections of the National Highways Act,” Singh said.A police officer said: “Police are trying to identify the students who were involved in the protest and action would be taken against them soon.”
