These 5 Judges Delivered The Historic Ayodhya Verdict Putting A 30-Year-Old Dispute To Rest

The first stirrings of bubbling unrest came just two years after the Partition in December 1949 when an idol of Ram Lalla was found inside the Babri Mosque. This led to the filing of the initial few pleas in the matter, which eventually gave way to the demolition of Babri Masjid on 6th December 1992.

© Twitter/thefirstindia

The discussions and protests on the Ayodhya dispute has since spilt across the last three decades, and today, after years of dispute over the matter, a Constitutional bench consisting of five judges has delivered the Ayodhya verdict at 10.30 this morning.

The bench headed by Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi, along with Justices DY Chandrachud, S Abdul Nazeer, Ashok Bhushan, and SA Bobde delivered the unanimous judgement, which awarded the disputed site in Ayodhya for the construction of a temple while also ruling that Muslims must get an alternate land within the city for the construction of a mosque.

These are the 5 judges who delivered the historic verdict on Ayodhya-Babri dispute:

1. Chief Justice of India (CJI) Ranjan Gogoi

© Twitter/DD News

Ranjan Gogoi is the 46th and outgoing Chief Justice of India, who has been a part of numerous watershed cases throughout his career. However, CJI Gogoi has found himself in the lap of controversies over some of his judgements over the years. One of his prominent cases in the latter part of his career is the National Citizens Register.

CJI Gogoi is retiring from service of 17th November.

2. Justice DY Chandrachud

© TOI

Justice Chandrachud is the former Chief Justice of the Allahabad High Court and is also a former judge of the Bombay High Court. He was also a part of the nine-member bench that declared Right to Privacy as a fundamental right in the country, as well as the historic Section 377 verdict which was rolled out in September last year. He also overturned several outdated laws in 2018 which included his father's ruling that said adultery was constitutionally valid.

3. Justice S Abdul Naseer

© Wikipedia

One of Justice Nazeer's greatest career highlights is that he practised in the Karnataka High Court for 20 years. He was one of the nine Supreme Court judges who helped to make 'privacy' a fundamental right in 2017. He was also a part of the multi-faith bench that worked to check the constitutional validity of Triple Talaq.

4. Justice Ashok Bhushan

© allahabadhighcourt

Justice Bhushan joined as the Judge of the Supreme Court of India in 2016. He has been part of a number of significant cases such has Delhi's special status, Parsi ex-communication, amendment of constitutionality of unlawful activities prevention act, the constitutionality of Aadhaar act and the like.

5. Justice SA Bobde

© BCCL

Soon to be the next Chief Justice of India, Justice Bobde has been practising as the Judge of the Supreme Court of India since 2013. He has been a part of myriad significant cases such as Aadhaar Ordinance, Article 370, EWS Reservation as well as Fundamental Right to Privacy alongside Justice Naseer.
