Govt withdraws Gandhis’ SPG security cover

Govt withdraws Gandhis’ SPG security cover

Blinded by revenge; Cong slams Centre

NEW DELHI, Nov 8: The central government has decided to take away the elite SPG protection from Congress president Sonia Gandhi, her son Rahul and daughter Priyanka, officials said on Friday.

The Gandhi family will now get 'Z+' security by the CRPF on an all-India basis, they said. The Union government took the decision to withdraw the Gandhi family's Special Protection Group (SPG) cover after a security assessment, a senior official said. Sonia Gandhi's husband Rajiv Gandhi and mother-in-law Indira Gandhi, both former prime ministers, were assassinated.

The government had recently withdrawn the SPG cover of former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.

Following this move, the Congress hit out at the Centre. “Prime Minister Narendra Modi and home minister Amit Shah have been blinded by revenge and personal vendetta,” Congress general secretary in-charge of organisation KC Venugopal.

“They have murdered every democratic tradition today by withdrawing the SPG security cover to Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra,” Venugopal said during a press conference.

Earlier officials said that the decision was taken on the recommendation of a top security review panel that carries out a threat perception analysis of protected persons. A formal order to accept this panel's recommendation was issued on Thursday.

The three Gandhis will now be protected by the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), people familiar with the development said.

Venugopal pointed out was former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee had amended the law to give cover to the family members of the two former PMs. Venugopal said former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and other senior leaders of the party had written a letter to the cabinet secretary, urging him not to withdraw the SPG cover to the Gandhi family.

“The government is playing with the lives of Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi,” Venugopal said.

Congress' chief spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala said Modi and Shah should have read a few lines from the Justice J S Verma Commission's report in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case. “Modi and Shah have shown their political level by taking away the Gandhi's SPG cover,” he said. Congress workers staged a protest near Union home minister Amit Shah's residence against the government's decision to withdraw SPG cover of the Gandhi family.
