Ayodhya verdict: Unsatisfied Muslims in Agra accept SC judgment

The implied ban imposed by the state police on criticising this verdict over social media kept the emotions of the Muslim community in the city under wraps.

When it was announced on Friday night that the Supreme Court will deliver its verdict on the Ayodhya issue on Saturday, it sent shivers down the spines of the residents of Agra who were reminded of the 1992 riots.

Shops of daily essentials remained open till late with people stocking up on food and other things, in anticipation of probable communal violence and market closure. People could be seen at road crossings discussing the outcome of the Ayodhya case and its possible repercussions.

When the decision was pronounced around 11 am on Saturday, the city remained completely calm. However, it was evident that the Muslim community was not happy with the decision.

People stayed at home fearing backlash from the Muslim community but the extensive police and administrative deployment in the city appeared to be creating an effective deterrent to any anti-social elements.

The implied ban imposed by the state police on criticising this verdict over social media kept the emotions of the Muslim community in the city under wraps.

Speaking to India Today, Muslim academician and former principal of Shobiya College Haji Jameel Qureshi said the Supreme Court appeared to have pronounced this judgment on the basis of Hindu faith, but the country's Muslims will still accept this decision. However, it was an appeal to all Muslims to not take out the Barawafat processions on Sunday in protest against the verdict, he said.

Jameet-ul-Quresh president Mohd. Shareef Kale also said the Supreme Court's decision was completely one-sided but it will be accepted by the Muslims. He added that however, the five-acre plot for building a new mosque is not acceptable as according to Islam, a mosque cannot be built on donated land.

The district magistrate and other officials have been in continuous communication with the prominent Muslims of the city.

Mufti Mudasssar Ali Qadri said if the Supreme Court had asked the government to give land for a mosque, it should have also ordered the Muslims to pay a proper price for the land. This way it would have been a monetary transaction, which is allowed under Islam, he said.

Meanwhile, at the Taj Mahal, there was an unprecedentedly low number of tourists despite it being a November weekend. Traffic remained low throughout the day and most shops were shut in the first half of the day, opening only in the evening after the situation remained normal.
