Ailing Dalvi Hospital run to the ground as PMC leaves it unmonitored

Multi-storeyed facility in Shivajinagar operates just on ground floor; conducts only pre-natal checks but sends away patients who approach for procedures



A few years ago, the then health chief of Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) threw up his hands when he saw that the civic body did not have the wherewithal to run some of the hospitals it built and handed them over to private operations. But now it has emerged that the civic body has let even the few still in its fold to go neglected — a prime example being the Dalvi Hospital at Shivajinagar — whose unhygienic and dysfunctional facilities betray the situation.



The four-storeyed maternity hospital that after a failed experiment with public-private partnership returned to PMC’s care in 2014, operates only out of its ground floor, where it has about 25 beds. Despite being equipped with a labour room and an operating theatre, the hospital has very little use for them as its staff has taken to turning away hapless patients to other hospitals, when they come for delivery or other procedures.



“All the pre-natal check-ups for my sister were done at Dalvi Hospital but when she went into labour last week on Saturday, the staff told us the doctor was not in and referred us to Kamala Nehru Hospital. However, that hospital too did not entertain us claiming they were not equipped to handle complications. We were redirected again to Sassoon hospital,” recounted Sharad Kamble, a resident of Yerwada, who lodged a complaint with a local corporator.



~~71997995~~

While the second floor of the 40-year-old hospital has been lying vacant, the doctors, nurses and support staff have been using the third and first floors. The sonography machine stopped working a couple of months ago and nobody has bothered to get it serviced. The washrooms of the hospital are absolutely filthy. “Patients start coming to the hospital from 9 am. The place is supposed to have been cleaned before that, but the cleaning staff start their days far later and the patients have to be made to wait outside while they do their job. The staff here simply work at their own whim, in the absence of any scrutiny by senior officials,” a staffer at the hospital told Mirror.



Many of the medical staff refuse to be at the hospital through the work hours. They sign in and then disappear to return to mark their presence as their duty hours come to an end, inform insider sources. Medical superintendent Dr Madhuri Ghare has been on medical leave for at least a couple of months. “Many of the medical staff are full-time employees but behave like they are visiting members. The machinery gifted to the hospital six months ago has been dumped and kept locked in a room. They do only normal deliveries here and at any sign of complications they push the patients to other hospitals on the grounds of non-availability of doctors or anaesthetist,” another insider informed.



The hospital has patients coming in from Khadki, Range Hills, Wakdewadi, Shivajinagar and Gokhale Nagar, with the other PMC-run hospital in the vicinity — Bhama Hospital — having shut shop four months ago. But staffers at Dalvi have reduced it to providing only prenatal care and are very rude to interact with even for that. Beyond that they simply refer the patients to the PMC-run Kamala Nehru Hospital at Mangalwar Peth or the state-run Sassoon General Hospital, say exasperated patients and health activists.



~~71998016~~

“The numbers tell the story. The hospital treats about 50-60 patients a day at its out-patient department (OPD) or do prenatal check-ups. In contrast, the number of deliveries done here are negligible. Many patients in labour are routinely turned away and redirected to other hospitals. If only senior officials bothered to make surprise visits to the hospital and run checks on patient data, they would be privy to the goings on here,” pointed out Sharad Shetty, a social worker dedicated to health sector.



Predictably the medical officer of the Dalvi Hospital, Dr Shilpa Bramhane, refused to enter into any discussion on the situation, insisting that she would share information only on a written permission from PMC. PMC’s health chief, Dr Ramchandra Hankare, was clueless about the deplorable functioning of the hospital. On being apprised of the complaints about the facility, he offered to do an inquiry. “We have several developments lined up for the hospital in the coming days, which will be done at its second floor. I will appoint a team to run a detailed inquiry on the complaints against the staff and the state of the facilities and action will be taken based on its report,” he told Mirror.


