[GROUND REPORT] Massive protests rock JNU; students irked over probable fee hike, dress code

The protesting students have demanded the withdrawal of the hostel manual.

Key Highlights The students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) have been protesting against the administration The protest broke out while the institution was holding its third day of convocation According to the students, they are upset with the university's hostel manual Allegedly, the hostel manual holds information about a probable fee hike, curfew timings and a dress code

New Delhi: Students of the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) staged protests on Monday, alleging that the college administration has adopted an anti-student policy. The protest took place after the students' union learned about the provisions mentioned hostel manual. According to the protesters, the manual has a provision for a fee hike, a dress code restrictions and curfew timings.

The protesting students have demanded the withdrawal of the hostel manual. The protest broke out while the institution was holding its third day of convocation. Vice President of India, Venkaiah Naidu was one of the chief guests of the convocation. Police personnel were deployed at the venue to ensure that the convocation ceremony is not interrupted by the protest. The protest, however, intensified as the Vice President addressed the graduands and the faculty.

According to Mirror Now's ground report, JNU students had been paying Rs 200 per year as their hostel fee. However, according to the new hostel manual, they will have to pay Rs 1,500 per month. Irked over the hike, the students demanded that the hostel manual is withdrawn at the earliest. They also boycotted the convocation as they accused the administration of adopting an anti-student policy.

The administration, however, defended the manual and said that the rules of the university have been stagnant for the last 20 years. They said that it is high time for them to alter some of the rules and regulations. According to the new rules, the students residing in the hostels have to return to their respective rooms by 11 pm every night. The students have refused to accept the alterations mentioned in the hostel manual.

The students have claimed that they want to register a complaint against the vice-chancellor of the university. The administration of the institution has not commented on the protests yet.
