NGO Mass India demands CBI Probe in Fr Mahesh D’Souza death case

NGO Mass India demands CBI Probe in Fr Mahesh D’Souza death case

Udupi: The Mass India NGO Mahiti Seva Samithi Udupi District demanded the state government to hand over the alleged suicide case of Fr Mahesh D’Souza assistant parish priest and principal of Don Bosco English School Shirva to the CBI.

Speaking at a press meet held at the Press Club on Monday, November 11, the state president and national executive committee member G A Koteyar said, “The Mahiti Seva Samithi Udupi District working to provide justice is not involved with any religious or political party. Our main objective is to try and provide justice for the people in a legal manner.

Fr Mahesh had dedicated his life to serving the people and had worked tirelessly for the betterment of the Don Bosco School. He had gained appreciation from all sections of society. On October 11, his body was found hanging in his school chamber. His funeral rights were held on October 15 at Our Lady of Health Church, Shirva with a huge gathering of people from all communities”.

Koteyar further said, “Fr Mahesh was mentality sound and was ready to face any problems, it is unbelievable to hear that such a person had committed suicide due to depression. After his death, the parish priest nor the parish committee did not file any complaint in the police station. The Bishop and the SP of Udupi district have said that, the family of the deceased priest had personally requested them not to reveal the personal details that led to the death of Fr D’Souza. Which is far from the truth. When the people of Shirva met Fr Mahesh D’Souza’s parents they said that we did not tell anything to the police officials or the Bishop. We had only requested them to provide justice for our son’s death”.

Koteyar also said, “The people of Shirva held a silent protest on November 5 and submitted a memorandum to the Shirva PSI to hold a thorough enquiry in the death of Fr Mahesh D’Souza. We are demanding to the government to handover the death case of Mahesh D’Souza to the CBI and give justice to the family members. If the government fails to give the case to the CBI we will hold a protest in front of the DC office”, he warned.

When the mediapersons questioned whether anyone has filed a complaint in the death of Fr Mahesh D’Souza, Koteyar said that a memorandum was given to the PSI and no individual complaint has been filed.

Sunil Cabral, Conrad Castelino, Johnson Dolfred Castelino, Stephen Rajesh were present in the press meet.
