JNU Students Protest highlights: Students clash with police; Union minister stuck for 6 hours

JNU Protest Today, Protest in JNU highlights: The JNUSU said that students are protesting against the “anti-student” policies of the administration. According to them, the Draft Hostel Manual has provisions for fee hike, curfew timings and dress code for students.

JNU Students Protest highlights: The Jawaharlal Nehru Students’ Union (JNUSU) has called for a university strike today to protest against various issues including fee hike. News agency ANI reported that students are protesting with placards in hands which reads “say no to massive fee hike”.

The police said that barricading has been done outside the university to prevent students from protesting on the city roads. Massive security arrangements are in place in the vicinity in view of the protest which coincides with the convocation. The varsity is hosting its third convocation today and Vice President M Venkaiah Naidu is the chief guest.

The JNUSU said that students are protesting against the “anti-student” policies of the administration. According to them, the Draft Hostel Manual which was approved by the Inter-Hall Administration has provisions for fee hike, curfew timings and dress code for students.

Students said that they will not end the strike till the Hostel Manual is withdrawn.

Meanwhile, clashes have erupted between the JNU students and Delhi Police near the varsity premises.

Live Blog JNU Protest Live: JNU Students Protest Today Live Coverage Highlights Last day ‘ruined’ due to protests, say students attending convocation Many students who got their degrees at the third convocation ceremony of the Jawaharlal Nehru University were left disheartened on Monday owing to the protests over fee hike as they felt their last day as a JNU student was “ruined”, PTI reported VC destroying the varsity: JNUSU president Aishe Ghosh JNUSU office bearers met Union Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank after he was stuck at the AICTE auditorium earlier in the day, after university students protested over fee hike. Thet were not able to meet JNU VC and raised slogans like “we want V-C”. “The VC is destroying the varsity. We have made several attempts to meet him in campus, but there has been no fruitful result,” JNUSU president Aishe Ghosh was quoted by Indian Express as saying. JNU students demand withdrawal of draft hostel manual Students wanted to meet the vice chancellor and demand withdrawal of the draft hostel manual. A protesting student said, “The university administration’s policies are against students who are from marginalised sections of the society. The hostel fee has been increased to 300 per cent. Where will the students stay and study if this happens with us.” JNU students gather outside AICTE HQs during vice-president’s address Earlier on Monday, hundreds of students gathered outside the AICTE headquarters protesting against hostel fee hike. Students wanted to march towards the ACITE premises where Vice President Venkaiah Naidu was addressing the university’s convocation at an auditorium. Protests in JNU escalate The protests started in the morning and escalated as the day progressed with angry crowds of students pushing against police personnel in anti-riot gear. HRD minister stuck inside auditorium for over 6 hours as JNU students protest Union Human Resource Development Minister Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’ was stuck inside the AICTE auditorium in New Delhi for over six hours on Monday as protests by JNU students escalated, forcing him two cancel two events later in the day, news agency PTI reported. JNU students clash with Delhi police Shouting slogans and raising banners, thousands of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students clashed with police on Monday outside the campus as they raised their voices against the administration’s “anti-student” policy. #WATCH Delhi: Women police personnel push back girl students of JNU as the protest by Jawaharlal Nehru Students’ Union (JNUSU), over different issues including fee hike, continues outside the university campus. pic.twitter.com/FahM7wi8VV — ANI (@ANI) November 11, 2019
