JNU Hostel Fee hike: Large Protest breaks out as Vice President Venkaiah Naidu addresses 3rd Convocation

JNU Hostel Fee Hike Protest: JNU students launched a massive protest against the hostel fee hike today near the AICTE auditorium, where JNU is holding its 3rd Convocation Ceremony today. JNUSU (Jawaharlal Nehru Students’ Union) intensified its protest against the “anti-student” policies of the University administration today even as Vice President Venkaiah Naidu is attending the JNU Convocation Function as the chief guest today. Vice President Venkaiah Naidu will be addressing the 3rd Convocation Function of JNU at AICTE auditorium in Delhi, as the chief guest.

Police Put Up Barricades

With protests intensifying, police have put up barricades outside the convocational venue where Vice President Venkaiah Naidu will be delivering the convocation function today. The barricading has been done to avoid any untowardly incident during VP’s visit. As per reports published by ANI, a large number of students have joined the protest against hostel fee hike and new hostel rules proposed by the University administration. Some students can be seen clashing with the cops during the protests despite the barricading.

Vice President Addresses JNU Convocation

Vice President M Venkaiah Naidu addressed the JNU’s 3rd Convocation Ceremony today and awarded degrees to students. In his address, Vice President said "My congratulations to all the students who are receiving their degrees and compliments to faculty members of JNU for providing quality education.” He also lauded JNU for becoming synonymous with academic excellence in the country and congratulated the students and administration for receiving the highest ranking, Grade A++ from NAAC." At JNU’s 3rd Convocation ceremony, students from July 1, 2018 to June 30, 2019 have been conferred their Ph.D degree.

Protest Against Hostel Fee Hike, Hostel Manual

Jawaharlal Nehru Students’ Union (JNUSU) on Sunday, issued a statement saying that the students group will be protesting outside the convocation venue against hotel feel hike and the new hostel rules manual released by the University. JNUSU termed the Monday’s protests as continuation of their protests against “hostel manual and several other issues like restrictions by the administration on entry to Parathasarathy Rocks, attempts to lock students' union office, etc.” JNU students have been protesting against the hostel fee hike and new hostel rules manual for last 15 days.

JNU Administrations Asks Students to End Protest

Earlier, JNU administration had asked students to end the ongoing protests against a draft hostel manual, which allegedly has provisions for fee hike and dress code. The administration said that the protests have been affecting academic activities of the varsity and students were facing problems while trying to complete academic assignments and prepare for their examinations.

Also Read: Venkaiah Naidu urges teaching students upto Class 10 in mother tongue
