Magazine row: probe panel moots action

Next Syndicate meeting will take a final call, says Vice Chancellor

The Calicut University Syndicate will decide if action needs to be taken against those behind the publication of ‘Post-truth’, the Departmental Students Union (DSU) magazine which courted a controversy over its alleged objectionable content.

This follows a report prepared by a three-member inquiry panel which found that some of the contents of the magazine had hurt religious sentiments.

K. Mohammed Basheer, Vice Chancellor, told The Hindu that that the next meeting of the syndicate would discuss the report in detail.

“There are some recommendations against the students. The meeting will take a final call,” he said.

The panel report, submitted to the Vice Chancellor on Monday, had sought disciplinary action against members of the magazine committee.

The DSU is led by the Students Federation of India.

The staff editor reportedly told the panel that leave alone the content, he was not even aware of his appointment to the post.

Staff adviser P.J. Herman was found to have sanctioned funds for the magazine without checking the content. He also claimed that though he had participated in the magazine release function, he had not read it in full.

Mr. Herman, an assistant professor with the Department of Hindi, was relieved of the post of DSU president earlier.

The inquiry panel is also learnt to have sought republication of the magazine after removing the objectionable content.

The university had withdrawn the magazine in mid-October, days after its release, after the United Democratic Students’ Federation, an alliance of the Kerala Students’ Union and the Muslim Students’ Federation, protested against the contents.

An association of university staff affiliated to the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh also approached Chancellor and Governor Arif Mohammed Khan, claiming that Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah were portrayed in an insulting manner.
