JNU students protest over fee hike, curfew hours; demand Vice Chancellor's resignation

Delhi

Jawaharlal Nehru University

Mamidala Jagadesh Kumar

JNU

JNUTA

Untitled Carousel IIT-B’s research scholars condemn tenfold fee hike Research Scholars’ Forum asks if serious students only come from higher income group.

Untitled Carousel IIT students renew protests over hike in MTech tuition fee IIT Council had announced an increase in the annual fee from Rs 25,000-50,000 to Rs 2 lakh in all 23 IITs in September.

Hundreds of students of thestaged massive protests right outside the university premises demanding a rollback of the proposed fee hike and changes in the hostel manual that imposes curfew hours, dress code and other restrictions on students.The students clashed with policemen deployed to control the situation as the protest turned unruly and students upturned barricades and hurled shoes at the cops. The police in turn resorted to water cannons and batons to control the crowd that finally dispersed in the evening after an assurance from the Ministry of Human Resources to look into the grievances of the protestors.The agitating students waited all day demanding a meeting with the University’s Vice Chancellor, who refused any discussion on fee hike and other issues raised by the students. The students received the backing of theTeachers Association that held a Teachers’ Assembly on Monday where the police action was condemned and a strong demand for the VC to step down was made.“The police action was clearly only to defend the obstinate refusal of the Vice Chancellor to engage in any dialogue with students on their concerns….The Assembly was an expression of the collective view of the JNU faculty that the changes in the hostel manual and the steep increase in hostel charges are unacceptable. It is the University's responsibility to provide residential and mess facilities to students at reasonable cost and hostels cannot be be run on a self-financing principle as the new Hostel Manual proposes,” an official statement ofread.Students claimed that the fee hike was threefold to 999 percent in varying cases that would drive out 40 per cent of the students since a large number come from economically weaker sections of society. The varsity has increased fees for a single-occupancy room from Rs. 20 to Rs 600 per month and from Rs. 10 to Rs. 3000 for a double-occupancy room. A new service charge of Rs 1700 per month has been levied taking up the monthly hostel feel from Rs 2000 to 2300 while the one-time mess security deposit has also been hiked from Rs 5500 to Rs 12,000.The JNU administration has explained that this is the first fee revision in 19 years and that the previous fee structure was outdated and extremely low. The authorities have previously stated that an annual expenditure of Rs. 10 crore on electricity, water and service charges is incurred, which has to be borne from the general fund given by the University Grants Commission that could have otherwise been used for maintenance and giving the university a face lift.Demanding the resignation of the VC, the JNU Students Union issued a statement that said, “The meeting on hostel rules be reconvened in the presence of student representatives and all regressive parts pertaining to clothing, timings etc must be revoked….Due to the 999 percent fee hike that is being imposed on us, the University today faces an unprecedented crisis, with an overwhelming number of its students facing a threat to their academic future. For a university where a majority of students come from the most marginalized backgrounds in this country, it no wonder that many of the degree receiving students participating in the convocation also joined the protest. We appeal to all the citizens of this country on whose taxes this university runs. JNU remains a university which is still accessible to the poorest and most marginalized sections in this country and this present move is a brutal attack on not just current students but on all those students from such backgrounds who fight and aspire for higher education. This is why the protest will only intensity if the demands are not dealt with soon.”
