Civil society organisations call on govt to save Dr KC’s life - The Himalayan Times - Nepal's No.1 English Daily Newspaper

Minister urges KC to end hunger strike. Says border dispute with India a more pressing concern

Kathmandu, November 11

Several organisations have urged the government to address the demands made by senior orthopaedic surgeon Dr Govinda KC immediately. The organisations have also demanded that the government hold talks with Dr KC at the earliest.

Kathmandu University Professors’ Association said as the government had earlier promised to fulfil Dr KC’s demands, it was now time to implement the agreements. Issuing a press release yesterday the association demanded that anomalies and irregularities in the medical sector be solved permanently and Dr KC’s life be saved.

Nepal Medical Association also urged that the demands made by Dr KC be fulfilled at the earliest. Issuing a press release today the medical association said that Dr KC had been fighting against irregularities and anomalies in the medical sector.

“Dr KC has been fighting for access to medical education and health service for the public. He has also been making policy makers aware through his peaceful protest. It is the responsibility of the government to immediately address the issues raised by Dr KC. The government should implement agreements reached with Dr KC and the association,” it reads.

Minister of Education, Science and Technology Giriraj Mani Pokharel also appealed to Dr Govinda KC to end his protest. “It is not the time for Dr KC to continue his protest when the whole country is united on the issue of border encroachment. It is time for him to help in implementation of the Medical Education Act. Most of his demands have been fulfilled. But his demands on the transitional justice will be presented in the Parl i a m e n t ,” s a i d Minister Pokharel at a press meet organised in the capital today.

Dr KC had begun his 17th hunger strike in Dadeldhura district headquarters Baghkhor demanding that anomalies and irregularities prevalent in medical sector be ended and the extra fees taken from students be returned. He started his strike on November 4.
