Amit Shah has assured Manipur’s integrity won’t be affected due to Naga peace deal: Biren Singh

The chief minister was addressing the media a day after his return from the national capital. (File)

Manipur Chief Minister N Biren Singh Tuesday said that Union Home Minister Amit Shah had “categorically” reiterated that Manipur’s integrity would not be affected in any form by the Indo-Naga peace deal.

The chief minister was addressing the media a day after his return from the national capital. Singh and his cabinet ministers had gone to New Delhi last Friday to meet central leaders in the wake of unabated protests in the state against the disintegration of Manipur by the Indo-Naga settlement.

Allaying the fears of the public, Singh said that BJP leaders are committed to the welfare of the people and made an appeal to the people to remain calm. “We firmly believe in the commitment given by our leaders and we honour them as the BJP is committed to the welfare of the people,” he said.

Singh also said that the Central Government will soon invite stakeholders in Manipur for consultation before signing the final agreement with Naga groups. Moreover, Singh further added that the state government will also hold a meeting with the civic bodies concerned in a couple of days.

As such, Singh suggested that it would be wise not to take further steps that could be counterproductive.

The Coordination Committee on Manipur Integrity (COCOMI) spearheading the current agitation in Manipur has been demanding a special assembly session to take a resolution to protect Manipur’s integrity among others.

The chief minister said that Manipur Legislative Assembly had adopted 11 resolutions pledging to protect Manipur’s integrity and two out of the eleven resolutions two were taken by the present BJP-led government.

Pointing out that the state has witnessed enough tension, Singh appealed to the people to stop painting a bad image of Manipur at a time when the state is going to celebrate its biggest tourism festival.

“We urge the people to have faith in the government this time. We assure you that our leaders, who have been trying to undo the division created by past governments, will not fail us,” he added.
