India Inc, wanna invest in HR-R&D?

Indrajit Hazra is Editor Views, Economic Times. His attempt to comment on everything under the sun has made him a social menace in certain social media circles.

One of the mistakes that many people may be making when confronted with the monetary amounts related to the proposed hostel fee hike at Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) is to use their own budgetary yardsticks. The current hostel mess security deposit (refundable) is Rs 5,500, a monthly accommodation fee for a single-occupancy room Rs 20, and Rs 10 for a double-occupancy room.

According to the authorities, and quite rightly going by these numbers, there has not been a hike in fees for the last 19 years. So, why the old whine in a new bottle?

Now, the respective amounts proposed by the administration are Rs 12,000, Rs 600 and Rs 200. In addition, a new maintenance service charge of Rs 1,700 has been proposed.

So, apart from the proposed hike in the one-time deposit fee from Rs 5,500 to Rs 12,000, the intended monthly accommodation fees will now be Rs 1,700 (maintenance)+Rs 600/200 = Rs 2,300/1,900. That’s an increase of Rs 2,280/1,890, once an extra one-time (refundable) Rs 6,500 is deposited.

Yes. It’s hardly a a daunting increase — especially if you consider that today’s accommodation fees at JNU have remained unchanged since 2000. You’re bound to think the hike, as well as the changed amount, is a piddly amount, especially if you’re a corporate entity or even a HNWI (high-net-worth individual) JNU alumnus. And you’d be right to think so.

And if you’re one of the folks who were delighted and chuffed — either as an ex-JNU student or scholar, or as a general India — when one of this year’s Economic Nobel winners, Abhijit Banerjee, lauded his ‘JNU years’, describing the institution as how it “taught me what India was all about”, then surely, you could consider sponsoring accommodations for those students who may find (genuinely or out of subterfuge) even such a proposed hike daunting?

The proposed hike in accommodation fees in JNU is justified, considering rising prices and shrinking institutional revenues. There is no campus kamadhenu, yet. Also justified are the concerns of students – reportedly about 40% of whom come from families with an annual income below Rs 1.44 lakh (monthly Rs 12,000) – many of whom, despite stipends and scholarships, could find this increase steep enough to make their scholarly pursuits ‘too much of a luxury’, and drop out or falter.

The charge that many students simply while away, using JNU’s cheap accommodation as a cushion to nest into as long as possible, and so, every student should somehow manage to pay for the ‘corrected’ accommodation fees or, well, tough, is a bit like asking banks to not lend money because there are lazy, no-good, ‘professional’ defaulters out there.

At the cost of loosening some shekels from their loose-change saddle, JNU’s well-wishers – indeed, those wishing well for higher education students across institutions in the country and hoping to utilise the legendary ‘demographic dividend’ – could consider sponsoring students’ accommodation. As HR-R&D investment – not as CSR! — for the future of our inclusive economy.

And in the process, if this stops those ‘silly, protesting JNU students’ from inviting themselves to be water-cannoned by a hapless police time and again, what could be better? After all, as everyone except those protesting students seem to be in agreement with, it is a piddly amount even after the proposed hike.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
