'After 2G, Congress now have Priyanka G': Amit Shah in West Bengal rally

BJP president Amit Shah on Tuesday mocked Priyanka Gandhi's decision to join politics and said a government run by a dynasty could not serve the people but could only provide a "majboor (helpless) government".

Taking a shot at the entry of Priyanka Gandhi into active politics, he said, "There was 2G in the ten year long government of Sonia ji and Manmohan ji. There was Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi which means two Gs. During that UPA rule, we had witnessed huge scams such as 2G. Now the third G has jumped on the bandwagon .... Now we have Priyanka G (Gandhi). What will be the amount of the scam? "So now, they (the Congress) want to add 2G and the third G and indulge in more corruption."

'Cong, TMC two side of same coin'

The BJP leaders said both Congress and Trinamool Congress are two sides of the same coin who believe in “parivarvad” (family rule).

“Both Congress and Trinamool Congress are two sides of the same coin. There is parivarvad in Congress. There was Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi, Sanjay Gandhi, Rajeev Gandhi, Sonia Gandhi and now there is Rahul Gandhi. Here in West Bengal too, after Mamata Banerjee there is her nephew Abhishek Banerjee. Do you agree with this parivarvad? This cannot develop the country,” Shah said.

He also criticised the Mamata Banerjee-led Trinamool Congress (TMC) government in West Bengal and said the upcoming Lok Sabha polls would be about restoring democracy in the state.

"Narendra Modi will get elected as prime minister again after the Lok Sabha election. But in West Bengal, the polls will be about restoring democracy," Shah a rally in East Midnapore.

Shah also demanded that West Bengal CM should clear her stand on the Citizenship Amendment Bill, while accusing that her government welcomes infiltrators but has no place in the state for refugees.

Shah said: “I would like to ask Mamata ji if she will support Citizenship Amendment Bill in Rajya Sabha or not, and tell that to people of Bengal. They welcome infiltrators and Rohingyas but there's no place here for the refugees who come to save themselves! I would like to tell all the refugees in Bengal that BJP and Narendra Modi government will grant them the citizenship".

India is looking at Bengal, says Shah

Asserting that no state can progress unless the roots of democracy are strengthened, he said that the present generation is missing the past glory of the state.

“This land of West Bengal has led the nation for many years. It provided cultural leadership, political leadership and commercial leadership but what has happened to that Bengal? Where did 'Shonar Bangla' go? Bengalis in India are searching for it. All are looking towards Bengal... For this nation, it might be an election to make Modi ji PM once again but for Bengal, the election means to re-build 'Shonar Bangla',” said Shah.

He also criticised the state government for creating an obstruction in BJP’s planned Yatras. He said, “I want to ask people of West Bengal, does a political party have a right to campaign or not? BJP wanted to reach out to the people by taking out five raths to all villages. But we were not allowed to go to people and meet them. I want to tell Mamata Banerjee that no matter how hard she tries to stop us, BJP workers will go to each home and village to propagate the message of lotus. She can’t stop us because there is democracy in the country".

(With ANI and PTI Inputs)
