Pune: Kisan Sabha stages protest at Oriental Insurance office

The protest outside the office of Oriental Insurance Company in Shivajinagar on Wednesday. (Express Photo)

The Beed unit of the All India Kisan Sabha staged a protest outside the office of the Oriental Insurance Company in Pune, demanding that the company release unpaid insurance claims for the 2018 kharif season. Ajay Burade, leader of the Kisan Sabha, claimed that farmers from villages in Manjalgaon, Parli, and Dharur taluka of Beed are yet to receive compensation.

About 200 farmers had gathered outside the office of the Oriental Insurance Company as part of the protest. Annasahed Khadak, a farmer from Kawlewadi village in Parli taluka said residents of his village had paid the amount to opt for the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana crop insurance scheme.

“While some of us received the compensation, others were left out. The company cited technical issues for non-payment, which we rectified, yet compensation was not released,” he said.

Many farmers said the insurance company had cited “over insurance”, or multiple enrollments by the same farmer, as another common reason for refusing claims. “If there were discrepancies, why were they not pointed out during enrolment?” said the farmers.

In response to the agitation, the company, in a press release issued on Wednesday, said that it was the notified insurer for kharif season 2018 for Beed, Jalgaon, Nashik, Osmanabad, Raigad, Sangli, Satara and Solapur. The total premium paid by farmers was Rs 118.92 crore while the government’s share was Rs 1,073.65 crore. “We had paid claims of Rs 2,014.83 crore to 22,59,471 farmers, of which Rs 1,151.80 crore was disbursed to 12 lakh farmers in Beed,” the press statement read.

The statement agreed that Rs 42 crore in claims had not been paid and claimed this was due to various mistakes in entering the bank account details during the enrolment process, or because some accounts had become inactive. “Advertisements were issued twice requesting farmers to link their bank accounts with Aadhaar number. Despite three attempts at Aadhaar-based payment, 17,851 transactions failed on October 25 due to non-linking of bank accounts with Aadhaar numbers. A majority of the discrepancies were observed in Ambejogai and Parli taluka of Beed,” it stated.
