Residents in Mankhurd, Govandi organise condolence meet for public toilets to get BMC’s attention

Mankhurd-Govandi

M East ward

public toilets

World Toilet Day

Shivaji Nagar

Rafique Nagar

(Top) Public urinals in an unusable state in Mankhurd; above: residents participate in the ‘condolence meeting’

MHADA

A construction site in Mandala, where three people died after falling into a septic tank

Mantralaya

Bare Necessity- Photographs that expose Mumbai's ODF claims 02:20

An NGO has launched a campaign to draw the BMC’s attention to the dismal state of the restrooms inAt around 6 pm in the, a group of people gathered with lit candles to participate in the condolence meet of a community toilet. The group gathered as part of a campaign launched by the Committee of Resource Organisations (CORO), to draw the attention of the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation’s (BMC) to the dismal state ofThe ‘Toilet is dead’ campaign is a snarky initiative under the local NGO’s larger ‘Right to Pee’ crusade, which was launched in 2011. The local NGO flagged off the campaign with its first “condolence meeting” on November 11. The group will conduct similar gatherings until November 19, which is observed as. “We are meeting every evening to pay tribute to our dear toilets, which are no longer with us. They have served us in the toughest of times,” says a message on the NGO's poster outside a public toilet.The NGO has focused on public toilets in, Nirankari Nagar, Mandala, Cheeta camp, Vashi Naka, Mankhurd Ambedkar Nagar, Bharat Nagar, Anand Nagar, Santosh Niwas in Payli Pada – Trombay. Residents said the BMC has only paid lip service to the repairing and reopening of public toilets in these areas.In Mandala, three people died after falling into a septic tank of a community toilet that collapsed in 2018. “We have sent reminders urging the BMC to build this toilet,” Rohini Kadam, coordinator of Right to Pee movement said. “People cannot afford to pay Rs 5 to use a public toilet every time. It is the duty of the BMC to provide this basic infrastructure. This toilet was demolished and the construction began six months ago. But not even plinth is done.”Kadam said the protest is a bid to seek answers. “We have been told that the two-storeyed toilet will be constructed soon. But when is that going to happen?” Kadam asked.In Rafique Nagar and Vashi Naka, dilapidated public toilets have been demolished to make way for new constructions, but the projects have not begun yet. Three agencies have been involved in the construction of public toilets in M East ward – the BMC, Maharashtra Housing and Development Authority (), and Mumbai Sewage Disposal Project (MSDP).The MHADA-built toilet in M East ward’s Ambedkar Nagar is in a pitiable condition. Its windows, doors and tin roof are broken. Residents collect monthly contributions to get the toilets cleaned. In Maharashtra Nagar, the MHADAbuilt public toilet has never been cleaned and does not have water supply. Residents, however, are forced to use the neglected facilities.In Ambedkar Nagar, a two-storeyed public toilet is ready to use but is yet to be inaugurated. Residents in the area are forced to use the other shoddy public toilets in the area. “If this toilet is opened to the public, people will be relieved from using the choked-up toilets in this area,” said resident Varsha Mohite.In 2018, Right to Pee activists painted walls in protest against the conditions of the public toilets. Five of the NGO’s activists were arrested at thewhen they tried to give Devendra Fadnavis, chief minister at the time, photos of the toilets. They had sent ‘Ha’PEE Diwali’ cards to officials responsible for the construction and maintenance of toilets in the area. The NGO has also distributed pamphlets among employees at the BMC headquarters. “All these were sarcastic protests,” said Supriya Jaan, who heads the Right to Pee campaign. “With humor we get a positive response. We cannot confront officials on road all the time. Sometimes, we have to be imaginative too.”
