Rightwing epidemic of Divider in chief plagues world

Extreme rightwing, racially-charged bias and communal hatred appears to be spreading internationally like an epidemic. The German city of Dresden is said to have declared Nazi emergency. Earlier, the locals took to the streets in organised demonstrations to protest against the influx of refugees who are not white and Christian. Germans are supposed to be a cultured and educated people having produced renowned thinkers, philosophers, writers and scientists but unfortunately the same people have been guilty of the Holocaust and racial and religious persecution of most heinous level.

In the US, a city removed the name of Martin Luther King from the street and in another white Protestants attack a black Catholic Church both being Christian sects. It shows that religion is not as strong a unifying glue as racialism a dividing force. In Berlin, Nuclear Weapons Division (AWD) Germany, an offshoot of the notorious the US-based new energy group issued death threats against Green Party leader.

Intolerance, religious hatred and racial bias were expected to have been buried after the defeat of the bigots and fascists in World War II and rise of liberal post-war generation. But unfortunately geopolitical ambitions of some nations and rebirth of racial, cultural and religious identities on rebound fuelled inter-culture, inter-religious competition and conflict to dominate the world stage – first in Southeast Asia, then the Middle East and then in Europe and America. Instead of a big conflagration, small localised fires burned locally in different parts of the world and this religious and racial discord percolated in the civil society resulting in localised confrontations between different races and religions. In India these are called communal riots or danga and right from the 1940s, the second half of the last century, the subcontinent has had a series of shameful and communal riots and the current century started with most shameful pogrom which totally changed the script and the nature of Indian politics from Gandhian non violence and Nehruvian secularism to polarised and assertive Hindutva.

The Hindutvavadis should be asked as to how they feel when the shoe is on the other foot. Only this week in the German city of Nuremberg local authorities chose 17-year-old girl Benigna Munsi as child Christ. In the past every actor who played the role of child Christ has been white and extreme rightwing party Alternative for Germany (Deutschland) (AfD) openly attacked the choice with openly racist connotations and the local mayor commented, “You could cry about this level of misanthropy”. Bavaria’s interior minister termed it “the malicious grimace of racism”. The jury which selected Miss Munsi found her “fresh warm empathetic and of easy going manners”. Even in the liberal and broad-based British society Indians find cultural, religious and racial discrimination. The president of the UK wing of overseas friends of BJP said all the 6 Indian origin MP are Labour but as the Labour is opposed to anything India, his organisation will now work for Tory candidates.

This tide of acrimony has to be turned back, both at the national and the international level if the tenet of Vasudhaiv Kutumbakum – the whole world is one family – is to be put in practice. Great thinker and humanist Swami Vivekananda more than a century ago started his speech in the US by addressing the audience as brothers and sisters. Those in India who seek power in the name of Hindu culture and tradition should follow the thinking and philosophy of this great Indian .As they say charity begins at home, the Hindutva brigade should not only profess but practice this universal brotherhood irrespective of class, caste, race or religion of the person whether in India or abroad.

For those who equate the opening of the Kartarpur corridor with the falling of the Berlin Wall but pursue divisive, racial and religious policies, must pay heed to the statement made at an event in Berlin to mark the 30th anniversary of the falling of the wall by the German chancellor. Angela Merkel, in an apparent reference to the rise of far right, observed: “No wall that keeps people out and restricts freedom is so high that it cannot be broken down.” It is time that India demolishes the walls erected in the hearts and minds by the Dividers and their Chief.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
