Writing on the wall: JNU's tryst with revised hostel manual and VC Jagadesh Kumar

Slogans painted on the walls of JNU's administrative building (Photo Credits: Amrtansh Arora) | Photo Credit: People

Key Highlights The agitation by JNUSU commenced in the last week of October Students foiling name of university by vandalising buildings: VC Want complete rollback of revised hostel manual, says JNUSU

New Delhi: In the wake of the massive unrest, the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) administration on Wednesday decided to partially roll back changes made in the Hostel Manual that have got the students of India's premier varsity on tenterhooks for over two weeks.

The decision came two days after protesting students laid siege to an event at the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) where Union Minister for Human Resource Development (HRD) Ramesh Pokhriyal was the chief guest. Reports suggest that the minister was stuck inside an auditorium for almost three hours.

Inside the JNU campus which, is spread across an area of a little over 1,000 acres, is the administrative building that houses offices of senior administration officials, including sitting vice-chancellor M Jagadesh Kumar. On Wednesday, the doors of the administrative building were opened to students demonstrating in favour of subsidising of education along the university's famous 'Freedom Square' that is located parallel to a life-size statue of India's first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.

(Photo Credits: Amrtansh Arora)

By evening, students spray-painted the insides of the administrative building as well as the flight of stairs leading up to it in the presence of security guards who did not as much as raise a finger to deter them. The structure's exterior walls, made of red marble, were covered in slogans about 'free education' and 'revolution'.

On the Freedom Square outside, crowds of varsity students sang songs and voiced slogans about the importance of debate in a democracy. While some were engaged in discussions about why they have rejected the revised hostel manuals, others were recalling how the Delhi police had used lathis, water cannons and tear gas to subdue them during the mass-protest earlier this week.

(Photo Credits: Amrtansh Arora)

In a statement issued today, the Jawaharlal Nehru University Students' Union (JNUSU) termed the partial rollback of hostel room fee by the administration as an "eyewash". JNUSU vice-president Saket Moon says that the strike will continue until there is an absolute revocation of the revised hostel manual.

(Photo Credits: Amrtansh Arora)

"The decision was taken in two illegal meetings which were conducted against the rules and provisions of JNU," said Moon. The VP of the students' union also said that the power to alter the fee structure now rests with the administration which is what the students are protesting against. When asked why the students are engaging in vandalism instead of taking up their concerns with the VC, Moon said, "I have never seen him in person."

Interestingly, several varsity students echo the same notion. "We do not understand why the VC is afraid of meeting students or their representatives," they say. The same VC on Thursday filed a police complaint against ten students and appointed an investigative provost to probe five separate instances of vandalism. An FIR has been registered in this regard and further investigation is underway.

"Wardens and provosts are being shuffled to ensure that only the kind of people who are loyal to the VC and subscribe to a particular ideology is made in-charge of things," claims a member of the All India Students Federation (AISA). Another says that the service charge levied on students will result in sanitation and mess workers being fired. It is also being reported that the security guards who let students into the administrative building were disgruntled with the administration and have not been paid their salaries in almost two months.

Going by the most recent inputs, the Jawaharlal Nehru University Teachers' Association (JNUTA) and the workers' associations have lent their support to the protest. This makes one wonder what drives students to boycott their lectures and their teachers to support the agitation? Why hundreds of young boys and girls willingly become human barricades knowing fully well that they are vulnerable to excessive force used by security forces? The answer to that question is now painted across walls of a staircase leading up to the office of the vice-chancellor in the administrative building. The writing on the wall now says, "VC resign now!"
