Discussions on to find solution for Manesar plant, says HMSI

Prior to the laying off this month, 700 contractual workers had been let go in August.

The management at Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India (HMSI) is looking for a resolution to their standoff with the trade union, the firm’s senior vice-president—sales and marketing, Yadvinder Singh Guleria said on Thursday.

Around 2,500 contract workers at the company’s Manesar plant have been on an indefinite strike to protest against retrenchment of over 200 such workers last week, when, on Monday, all “normal operations” in the plant were suspended without citing a date for its resumption.

“Discussions are going on (for a resolution to the issue) … their (contractual workers’) tenure was over, so they were not employed further,” Guleria told reporters.

On Wednesday, a few hundred workers sat in protest outside the plant, while around 1,500-1,800 — the workers’ claimed — protested inside the plant premises. Most, they said, have been working at the plant on contract basis for at least eight years. The protests continued on Thursday, with the workers demanding their dues be paid. “We have given the most important years of our lives to the company.”

Prior to the laying off this month, 700 contractual workers had been let go in August.

“We had been earning Rs 14,000 per month since 2014 without any revision. Now they’ve told us that they’ll call us back ‘when they require our services’. They regularise 50 most senior contract workers every year, but they haven’t done that in the last two years. Nobody got the Diwali bonus this year. They must regularise all contract workers now; we won’t move from here until they do,” said Manas Ranjan Tripathi, who had worked at the plant on a contract basis for a decade.

Protesting workers are receiving support from the 1,900 regular workers at the plant.

HMSI has cited low production and low demand for two-wheelers as the reason for the layoffs. However, the protesting workers say they do not buy that argument. In an earlier statement, an HMSI spokesperson said, “Based on demand fluctuations and production adjustment, 200 contractual members whose term had been completed are relieved from their work.”
