IIT-Madras suicide: Parents to meet Tamil Nadu CM today as protestors continue to demand justice for Fathima Latheef

The suicide of 19-year-old Indian Institute of Technology-Madras (IIT-Madras) student, Fathima Latheef has escalated as the premier institution has been witnessing continuous demands for justice since the tragedy took place.

Fathima Latheef's parents are going to meet Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K. Palaniswami and senior members of the police department today urging them for a fair probe and to discuss the doubts behind their daughter's death.

What is the case:

On November 8, 19-year-old Fathima Latheef, an undergraduate student of Humanities at IIT-Madras allegedly committed suicide in her hostel room.

Preliminary police investigations suspected that the student, a native of Kerala, was depressed because of poor performance in the examinations. Police initially believed that her low marks were the reason behind taking the dire step.

However, three days after her suicide, Fathima's father Abdul Latheef, appealed Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan to ensure a fair probe in the matter as his daughter in a text had reportedly accused one of her professors of harassing her.

The suicide note:

Fathima's father Abdul said that on the day she committed suicide, she told him that she will be switching off her phone as she wanted to study. The next call he got from the premier institution was to let him know about the death of his daughter.

On reaching Chennai after getting the news of the suicide, Fathima's sister Aysha switched Fathima's phone on and found a message in it blaming one of her professor's to be the "cause of her death".

The family, after reading the message on Fathima's phone, believe that she was constantly under harassment by her professor at IIT Madras and said, "it hurt her dignity".

Manitheneya Makkal Katchi (MMK) leader MH Jawahirullah said that he had spoken to Abdul Latheef who alleged that his daughter was subjected to religious discrimination by the accused faculty member.

According to Jawahirullah, Fathima's father had told him that once the professor had given his daughter three marks less and the same was corrected after it was brought to the notice of the head of the department.

Fathima's father Abdul has also accused IIT-Madras officials of giving "contradictory statements" to "cover-up" the matter.

The protests:

The IIT-Madras campus on Thursday saw massive protests by members of the Students' Federation of India (SFI) followed by members of the Congress' youth wing, who staged a protest outside the campus.

"This is institutional murder and not suicide this is a continuation to Rohith Vemula's death. Discrimination should be stopped," an SFI leader said.

Fathima Latheef ( IIT Madras) is killed by Institutional discrimination. Higher Education Institutions cannot be let to turn into graveyard for marginalized students. Fair probe and institutional mechanism is the urgent need of the hour. pic.twitter.com/Kkh4JohjC2 V P Sanu (@VP_Sanu) November 13, 2019

"This is an institution and not an Agraharam (a Brahmanical society). Action needs to be taken against the professor who has been named in the letter. He must be removed from his post in the IIT," a member of Congress's youth wing said.

Those in power are trying to deny justice in the case of the tragic death of IIT-Madras student Fathima Lathif.@TN_PYC President @Hassan_tnpyc & other @IYC poltiical activists took to the streets to demand #JusticeForFathima.



IYC stands in solidarity with the aggrieved family. pic.twitter.com/4ckLBvIMF0 Youth Congress (@IYC) November 14, 2019

Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) chief MK Stalin too had expressed his shock and demanded a "time-bound, honest, independent and a transparent" probe in the matter.

"It's extremely shocking that Fathima committed suicide due to discrimination. Allegations by Fathima's mother have cast a cloud on the secular credentials of Tamil Nadu. This is a worrying trend. It's time we avoid saffronisation of educational institutions," a statement by MK Stalin read.

Shocked to learn about the death of IIT student Fathima Lateef.



The Central Crime Branch must carry out a timely, fair and transparent investigation to ensure #JusticeForFathimaLateef.



Saffronization of Govt-run institutions needs to be checked immediately. https://t.co/cCy2itEUqn M.K.Stalin (@mkstalin) November 14, 2019

IIT-Madras students have also put forth a letter to the institute authorities in which they have demanded: 1) Institute should fully cooperate with the police investigation into Fathima's death and set up a committee with all stakeholders conduct a fair investigation

2) Implementation of SLC resolution asking IIT admin to set up a body of outside experts to study the overall mental well-being of the students in the institute.

3) Setting up of a complaints and grievances redressal committee in all departments at the earliest.

What has happened so far:

The investigation into the suicide of 19-year-old Fathima Latheef has been transferred to the Central Crime Branch and a special team has been set up to probe the matter.

Chennai Police Commissioner AK Viswanathan visited the IIT-Madras campus along with senior officers and held an inquiry into the suicide of the student.

"A special team of the Chennai crime branch headed by Additional Commissioner Eswaramoorthy has been set up to investigate into the case and Additional Commissioner for Women and Children will also be probing the matter," Viswanathan said.

" The case is very sensitive and hence, we are trying to complete the investigation as soon as possible. The investigation is under progress, therefore, we can not divulge into details at the moment. There are several allegations being made by the family and a special team has been formed to investigate the same," he added.

As this case progresses, it needs to be taken into consideration that in the last ten years IIT-Madras has witnessed 14 suicides, out of which, five took place in the past one year.
