Provident fund scam in UP: Power department staff take to the streets

NOIDA: With money of around 45,000 employees, including officials serving at various positions of at UPPCL and PVVNL, stuck in the tainted Dewan Housing Finance Corporation (DHFL), those affected have have protested against the alleged provident fund scam in the state and demanded a CBI probe.While the economic offenses wing (EOW) has arrested erstwhile managing director of UPPCL AP Mishra, director Sudhanshu Dwivedi, general manager (finance) PK Gupta and the latter’s son Abhinav Gupta, the UPPCL employees have asked the government to provide a written assurance regarding the safety of their money.Dinesh Agrawal, assistant secretary and in-charge of PVVNL in UP Rajya Vidyut Parishad Sangh, told TOI that out of the total 45,000 employees who have been affected by the PF scam , as many as 12,000 are working with the PVVNL, which is responsible for power distribution in the western UP region and around 1,000 are located in the Noida-Ghaziabad area.“From a peon to the chief engineer, everybody’s money is at stake. So far, there is no assurance from the state government and We demand that a government order be released stating that it will provide security to our money,” he said, adding that in case no written assurance arrives, they will resort to boycotting work as announced on November 18-19. The body has also demanded that a CBI probe be carried out in the scam, which is pegged to be around Rs 2,267 crore. “So far, the topmost officials who were involved have only been questioned and not arrested. If we do not get any assurance, the only resort will be to boycotting work,” said Agrawal, in-charge of the PVVNL region.Meanwhile, even senior officials of the PVVNL and UPPCL are concerned about their money and many are in process of applying for refunds, officials said. “Those nearing retirement are in the process of taking back their money as nobody is immune to the scam. The PF money, which gets accumulated, is seen as a secured investment. Earlier, it was only limited to making investment in secure public firms but changes were made in 2017 and it was decided that investment will be made in firms that provide high rate of interest. Since the scam has been orchestrated in a government entity, the state government cannot shy away from its responsibility,” said a senior PVVNL official posted in western UP on condition of anonymity. Around 50-60 employees from GB Nagar joined their counterparts on Thursday in Lucknow, where they held a demonstration outside Shakti Bhawan.Meanwhile, with PK Gupta’s son Abhinav Gupta too being arrested, his Noida link has come to fore with sources confirming he was running multiple shell companies through which the money was diverted elsewhere. “He had multiple shell companies, which were used to divert money. Many of them have apparently been shown to be based out of NCR,” sources said.Gautam Budh Nagar police said that the matter is being looked into by the EOW. “The EOW is carrying out the probe. If they require any assistance, it will be provided,” GB Nagar SSP Vaibhav Krishna told TOI.
