For the BJP, josh ran high outside counting centre

MANGALURU: With hundreds of supporters gathered, celebrations began early for BJP leaders and supporters outside Rosario School Ground , where the Mangaluru City Corporation election results were announced on Thursday.BJP supporters could be seen whistling, raising slogans and waving party flags even before elections results were completely declared—as they knew the obvious outcome half-way through the results being announced.Josh ran high among BJP supporters ever since counting of each ward began, starting from 8am till the results were declared completely. However, Congress and SDPI supporters, who also gathered in equal numbers, also did not fail to celebrate, though the grand old party won just 14 seats and SDP1 just 2. “It is time for celebrations, we were sure that BJP would oust the Congress but never expected such a thumping victory—winning 44 out of 60 seats. All credit should go to karyakartas and senior party leaders, who instilled faith in newbies,” said a senior party worker, who was in celebration mood, adding that it was also disappointing that some BJP candidates lost with small margins.The Congress workers, who were gathered in large numbers, were disappointed with the results, but still celebrated the victory of certain senior Congress leaders, especially M Shashidhar Hegde, Praveen Chandra Alva and Ashraf from Bajal.Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) workers, who had also gathered in large numbers, were in a celebratory mood as their seat tally became two from one, since the last election. The party, which is taking baby steps in the coastal district won seats in Katipalla North and Bengre. “We expected more seats this time but won only two. It will help us to work better in the coming days,” said a SDPI worker. As and when results came in, some of the Congress candidates who were at the counting centre walked out knowing the obvious. “It is an unexpected defeat for me, the margin I lost with is very less. We need to introspect on what went wrong,” said a young Congress candidate.
