Dozens join hands for Hyderabad’s 'Chipko movement'

HYDERABAD: Dozens gathered along Tellapur-Nallagandla road on Thursday to protest hacking of trees. Over 130 trees are to be axed immediately and 400 will be affected as a result of road widening.Under the umbrella campaign #SaveNallagandlaTrees, protesters shouted slogans to draw the attention of powers-that-be to the green massacre. As the cry to “save lives, save trees” grew louder, the contractor stopped work on Thursday.Bharat Dantuluri, a resident, said, “We spoke to the contractor and officials from the roads and building department. The permission granted to chop trees by the forest divisional officer only held good till 2018. They have not got an extension for the chopping of trees.” Officials from the R&B department, for their part, said they would apply for permission and get it, since the widening would help the development of the area and ease traffic woes.Rachita Agarwal, another protester, said, “While the work has stopped for now, we have to remain vigilant. Our protest has rattled officials which shows that citizen-driven protests are powerful.”Stating that they would up the ante, by organising another protest on Sunday, Batta Suresh, who has been key in driving the campaign, said, “Out of 400 trees, at least 80 have been cut till now. We don’t know who is benefiting, but we condemn the chopping.”Refuting the idea that road widening is a solution to the problem, Srikanth Peddibhotla, founder, HappiCities Labs, which has been working on better planning of cities, said, “You cannot build your way out of congestion. The only sustainable way to serve people is to provide good public transport.” Stressing on the fact that we are inching towards climate catastrophe, he said, “Alternatives are the need of the hour.”For their part, officials remained baffled at the protest. Forest divisional officer, Shamshabad , Shivaiah, said, “Permission was granted for the move by the Tree Protection Committee. The committee has considered all aspects before permitting the chopping of trees.”
