BJP worker sits in protest over misplaced NOC file

Ludhiana: Raising allegations against building branch officials for misbehaving over the issue of pending NOC for regularization of plots, BJP senior worker Pawan Garg sat on a protest at Zone D office in Sarabha Nagar on Thursday. He complained that he had applied for NOC for two plots in Panchsheel Colony in 2013 and even after completing the payment process in 2015, the NOC was not issued. Moreover, officials misplaced the file as well as the draft he had submitted. However, when the BJP leadership gathered at the spot, officials had to apologize and the protest got over.

Garg said he had been asking for an NOC for two plots for the past several months from officials, but they first took the plea that drafts were misplaced, and instead of taking action against that employee who misplaced the draft, they had asked him to create the drafts again. He said he had reached officials with the revised drafts as well, but even then, they kept delaying the matter.

He said he then approached the MC commissioner last month for action, but no action was taken against the officials. He said on Thursday, senior deputy mayor Shyam Sunder Malhotra called up officials for solving the issue, but when he reached the Zone D office and met assistant town planner (ATP) Vijay Kumar for an NOC, the ATP allegedly misbehaved with him, so he sat on a protest against the officials.

Meanwhile, other BJP leaders also gathered in Zone D, and after their intervention, the matter was sorted out. The officials apologised to BJP workers and assured that an NOC would be issued on Friday. ATP Kumar denied he had misbehaved with the BJP worker, and said Garg had started shouting in his office. He said he had only sought 10 minutes for tracing the file, but Garg was not ready to listen to him. Meanwhile, the latter sat on protest and gathered other leaders there, and after that, other senior officials had resolved the matter.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
