JNU-Fee Hike Row: Morphed Image Of Shehla Rashid Revived













A photo of activist Shehla Rashid wearing a saree with the Pakistan national flag printed on it is morphed. The edited photo of the former vice president of Jawaharlal Nehru Students' Union (JNUSU) is viral with false claims that Rashid wears saris with Pakistan's flag on it, when travelling outside India.

The set of two images, one where Rashid can be seen covering her head with a dupatta and the other, a photoshopped image of Rashid flaunting a green and white sari with a crescent moon and star, is viral on social media.

The posts are doing the rounds in the wake of the recent protests held by students of Jawaharlal Nehru University against the proposed fee hike. Following protests for over 16 days the government on November 14, partially rolled back fees.

Rashid, who has been a regular subject of misinformation, joined the JnK Peoples Movement founded by Shah Faesal, ahead of the general elections this year. She quit active politics last month.

A screenshot of the recent viral post can be viewed below.

Post with the morphed photo of Shehla Rashid

The post can be seen here and its archive here.

On a reverse image search BOOM found the original image, where Rashid can be seen wearing a dark green solid coloured sari. The image has been on the internet since as early as 2018.

We then went through Rashid's social media accounts and found another image where Rashid can be seen sporting the same sari, with a jacket. Shot in Manhattan, the photograph was posted on Rashid's official Instagram account in November, 2017.

Furthermore, the original image has also been used by multiple social media accounts and news portals in the past. Click here to view.







The tweet is archived here.

The first image in the viral post has been taken from the profile picture of Rashid's social media accounts.

Screenshot of Shehla Rashid's Instagram profile.

The same image was earlier debunked by BOOM Bangla. Read our fact check here.
