Citizenship bill on govt's agenda for Winter Session

GUWAHATI: Centre is set to introduce a new Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the coming winter session of Parliament starting from Monday after the earlier one lapsed in last Lok Sabha as anti-bill student organizations and the civil society in Assam on Friday announced intense protests from day one of the session.Centre has submitted its tentative list of businesses for the session, which has been posted in Lok Sabha website and it includes the introduction of Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 “to amend the definition of illegal migrant, reduction in the number of years of residency period to obtain Indian Citizenship through naturalization and to empower Central Govt. to cancel the registration of Overseas Citizen of India card in case of any violations.”State finance minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said, “Home minister has already announced that the citizenship amendment be introduced in the winter session. The draft will be different from the earlier one and I think there will be maximum possible provision included this time to protect the unique cultural identity of the population of the northeast.”He said that the bill will be passed within two days. When asked why the government is determined to bring the bill undermining the mass protest in the state, he said, “BJP has been committed to bringing this bill for 30 years. Once the bill becomes an act it will solve the problems of just about four to five lakh people in the state…the Bengali Hindus who have been excluded from the National Register of Citizens. In our next assembly session we will give the district wise breakup of the excluded Bengali Hindus…it would be about 2 lakh alone in Barak valley .”He added, “In a democracy, everyone has got the right to protests and voice his concerns. We have won several elections, from panchayat to Lok Sabha despite remaining committed to this bill. Assam needs to move forward and once this Bill is implemented, we can focus on other issues.”The majority of these Bengali Hindus have been excluded in the NRC because the refugee certificates they had submitted as proof entering Assam in the ’50s have not been accepted by NRC authorities as a valid document. The new bill is expected to include a provision for these categories of people.Former chief minister Tarun Gogoi said that his words that the NRC will become a ‘waste paper’ if the citizenship act is amended is turning out to be true. “BJP has the numbers in parliament and will get the bill passed but NRC will no longer be a valid document. I had said it earlier the NRC will become a waste paper.”A source said that the bill is unlikely to override the provisions of the 6th Schedule, Inner Line Permit , Article 371, and state acts like the Meghalaya Residents Safety and Security Act, which are in force in different states of the region.AASU general secretary Lurinjyoti Gogoi said, “the citizenship amendment will never be accepted. We will not let BJP destroy the state.” The state’s students’ body announced that on November 18, its members will hold demonstrations around the Raj Bhawan to protest against the bill. The protest in Assam will set off a chain reaction of protests across the region as it had happened 10 months back.This is the second attempt by BJP government to amend the Citizenship Act of 1955 to declare that Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis, and Christians from Afghanistan , Bangladesh, and Pakistan, who have entered India till December 31, 2014 shall not be treated as illegal migrants and would be eligible for citizenship after minimum residency of six years. The earlier amendment bill of 2016 after being approved by the joint parliamentary committee was passed in Lok Sabha last year but the government failed to table it in Rajya Sabha, following which the bill lapsed in the lower house.
