The Burden of Proof

A fair adjudication of a contested claim requires even standards for the quality of evidence the disputing parties show in support of their respective assertions. The judgment in the Ayodhya case (2019) points to a divergence from this general principle of common law. In deciding a title suit over the disputed property, the Supreme Court found that the idol of Ram Lalla was not only in possession of the outer courtyard (the Ram Chabutra that was demolished with the Babri Masjid) but also the inner courtyard, where the majestic, three-domed mosque stood for centuries.

The dispute goes back to the days of the Raj, when Mahant Raghubar Das presided over the construction of a chabutra (a raised platform) in the outer courtyard of the mosque. In 1886-87, three different judicial forums rejected the Mahant's legal claims to the land and ordered that status quo be maintained. Between 1886 and 1949, Hindus prayed in the outer courtyard (the Ram Chabutra) and Muslims inside the mosque. On the night of December 22-23, 1949, idols were surreptitiously placed inside the mosque, which was demolished on December 6, 1992.

The Supreme Court verdict admits-and re-asserts-the illegality of both the installation of the idols of Ram Lalla in 1949, and the demolition of the mosque, violating the apex court's own orders. It also states that the ASI (Archaeological Survey of India) report does not prove that a Ram temple was demolished to construct the Babri Masjid-the black stone pillars of the mosque were not from the pillar bases found in the excavation. And yet it decided the title suit in favour of Ram Lalla, who became a party as late as 1989.

A similar pattern plays out on the question of evidence of possession. The Supreme Court found insufficient evidence of 'exclusive' possession of the mosque by Muslims. According to the judgment, Muslims failed to demonstrate evidence of 'continuous' possession from the time the mosque was built (in 1528) till 1857. At the same time, the judgment recognises that, despite the harassment by bairagis, Muslims continued to pray in the mosque till the idol was smuggled in on the night of December 22-23, 1949. Soon after, the mosque was locked and a receiver appointed through a status quo court order.

To demonstrate 'continuous' use of the mosque between 1528 and 1857 is a demanding standard for proof. Also, there is no clear evidence to the contrary-that worship at the mosque was ever interrupted. In contrast, proof of the Hindu claim was simply that "the Hindus continued to assert their right to pray below the central dome". In other words, while Muslims were required to summon evidence spanning three centuries, scant evidence pointing to Hindu "belief" and "assertion" was considered sufficient.

It is difficult to imagine a situation where illegal acts of trespass and occupation are interpreted as evidence of a contested legal right. The judgment variously cites the construction of the chabutra on Babri Masjid property; the locking of the masjid after 23 December 1949; and its conversion into a temple as evidence that the Muslim right to worship was contested by Hindus. However, these acts were illegal, and an illegality cannot be evidence of faith or title.

Babur's grant of Rs 60 and the appointment of his general Mir Baqi, credited with the construction of the mosque, as mutawali (trustee) of the masjid, are recorded, and it beggars belief that local police would have allowed Hindu prayers inside a mosque during the reign of the Mughals. In the time of the later Mughals, powerful Muslim nawabs ruled Awadh, and Faizabad, which is just 8 km from Ayodhya, was their capital from 1722. It is hard to believe that Muslims did not have exclusive use for prayers of a historic and prominent mosque during this period. Besides, this was not an issue framed by the Allahabad High Court nor was any evidence led by any party to prove or disprove continuous Muslim use of the mosque during these three centuries. Where there is a mosque, there is presumption that it is used for Muslim prayers.

It is difficult to imagine adjudication where "evidence of faith" trumps "evidence of title/ possession". By any measure, if the Supreme Court found that the demolition of the mosque was illegal and that Muslims were, in fact, dispossessed and deprived of a mosque, how can they be deprived or dispossessed again? The Supreme Court cannot be sitting in judgment over mythology or faith or history. Even the judgment admits as much, and yet does exactly that.

(Faizan Mustafa is Vice-Chancellor, NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad, and Aymen Mohammed is a research scholar at NALSAR)
