BJP To Protest Outside AICC Office In Delhi Demanding Apology From Rahul Gandhi

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) will hold countrywide protests on Friday against former Congress president Rahul Gandhi and his party for "misleading" the country on Rafale deal. The BJP leaders will hold protests outside All India Congress Committee office in Delhi and other Congress offices in other parts of the country demanding an apology from Congress leader Rahul Gandhi over his remarks on Rafale. A party release signed by general secretary Arun Singh said that Congress and Rahul Gandhi gave 'false', 'fabricated' and 'undignified' statements on Rafale deal.

Amit Shah asked Congress to apologise to the nation

Rahul Gandhi received a lot of flak from the BJP leaders for his remarks on the Rafale deal. Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Thursday stated that the Supreme Court’s dismissal of the review pleas on Rafale was a “befitting reply” to political parties and leaders who ran “malicious” campaigns. Maintaining that there was no instance of corruption in the Modi government, he claimed that the disruption of Parliament to raise the Rafale issue was a “sham”. Moreover, Shah referred to the SC having warned former Congress President Rahul Gandhi and asked him as well as the Congress party to apologise to the country.

Now, it has been proved that disruption of Parliament over #Rafale was a sham. The time could have been better utilised for the welfare of people.



After today's rebuke from SC, Congress and its leader, for whom politics is above national interest must apologise to the nation. — Amit Shah (@AmitShah) November 14, 2019

SC dismissed review petitions challenging its verdict

The Supreme Court on Thursday dismissed the review petitions challenging its verdict in the Rafale case passed on December 14, 2018, upholding the 36 Rafale jets deal. A three-judge bench presided by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and comprising Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul and K M Joseph passed the order on a batch of petitions seeking review of its December 14, 2018 verdict which had upheld purchase of 36 Rafale jets by Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led government from France.

READ | Amit Shah scorches 'malicious, baseless' anti-Rafale campaign after SC's verdicts

READ | Sambit Patra on Rafale verdict: 'India has won, anti-India forces have lost'

SC accepted Congress leader Rahul Gandhi's apology

The top court closed the contempt petition filed by BJP lawmaker Meenakshi Lekhi against Rahul Gandhi for his remarks. The Supreme Court accepted Congress leader Rahul Gandhi's apology for wrongly attributing his infamous "chowkidar chor hai" remark in Rafale case to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and opined that a person holding a place of importance in political spectrum should have been more careful. "Rahul Gandhi needs to be more careful in the future. It was unfortunate," a three-judge bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and Justices S K Kaul and K M Joseph said in their verdict.

READ | Ravi Shankar Prasad: Rahul's Rafale allegations from sponsored stories

READ | Subramanian Swamy tells Rahul Gandhi how he can recur self-respect after Rafale verdict

(With ANI inputs)
