NHRC issues notice to the Government of UP over dilapidated condition of 209 primary school buildings

New Delhi:

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will visit Dandi in neighbouring the Navsari district of Gujarat to dedicate the National Salt Satyagraha Memorial on the occasion of Mahatma Gandhi’s death 71st anniversary. Rajya Sabha Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu and Lok Sabha Speaker Sumitra Mahajan have called separate all-party meetings today ahead of the Budget session, which begins on January 31. Transport Minister Nitin Gadkari will inaugurate and lay foundation stones for seven road and river projects in Bihar, entailing Rs 871.61 crore investment, on Wednesday. Anna Hazare to hold a protest in Maharashtra's Ralegan Siddhi over state governments not enacting Lokayukta Acts. British MPs vote in favour of changing Prime Minister Theresa May's Brexit deal.

21:19 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Rajiv Saxena was picked up by UAE state security from his residence this morning at 9:30 am (UAE time) and illegally extradited to India around 5:30pm (UAE time).

19:20 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Andhra Pradesh N Chandrababu Naidu announces to hold protest against the Central government from February 1 to February 13. Agitation in Delhi will be on February 11.

18:00 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Hindon airbase, Ghaziabad will be operational for commercial flight by first week of March under Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS), 80-seater aircraft will be allowed to operate.

14:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi: Fire broke out at a chemical factory in Okhla Phase- I, earlier today; 22 fire tenders engaged in fire fighting operation, no casualties reported.

14:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In West Bengal: Elephants damage houses and vegetable farms in Chanduria village in Bankura district.

12:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi police has arrested Sanjay Sachdev, owner NGO Love Commando for threatening and extortion of money from a couple.

12:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Fire breaks out at Mochi building, at 5th Kumbharwada, Maruti Mandir road, Girgaon; Fire brigade and police rushed to the spot, no injuries reported.

12:56 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress suspends DCC member OM George from primary membership of the party.

12:56 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi's Safdarjung hospital has reported 18 positive cases of Swine Flu. Out of 18 cases, three deaths took place till January 28.



Delhi's Safdarjung hospital has reported 18 positive cases of #SwineFlu. Out of 18 cases, three deaths took place till January 28.

— ANI (@ANI) January 30, 2019



11:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Vice-President M Venkaiah Naidu pay tribute to Mahatma Gandhi at Rajghat.



Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Vice-President M Venkaiah Naidu pay tribute to #MahatmaGandhi at Rajghat pic.twitter.com/0kGL7ZC7Lg

— ANI (@ANI) January 30, 2019



10:40 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi Chief Secretary alleged assault case adjourned for March 5 by Delhi's Patiala House Court.

10:21 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Gujarat Education Minister Bhupendrasinh Chudasama has written to rape-convict Asaram's organisation congratulating them for celebrating 14 February as 'Matru-Pitru Diwas'.

09:52 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In A man gives triple talaq over the phone to his wife for reaching home 10 minutes late in Uttar Pradesh’s Etah.

09:50 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Gujarat Education Minister Bhupendrasinh Chudasama has written to rape-convict Asaram's organisation congratulating them for celebrating 14 February as 'Matru-Pitru Diwas'.



Gujarat Education Minister Bhupendrasinh Chudasama has written to rape-convict Asaram's organisation congratulating them for celebrating 14 February as 'Matru-Pitru Diwas'. pic.twitter.com/WACinwJAW1

— ANI (@ANI) January 30, 2019



08:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In UNESCO celebrates 150 years of chemistry's periodic table

It is the periodic table of chemical elements' 150th birthday, and the UN scientific agency is holding a year of events to celebrate. Anyone who has studied chemistry will recognize the table, which organizes all chemical elements by the number of protons in a given atom and other properties. Russian scientist Dmitry Mendeleev published the first such table in 1969.

The UN Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization kicked off the “International Year of the Period Table of Chemical Elements” on Tuesday with a ceremony including a Nobel chemistry laureate and Russia’s science minister, among other dignitaries.

Other activities UNESCO is organizing this year include an online competition to test high school students’ knowledge of the table, and scientific experiments brought to schools around the world.

08:07 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In A grenade attack on a mosque in the troubled southern Philippines killed two people early Wednesday, authorities said, just days after a deadly Catholic cathedral bombing and a vote backing Muslim self-rule. "A grenade was lobbed inside a mosque killing two persons and wounding another four," regional military spokesman Lieutenant Colonel Gerry Besana told AFP of the attack in Zamboanga City.

07:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi: 12 trains are running late due to fog and low visibility.

07:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Damoh (MP): A pregnant lady was allegedly denied treatment by govt hospital staff for not paying Rs.5000 in Tendu Kheda yesterday. Narayan Singh, SDM says," statements of relatives revealed that hospital staff had demanded money. Proper action will be taken."



Damoh: A pregnant lady was allegedly denied treatment by govt hospital staff for not paying Rs.5000 in Tendu Kheda yesterday. Narayan Singh, SDM says," statements of relatives revealed that hospital staff had demanded money. Proper action will be taken." #MadhyaPradesh pic.twitter.com/Xd4fssi4tE

— ANI (@ANI) January 30, 2019



07:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The Congress party in Karnataka will issue a fresh round of notices to four of its legislators who did not attend the recently-held CLP meetings.

07:23 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Maharashtra: Senior BJP leaders including state BJP president Raosaheb Danve held a meeting at CM Devendra Fadnavis' residence last night.

07:23 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Mumbai: A 35-year-old woman was stabbed to death by her husband at her office in Bhayander yesterday. The accused has been arrested and further investigation is underway.

07:23 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In US to deploy radar in Japan to detect missile launches by China, Russia.

07:22 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The Madhya Pradesh government will open 1000 gaushalas or cow shelters across the state to provide shelter to over 1 lakh cows, said OSD to Kamal Nath.

07:21 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In British MPs vote in favour of changing Prime Minister Theresa May's Brexit deal: AFP.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
