The voice of workers and a lifelong rebel

George Fernandes

Rajya Sabha

Indira Gandhi greets Fernandes at his wedding

George Fernandes June 3, 1930 – January 29, 2019

Shiv Sena

By Jyoti Punwani, Makarand Gadgil and Yogesh NaikAnti-Emergency hero, who earned his stripes in Mumbai as a trade unionist, never shied away from unpopular causesHis tousled hair and crumpled khadi kurta wasn’t just a cultivated image. George Fernandes was indeed what his appearance denoted: easy to talk to, accessible, lacking the airs expected of anyone with such a successful political record.Fernandes, who died aged 88 on Tuesday after prolonged illness, was a trade unionist, a socialist leader, an anti-Emergency hero, a former Union minister and amember. He was the original angry young man of Indian politics, a lifelong rebel who never hesitated to take up unpopular causes. He could relate to activists, considering himself as one of them, despite his cult status — he led the historic all-India railway strike in 1974 that became one of the reasons for the imposition of Emergency in 1975, and he contested and won the 1977 parliamentary election from Muzaffarpur, Bihar, while still being in jail.Fernandes frequently participated in activities of Mumbai-based human rights group Committee for the Protection of Democratic Rights (CPDR). There were democratic-minded luminaries in Mumbai like a famous Marathi editor who refused to address a CPDR meeting where the audience wasn’t expected to cross 50. But such considerations never bothered Fernandes. Nor did he need to be picked up and brought to the venue. He thought nothing of climbing up the dark, run-down staircase of Prospect Chambers to address a CPDR meeting at the office of the Bombay Union of Journalists; nor of slowing down his fancy car and offering a lift to CPDR members walking to work after the meeting.Fernandes showed contempt for authority at an early age. He was 16 when his father asked him to study law; he ran away from their Mangalore home and joined a seminary in Bangalore to become a priest. He later quit in protest over the quality of food served to students there. His next stop was Mumbai, where he spent the initial days on the footpath. He started working as a proof reader with an English newspaper, where he met trade union leader P D’Mello. That encounter changed his life.Fernandes quit his job and became a full-time trade unionist; his first task was to mobilise taxi drivers who at the time were considered members of unorganised labour. His role grew much bigger, covering BMC, BEST and railway employees and hawkers, and he could literally bring Mumbai to a standstill by raising his finger in the 1960s and early 1970s.“In the early 1960s, he was elected to the BMC as a corporator, and he, along with Mrinal Gore, introduced the resolution to conduct BMC’s affairs in Marathi. That’s how Marathi become the official language of BMC,” said former corporator Ramesh Joshi, who was Fernandes’s close associate during the trade union movement.Fernandes made a huge impression in national politics by defeating Congress leader SK Patil, who was considered Mumbai’s most powerful politician, in the 1967 Lok Sabha election. Many still remember Fernandes’s campaign poster, which feature Patil’s photo instead of his. “A line in Marathi below Patil’s photo said: ‘Tumhich yana harvu shakta (Only you can defeat him),” said Mahabal Shetty, president of Municipal Mazdoor Union.The 1974 rail strike was his next career-defining event. The country had never witnessed such a railway protest before: it lasted for 21 days. Many still remember the images of Fernandes lying down on tracks at Dadar station. A few months later, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi declared Emergency and he went underground like many opposition leaders across the country.He became a big gun in the Janata Party with his 1977 election win from behind the bars. His victory margin: 3 lakh votes. As the Union minister of industries in the Janata Party government, he kicked out multinationals Coca-Cola and IBM from country as they refused to dilute their 51 per cent stake in local partners. This article’s lead writer remembers her mother, who went to jail during the freedom struggle, cheering, getting rid of the Coke bottles lying at home, and stocking up on 77, the Indian cola that replaced it.Fernandes never shied away from complex causes. In 1981, barely two years after serving as a Union minister, he inaugurated a state conference of the Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee (APCLC) in Hyderabad. The APCLC was one human rights group most targeted by the State and hated by the police, because it was continuously fighting the policy of killing Naxalites in fake “encounters” that pre-dated Emergency and continued after it. Unlike other chief guests, George didn’t disappear after the inaugural session. The next day, the MP from Muzaffarpur led an APCLC team to Nalgonda to investigate two encounter deaths.Three months later, George was in Mumbai, the chief speaker at a CPDR meeting called to protest against the policy of “encounters”, which by then had spread beyond Andhra Pradesh to Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra. He was in illustrious company — CPDR president and famous playwright Vijay Tendulkar presided over the meeting. But how many MPs would have deigned to speak at a venue as low-end as Chhabildas School in Dadar?Fernandes was the railway minister in the VP Singh government, pushing the implementation of Konkan railway that ran through the entire western coast of India. In 1994, he quit Janata Dal (the new avatar of Janata Party) following differences with Lalu Prasad Yadav, and formed Samata Party with Nitish Kumar.After his work with activists, his teaming up with the BJP in 1994 seemed like a betrayal. In the Janata government, he had been in the forefront of the ideological fight over the dual membership issue (ministers AB Vajpayee and LK Advani continued to be members of the RSS). He had once shared the stage with thewhen all trade unions had united, in vain, against the new threat to them: Dr Datta Samant. But that had only evoked cynical contempt.In the run-up to the 1998 Lok Sabha elections, he again aligned with BJP to stay political relevant and became the defence minister in the Vajpayee government, overseeing the Kargil war in 1999. He was appointed as the convenor of BJP-led NDA, emerging as the go-to leader to pacify Jayalalitha and Mamata Banerjee, who were part of the coalition.His association with the Vajpayee government evoked a deep sadness. But it was when he scoffed at rapes reported during the 2002 Gujarat riots in Parliament, that he reached the nadir of his career. The Vajpayee government’s loss in 2004 dealt another blow, and in 2009, he was denied a party ticket on health grounds. He was later was nominated to Rajya Sabha.“Till he was following Madhu Limaye and SA Dange, Fernandes was on the right path. In the 1970s, he became a larger-than-life figure, which eventually clouded his judgement, pushing him towards the BJP,” said Rajya Sabha MP Kumar Ketkar.Fernandes suffered from Alzheimer’s and he gradually withdrew from public life. He recently contracted swine flu and breathed his last at a hospital in Delhi on Tuesday. Leaders from across party lines paid tributes to him.Senior Shiv Sena leader and former chief minister Manohar Joshi recounted his first interactions with Fernandes when the latter was a union leader. “He was a force. I got an opportunity to speak to him and hear him on many occasions as he was leading a union of municipal workers in Mumbai. The best thing about him was his humanity. He was the voice of workers, who viewed him as a god,” Joshi told Mirror. “He was an upright politician; we all respected him. He was one of Balasaheb Thackeray’s closest friends. The two, in fact, jointly addressed a meeting at Shivaji Park.”
