Fact Check: Four-year-old incident of nude protest goes viral as atrocity on Christian couple

This viral image is from October 2015 when a Dalit family of five stripped in a town in UP’s Gautam Buddh Nagar district to protest against alleged police inaction on a complaint.

A disturbing image of a man and woman standing naked in public and holding a baby has gone viral on Facebook.

The message along with the image says a Pastor and his wife were made naked and marched around a town in Uttar Pradesh as punishment for teaching the Gospel.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) found the claim to be untrue. The viral image is from October 2015 when a Dalit family of five stripped in a town in UP’s Gautam Buddh Nagar district to protest against alleged police inaction on a complaint.

Facebook page Good morning God’ shared the misleading post on Friday. The archived version can be seen here.

A simple reverse search revealed the truth behind the viral photo. We found many old media reports regarding the incident. According to Zee News, the Dalit family resorted to a nude protest after Greater Noida Police refused to register an FIR for an alleged robbery despite repeated requests. According to reports, one of the family members was called Sunil Gautam.

However, contrary to this, some reports claim Greater Noida Police allegedly stripped the family naked for attempting to file a complaint.

Some news reports carry the uncropped version of the viral photo. The video of the incident had spread like wildfire at that time.

The misleading claim went viral in February last year too. At that time, some media outlets had debunked the claim.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Christian Pastor and wife made naked and marched around UP town for preaching Gospel Conclusion This is a four-year-old image of an incident wherein a Dalit family in UP stripped to protest alleged police inaction on a complaint. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
