JNU On Edge Ahead Of Students March, Vice-Chancellor Appeals 'Come Back To Classes'

New Delhi:

Tension is palpable with hundreds of policemen deployed right outside the Jawaharlal Nehru University ahead of the protest march called by the varsity students against the fee hike. The Jawaharlal Nehru Students' Union (JNUSU) on Sunday had appealed to students of other universities to join its march to Parliament on Monday. The students' union will be marching from the JNU towards Parliament on Monday, when the Winter Session will commence. "At a time when fee hikes are rampant across the country, students have emerged as the first line of defence for inclusive education. We invite all students of Delhi, to join us as we march on foot from JNU to Parliament on the first day of the winter session of Parliament," the JNUSU said.

Meanwhile, JNU Vice Chancellor M Jagadesh Kumar issued a video message for protesting students. In a video message released on the varsity's website, he said he has been getting e-mails from worried parents and students about the situation in the university which is affecting academic activities. "If we still continue with the strike and cause academic loss, it is going to affect future of thousands of students. "From tomorrow, a new week will begin and I request the students to come back to the classes and resume your research activities. From December 12, the semester exams will start and if you do not attend classes, it will affect your future goals," Kumar said.

News Nation has learnt that the heavy police deployment is being done to prevent students from joining the march. Last week, facing intense agitation for over two weeks, the JNU on Wednesday rolled back the hostel fee hike partially for BPL students not availing any scholarship, a move which failed to satisfy agitating students who dubbed it as an "eyewash", and decided to continue with the strike. The decision was taken at the varsity's 283rd Executive Council (EC) meeting, HRD Secretary R Subrahmanyam announced while asking the protesting students to resume classes. The EC meeting was shifted outside the campus at the last moment fearing trouble by agitators. On Monday, the students had gheraoed AICTE building, the venue for varsity's convocation, forcing Union HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal to stay put for six hours.
