Punjab: After protests, government offers help to family of Dalit man

PATIALA/CHANDIGARH: Faced by widespread anger over the death of a Sangrur-based Dalit Jagmel Singh (37), the Punjab government on Sunday announced a compensation of Rs 8.15 lakh and a monthly pension of Rs 5,000 for the family of deceased. Jagmel was brutally tortured by upper-caste men of his village, Changaliwala, on November 7 and he died during treatment at the PGIMER, Chandigarh, on Saturday. Punjab minister Sadhu Singh Dharamsot, who announced the compensation, said steps would also be taken to give a job to a member of Jagmel's family.The move came against the backdrop of widespread protests in Sangrur over the death. Chief minister Amarinder Singh , who is on a tour of Europe, also stepped in. A government spokesperson said the CM spoke to chief secretary Karan Avtar Singh and DGP Dinkar Gupta over the phone and asked them to ensure "stringent and exemplary punishment" for the accused within three months.The CM promised justice and proper rehabilitation of the affected family. The spokesperson said Amarinder also urged Jagmel's family to withdraw their protest and appealed to political leaders not to politicise the issue.Before the CM's appeal, political leaders thronged Changaliwala. Protesters belonging to AAP, Bahujan Samaj Party and several Dalit organisations blocked the Sunam-Lehra road for hours to demand compensation and job for a member of Jagmel's family. Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) Punjab chief Bhagwant Mann and leader of opposition in state assembly Harpal Singh Cheema also met the family.While Mann said he would be raise the issue in Parliament on Monday, Cheema announced support for the agitation and demanded that police protection be provided to Jagmel's family. AAP Sunam MLA Aman Arora also participated in the protest.SAD president Sukhbir Badal too continued to keep the pressure up on the government. He announced that his party had formed a four-member committee which would ascertain facts related to Jagmel's murder. Led by Prem Singh Chandumajra, the committee will visit the village on Monday and submit a report within 24 hours, said Sukhbir. The other members of the committee include Parminder Singh Dhindsa, Gulzar Singh Ranike and Pawan Kumar Teenu .The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) described the incident as the outcome of a "jungle raj" (lawless rule) in which Dalits were not safe.Congress leaders have extended support to the family. Punjab minister Vijay Inder Singla said it was the most unfortunate incident. Punjab Congress chief Sunil Jakhar said the the government would ensure strict punishment to the accused. The Punjab State Scheduled Castes Commission has also already sought a report from the Sangrur SSP.Jagmel had gotten into an altercation with the four accused on October 21 and later a compromise was reached after the panchayat intervened. The four accused - Rinku, his father Amarjeet, Lucky and Binder Singh - have been remanded in police custody till November 16. On November 7, they took Jagmel along with them by promising to help them get some medication. They later tied Jagmel up at Rinku's residence, where he was beaten up with iron rods, causing several fractures in his legs. The accused then allegedly poured acid on his legs and tried to pull off the skin using some tools. Jagmel developed gangrene in both his legs and had to be amputated at the PGIMER, following which he died of multiple organ failure.
