JNU Protest LIVE Updates: Massive Traffic On Roads As Students March Towards Parliament

JNU Protest: The students were forced to make a detour after cops stopped them midway

Security has been strengthened outside the JNU campus in Delhi ahead of students' protest march against hostel fee hike. The agitation comes on the first day of the winter session of the parliament. Over 700 police personnel have been deployed outside the university campus. The JNU Teachers' Association (JNUTA) has expressed their concern over this.

Police officials said adequate security arrangements have been made along the route of the march. Police personnel have been deployed at all entry points leading to the parliament, a senior police official said, reported news agency PTI.

The students' union has continued their protests despite the JNU administration announcing a partial rollback of the hike on Wednesday, saying the decision is an "eyewash".

Here are the LIVE updates of the JNU protest:

Nov 18, 2019 19:22 (IST) Metro services resume at 3 stations

"Trains will not be halting at Jorbagh and entry/exit gates of the station have also been closed temporarily," Delhi Metro tweeted. Exit/Entry Gates for Udyog Bhawan, Patel Chowk and Central Secretariat re-opened. Train services have resumed at these stations. Lok Kalyan Marg still shut.



Nov 18, 2019 17:59 (IST) 50 JNU students, arrested earlier today, released by Delhi Police

Delhi Police release 50 JNU students who were earlier detained and taken to Kalkaji Police Station. The students are protesting against the massive hostel fee hike, dress code and curfew timings.



Nov 18, 2019 16:54 (IST) Delhi police to investigate allegations of laathi charge

News agency ANI quoted the Delhi Police PRO Mandeep S Randhawa saying, "We are trying to talk to the students about their demands and convince them to not take law in their hands. Regarding the allegation of laathi charge, we will inquire into it."



Nov 18, 2019 16:49 (IST) No halts at Udyog Bhawan, Patel Chowk, Central Secretariat, Lok Nayank Marg: Delhi Metro Rail

Delhi Metro has issued an advisory for commuters on Twitter saying, "As advised by Delhi Police, trains are not halting at Udyog Bhawan and Patel Chowk. Exit/Entry Gates for Udyog Bhawan, Patel Chowk and Central Secretariat have been closed temporarily. Trains are not halting at Lok Kalyan Marg and entry/exit gates of the station have also been closed temporarily."



Nov 18, 2019 16:11 (IST) JNU students' march to parliament stopped by police

JNU students march to parliament stopped by police near Safdarjung Tomb. They are demanding complete fee roll back along with other demands.







Nov 18, 2019 15:24 (IST) Police detain at least 50 JNU students

At least 50 students have been detained by the police, including JNUSU President Aishe Ghosh, after standoff between students and police. The students continued their march despite prohibitory orders were issued. The students have been taken to Kalkaji Police Station. Police used batons on protesting students to disperse them.



Nov 18, 2019 12:37 (IST) Education Ministry appoints panel to intiate dialogue with protesting JNU students

The Union Human Resource Development Ministry has formed a high-powered panel today to recommend measures for restoration of normal functioning of the Jawaharlal Nehru University. The three-member committee comprises former UGC Chairman Professor VS Chauhan, AICTE Chairman Professor Anil Sahasrabudhe and UGC Secretary Professor Rajnish Jain.



"The above-said committee is requested to initiate dialogue with the students and the university administration immediately and submit recommendations on the action to be taken," said the Ministry order.



According to the order issued by the Central Universities Bureau of the Department of Higher Education, the panel will initiate dialogue with all stakeholders and advise the JNU administration on measures for resolution of contentious issues, reported news agency IANS



Nov 18, 2019 12:19 (IST) Police stop students' march

Police have stopped the students half a kilometer from the campus. Barricades have been put up to stop the students within a 1 km radius.



Nov 18, 2019 12:18 (IST) Students begin march to parliament



JNU students begin march towards the parliament. The students said they are "determined" to march to parliament. They have formed a human chain to ensure the students remain on one side of the road.

Nov 18, 2019 11:58 (IST) Students will be stopped within 1 km of campus, sources say

Delhi police will not allow the students to reach the parliament. Prohibitory orders have been issued in areas around the parliament. The police plan to stop the protesting students within 1 km from the campus, sources said.

Section 144 has been imposed outside the JNU campus ahead of the protest.

Nov 18, 2019 11:40 (IST) JNUTA calls security deployment "extremely unfortunate"

Expressing concern over the massive police deployment outside the campus, the JNU Teachers' Association said, "The massive police deployment and barricading at the gates of the JNU campus appears to be only for the purpose of preventing the students from taking out their planned march to Parliament. Such measures to thwart the exercise of constitutionally guaranteed democratic rights and to impede the students from peacefully taking their voice beyond the campus would be extremely unfortunate and the JNUTA hopes that no such situation will eventually arise."


