Inhuman lockdown enters 106th straight day in Occupied Kashmir

Inhuman lockdown enters 106th straight day in Occupied Kashmir

In Occupied Kashmir, inhuman lockdown imposed by India in Kashmir Valley and Muslim majority areas of Jammu and Ladakh regions entered 106th straight day, today.

The restrictions under Section 144 continue to remain enforced in the territory where people are seething with anger over India’s anti-Kashmir moves.

The onset of winter amid total ban on internet, SMS and prepaid cellular networks has added to the worries of the Kashmiri people.

People continue to observe silent protest against India’s unilateral actions by staying away from educational institutions and offices.

Indian government has ordered cable operators not to air any channel from Muslim countries like Pakistan, Iran, Turkey and Malaysia.

Meanwhile, two prominent Kashmiri-origin filmmakers, Danish Renzu and Sanjay Kak have warned that Kashmir would be turned into another war zone like Gaza and Syria.

In media interviews in New Delhi, after a recent visit to Kashmir, they condemned Indian government for abrogating Kashmir’s special status. They said resistance would grow in Kashmir.

Leader of Congress in Lower House of Indian Parliament, Lok Sabha, Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury today, launched a blistering attack on BJP government for barring members of Parliament from visiting IOK while allowing selected EU lawmakers to visit Srinagar.

PDP members, Mir Fayaz and Nazir Ahmed Laway held a protest inside the Indian Parliament against scrapping of Kashmir’s special status.

On the other hand, a former General of Indian Army was slammed by social media users for his highly uncalled-for remarks about Kashmiri women.

Major General retired SP Sinha, who is now a member of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, during a TV programme vociferously advocated war crimes in Occupied Kashmir.

The remarks were rebuked by some fellow panelists who demanded an apology, but General stood by his opinion and even found some support from audience members.

NNR/Zunera
