Martyrs' families to return honour today protesting the Citizenship Amendment Bill

Staff Reporter

GUWAHATI: Honour bound to keep the sacrifices of over 860 martyrs of the Assam Agitation intact, the martyrs' families of the State are going to return the honour given to them by the present State Government. They say that if the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 is passed, the sacrifices made by the Assam Agitation martyrs will come to nought.

It was on December 10, 2016 the present government honoured each of the martyrs' families with Rs 5 lakh and a memento at a function at Khanapara playground in Guwahati. On that very day, while talking to the media on the sidelines of the function, some martyrs' family members had said that they were going to oppose the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. As a mark of their protest against the Citizenship Bill, the martyrs' families, under the banner of the Sadou Asom Jatiya Swahid Pariyal Samannay Rakshi Samiti (SAJSPSRS), are going to return the honour given to them by the State Government. The first phase of return of the honour to the government will be on January 30, 2019 through the Kamrup (M) Deputy Commissioner.

Talking to The Sentinel on Tuesday, Samiti president Rajen Deka said: "When Sarbananda Sonowal took oath as the Chief Minister of the State, we thought that foreigners who had entered Assam after the midnight of March 24, 1971 would be deported from the State. However, the Sonowal government has poured cold water on our aspirations. The Bill has been passed in the Lok Sabha. Even some Assamese people had to stage nude protests in New Delhi against the Bill. If the Bill becomes an Act, the sacrifices made by the over 860 martyrs of the Assam Agitation will come to nought. Their sacrifices will bear no meaning if Hindu Bangladeshis entering Assam after 1971 are accorded Indian citizenship. In such a situation, the mementos given to us by Dispur as a mark of honour will no longer adorn our drawing rooms. In the first phase, we're going to return the mementos to the government on January 30 through the Kamrup(M) Deputy Commissioner. We've already informed the Chief Minister and the Kamrup(M) Deputy Commissioner of it."

Also read: Martyrs' Day to be observed on January 30, 2019
