Fathima Lateef suicide case: IIT Madras students begin indefinite hunger strike, demand fair probe

The protestors are demanding a fair investigation into the suicide of 19-year-old Fathima Lateef | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights As many as two students began an indefinite hunger strike on Monday outside the college campus The protestors are demanding a fair investigation into the suicide of 19-year-old Fathima Lateef Students are also demanding an internal committee to probe the suicide incidents at IIT-M

Chennai: The Indian Institute of Technology- Madras student's suicide case has taken another turn as two students sat on an indefinite hunger strike on Monday outside the college campus. The protestors are demanding a fair investigation into the suicide of 19-year-old Fathima Lateef and an internal committee to probe the suicide incidents at the premier institute.

The students also demanded the implementation of SC/ST/OBC/Minority Students Grievance Welfare cell at IIT-Madras. The students' voices have been growing ever since Fathima's father Abdul Lateef submitted a suicide note, where the deceased alleged harassment by a college professor. Fathima's family members also reached out to Kerala's Chief Minister, Pinarayi Vijayan, Chennai Police Commissioner demanding justice for their daughter and a fair probe in the matter.

Following massive protests, earlier this week, the probe was shifted to CB-CID. The Chennai Police has been ensuring a fair probe and the Chennai Police Commissioner AK Viswanathan told media that the guilty will be punished.

Meanwhile, on Saturday the special team interrogated Abdul Lateef over his last conversations with Fathima and his version of the case. The special team comprises of Additional Commissioner of Police C Eswaramurthy, Deputy Commissioner of Police- G Nagajothi and Additional Deputy Superintendent of police- Meghalina visited the IIT-M campus and held inquiries.

Chennai: Two IIT-Madras students sit on fast demanding fair investigation into suicide of IIT Madras student Fathima Latheef pic.twitter.com/9uFqu0Jhdo — ANI (@ANI) November 18, 2019

The police officials visited the staff members of Sarayu hostel of the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT)- Madras, where Fathima had been living during her academic session and had been found dead there. However, the professor accused of harassment as mentioned in the suicide note has not yet been interrogated by the special team. However, further probe in the matter is underway.
