JNU protest: Students injured in face-off with police during protest march to Parl against fee hike

JNU protesters detained by police as they march towards Rashtrapati Bhavan

JNU protest: Students injured in face-off with police during protest march to Parl against fee hike

India

oi-Deepika S

New Delhi, Nov 18: Students of the Jawahar Lal Nehru University in Delhi, who began protest march towards parliament demanding a complete rollback of the recent hostel fee hike were stopped by the Delhi Police. Reportedly, JNUSU president Aishe Ghosh has been detained by cops

Following the protest, entry and exit points of three Delhi Metro stations near Parliament have been shut down temporarily due to the ongoing JNU protest.

"As advised by Delhi Police, trains are not halting at Udyog Bhawan and Patel Chowk. Exit/Entry gates for Udyog Bhawan, Patel Chowk and Central Secretariat have been closed temporarily," the DMRC tweeted.

Reportedly, visually-impaired Shashi Bhushan Samad, a JNUSU councilor, was beaten up brutally by cops and later admitted at All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.

Shashi Bhushan Samad, revolutionary singer, councillor, JNUSU has been brutally beaten up. He is visually challenged. Inspite of that Police stamped his chest with boots. He is in AIIMS Trauma Centre. His condition is critical.#JNUProtests pic.twitter.com/KNfAE8dIEo — N Sai Balaji (@nsaibalaji) November 18, 2019

A PTI report also indicated that several other protesting students were also injured after being beaten brutally by cops as they took out a march to the parliament.

The Delhi police have warned the students to disperse or they will have to face action.

Meanwhile, the HRD Ministry has appointed a high power committee to hold discussion with students and administration for peaceful resolution of all issues.

Police officials said adequate security arrangements have been made along the route of the march. Police personnel have been deployed at all entry points leading to the parliament, a senior police official said, reported news agency PTI.

JNU administration files FIR against students for vandalise Swami Vivekanada’s statue

"The massive police deployment and barricading at the gates of the JNU campus appears to be only for the purpose of preventing the students from taking out their planned march to Parliament, " said the JNU Teachers' Association.

"Such measures to thwart the exercise of constitutionally guaranteed democratic rights and to impede the students from peacefully taking their voice beyond the campus would be extremely unfortunate and the JNUTA hopes that no such situation will eventually arise." it added.

The students' union has continued their protests despite the JNU administration announcing a partial rollback of the hike on Wednesday, saying the decision is an "eyewash".
