JNU protest: Will demand action against erring JNU students in Parliament, says BJP MP

Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students stage a demonstration against the alleged partial rollback in hostel fee hike | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Thousands of JNU students marched towards Parliament on the first day of Winter Session Three-member committee constituted to restore JNU's normal functioning The JNU students have been holding a protest against hike in hostel fee

New Delhi: Bharatiya Janata Party MP Ramesh Bidhuri on Monday said that in the ongoing in Parliament session, he would take up the matter of violence by the protesting Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students.

Bidhuri said that the JNU students enjoy the support of leaders like Congress’ Rahul Gandhi. The South Delhi MP further said that he would talk to the DCP regarding the alleged attack on the media.

Escalating their protest, the JNU Students' Union, meanwhile, today carried out a march to Parliament, as the Winter Session commences.

The Delhi Police put up barricades as thousands of students tried to march towards Parliament. A huge deployment of police personnel was witnessed around the JNU campus.

Defying the Section 144 that was imposed to stop the protests, the students, carrying placards and shouting slogans, refused to yield until there is a complete rollback of the hike.

The posters read "save public education", "ensure affordable hostels for all", and "fees must fall".

"The protest by JNU students has been stopped by Delhi Police about a kilometre away from Parliament's north gate," said ex-JNUSU president N Sai Balaji.

Why JNU students are protesting?

The JNU students have been holding a protest on the university's premises for the last three weeks following the issuance of a draft hostel manual, which includes provisions like hostel fee hike, hostel timings, and dress code.

Although the JNU administration on Wednesday announced a partial rollback of the hike, the JNU Students' Union is refusing to back down and is demanding a complete withdrawal of the new manual.

Expressing their disapproval of the hike in hostel fee structure, the students had forcibly confined a female associate professor in a classroom for around 20 hours. On November 11, the students confined Union Human Resource Development Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank', who was at the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) headquarters to attend the convocation at JNU.

On Saturday, the Delhi Police received a complaint against unknown JNU students for purportedly vandalising and defacing the statue of Swami Vivekananda on November 14.

The Union Human Resource Development Ministry has, meanwhile, appointed a three-member committee to recommend ways to end protests in the JNU and restore its normal functioning.

Former UGC chairman Professor VS Chauhan, AICTE chairman Professor Anil Sahasrabudhe and UGC secretary Professor Rajnish Jain comprise the committee.

"The above-said committee is requested to initiate dialogue with the students and the university administration immediately and submit recommendations on the action to be taken," said the Ministry order.
