We reject it: Students launch protests against Citizenship Bill in North East

The North East Students’ Organisation (NESO) an umbrella organisation of eight student bodies of the North Eastern region - launched protest marches across the region on Monday against the proposed Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

The contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill will be tabled in the winter session of parliament that commences on Monday and is scheduled to continue until December 13. The Bill seeks to amend The Citizenship Act, 1955, and is aimed at granting Indian citizenship to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan.

In Guwahati, the All Assam Students’ Union (AASU), a major constituent of NESO, held a demonstration in front of the Raj Bhawan. Several hundred activists of the student body, including its advisor Dr Samujjal Kumar Bhattacharyya, President Dipanka Nath, General Secretary Lurinjyoti Gogoi, marched to Raj Bhawan and shouted slogans against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

Apart from Guwahati, All Arunachal Pradesh Students’ Union (AAPSU), Khasi Students' Union (KSU), Mizo Zirlai Pawl (MZP), Garo Students’ Union (GSU), Naga Students' Federation (NSF), Twipra Student Federation (TSF), All Manipur Students' Union (AMSU) held protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in other states of the North Eastern region.

AASU advisor Dr Samujjal Kumar Bhattacharyya said, "The BJP wants the vote of illegal Bangladeshis so they are imposing this bill on the people of North East but we will not accept this bill."

He said just because the BJP has the numbers in the parliament it does not mean they will impose any act on the people of North East. "We are opposing it. North East is not the dumping ground of illegal Bangladeshis. We are telling the Prime Minister and Home Minister that there is also part of the country beyond Kolkata, that is North East. It is a warning to the government, Dr Samujjal Kumar Bhattacharyya said.

The protesters have submitted a memorandum to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah against the bill through the governor of each state.

Under The Citizenship Act, 1955, one of the requirements for citizenship was that the applicant must have resided in India in the last 12 months as well as for 11 of the previous 14 years. The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill proposes to relax the second requirement - from 11 years to six years.

In short, the bill intends to make it easier for non-Muslim immigrants from India’s three Muslim-majority neighbours to become citizens of India.
