How Austrian degree opens door to the EU job market

Congratulations! You have successfully cast your vote Login to view result

The exchange of ideas, perspectives and growth models in a multi-cultural and international setup helped in understanding the global entanglement of issues such as food security and human rights Sangeetha Parthasarathi

Graduates from Austria can renew their residence permits for 12 months to search for jobs or start a businessGrowing up in Bengaluru, Sangeetha Parthasarathi often witnessed farmers' protest on her way to school and college. It would pain her to see farmers who feed the nation leading a life of misery. This stayed with her and she was constantly looking for opportunities, which would enable her to delve deep into the dynamics of poverty and development.It was only in 2005 that after working in the IT industry for two years post the completion of her BE in Telecommunication, she decided to pursue her true calling and applied for the Erasmus Mundus Global Studies (EMGS) at the University of Vienna. She was selected for a full scholarship."The Global Studies programme offered me the space and resources needed to understand the complexities of development challenges," says Parthasarathi.The extensive Global Studies curriculum offered by the university was the biggest draw for her to choose Austria. "The EMGS is an inter-disciplinary research-based programme to analyse the processes and impacts of globalisation. True to its name, students come from around the globe bringing their local experiences to global phenomena such as climate change or international trade agreements. In addition to the core faculty, the programme hosts guest professors from India, Africa, USA, Russia, China etc," says Parthasarathi.The exchange of ideas, perspectives and growth models in a multi-cultural and international setup helped Parthasarathi understand the global entanglement of issues such as food security or human rights.Besides, culturally too, aspirants have every reason to choose Vienna. "As the capital of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Vienna has several monuments and sites to explore during weekends. Students can attend a host of cultural activities at subsidised entry fees. The Austrian rail offers special deals to students to facilitate mobility inside the country. Non-Austrian residents are mainly from the neighbouring countries but there is a sizeable global diaspora due to the presence of several international organisations," she says. Austria is also the perfect destination for students who want to pursue Music and Arts.Having an Austrian degree helped Parthasarathi in assessing the right direction for her career. Due to the Bologna process, which established agreements between European countries to ensure comparability in the standards and quality of higher-education qualifications, the quality of education is high in Austria."The university system and the degree itself is recognised internationally and also in the international job market. With an Austrian degree, it is easy to navigate through the EU job market. My degree helped me land some amazing jobs in international organisations. I worked in Germany for two years post my degree before starting my research career at University of Leipzig there," she adds.The public universities have undergone a tremendous internationalisation in the past ten years, bringing English as the main language of instruction for many courses. Also, due to the Bologna process, varsities now follow the bachelor/master/PhD system with defined European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS), says Parthasarathi."Austrian society has become more tolerant in the last ten years. Cities such as Vienna, Salzburg, and Innsbruck are more crowded and far more international now. A notable development in terms of visa regulations is that graduates from Austria can renew their residence permits for 12 months to search for jobs or start a business," she adds.Although, the number of foreign students in Austria is fairly high, it is mainly composed of European students. The number of non-EU students is in general quite low and the percentage of Indian students in Austria has been rising slowly.Parthasarathi recommends aspirants to learn German, either before departure or soon after arriving in the country."I started learning German the moment I arrived in Vienna. Life gets easier, especially outside the campus, when you know the language. Communicating with the bank, insurance providers, local shopkeepers or the foreign office officials for visa extension, everything becomes smoother if you can converse in the local language," she says.For those planning to self-fund their studies, they need at least a B1-B2 level of German language certificate to find part-time jobs."Also, students should look for scholarships as there are plenty available. They must spend enough time to prepare a good application," recommends Parthasarathi.Students can look for scholarships provided by Austrian agency for international cooperation, OeAD (https://grants.at/en/) and EURAXESS (https://euraxess.ec.europa.eu/worldwide/india).
