Fathima Lateef suicide: 2 IIT-Madras students launch indefinite fast demanding time-bound investigation

As the Chennai Crime Branch investigates the alleged suicide of IIT Madras student Fathima Lateef, two students from the institute have gone on an indefinite hunger strike demanding an external survey into the issues faced by students inside the institute and a time-bound investigation into the allegations raised by parents of Fathima Lateef.

On Monday morning, Azhar Moideen and Justin Joseph, students of the humanities department and members of Chinta Bar, an independent student body, began their protest near the main entrance of the institute.

According to the students, the resolutions passed during the Student Legislative Council meeting last semester is yet to be implemented by the institute. The resolution urged the institute to set up a panel of external experts comprising psychologists, mental health experts, educationalists and faculty of IITM to examine the mental well being of the students and the scope of available mechanisms to tackle the issued faced by the students.

Speaking to India Today TV, Srihari, a member of ChintaBar said the students' body was forced to go on a hunger strike as their demands fell on deaf ears of the institute. The hunger strike will be withdrawn by students if the management accepts our demand to probe into Fathima's death and address the allegations made by her father.

In solidarity with the members of @ChintaBAR who are protesting against the ineptness of @iitmadras administration in dealing with the issue of student suicides. IIT Madras tops in the number of student suicides across India. 14 in 10 years! @lonelyredcurl #NoMoreDeathsinIIT pic.twitter.com/7eeMkSw3AI pratheesh (@pratheesh) November 18, 2019

We are in solidarity with Justin Joseph and Azhar Moideen from @ChintaBAR, IIT Madras, who are on a hunger strike right now near the IIT main gate demanding justice for Fathima and for all who have lost their lives in IIT Madras in pursuit of education.



No more suicides in IIT! pic.twitter.com/pw2VptHNgw DYFI DELHI (@DyfiDelhi) November 18, 2019

Meanwhile, DMK MP Kanimozhi raised the issue in the Loksabha questioning why an FIR has not been filed against any of the professors of the IIT despite Fathima Lateef mentioning naming few of the professors in her note. Highlighting cases of suicides and alleged caste discrimination in the institute, Kanimozhi said, It is shameful. What are we teaching? What is the point of these institutions if this is what we are going to do to our students?.

Earlier, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) president MK Stalin had said that Fathima Lateef's death was not a suicide.

"The death of IIT Madras student Fathima Lateef is not suicide. After interacting with Fathima's father it is clear that there are many mysteries and questions around her death," MK Stalin tweeted in Tamil. Stalin urged the state government to arrest the culprits in the case and ensure that justice is given to the victim.

Fathima Lateef had allegedly committed suicide by hanging herself from a ceiling fan in her hostel room. She was found dead in her room on November 9. Fathima Lateef was a native of Kerala and was pursuing an integrated MA program at the institute.

Fathima Lateef was staying at the Sarayu hostel at the campus. Following the incident, the police, in its primary investigation, had revealed that Fathima Lateef was separated from her family for the first time and had scored poorly in her internal exam.
