Farmers fume as Nafed rejects stock

RAJKOT: Trouble for groundnut farmers seems to be never ending. After unseasonal rains damaged their crops, many farmers faced rejection when they came to sell their produce at minimum support price (MSP) at the National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Ltd (Nafed) centres across Saurashtra.Majority of the crop was rejected because of the higher moisture content than the limits prescribed by the Nafed.Protest erupted at Kalavad in Jamnagar district after moister more than the permissible limit was found in the lots that farmers brought to the centre on Monday. The central government has fixed MSP of Rs 5,090 per quintal for groundnut.Over a dozen farmers staged a blocked roads on Jamnagar-Junagadh Highway in Kalavad on Monday after their groundnut crop was rejected at the Nafed-run centre. The roadblock was removed after police was called in to disperse the protesting farmers.The Nafed officials refused to accept the nuts as it found more than 8% moisture in it. As per the Nafed’s parameters, the moisture in groundnut should not exceed 8%. The rejected produce was found to have 10% to 12% moisture“I undertook the groundnut cultivation in my village after my stint in diamond polishing business and tours and travels at Surat failed. Now the rejection of the 2,500 kg produce has dealt me a body blow. When I brought my groundnut at Nafed centre, it was rejected as it had 10% moisture content,” said Vaju Shingala, a farmer from Kharedi village of Kalavad taluka.Another farmer Dahya Dangaria from Pithadia village of Kalavad said, “I had cultivated groundnut in 10 bigha land. I had brought 2,500 kg groundnut to the centre, however, the entire batch was rejected after it was found to have 12% moisture content.”Similar was the case with Kanti Faldu, a farmer from Umrala village of Kalavad.“While the rain destroyed cotton, groundnut was safe. However, the produce got rejected for having 12% moisture,” said Mahesh Tarpara, a farmer from Lakshmipur Dudhala village.
