IOK lockdown enters 106th day

ISLAMABAD: The inhuman lockdown imposed by India in the Indian Occupied Kashmir (IOK) entered 106th straight day on Monday.

According to the Kashmir Media Service, though some restrictions have been eased in most parts of the occupied territory, the situation is still far from normal, especially in the Kashmir Valley and Muslim majority areas of Jammu and Ladakh regions where people are seething with anger over New Delhi’s anti-Kashmir moves.

Total ban on the internet, SMS and prepaid cellular networks as well as restrictions under Section 144 remain enforced. The onset of winter has compounded Kashmiris’ woes.

People in the occupied valley continue to observe a silent protest against India’s unilateral actions by staying away from the educational institutions and offices. Shopkeepers also joined the protest by downing their shutters after opening their shops for a few hours in the morning. However, the weekly flea market remained open in Srinagar throughout Sunday.

India’s Information and Broadcasting Ministry has asked cable operators not to air any channel from Pakistan, Iran, Turkey and Malaysia. The directions were passed during a long meeting held between a senior official of the Ministry Vikram Sahay and the operators in Srinagar on Sunday.

The cable operators were reportedly instructed to block the channels from these hostile Muslim countries. A report citing officials says govt departments in the valley can get back their internet services only with a rider: the head of the department will be held responsible for any misuse.

It added that this is part of an undertaking that field departments in the valley are required to submit to the police to seek restoration of internet facilities in their offices to carry out departmental work. The undertaking has been drafted by the police.

As per a report, the IOK admin Sunday shifted all 34 political prisoners, lodged at Centaur Hotel in Srinagar since Aug 5 to the MLA Hostel in the city as the facility lacked proper heating arrangements.

Meanwhile, An Indian army Havaldar was killed and two soldiers were seriously injured when their vehicle hit an IED in Akhnoor area of the Indian Occupied Kashmir (IOK).The incident took place when the soldiers were on routine patrolling in Pallanwalla area of Jammu, an official told the media.

Havaldar Santosh Kumar of 4 Raj Rifles was killed, while two soldiers Naik Gemra Ram from Raj Rifles and Naik Krishan Lal from Armed Regiment received serious injuries.
