I don't know Quran as much as I know Sanskrit literature: BHU's Firoze Khan

Some students have been staging a sit-in outside the BHU vice chancellor's office against the selection of Firoze Khan in the Sahitya department of the Sanskrit Vidya Dharma Vijnan (SVDV). (Photo:Facebook/Firoze Khan)

An assistant professor in the Sanskrit faculty of the Banaras Hindu University (BHU), whose appointment led to protests by a section of students, has said he is unable to understand why his religious identity suddenly an issue.

On the opposition by Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) over his appointment in the Sanskrit literature department, Firoze Khan told The Indian Express, "All my life, I learnt Sanskrit and I was never made to realise I am a Muslim, but now when I am trying to teach, suddenly it has become the only subject."

A doctorate in Sanskrit, Firoze Khan is distraught by protests over his appointment. Speaking to the daily, he said he doesn't know as much Quran as Sanskrit literature.

"I started learning Sanskrit in Class 2, but no one ever pointed this out even though my mohalla in Bagru (30 km from Jaipur) had 30 per cent Muslimsneither the local maulavi nor the society. In fact, I don't know as much Quran as I know Sanskrit literature. Prominent Hindus in my area praised me for my knowledge of Sanskrit and its literature despite being a Muslim," Firoze Khan said.

In a message to protesting students, Firoze said religion has nothing to do with teaching Sanskrit literature. "In Sahitya department, we have to study about the technicalities of Sanskrit literature and famous dramas like Abhigyan Shakuntalam, Uttar Ramcharitam or Mahakavya like Raghuvansh Mahakavya or Harshcharitam and all this has nothing to do with religion," the BHU assistant professor said.

With protests continuing for over 10 days, Firoze Khan hopes his students will be back. He says when the environment is one of inclusiveness, situations like these don't arise. "Whatever they have in their heart, I hope I can change that," Firoze Khan added.

The Banaras Hindu University, meanwhile, continues to back the appointment of the Muslim professor, saying it is committed to provide equal opportunities to everyone irrespective of religion, caste, community or gender.

In a statement, the BHU said the administration had already made it clear that the selection committee unanimously recommended the selection of the said candidate on the basis of prescribed guidelines of the University Grants Commission and the central government.

Also read | Banaras Hindu University backs Muslim professor's appointment in Sanskrit department

Also read | Two groups of BHU students clash on campus; petrol bombs, stones hurled
