Students stage demonstration demanding justice for IIT Madras student Fathima Latheef

The Federation of Students' Organisations expressed their anguish over the many recurring deaths in Central government educational institutions

Representatives of the Federation of Students’ Organisations on Tuesday staged a demonstration expressing their anguish over the recurring deaths in Central educational institutions, including the recent death of first-year student Fathima Latheef at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras. They demanded a conducive and safe atmosphere for students to pursue their education in their campuses.

Over 100 representatives gathered at Valluvarkottam and indulged in sloganeering against social discrimination in Central education institutions. They also held placards seeking to resist saffronisation of educational institutions and to defeat discrimination.

The Federation TN chapter co-ordinator and DMK MLA C.V.M.P. Ezhilarasan said more than 10 days have passed since the death of Fathima, and no action has been taken against anyone who was responsible for her death. “We demand justice for her death. The Central and State governments should take concrete action to prevent the recurring deaths in Central education institutions,” he said.

He said no action has been taken against the professors who were allegedly responsible so far. IIT Madras should have initiated disciplinary proceedings against them by placing them under suspension. “We will intensify our agitations if there is no action taken against the persons who is allegedly responsible for her suicide,” said Mr.Ezhilarasan.

The gathering also condemned the attack on students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) who have been raising their voice against the recent fee hike.

The representatives of the Federation included the students’ wings of Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, MDMK, Dravida Manavar Kazhagam, the All India Students’ Federation, Students Federation of India, Campus Front of India and other organisations.
