Maybe India should swap JNU protesters for their Hong Kong counterparts!

On the night of Monday, November 18, two JNU alumni, the actress Swara Bhaskar and the activist Kanhaiya Kumar, maintained that the ongoing students’ protest was peaceful and non-violent when asked by the anchor of a national TV news-channel about not just the recent vandalizing of a campus statue of Swami Vivekananda but also the gherao of the dean of students.

A gherao is far from non-violent. You don’t even have to go by the Cambridge English Dictionary which defines gherao as “an occasion when people show that they disagree with something by standing around a person in authority and not letting them leave until they agree to do what the people want”.

Confinement under duress is a serious offence in the Indian Penal Code (IPC) even if the JNU Students’ Union (JNUSU) maintains that “In a functioning democracy, peaceful and democratic protests are the normal course, not an aberration.”.

It shouldn’t take a stretch of imagination for even a TV news-anchor to realize that surrounding a person for hours together and preventing the person from taking any form of nutrition while subjecting him or her to repeated abuse and slogans like “Murdabad”, Murdabad” (meaning Death to the gheraoed victim) can break the person, both in body and mind.

It is not surprising that JNU’s middle-aged Dean of Students Umesh Kadam, who was gheraoed for hours by JNUSU protesters on October 28, complained of high blood pressure (BP) and had to be subsequently hospitalized. According to a news-report published in The Times of India (ToI) , Kadam fell sick and had to be rushed to the JNU health centre. The TOI correspondent quotes the JNU administration as saying that doctors were initially prevented by the JNUSU protesters from attending to the ailing Kadam despite the pleas with folded hands of the dean’s wife and children. When an ambulance arrived, the students blocked the vehicle and insisted that it be taken to the on-campus health-centre and not the nearest hospital.

While students in a democracy are entitled to protest, surely you don’t have to kill a dean or hospitalize him or her to make a point! Surely, not even Swara Bhaskar and Kanhaiya Kumar would like their aging kith and kin to be subjected to a `peaceful’, `non-violent’ gherao for hours and hours.

The JNU vice-chancellor (VC) Prof M Jagadesh Kumar tweeted that the behavior of the gheraoing protesters was “completely heartless”. And Prof Kumar ought to know. On an evening in March 2019, when he was not at his campus residence, 200 JNUSU protesters broke into his house and gheraoed his wife (who had nothing to do with the university) for hours until the wives of the other professors intervened. The traumatized VC’s wife had to be admitted to the Fortis Hospital in Vasant Kunj.

The JNUSU protesters claimed that they were protesting about the admissions-policy and that they did not know that the VC was not at home. So when they forced their way into the VC’s house and learnt that he was not there, why didn’t they apologize and immediately get out. In any case, hadn’t the protesting students violated the law by breaking the gate and forcing their way into the VC’s residence!

In this day and age of 24-by-7 television, viewers in India can now simultaneously watch the protests not just in JNU but in China’s Special Administrative Region (SAR) of Hong Kong.

The essential difference, of course, is that there is no real democracy in Hong Kong where the protests began over an official move to extradite to the mainland of China those who were charged with crimes in the SAR. Whereas, in India, and its capital city of New Delhi, there are repeated democratic elections, whether national, state or local (like the September 2019 JNUSU polls which was swept by the United Front of Left student groups).

JNU’s latest ongoing protest is over what the protesters term as an unprecedented 300 per cent (it should actually be 3,000 per cent) hike in students’ hostel accommodation fees. “Where will we live and how can we study?” a JNU student was quoted as saying.

Percentages can be misleading since the JNU monthly hostel-room rent has been stuck for decades at the abysmally low level of 10 rupees for a double-room and 20 rupees for a single-room, and is only now being increased to 300 rupees and 600 rupees, respectively. Ten rupees or five is what a beggar on the streets of Bangalore would consider a kind act of charity from an individual donor.

The JNUSU has also complained about the imposition from the next session of a monthly service-charge of Rs 1,700. The JNUSU is also protesting about the hike in the refundable mess-security fee from 5,500 rupees to 12,000 rupees.

Granted, the JNUSU does have a point when it says that the students should have been consulted about these hikes. However, like the former Delhi University (DU) vice-chancellor (VC) Prof Dinesh Singh was quoted as saying on a TV news-channel, JNU fees compare favourably with the tariffs in other varsities and colleges, including those in Delhi. And, as Prof Singh added, states like Bihar also subsidize their OBC and SC/ST students studying in Delhi colleges.

In any case, the JNU administration has subsequently clarified that the hike in tariffs will not apply to those BPL (below-the-poverty-line) students in JNU who do not have scholarships. A high-powered official committee has also been set up to look into all the JNUSU demands.

Despite all of which, the JNUSU marched onto the streets of Delhi and tried to force their way into Parliament on the first day of its winter session on November 18. When they were stopped at the barricades by the cops, hundreds of protesters squatted on the main roads, tying up the traffic into knots for hours and impacting the flow of emergency ambulances with seriously-ill patients to leading hospitals like Safdarjung.

At some stage, the street lights were switched off and the protesters evicted, with the JNUSU claiming that the protesters had been brutally lathi-charged and the cops denying it.

Some of the JNUSU demands defy common sense. For instance, JNUSU cribs that “It is mentioned that `unauthorized individuals’ found in the room of a resident after 10.30 pm (at night) would be a matter of disciplinary action. The problem here is that the term ‘unauthorized’ has been kept open-ended and its discretion given to the warden. Again, this leads to a culture of intimidation and surveillance,” JNUSU maintains.

An unauthorized person is an unauthorized person. And if not the warden, at 10.30 in the night, who else is supposed to decide who is an unauthorized person in a resident’s room? Or is JNUSU implying that two students sharing a double room (at the monthly rental of Rs 10 each) should be allowed to sub-let the limited space to a third person who is not a student? Going by which logic, the same JNU student could one day become a government officer who sub-lets parts of the official accommodation allotted to him! So much sub-rent for a barsaati (makeshift room on the terrace), etc!

In this era of student-exchange programmes, the only solution one can think of is that maybe India should just swap the JNUSU protesters for their counterparts in Hong King. The Hong Kong protesters could feel they have come to a paradise of freedom once they reach JNU. And, hopefully, the JNUSU protesters could realize how much they have been pampered in New Delhi once they reach Hong Kong!

The JNUSU (which is dominated by the United Front of Leftist student groups on the JNU campus) would not even be in an ideological position to crib since it is supposed to feel at home in Hong Kong which is a Special Administrative Region of the PRC (People’s Republic of China) which has been ruled for the last seven decades by the CPC (Communist Party of China)! In other words, the JNUSU would not feel Left out in Hong Kong!

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
