PMC bank depositors protest outside Bombay High Court

Depositors of Punjab and Maharashtra Bank took out a march against Reserve Bank of India outside the premises of Bombay High Court on Tuesday. They had gathered outside the court since morning as a PIL seeking the removal of restrictions on the withdrawal amount from PMC Bank came up for hearing.

A bench of Justices Satyranjan Dharmadhikari and Riyaz Chagla heard the matter and kept the next hearing for December 4. RBI submitted an affidavit explaining steps taken by them after the scam came to light. RBI counsel Venkatesh Dhond told the court that depositors can approach RBI administrator for withdrawal up to Rs 1 lakh in case of medical emergencies.

Depositors who were waiting for relief from the high court were not satisfied with the day’s proceedings and raised slogans against the central bank. The protest went on for two hours before the crowd dispersed.

Heavy police bandobast was deployed outside the court to disperse the crowd. "RBI has not said anything new. We have heard all this for the last 55 days. Our demand is that its RBI’s job to return our money as we deposited the money on their assurance. We will file a reply on this affidavit in next hearing," said Harpreet Singh, PMC bank customer.

In its reply, the RBI said it has found large-scale wrongdoing in the bank and that only the top 15 officials of the bank were aware of the fictitious accounts were used to facilitate HDIL. RBI’s counsel Venkatesh Dhond informed the court that malice was to the extent that PMC bank was to receive Rs 180 crore after selling a property owned by HDIL. Without receiving the proceeds from the sale, the bank paid Rs 60 crore to the liquidator as charges.

Dhond went on to say that 75 per cent of the depositors have withdrawn their money. If directions are given by the court on withdrawal will be given by the court there will be a run on the bank and nothing will be left. In this affidavit, RBI said that they have used their statutory powers to impose restrictions and protect the interest of depositors.

Eknath Gokhale, a lawyer for the petitioner said, "RBI filed its affidavit saying they have put the restrictions as it was necessary for the functioning of the bank. This has been done to protect the interest of the depositors."

The court refused to increase the withdrawal limit and said they can’t set priorities for the bank as they don’t run the bank.
