Anna Hazare begins hunger strike, demands implementation of Lokpal, Lokayukta

Ralegan Siddhi (Maharashtra): Social activist Anna Hazare began a hunger strike Wednesday over ‘non-fulfillment’ of assurances by the Centre and the Maharashtra government on the appointment of Lokpal and passage of the Lokayukta Act in the state.

Hazare offered prayers at the Padmavati Temple here in Ahmednagar district in the morning. He then went in a procession, accompanied by students, youths and farmers, to the Yadavbaba Temple and sat near it to begin his hunger strike.

The anti-corruption crusader told this agency that he welcomed the Maharashtra Cabinet’s decision to bring the office of state Chief Minister under the jurisdiction of Lokayukta.

“However, the strike will continue till the government fulfils promises they made before coming to power about passage of Lokayukta Act, appointment of Lokpal and to tackle farmers” issues,” Hazare informed.

As a routine procedure, doctors conducted a basic health check-up of Hazare, a close aide of the activist said. “Hazare has now begun his fast as he is disappointed with the state government for not appointing the Lokayukta,” the aide stated.

Hazare had written a letter Monday to Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and had said he would launch the agitation in his village from Wednesday.

Maharashtra minister Girish Mahajan, who has been acting as an emissary between the state government and Hazare, had Tuesday urged the activist to cancel the agitation. He claimed that almost all the demands made by Hazare were fulfilled.

“His first demand was implementing Swaminathan Commission recommendations, that farmers should get 1.5 times MSP. I think that demand has been fulfilled,” Mahajan had told reporters in Mumbai.

“It has been five years since the Lokpal Act was passed. Yet the Narendra Modi government has not appointed Lokpal…Lokayukta Act has not been passed in Maharashtra for four years,” Hazare had observed in his letter dated January 28.

“Nine months have passed, yet the demands have not been fulfilled. Hence, I will be on hunger strike in my village Ralegan Siddhi starting January 30,” he had also said.

PTI
