PMC Scam: Only 25 in the bank knew about HDIL accounts; each loan account was protected by a password

Bombay High Court

Housing Development and Infrastructure Ltd

PMC Bank

PMC Bank scam: ED to give its nod for sale of HDIL assets Enforcement Directorate (ED) has decided to give its nod for the sale of assets worth up to Rs 3,000 crore belonging to the HDIL group, accused of causing a loss of around Rs 4,335.46 crore to PMC Bank, to enable the bank in recovering its losses and providing relief to depositors, sources said.

Photos by Satish Malavade

''Will borrow from friends to pay for my daughter’s wedding': PMC customers on how they are forced to scale back plans PMC Bank customers with family weddings on the horizon tell Mumbai Mirror how they have been forced to scale back their plans.

PMC Bank customers

PMC Bank customers protest outside the high court on Tuesday

In an affidavit filed in theon Tuesday, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) revealed that every one of’s (HDIL) loan accounts in Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative (PMC) Bank was protected by an access code in the bank’s internal systems, and that only 25 of the bank’s 1,800 employees had access to these codes. HDIL’s hidden bad loans were allegedly responsible for the bank’s near-collapse in September.While enumerating the steps it had taken to protect the interests of’s customers, the RBI provided details of how bank officials escaped its scrutiny when granting unsecured loans to HDIL. RBI said the bank used two core banking systems – Finnacle and Omni – and had certain access codes for HDIL’s loan accounts to restrict their visibility internally. “Fewer than 25 employees could access these loan accounts,” Rajlaxmi Sethi, assistant general manager, wrote in his affidavit filed on behalf of the RBI.According to investigating agencies, a large number of fictitious loan accounts were opened and loans were issued before being re-routed to HDIL. Since these accounts were not disclosed to the RBI, they could not be declared non-performing assets and the true financial health of the bank remained hidden, the RBI alleged.The banking regulator claimed that its annual inspections also did not reveal the HDIL connection as the inspections rely on a sample set of records provided by the bank. “Since transaction testing is not done in the RBI inspection, and the bank submitted manipulated data for checks, the accounts picked for inspection did not contain undisclosed, HDIL-related accounts,” the affidavit said.The RBI claimed that the March 31, 2018 inspection report on the bank’s financial position did not reveal the scale of the violations as they were camouflaged by the bank. However in September 2019 an RBI team was deputed for a thorough scrutiny of the bank, which revealed their modus operandi. The report revealed that Waryam Singh, the bank’s former MD, had participated in a meeting in which the bank had sanctioned mortgage overdraft limit to a “wholly owned group company of HDIL” despite being a director in the company, thus violating the RBI’s rules.The RBI also said that the withdrawal limit for customers, which was initially Rs 1,000, had now been raised to Rs 50,000. With this, 78% of the bank’s customers can now withdraw their entire balance, it said. It added that beyond this stipulated limit, the RBI would entertain applications for withdrawals of up to Rs 1 lakh for medical reasons, and up to Rs 50,000 for weddings, college fees, etc.A division bench of justices SC Dharmadhikari and Riyaz Chagla accepted the RBI’s affidavit. It said the petitioners could approach the RBI to get the Rs 50,000 limit increased further and refused to interfere into the RBI order. Hundreds ofprotested outside the court over this, saying they were dissatisfied with the way the court was handling the case.
