JNU protests spark stirrings of rebellion... among city students

72133849

Faced with similar fee hikes in the past, section of scholars on city campuses like SPPU, FC say need for political awareness in their fraternity has never been higherAs simmering discontent over a fee hike boils over and explodes in the national capital, its ripples are being felt all the way here, too. Even as students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) erupt in protests against an escalated hostel fee hike, scholars under the umbrella of the Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU) and Fergusson College (FC), located in Pune, have felt stirrings of solidarity.^^72136907^^For years, students here have raised similar objections to fee rates, stay facilities, quality of faculty and more, although most of their protests have achieved neither the scale nor force of what is being witnessed in Delhi, usually settled after a response from the administration.But as the ongoing situation prolongs and takes on a political colour, students from various educational campuses in the city seem to be infected with a revolutionary zeal - triggered to launch a political awareness campaign, both online and offline, to ensure that their fraternity knows its rights and is ready to fight for them.On Tuesday, students from across departments gathered at the varsity's Aniket Canteen, not only to express support for brethren at JNU, but also to discuss the necessity for organised political awareness on campus."Whenever there is outrage in JNU, it filters down to students in various cities, such as in 2016, after the uproar surrounding Kanhaiya Kumar. Today, all students are talking about the JNU hostel fee hike protests. Such hikes take place everywhere, but most other campuses hardly see any objection raised. JNU has set an example for us on how to fight for our rights. This awareness needs to spread," said Satish Gore, an MPhil student of the English department at SPPU.On this note, a Democratic Club has been announced for students living in Pune, in a bid to make members aware of constitutional rights, and to bring students with a similar thought process together.Postgraduate commerce student Satish Pawar said, "We have discussed various plans to take this campaign ahead. We will also have a 'Free Talk' on the SPPU campus to talk about student rights and democracy. At the varsity, too, students have protested hostel fee hikes and demanded waivers for students from drought-affected areas. Yet, as soon as the officials took a decision, they simply listened."Agreed Ruksana Patil, a second-year student of political science, "We pay more than triple the previous fees at the hostel already - it has gone up from Rs 1,200 per semester to Rs 6,000 this academic year. All this was discussed in our solidarity meet. This is a public university - chosen for affordability. If fees go up unchecked, how will poor students manage? Private universities are not an option for them."~~72134317~~Calling Tuesday's gathering "a right to a free voice", Akash Daunde, who is in his second year at the media and communication studies department, said, "The protest at JNU is nothing but democratic. Authorities usually kill the individual voice - but when many come together, it helps put forth viewpoints effectively. Education is a basic right and all students should know this."Similar thoughts echoed out of FC, with students citing that if they had not called off their strike against a fee hike earlier this year, things could have been very different. Said Bachelor of Arts student Sunil Jadhav, "The college had abruptly hiked our fee by over 50 per cent. We objected, but backed off when the administration assured help for needy students. But seeing what is happening at JNU, we feel that if we had continued firmly with our stand, the hike could have been rolled back. Students should know these things about the system, and how they can make a difference."The sentiment radiated out of these two campuses and onto social media as well - a number of students took to social networks to post statuses and videos expressing solidarity, amid others who criticised the JNU agitation. One supportive post mentioned, "A letter from my FC to my JNU: The fee hike is not just your problem, but a fight for the whole nation. Every university and college will raise its voice, as education is the right of all. The conspiracy to remove Bahujan students from the ambit of education will not be supported..."The authorities were, however, a tad more restrained in their approval. Sharad Kunte, chairman of the governing body and council at Deccan Education Society - which runs colleges like FC and Brihan Maharashtra College of Commerce - said, "Students should know their rights. Discussions on national-level affairs should happen on campus. But there should be a limit to it - no damage should be caused to society and academics should not be compromised. Every student should have their own ideas and beliefs, and should be aware of political happenings around." When asked by Mirror, SPPU vice chancellor Nitin Karmalkar refrained from commenting on the issue.
