9 held for manhandling cops, blocking traffic

Ludhiana: The Ladhowal police have arrested nine accused for manhandling police personnel and blocking traffic with the body and provoking the kin of the deceased for holding protest.

The protest was staged demanding a murder case to be registered against the accused.

Despite FIR, some labour unions have announced to intensify their protest on November 21 outside Humbran police post.

The arrested accused have been identified as Sukhdev Singh of Bhundri, Sukhwinder Singh of Humbran, Major Singh of Bhundri, Jashneet Singh of Suraj Nagar, Rajwinder Singh of Bathinda, Gurdeep Singh of Mundian Kalan, Jagdev Singh of EWS Colony, Gurwinder Singh of Patiala and Salinder Yadav of Shakti Nagar.

All the accused are the members of different labour unions.

A case has been registered against them under Sections of 186 (obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions), 353 (assault or criminal force to deter a public servant in discharge of his duty), 341 (punishment for wrongful restrain) 283 (danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation) and 149 (every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common object) of the IPC.

ASI Surinder Kumar said members of different organisations gathered at Bijli ground of Humbran and staged a protest. They also provoked the kin of the deceased Lovekush to protest and block the road with his body. The police tried to pacify them, but the agitators manhandled the cops. Thereafter, the police had to use force to stop the agitation.

Organisations have announced protest on November 21. They have also formed Humbran Katal Kand Virodi Sangharh Committee.

Lakhwinder Singh, a member of the committee, said the police had registered a case of culpable homicide against the labour contractor, Raghbir Singh, while they had demanded a murder case as accused thrashed Lovekush to death. They had also demanded cancelation of FIR against the protestors.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
