SPG cover debate takes centre stage in Parliament; Congress says politicians' safety should be beyond politics

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights A fiery debate erupted between the Congress and Centre in Parliament over Gandhis SPG cover Issue of personal safety of politicians has to be beyond the partisan political consideration: Congress Nothing political in withdrawal of SPG cover: JP Nadda

New Delhi: A fiery debate erupted between the Congress and Centre during the third day of the winter session of Parliament on Wednesday over the withdrawal of SPG security cover for Gandhi family.

The Congress party had on Tuesday protested against Centre’s decision to withdraw the Special Protection Group (SPG) security cover of Congress interim chief Sonia Gandhi, her son Rahul and daughter Priyanka in the Parliament.

Gandhi family and former prime minister Manmohan Singh were stripped of the elite SPG security cover earlier this month, 28 years after the force's continuous deployment. The SPG cover was replaced by the 'Z-plus' security of the CRPF.

During today’s Parliament proceedings, Congress spokesperson Anand Sharma said that the withdrawal of SPG cover has made Gandhis vulnerable and asked the government to reconsider its decision.

“All four have been vulnerable to threats. Withdrawal of SPG cover makes them vulnerable. It is the responsibility of the state to protect its leaders. When UPA was in office, the security cover of Dr Atal Bihari Vajpayee was not disturbed. We urge the government that issues of personal safety and lives of politicians have to be beyond the partisan political considerations,” he said.

Countering Sharma’s comment, BJP working president JP Nadda ruled out any political motive behind the decision and said the security cover was downgraded keeping in view the threat perception.

“There is nothing political, security hasn't been withdrawn. Home Ministry has a very set pattern and there is a protocol. It is not done by a politician, it is done by Home Ministry and according to threat perception the security is given and withdrawn,” Nadda said.

Meanwhile, Indian Youth Congress staged a protest against the removal of Gandhi family's SPG cover in the national capital.

Delhi: Indian Youth Congress stages a protest against the removal of SPG cover to Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi, and party leaders Rahul Gandhi & Priyanka Gandhi Vadra. pic.twitter.com/y1AofWdQC0 — ANI (@ANI) November 20, 2019

On Tuesday, Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury had raised the issue in the Parliament, but the government said he cannot flag the matter in Zero Hour as he had not given a notice for the same. Some Congress leaders had also raised slogans like, "stop politics in the name of security", "stop dictatorship", "Prime Minister give reply", "we want justice".

The decision to withdraw SPG cover given to the family of former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi, who was assassinated by LTTE terrorists on May 21, 1991, was taken after a detailed security assessment, a senior home ministry official said.
