Women protestors manhandled, groped by male policemen during fee hike protest, allege JNU students

Women students manhandled during JNU protest | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The Delhi police allegedly groped and manhandled female students of Jawaharlal Nehru University who were protesting on the streets of national capital against hostel fee hike on Tuesday. JNU Students' Union president Aishe Ghosh alleged that women students were "manhandled and groped" by male policemen.

"When I was detained, my kurta was pulled and I was picked up by four male policemen. Women students were literally groped and manhandled," Ghosh said.

Another JNU student, Sucheta Talukdar, who was also part of the protest, made similar allegations. Former students' union president N Sai Balaji alleged that a woman student's foot got fractured after the policemen stomped on her foot.

Several other students alleged that police lathi-charged them during the protest and also thrashed physically challenged protesters, the allegations refuted by the police. The police said that they did not use any form of violence against students.

A visually challenged student yesterday alleged that police beat him up even when he told them he is "differently-abled".

Addressing a press conference in the university campus, Shashibhushan Pandey, said, "I removed my spectacles to show them that I can't see. Still, they beat me up. A student who intervened was also beaten up."

Pandey also claimed that when he told the police that he is "visually challenged", they reportedly said, "If you are blind, why have you come here to protest".

"My friends told me street lights had been switched off and police were beating students. They made me stand on the side of a road, but policemen started nudging me with lathis from behind," Pandey added.

The students of Delhi's Jawaharlal Nehru University have been protesting for nearly three weeks against the new draft hostel manual, which has provisions for the hostel fee hike, dress code and curfew timings.

On Monday, a large number of students took to the streets to protest against the hostel fee hike. The students also engaged in fierce clashes with police while marching towards the Parliament on the first day of its winter session, demanding a total rollback of the hostel fee hike.

Around 100 students were detained and some were injured when police allegedly baton-charged protestors to stop them from heading towards Parliament.

On Monday, the Union HRD Ministry had set up a three-member committee to recommend ways to restore normal functioning of the varsity.
