BHU news: Students’ protest enters 14th day; Muslim professor feels 'insulted'

Varanasi: Students stage a protest dharna at the Banaras Hindu University (BHU) against the appointment of a Muslim teacher of Sanskrit at the universirty | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The BHU administration maintains that Firoze Khan’s appointment was made according to the established norms The BHU added that the decision to appoint Khan was a unanimous one and was taken by a selection committee The agitating students have started chanting Hanuman Chalisa to emphasise their opposition to a Muslim professor

Varanasi: Firoze Khan, whose appointment as professor in the Banaras Hindu University’s Sanskrit Vidya Dharma Vigyan has triggered protests, on Wednesday said that he felt 'insulted' by the incident. Khan’s remark came as the students' protest against the appointment of a 'non-Hindu' entered its 14th day today.

Meanwhile, the BHU administration continues to maintain that Khan’s appointment was made according to the established norms.

In a statement, the BHU said: “The idea behind the establishment of the university was to contribute in nation-building by providing equal opportunity of study and teaching to all deserving people without any discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, gender and sect."

The statement added that the decision to appoint Khan was a unanimous one and was taken by a selection committee.

Meanwhile, Firoze Khan, the Muslim faculty member, said that had the university mentioned in the advertisement that they did not want to hire a Muslim professor, he would have never applied for the job.

The agitating students, in the meantime, have started chanting Hanuman Chalisa to emphasise their opposition to a Muslim professor.

Banaras Hindu University vice-chancellor Professor Rakesh Bhatnagar had on Tuesday met the students and urged them to end the protest.

"The vice-chancellor today met a delegation of the protesting students at his residence and discussed the issue for over two hours. He assured them that the appointment was made in accordance with the BHU Act and central UGC guidelines," the BHU had said in an official statement yesterday.

"The selection committee, chaired by vice-chancellor Rakesh Bhatnagar, had met on November 5 and recommended the most suitable candidate for the said position on the basis of the applicants' performance in the interview.”

"The VC assured the students that the university is committed to rising above discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, life, community, etc, and work for the welfare of the country," the statement had added.

Earlier this month, the protestors, in a letter to the BHU vice-chancellor, had alleged that the founder of the university - late Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya - had described the SVDV faculty as the heart of the varsity.

"The stone plate of the faculty also contains that this institution is for cultural, religious, historical debates and discussion of Sanatan Hindus and their direct or indirect branches like Arya Samaj, Buddh, Jain, Sikh, etc.", the letter had read.

To this, BHU spokesman Rajesh Singh had cleared that Khan's appointment was made following an interview in the 'Sahitya' department of the SVDV faculty.
