The Realme X2 pro, boasting four cameras, will cost you around Rs 30,000

Towards the end of Realme’s flagship launch event earlier this afternoon, the brand’s India CEO Madhav Sheth chose to quote a 12th century French philosopher. “On the shoulders of a giant, I may see further than the giant,” he said, borrowing from Bernard of Chartres (just like Isaac Newton had done, a few centuries ago), while the screen behind him flashed a slide titled “world of flagships”. As Sheth thanked all the world’s biggest smartphone brands for “motivating us,” the new Realme X2 Pro quietly slid into the screen to stand next to the best smartphones that Huawei, Apple, Samsung and OnePlus offer in 2019.

In this cheeky display of ambition lies Realme’s secret to success. The Chinese smartphone brand that emerged as an offshoot of Oppo, has been present in India for a mere year and a half. But in this short time, it’s managed to carve out its own share of the budget smartphone user-base. Already running in solid competition to Xiaomi, currently the top seller in this segment, and fuelling the Indian smartphone wars -- as per news reports and snide exchanges over Twitter -- Realme today stepped into the mid-range territory with the launch of its first flagship.

Although, going by Realme X2 Pro’s specs and features, the term flagship killer is perhaps better suited. In this, the “fastest charging flagship” from Realme, you get a phone that saves you time and keeps you going with a 4000mAh battery that can be charged to full capacity in 35 minutes. They actually demonstrated this in real-time at the launch event today, pitting the Huawei P30 Pro, Samsung Note 10+ and the iPhone 11 Pro Max against the Realme X2 Pro on a live charging station.

And then there’s the quad camera system on the back: A rare thing on a smartphone that costs less than Rs 30,000. Of course, you can’t have everything: there’s no audio gear in the box, which includes a Super Vooc 10V5A charger, a USB-C cable, a sim card tool and an instruction manual. The Realme X2 Pro does come with a 3.5 mm headphone jack: and while you can opt to buy the Realme buds to pair with this, it helps that we live in a world where wireless earbuds are plentiful and savvy like never before.

Realme X2 Pro price in India, key specs and availability:
