SFI activists protest in support of JNU students

Police action on students in New Delhi, fee hike flayed

Condemning the police action on protesting Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students, the Warangal Urban District unit of the Student Federation of India (SFI) staged a protest at Nayeemnagar here on Wednesday.

Speaking at the protest, the SFI State vice-president D Naresh Yadav found fault with the Delhi police for attacking the students. “The students are within their right. They exercised their democratic right to protest against the fee hike. The demands of students - restoration of reservation for SC/ST students in the hostels, rollback of the proposed hostel fee hike are justifiable.”

Even though the fee hike adversely affects the students, the authorities proceeded with their decision which is condemnable, he said.

The SFI leaders criticised the Narendra Modi government stating that it was not the right way to deal with democratic protests. Beating up students indicates extreme authoritarianism on the part of the Central government, the said.

Mr Yadav threatened to launch nationwide agitation if the Centre fails to roll back the fee hike in JNU. SFI Urban district secretary B Santhosh, joint secretary M Prakash, Girls co-convener Mishreen Sultana and district committee member P Varun were among others present. The students also burned the effigy of the Delhi police.

Effigy burnt

In Khammam, activists of the SFI on Wednesday burnt the effigy of JNU vice-chancellor in protest against the university administration’s reported decision to hike hostel fee and the police action against the agitating JNU students in the national capital on Monday.

The activists staged a demonstration in front of SR&BGNR Government Arts and Science College here as part of the nationwide protest called by the SFI leadership.

The demonstrators raised slogans condemning the alleged police action against the agitating JNU students.

SFI district president J Ashok, secretary Ch Ramesh and others took part in the demonstration held at the entrance of SR&BGNR college here.
