Chile: More Than 26 Thousand Arrests in Less Than a Month – The Greanville Post

Out of this number – cited local media – a total of 8,664 people are from the metropolitan region of Santiago, a Chilean province where strong and massive mobilizations were registered in rejection of the measures, intensified during the government of Sebastián Piñera. RELATED CONTENT: Chile: A Day in Which the Fury against Piñera Became Evident Similarly, the courts declared the illegal detention of 1,108 Chileans, while the public ministry has presented more than 1,700 people to be given preventive detention nationwide. RELATED CONTENT: Chilean Intelligence Chief Resigns Questioned for Not Anticipating Magnitude of Protests For almost a month, Chile has been experiencing a wave of protests against the government of Piñera. at least 23 dead and more than 2,300 injured have been registered in the country as a consequence, in large part, of the repression measures used by the police. The Public Ministry also is investigating more than 800 complaints of human rights violations by the Chilean national police, including complaints of rape and sexual abuse. Translated by JRE/EF

Appendix

Hooray for RT.com, among the few larger media reporting the truth about Chile via programs like this (by Rick Sanchez) and others whose views would never see the light of day on the whore corporate media, as their task is to suppress the truth and dissenting views, not the real purpose of democracy-enhancing journalism. No wonder the "west"—led by the US-UK alliance, the major twin hypocrites—has declared war on RT.com, also part of their longstanding hatred of all things Russian.

Capitalism on trial in Chile – will it survive?

The common folk of Chile are engaged in weeks of violent protest against social inequality in their country. Twenty people have been killed and the government openly regards itself as at war with its own people. Rick Sanchez shows us the roots of Chile’s unrest. Then he takes us through some of the most extreme instances of the horrific and escalating violence in Hong Kong. Then “Boom Bust” host Christy Ai, investigative journalist Ben Swann and RT producer Dr. Enrique Rivera share their insights about Chile’s failing experiment in crony capitalism run amok. Broadcasting icon Larry King weighs in on President Donald Trump and the Democratic contenders for the presidency. RT's Yulia Shapovalova reports on Egypt's plan to buy Russian warplanes and Washington's reaction. RT America's Michele Greenstein explains the legal controversy surrounding worshipers barring women of childbearing age from a temple in India. Plus, comedian and host of "Redacted Tonight" Lee Camp discusses mainstream coverage of the coup in Bolivia.

Below, unfortunately only in Spanish audio, a field reportage of street skirmishes in Santiago's downtown, by an Argentinean TV crew. The images are eloquent.
