Language does not have a religion, say AU’s Muslim alumni & profs

Allahabad: As protests over a Muslim professor’s appointment to Banaras Hindu University’s Sanskrit department rage on across the country, Allahabad University has for long been a nursery for Muslim scholars who have had a penchant for learning the ‘dev bhasha’ ( language of gods).The varsity has produced many Sanskrit scholars, of which many were Muslims and are now teaching Vedas and Upanishads at institutions like Aligarh Muslim University and Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan.According to former head of AU’s Sanskrit department Ram Kishore Shastri, the department was established in 1872 and Aditya Ram Bhattacharya was its first head. He was succeeded by Ganga Nath Jha.The department’s alumni include Mohammad Sarif, who is currently the head of AMU’s Sanskrit department. “There are 20 PhD scholars in my department, of which five are Muslims. I believe that the religion an individual practises cannot have any bearing on the subject he or she is teaching or learning,” said Sarif.Sarvare Alam is one of Shastri’s former PhD students and is currently working in a Jagdishpur school. He was earlier posted in Kasmhir University in 2002, but left the job after three years. Speaking to TOI on phone, Alam said, “There cannot be any bias against a teacher on the grounds of religion. There are 25 Muslim students in my class who have opted for Sanskrit as the elective language in class 12.”AU alumna Gazala Ansari said that her family never had any reservations against her pursuing a PhD in Sanskrit. Currently working as an associate professor in Lucknow’s Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan, Ansari did her PhD under the first woman HoD of AU’s Sanskrit department Kishwar Zabeen Nasreen back in 2008.“If people think it is alright to protest against such a issue, then they don’t deserve any attention as language does not have a religion,” she added. In the current batch of AU’s Sankrit department, there are six Muslim students. “Asking any Muslim to not study or teach the language cannot be justified as for a teacher, one’s ability and knowledge are the only religion,” said head of AU’s Sanskrit department Uma Kant Yadav.Chand Mohammed, who is pursuing a postgraduate course in Sankrit, said one cannot decided who studies a language on the basis of religion. Notably, there are several Hindu students who are enrolled in courses run by AU’s department of Arabic and Persian at AU.
