Internet of Things India expo to be held from March 7-9, 2018

The 2nd Internet of Things India expo 2018 is co-organised by NASSCOM Centre of Excellence – Internet of Things (CoE-IoT), India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) and Exhibitions India Group.

AMN / New Delhi

The 2nd Internet of Things India expo 2018 co-organised by the NASSCOM Centre of Excellence – Internet of Things (CoE-IoT), the India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) and the Exhibitions India Group will be held from March 7-9, 2018, at Pragati Maidan in New Delhi.

CoE– IoT will provide high-end technology capabilities, data, expertise, thought leadership, and curated programmes to augment capabilities across academia, enterprises, government, innovators and advanced start-ups.

“The IoT Revolution is set to transform and redefine the future of critical industries like automotive, agriculture, healthcare, manufacturing and many others. The NASSCOM Centre of Excellence – IoT is the largest innovation platform in emerging technologies of IoT, Analytics, AI/ML, AR/VR and robotics for digital transformation, and is pleased to be co-organising the 2nd Internet of Things India expo 2018 to help build and drive a collaborative IoT eco-system,” said Sanjeev Malhotra, CEO, NASSCOM Centre of Excellence – IoT.

In its second year, the IoT expo is supported by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), the Ministry of Science & Technology, and the PHD Chamber of Commerce. The Institute of Engineering & Technology (IET) is a conference partner.

“Today the manufacturing sector is grappling with issues like innovation, cost effectiveness, productivity increase as also creating new markets. IoT, which is an intersection of people, data, internet and intelligent machines, will revolutionise the manufacturing sector. It is the next big thing after the IT boom, which can make Indian companies more competitive, and will also contribute towards the overall economic growth of India. The IoT India expo 2018 offers Indian players, especially start-ups, a platform to showcase and promote their products and services as also learn from the foreign companies participating in the expo,” said Anil Khaitan, President, PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry.

“This partnership augments our intent to strengthen the IoT movement in India – a vision that the IET IoT panel embodies. At the IET IoT panel, we give people a neutral place beyond the borders of organisations to come together and create the roadmap to derive the best out of IoT. Hence this collaboration was an obvious choice,” said Dr Rishi Bhatnagar, Chairman, IET India IoT Panel & President, Aeris Communications.

“We are delighted to have such prestigious partners for the 2nd Internet of Things India expo 2018. IoT will significantly change the way we live, work and manage our businesses. With new regulations and technological advances, fundamental changes are underway, while opening windows of opportunities for India to capture,” said Prem Behl, Chairman, Exhibitions India Group.

The expo promises to spark that enormous wave of change in the IoT space, while taking forward the government’s intensive Digital India campaign. The expo is expected to enhance the focus on IoT in tackling rural and urban challenges, even as global technology firms collaborate with Indian corporates to develop new IoT and M2M solutions.

Over three days, the latest technologies, innovations and best practices in the industry will be unveiled at the expo. Key focus areas include AR, VR, robotics, artificial intelligence, wearables, etc. The expo will host IT decision makers, industry leaders, technology providers, innovators, and many more.

The current number of IoT devices in India is around 60 million and the number will increase to 1.9 billion units by 2020, according to a report by Deloitte. Furthermore, the IoT market in India is expected to be $15 billion by 2020, accounting for 5% of the global market, indicates a NASSCOM report.

There will be a host of opportunities for startups and corporates to engage global solution providers at the IoT Ramp, Investors Forum and Start Up Planet. These forums will offer IoT startups an opportunity to demo their products and introduce their innovations to the business community, and enable these firms to pitch their ideas to leading angel investors and venture capitalists.

About NASSCOM Centre of Excellence – Internet of Things

NASSCOM CoE – IoT was announced by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in July 2015 as a part of the Digital India campaign. The Centre of Excellence is a joint initiative between the Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DEITY), Education and Research Network (ERNET) and NASSCOM. The Centre of Excellence is among the major IoT initiatives such as Policy on Internet of Things and Smart Cities rolled out by the Government.

About NASSCOM

Established in 1988, NASSCOM has relentlessly catalysed the Indian IT BPM industry in its journey towards building an innovation led growth sector, with transformative business models, expanding its value proposition and becoming a partner of choice for global businesses.

About India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO)

ITPO, the premier trade promotion agency of the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Government of India, is committed to showcase excellence achieved by the country in diverse fields, especially trade and commerce. ITPO provides a wide spectrum of services to trade and industry, and acts as a catalyst for growth of India’s trade.

About Exhibitions India Group

Exhibitions India Group is a trade promotion organisation creating opportunities for investments, joint ventures and technology transfers. Exhibitions India Group acts as an interface between businesses, government, academia, society, media, etc.

Exhibitions India Group has been in existence since 1987, and is committed to providing satisfaction to its customers by organising quality and focused international trade shows through exceptional services, employee involvement, market intelligence and continual improvement.

FOLLOW INDIAN AWAAZ ON TWITTER
