Parliament session [UPDATES]: Massive uproar as Congress raises electoral bonds issue in Lok Sabha

JNU fee hike, NRC likely to be discussed in Parliament today | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The Congress party, on Thursday, raised the issue of electoral bonds in the Parliament. Amid a massive uproar in the Lok Sabha, Congress leader Manish Tewari attacked the government saying it 'overruled Reserve Bank of India on electoral bonds'. The Trinamool Congress (TMC) party also raised the issue of NRC and gave an adjournment notice over pan-India NRC. Union Minister Amit Shah had, on Wednesday said that the centre intends to implement NRC across the nation.

Parliament Session LIVE:

2.48 pm: Rajya Sabha Deputy Chairman Harivansh Narayan Singh says 'you cannot display all these objects in the house' after BJP MP Vijay Goel shows masks, mineral water bottles, air purifier pictures and Delhi Govt advertisements during debate on

2.04 pm: Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, Union Minister of Jal Shakti, in Lok Sabha: More than 100 projects of the 305 projects sanctioned to clean the Ganga have been completed. Rs 20,000 crores were disbursed for the project against which work of more than Rs 28,000 crores have been allocated

1.12 pm: Rajya Sabha adjourned till 2 pm. Rajya Sabha Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu says, "Question hour is over. We will be taking up air pollution call attention notice. I request all members to be present in the House."

12.44 pm: EAM S Jaishankar in Rajya Sabha: Ability of spouses of H1B visa holders working in the US to work was introduced in 2015. This category of visa is covered in H4 visa. Indians today account for 93% of the total number of visas issued in this category. There is a court order to the effect to continue the program. Trump (US President) Administration has indicated that it may review it sometime.

12.07 pm: Massive uproar in Lok Sabha as Congress raises electoral bonds' issue in the Lower House of the Parliament. "I want to draw the attention of the House towards electoral bonds. The electoral bond scheme was limited to elections. RTI in 2018 revealed that government overruled Reserve Bank of India on electoral bonds," said Congress MP Manish Tewari.

11.45 am: Top sources on Congress Parliamentary strategy meeting: If the government doesn’t allow discussion on the issue of electoral bonds, Congress to stage a walkout. Congress will also hold a protest at the Gandhi statue. "We will not let the issue of electoral bonds die down. We will make the government answerable. Reaching out to opposition parties to build a floor strategy against the govt, we want a detailed discussion on it," sources told news agency ANI.

11.21 am: Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla appeals to Opposition MPs raising slogans in the House during Question Hour, says, "It is our duty to maintain the dignity of the House. Please do not come to the well of the house. I have always given all a chance for debate and discussion."

10.43 am: TMC has given Adjournment Motion Notice in Lok Sabha over "implementation of NRC all over the country"

10.30 am: AAP MP Sanjay Singh has given Zero hour notice in Rajya Sabha over the issue of "tribal people displaced from their land"

More during the day at the Parliament:

Minister of Law and Justice Ravi Shankar Prasad will be tabling key papers in the Rajya Sabha on Thursday.

Minister of State (MoS) for Human Resource Development (HRD) Shamrao Dhotre will also make a statement regarding 'Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the Fiftieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Information Technology on "Progress of implementation of BharatNet", pertaining to the Department of Telecommunications.'
