‘Kodavas want Autonomy. We Are Being Exterminated Politically’- CNC Chief Nachappa Codava

‘Kodavas want Autonomy. We Are Being Exterminated Politically’- CNC Chief Nachappa Codava

Mangaluru : The Codava National Council (CNC) apex body of Kodava tribe (original residents of Kodagu) have intensified their demand for a separate Kodava land having jurisdiction of two taluks Madikeri and Virajpet and parts of Somwarpet, which is also the Coffee heartland. The demands were though made in a press conference in Mangaluru on Wednesday, the various activities planned during the year and beyond, speak of signs of upheaval.

Addressing the media persons during a press meet held at Mangaluru Press Club,N U Nachappa Codava president of the Codava National Council (CNC) said “We are being socially, economically and politically exterminated, systematically by well connected political parties, names of our villages, our festivals are being wiped off, distorted and forgotten, our contribution to the country’s armed forces is being deliberately being swiped under the mat by the people on power. Which is why we want our own administrative system on the lines of a hill council in the North East, autonomous administrative unit. After the abrogation of Article 370 and subsequent rearrangement of Jammu and Kashmir state by the central government our hopes of getting our own administrative autonomy has further brightened up”.

“It is a known fact that the merger of Codava traditional homeland ie erstwhile {the then State of Coorg under the guise of State Organization act 1956 (1 Nov 1956) with Vishal Mysore later Karnataka has showcased Codava phobic/Xenophobic attitude which turned out to be a forced exodus of Codava tribe from their homeland. The State-sponsored homogenization has resulted in Culturocide of Codava tribe and their folkloric civilization and the Govt has instigated acculturation of Codava tribe by others. It amounts to a clear violation of human rights as enshrined in our most revered Constitution and also in international human rights covenants and declarations. Unfortunately, the merger of Coorg became a death blow to Codava tribe” added Nachappa.

He further said, “CNC will release a charter of 12 demands on the Kodava National day to be held on 24th November in Madikeri. The main purpose of the celebrations of Annual Codava National Day programme by CNC is to re insist rejuvenate our Geo-Political aspiration for quest for autonomy and register and ratify our solidarity with striving for self-determination Right of Codava tribal world. CNC was founded in the year 1991 and we have been striving for the restoration of our Geo- Political freedom under the banner as Codava land autonomous region. CNC has been striving constitutionally for Codava autonomy as its torch bearer since the past 28 years without any break”.

“Let the Global community respect protect the diverse Indigenous tribes across the Universe including Codava tribes. Thus let us join together to build a harmonious World. All these legitimate Codava demands have reached highest Constitutional destination of our Country. It is a known fact that we have been appealing continuously to both Government of India and Government of Karnataka. Every Codava feels that CNC demands are the symbol of their identity. We are happy to announce that each and every Codava considers CNC to be their sole conscious keeper irrepressible voice of Codava tribal world. Codava Quest for geopolitical Autonomy Self-Determination Right: The subject of Quest for Codava land Geo-political Autonomy has been taken up ” added Nachappa.

Nachappa added, “The indivisible and traditional homeland of Codava tribe i.e.; Kodagu AKA Coorg AKA Codava Land was a type ‘C’ State until the year 1956 when State re-organization was carried out. Kodagu was known to be the best administered utopian model of tiniest States of Indian Republic it became a part and parcel of the State of Vishal Mysore now Karnataka under draconian State re-organization act 1956. The merger of Codava homeland with Karnataka is one of the greatest Geo-political catastrophes of 20th century. The Govt. of Karnataka exploited looted all the wealth, resources including perennial water source, land, language, cultural heritage, folkloric identity, natural wealth, flora and fauna, rich Codava Martial tribal human resources. It has neglected the well being of natives and all other things possible without any hesitation, “As though Kodagu aka Coorg to be the sole supplier of the economic source to the superior king. The aboriginal indigenous Codava tribes are treated as second class apartheid citizens/subjects and even now it is being followed”.

While concluding he said, “We would like to inform you that all such activities have been carried out and being done by the nexus of Government supported deal makers, fixers, negotiators, underworld Dons, hawala racketeers, black marketeers, political vagabonds, power brokers, regular pimps, realtors, commission agents, swindlers, professional blackmailers, corrupt officials, MNC and NRI business tycoons also have made their inroads in Coorg) and without any doubt each of them have become rich and flourished on account of their unholy act. The indigenous Codava tribes have become aliens in their own homeland”. .
