Fee hike will change JNU character

Fee hike will change JNU character

No place for student’s from poor families

"The fee hike has affected foreign students as well, some badly. Almost 40 Tibetan refugee students residing in India, who cleared JNU entrance examination this year, could not take admission because of a steep fee hike. Then that thing happened that generally happens in a protest: A rollback."



JNU is on the boil again. And protests have returned to the University. This time, however, the protests have brought students from both left and right on the same page, as the issue concerns their very survival.

They have to now shell out more for staying at Jawaharlal Nehru University. The rent for a double-seater room has been increased from Rs 10 to Rs 300 a month, and for a single-seater room from Rs 20 per month to Rs 600 a month. Service charges of Rs 1,700 have been introduced, and the one-time mess security fee, which is refundable, has been hiked from Rs 5,500 to Rs 12,000.

Students say they will now have to pay close to Rs 30,000 a semester, excluding the mess fees and other provisions.

These changes have been made through the hostel manual that students' unions claim also has provisions for dress code and curfew timings.

The students are demanding a rollback of all that has been made in the hostel manual.

Their anger spilled over at the university convocation, which was attended by Vice President Venkaiah Naidu and HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank'.

And the angry students then turned violent, clashing with police and security personnel who were deployed outside, and breaking barricades set up by the anti-riot police. The police, in turn, deployed water cannons and detained protestors.

To understand the reasons for the protests, they say, one must understand the nature of the institution in question.

JNU is primarily a research university, where two-thirds of the students are research scholars.

"Nowhere in the world do you run research programmes by collecting fees from the students. Instead, students should be compensated for the opportunities they are foregoing, had they been employed," quips Professor Surajit Mazumdar, Secretary of the JNU Teachers' Association (JNUTA), which has also extended its support to the protesting students.

One Akansha, a JNU student, tweeted to put it succinctly: "You can't understand JNU, the way I couldn't understand before I took admission here, and came to know that parents of my batchmates were golgappa sellers, daily labourers, sanitary workers etc. You can't imagine their struggle stories & that's why you can't understand #jnuprotest.

The university has a long history of admitting students from underprivileged backgrounds.

The fee hike would forever shut the doors on them, and the purpose of a public university will be lost forever. Pointing out that more than 40 per cent of students belong to families with monthly income of Rs 12,000, JNU students' union questions how will students survive and pay the amount that is more than their scholarships.

"We are continuously protesting against this fee hike. We even got beaten up by police, but we stood as most of the Bahujan students here and economically weaker sections will have to leave the campus (if the fee is hiked)," says a leader of the Chhatra Rashtriya Janata Dal.

The fee hike has affected foreign students as well, some badly. Almost 40 Tibetan refugee students residing in India, who cleared JNU entrance examination this year, could not take admission because of a steep fee hike. Then that thing happened that generally happens in a protest: A rollback.

The Ministry of Human Resource Development announced that the draft hostel manual had been partially rolled back. But the main bone of contention-- the utility charges of Rs 1,700 that have been introduced for the first time-- have not been removed or reduced.

"We reject this sham propaganda and selective usage of facts which is eyewash," the students' union said in a statement.

The teachers also called the decision a mere lip service.

Three of the professors elected members of the Executive Council, which took the important decision, have alleged that they were prevented from attending a meeting by the administration through a "deliberate last-minute change of venue."

They say it was not a legitimate Executive Council meeting since eight members were kept out of it. Only a proper meeting, which considers the issue after due deliberations and discussions with student representatives, can take decisions in this regard.

This is not how a premier university of the country is supposed to function, they say.

The students' union has stressed that struggle will continue till their main demands are addressed. It wants a meeting on hostel rules reconvened in the presence of student representatives and all "regressive parts" pertaining to clothing/timings/etc revoked.

One can take JNU out of politics, but one cannot take politics out of JNU.

The ABVP, the RSS-backed students' union, which was on the same page with the Left unions, has now struck a different cord on the mode of protest.

In JNU, politics just happens, or happens to be there to pick up.

—[IFS]
