Why BHU students should be thankful to Firoze Khan for learning Sanskrit | Opinion

The BHU administration has come out in support of Firoze Khan saying he was appointed in accordance with law. (Photo: Facebook/FirozeKhan)

The last time Sanskrit was in the news was in May this year when a handful of newly elected Lok Sabha MPs took oath in the ancient language that is dying. Apart from this, there hadn't been anything significant of late to make Sanskrit a talking point, until last week. Sanskrit has since hogged national headlines. The reason though isn't anything to pride about.

A group of students at the prestigious Banaras Hindu University (BHU) in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, has been protesting against the appointment of Firoze Khan as an assistant professor at BHU's Sanskrit Vidya Dharam Vigyan (SVDV). They argue that Firoze Khan can't teach them Sanskrit and Hindu religion because he is a Muslim and that his appointment goes against the ethos of BHU's founder Madan Mohan Malviya.

Firoze Khan, who holds a doctorate in Sanskrit, was appointed at SVDV on November 6. Since then, the protesting students have boycotted classes and staged dharna outside the vice-chancellor's office. They demand cancellation of Khan's appointment claiming that "a Muslim can't teach them their dharma".

The students say only a Hindu can be qualified enough to teach them the Hindu religion and its various facets, including the shastras (scriptures).

In an interview with India Today TV, they said, "Anyone can have a right over teaching a language but everyone can’t have a right to teach religion. At SVDV we are taught the Hindu religion alongwith how to carry out various Vedic rituals. This can’t be taught to us by a non-Hindu. We aren’t against Khan teaching Sanskrit language but against his appointment at SVDV. Only one who follows Hindu rituals can teach us."

This stand is however contrary to the BHU Act and Article 15 of the Indian Consitution, both of which unequivocably say no citizen shall be discriminated on grounds of race, caste, sex, and religion.

Section 4 of the BHU Act goes on to say that such discrimination based on religious grounds shall be unlawful.

Students stage a protest at the Banaras Hindu University against Firoze Khan's appointment at the university. (Photo: PTI)

Meanwhile, the BHU administration has come out in Khan's support and said his selection was made in accordance with the BHU Act and the norms set by the University Grants Commission, the governing body for higher education in India. "He was the best among all candidates," BHU spokesperson Rajesh Singh was quoted as saying by the Times of India.

However, the protest continues.

Asked why do they object to Khan’s appointment when the selection committee says he was appointed in accordance with law, the protesters told India Today TV that the committee "deliberately ignored the significance of practicing Hindu rituals" while appointing Khan as a teacher at SVDV. They also cast aspersions on the credibility of the committee’s evaluation of candidates.

BHU shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class, and it shall not be lawful for BHU to adopt or impose on any person any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be admitted as a teacher or student. - Section 4 of BHU Act

The website of BHU's Sanskrit Vidya Dharam Vigyan (SVDV) says its "main objective has been the preservation and development of the ancient and traditional treasure of knowledge". Besides, while the protesting students say the SVDV exclusively teaches Hindu religion and Vedic rituals, its website says the faculty also teaches the philosophy of Buddha and Jainism.

On the other hand, speaking to reporters, Khan said he has been learning Sanskrit since he was in Class 2. His father and grandfather, too, had learnt Sanskrit and used to sing bhajans (devotional hymns) in Rajasthan, and this is the first time he is facing opposition because of his religion.

The protest against Firoze Khan's appointment comes at a time when India is faced with an acute shortage of qualified Sanskrit teachers. In Uttar Pradesh, where BHU is located, at least 65 per cent posts of Sanskrit teachers in various universities are lying vacant.

DEARTH OF SANSKRIT TEACHERS IN INDIA

While the protest in BHU continues for purely non-academic and religious reasons, it is apt to have a look at the state of Sanskrit education in India.

Documents presented by the central government in Parliament in June this year show that 46 per cent posts of Sanskrit faculties in different universities in India are vacant.

The government had informed Parliament that there are about 120 universities in India that offer Sanskrit as a subject or language. The combined sanctioned teaching posts in these was 1,748, of which only 949 (54 per cent) were filled up.

In Uttar Pradesh, universities offering Sanskrit as a subject collectively have 172 sanctioned teaching posts. Only 59 of them are filled up.

While informing Parliament about the vacant posts in June this year, the central government had said due to the shortage of regular Sanskrit teachers, the teacher-student ratio in Sanskrit classes has risen to 1:52 (one teacher for 52 students) .

Now, compare this ratio with the sanctioned teacher-student ratio i.e. 1:28.

NOT JUST IN COLLEGES

Shortage of Sanskrit teachers is not limited to colleges and universities.

In March 2018, the central government, in a written reply in the Lok Sabha, presented data on vacant teaching posts for various subjects in Kendriya Vidyalas (schools run and financed by the Centre). In these schools, Sanskrit is taught as a third language to students of Classes 6-8.

Analysis of the government data shows that 28 per cent posts of Sanskrit teachers in Kendriya Vidyalas were lying vacant in 2018.

In terms of percentage, this was much higher than the overall percentage of vacant teaching positions (16 per cent) in these schools.

WHO SPEAKS SANSKRIT IN INDIA?

Even though today Sanskrit has a negligible presence in India, the Constitution recognises it as one of the 22 scheduled languages. According to Census 2011, whose linguistic data were released in 2018, only 24,821 people in India identify Sanskrit as their mother tongue.

This was an increase of 75 per cent in comparison to Census 2001 when just 14,135 people said Sanskrit was their mother tongue. But 10 years prior to this-in Census 1991-a total of 49,736 Indians had identified Sanskrit as their mother tongue.

A state-wise breakup of the Census 2011 figure shows that Maharashtra has the highest number of Sanskrit speakers (3,802), followed by Bihar (3,388) and Uttar Pradesh (3,062).

In Varanasi, the district which is home to BHU and the city which has been an ancient centre of Sanskrit and Vedic studies, besides being one of the holiest cities for Hindus, only 55 people identified Sanskrit as their mother tongue.

BUT SANSKRIT BLOOMS IN DISTANT GERMANY

While students in BHU agitate against appointment of a qualified Muslim assistant professor as their Sanskrit teacher and refuse to be taught by him, in far-away Germany the craze for learning Sanskrit is such that universities have been forced to start summer schools in other countries, including India.

(Yes, German universities started summer schools for Sanskrit in India while India faces an acute shortage of qualified Sanskrit teachers.)

In 2015, the Mail Today, a sister publication of India Today, reported that the University of Heidelberg started a summer school in spoken Sanskrit in Switzerland, Italy and India as it was unable to cope with the flood of applications from around the world. More than 250 students from 34 countries had participated in these courses and the rush was such that the university had to "reject many applications".

Compare it with India where Sanskrit classes hardly draw students.

"When we started it 15 years ago, we were almost ready to shut it after a couple of years. Instead, we had to increase strength and take the course to other European countries," Professor Axel Michaels, head of classical Indology at the university had told Mail Today.

Professor Michaels said linking Sanskrit with religion and a certain political ideology was "stupid" and "detrimental to the cause" of its rich heritage. He said instead of indulging in a political and religious debate, Indians should try to preserve their heritage.

Back in 2015, 14 of the top German universities were teaching Sanskrit, classical and modern Indology and some of them have been teaching Sanskrit for the past 200 years. (The protesting BHU students can read more on this here and reflect where they stand in regards to preserving an ancient language.)

WHAT THEY FAIL TO SEE

Coming back to BHU, the Department of Sanskrit was established in 1919 and in these past 100 years hundreds, if not thousands, of students must have graduated from the department and served the language in some capacity or the other.

In its vision statement, the Sanskrit department says it aims to preserve and enrich oriental learning, culture, philosophy and thought by virtue of deep studies and research of the Vedic and classical Sanskrit literature.

The department's website says its mission is to "encourage usage of Sanskrit language and researches on various fields of its literature and to welcome the comparative studies on the scientific thoughts prevailing different Sanskrit texts".

Thus, viewed in context of the dearth of qualified Sanskrit teachers in India, craze for the language elsewhere, the miniscule number of Sanskrit speakers (even in Varanasi), BHU's Sanskrit department's mission and vision statements, one wonders if the protesting students even care enough about the language that is today struggling to even barely survive.

Instead of celebrating the fact that in an age when less than 0.0019 per cent Indians identify Sanskrit as their mother tongue, they at least have a qualified person to teach them Sanskrit.

Far from their narrow sectarian protest that is based on religion, these students should rather be thanking Firoze Khan for learning Sanskrit and deciding to teach it when he could have pursued any other subject with secured job prospects. It's because of his sheer love for the language that Firoze Khan became a Sanskrit scholar and earned a doctorate.

But will those who see a language/subject only from the narrow prism of religion and sectarianism ever see this love?

Too much to ask?

(Note: The two paragraphs on the protesting students' interview with India Today TV on their protest were added to this article after it was published.)
