Congress calls electoral bonds a scam, stages walkout in Parliament

Congress on Thursday staged a walkout from parliament as their demand for a discussion on electoral bonds was not entertained. (Photo: PTI)

Congress on Thursday staged a walkout in the Parliament as their demand for a detailed discussion on electoral bonds was not entertained.

Congress called the electoral bonds scheme, introduced by the government, a scam on Wednesday.

On Thursday, Congress had given adjournment notices in both Houses of the Parliament over "lack of transparency in the entire scheme of electoral bonds".

Sources who attended Congress's parliamentary strategy meeting said, "We will not let the issue of electoral bonds die down. We will make the government answerable. Reaching out to opposition parties to build a floor strategy against the government, we want a detailed discussion on it."

"If the government doesn't allow discussion on the issue of electoral bonds, Congress will stage a walkout. Congress will also hold a protest at Gandhi statue," sources told news agency ANI.

Congress MP Shashi Tharoor said it is a matter of great seriousness and asked Prime Minister Narendra Modi to explain the reason behind the introduction of electoral bonds ahead of assembly elections in May 2018.

"When the electoral bonds were introduced many people raised questions against it. I said on social media, the prime minister owes an explanation to the nation. Let them explain as to why, these bonds were issued for the state assembly election," Tharoor said.

Senior Congress leader Kapil Sibal also questioned the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) over the issue of electoral bonds in Rajya Sabha. A huge uproar was witnessed as Congress demanded an explanation on the introduction of electoral bonds.

Sibal also demanded PM Modi to explain the motive behind the move and called it a scam as the government allowed the sale of electoral bonds despite Reserve Bank of India and Election Commission's reservations on the matter.

Congress has been actively demanding answers from the government and had even accused the government of destroying transparency in the funding of political parties.

After the ruckus of electoral bonds in Rajya Sabha, BJP spokesperson GVL Narasimha Rao accused Congress and Rahul Gandhi of being corrupt.

The issue of electoral bonds came under the spotlight after a report indicated earlier this week that RBI had repeatedly warned the government that the electoral bond scheme would lead to money laundering.

However, the government ignored the warnings and went ahead with the scheme. With the introduction of electoral bonds scheme, any Indian citizen, corporate or other entity such as trusts or NGOs were allowed to buy bonds from SBI branches and donate them to political parties.
