BHU standoff: University says won’t revoke Muslim professor’s appointment, hopeful of resolving crisis today

Students at BHU hold protest | Photo Credit: PTI

Varanasi: Amid the ongoing standoff at the Banaras Hindu University (BHU) here over the appointment of a Muslim professor in the Sanskrit Vidya Dharma Vigyan, the chief proctor of the varsity emphatically stated that they would not revoke the decision.

Commenting on Professor Firoze Khan, Chief Proctor OP Rai said the university authorities are in touch with the students who have been demonstrating against the appointment. Rai said the authorities are confident that the students will fall in line today itself.

Meanwhile, BHU Chancellor Justice Giridhar Malviya said there was nothing wrong in the appointment of Professor Firoze Khan in the Sanskrit department. He called the protests by the students as wrong.

“The stand taken by the students is wrong. Mahamana (BHU founder, Madan Mohan Malaviya) had a broad thinking. Had he been alive, he would have certainly backed the appointment,” Justice Malviya said.

Today is the 15th day of protest by the BHU students against Professor Khan’s appointment. So far, the students have refused to budge from their demand.

The BHU administration had earlier, in a statement, said: "The idea behind the establishment of the university was to contribute in nation-building by providing equal opportunity of study and teaching to all deserving people without any discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, gender and sect."

In the statement, the university said Khan was appointed in the department in a unanimous decision taken by a selection committee, which followed a transparent process.

The protests have hurt the Muslim professor, who has said that he feels 'insulted' by the development. Professor Khan said had the university clarified in the advertisement that they did not was a Muslim, he would have even applied for the job in the first place.

Meanwhile, students protesting against the move and sitting on a dharna yesterday started reciting Hanuman Chalisa.

Student leader Chakrapani Ojha was quoted as saying: "The appointment of a Muslim faculty member has hurt the sentiments of Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya who established the BHU. This appointment has been made as part of a conspiracy. The entire process, including the interview, was rigged in favour of Firoze Khan. The stone inscription installed in BHU clearly states that no non-Hindu can either study or teach in our department. Then why was a Muslim professor appointed in the faculty?"

A varsity spokesman denied that any such stone inscription exists on the campus that suggests non-Hindus cannot study or teach at BHU.
