A guru has no religion - BHU protests over appointment of Dr.Firoze Khan built on shaky ground

Students at BHU have held peaceful protests against the appointment of Dr.Firoze Khan | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Scholars at both, graduate and doctorate levels, have been vociferous in their protests against the appointment of a Muslim into the university’s Sanskrit literature department The 29-year-old professor is also the only Muslim to have received the state of Rajasthan’s ‘Sanskrit Yuva Pratibha Samman’ award As the protests rumble on, it has now emerged that Dr Khan’s father, Ramzan Khan a ‘gau sevak’, is himself a holder of a Shastri degree

For almost two weeks now, Dr Firoze Khan, a recently appointed assistant professor at Banaras Hindu University has faced a wave of attacks from sections of the student body who have claimed his appointment to be a repudiation of the university’s core tenets. Scholars at both, graduate and doctorate levels, have been vociferous in their protests against the appointment of a Muslim into the university’s Sanskrit literature department. Some have even levelled allegations of a faculty-led conspiracy without providing any supporting evidence.

Given that these are research scholars at one of the country’s finest public universities, the protesting students seem to have displayed a distressing degree of ineptitude in their tradecraft. The protests themselves are in clear violation of Article 14 and Article 16 of the Indian Constitution that discuss a citizen’s ‘equality before the law’ and prohibit any discrimination on the basis of religion with regard to opportunities to employment at public institutions.

As far as allegations of corruption within the faculty go, Dr Firoze Khan’s curriculum vitae speaks for itself. Not only has Dr Khan devoted his entire life to the study of Sanskrit having secured a doctorate, but the 29-year-old professor is also the only Muslim to have received the state of Rajasthan’s ‘Sanskrit Yuva Pratibha Samman’ award. The award was bestowed upon him by the Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot, earlier this year. It has also been reported that BHU interviewed a minimum of ten candidates before selecting Dr Khan.





It should come as no surprise then that the BHU administration dismissed any claims of bias in its recruitment when it stated, “The idea behind the establishment of this university was to contribute in nation-building by providing equal opportunity of study and teaching to all deserving people without any discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, gender and sect.”

One of the students leading the protest was also quoted as saying, “The appointment of a Muslim faculty member has hurt the sentiments of Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya who established the BHU.” However, only a brief glance into the past of the university’s Urdu department is necessary to completely invalidate the student’s claim. It was, in fact, Pandit Malviya, who invited Maulvi Mahesh Prasad, a Hindu professor heading the Urdu department at Lahore University, to join BHU as its Urdu HOD in the mid-1920s. What’s more, the university appointed another Hindu professor - Dr Hukum Chand Nayyar - as its Urdu HOD in 1974. As such, the history of the university’s Urdu department should serve as an example to the student body of the principles of inclusion and diversity that BHU aims to uphold.

As the protests rumble on, it has now emerged that Dr Khan’s father, Ramzan Khan a ‘gau-sevak’, is himself a holder of a Shastri degree, and has been singing bhajans at temples for several years facing no discrimination in his village of Bagru. Expressing his lament over the controversy, Ramzan Khan said, “The protest by students is unfortunate and I would like to urge the agitating students to recognise my son and see what kind of background he has.”

The story of Ramzan Khan is ultimately a positive one, showcasing the sense of solidarity to be found in embracing India’s multi-religious culture. The protests, that lie in stark contrast to the environment at Bagru, appear to be the real betrayal of Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya’s vision.



The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
