Five held in bag snatching case

RAJKOT: Three persons have been arrested by police from a state transport bus in a case related to snatching of Rs 7 lakh from a courier firm's employee. In a major turn of events the complainant turned out to be the mastermind of the robbery.Rajkot police received a massage on Wednesday noon that two persons on a two-wheeler snatched a bag full of cash from an employee of a courier firm.The courier company used to transfer cash of jewelers and other traders from one city to another. The payment in traditional business take place through this courier firm. Vikramsinh Kedarsinh a native of Bihar and resident of Rajkot informed the police about the robbery. Assistant commissioner of police (crime branch) Jaydeepsinh Sarvaiya said “As we came to know about the robbery we blocked all the major roads leading out of city and also informed the police of neighboring districts. We have checked the whole route from where the complainant came with bag and where he was going and acquired the CCTV footage of the whole incident."The number of the two-wheeler was difficult to read but with the help of technical staff, police identified the owner of the vehicle on which the robbers came to loot the cash. The police came to know from the interrogation of some of the suspects and informers that three accused got into a state transport bus towards Ahmedabad from Greenlane crossing on the outskirts of the city.“We first located the moving bus with the help of manager of GSRTC and sent a team on the route. We intercepted the bus near Dolia bypass,” Sarvaiya added.The police got hold of main accused Jignesh Vegda and recovered the cash from him and arrested all the three persons traveling in the bus including Jignesh Vegda, Amarsinh Tambolia and Chetan Chavda. The police came to know from the accused that the complainant Vikramsinh Kedarsinh had conspired the whole robbery. Vikram was in need of money and he approched Ranjan Pade. Pande asked help of Chetan Chavda who roped in Jignesh Vegda and Amarsinh Tambolia into the loot. The police arrested all the five accused.
