Respect Muslim prof, but non-Hindu can’t teach us our rituals, dharma, say BHU students amid appointment row

Students protest against the appointment of a Muslim professor in the Sanskrit Vidya Dharma Vigyan in the Banaras Hindu University (BHU) on Thursday. (India Today Photo)

The students’ protest against the appointment of Firoze Khan in the Sanskrit Vidya Dharma Vigyan in the Banaras Hindu University (BHU) has been going on for over two weeks now.

But with the students refusing to give up on their demand, there seems to be no end to the deadlock. Despite multiple meetings with the BHU V-C, students continue to oppose the appointment of the professor -- on grounds of his religious identity.

With the BHU maintaining that they won't reverse the appointment, varsity students say they are not opposing the Muslim professor teaching Sanskrit. The protesting students say they are against a Muslim professor imparting education on "Hindu rituals as part of the course" -- which they claim can only be taught by a practising Hindu.

"BHU has two distinct faculties -- Sanskrit department and Sanskrit Vidya Dharma Vedvigyan Sankay (SVDVS) which deals with ancient shastras and literature. Firoze Khan has been appointed in SVDVS. At SVDVS, we go beyond theory. Here, practical knowledge is required for future scholars and priests as per Hindu traditions. Only professors who practice Hindu tradition can educate us about certain rituals...not possible by a non-Hindu. He will have to participate in Hindu ceremonies. How can he join us in such rituals?" asked Chakrapani Ojha, a BHU student.

Another student Shubham Tiwari adds that the controversy is not about teaching Sanskrit. "This is about our faith and culture, which must be respected as per ideas laid down by BHU founder [Madan Mohan Malviya]. We respect Professor Khan as an individual and this is not about his faith," Tiwari tells India Today.

The protesting student urges the BHU administration to transfer Firoze Khan to a different department saying he did not want him to lose his job.

"This is the failure of the select committee and that is why they are not responding on record," adds Shubham Tiwari.

PROTESTS CONTINUE, UNIVERSITY SAYS FOLLOWED RULES

Students on Thursday sang bhajans, raised slogans against the university as they camped outside the V-C office.

To end the deadlock, a second meeting was organised between the student delegation and officials on Thursday noon. The meet lasted for around an hour in which the students demanded clarification on the select committee procedure as they submitted a list of demands. University officials, including head of department, dean, and others assured students a response in 10 days as they asked them to return to classes.

BHU Chief Proctor OP Rai said, "University has followed rules and regulations. Students have the right to present their views but there will be no return (on appointment decision)."

WON'T LET SOME RUIN THE CULTURE OF VARANASI: FIROZE GETS SUPPORT

Meanwhile, a section of students gathered to support Firoze Khan, who reportedly has left for Rajasthan after the controversy erupted.

"Our university is run on the basis of the Constitution and not religious views. How can an individual, selected on merit, be discriminated on grounds of religion? We support the professor whose appointment has been followed by procedure," says Vivek, student of political science at the BHU.

Raj Abhishek, a student at Peace Research and Conflict Resolution, says they will protest if the Muslim professor is removed.

"This will set a negative precedent. This is the land of poets, writers, musicians like Tulsidas and Bismillah Khan. We will not let the culture of Varanasi be ruined," adds Raj Abhishek.

Also read | I don't know Quran as much as I know Sanskrit literature: BHU's Firoze Khan
