Protests in Assam against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill; AASU to meet political leaders in New Delhi

Different organisations including Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti protest in Guwahati against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) demanding its withdrawal. | Photo Credit: ANI

Assam: Different organisations held a protest in Guwahati against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) demanding its withdrawal. All Assam Students' Union (AASU), which is also opposing CAB said that it will be meeting various political parties in New Delhi to gather support against the 'communal' bill.

Massive protests were held in northeastern states over the past week and effigies of PM Modi were burnt by protestors in Assam. "Assam and the northeast are not dumping grounds for illegal Bangladeshis. As per the Assam Accord, we have already accepted all Bangladeshis - both Hindu and Muslims who entered Assam illegally up to 1971. We will not accept those who entered Assam after that year," Samujjal Bhattacharyya, AASU chief advisor had said earlier.

On Thursday, TMC MP Derek O'Brien had written a letter to Rajya Sabha chairman Venkaiah Naidu saying that 30 members from five opposition parties had given a dissent note on the bill.

“May I urge you to please refer to the report submitted by the Joint Parliamentary Select Committee, to ascertain the correct positions of different political parties. The All India Trinamool Congress (AITC) position on the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) is emphatically outlined in the Parliamentary report,” he had said in the letter.

The bill aims at amending the Citizenship Act 1955 to grant Indian nationality to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians who came to India due to religious discrimination from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan. Organisations in NE have been claiming that the 'communal' bill violates the Assam Accord of 1985 according to which any individual who came to India post-March 24, 1971, would be deported.

The bill could not be passed in the previous tenure of the government due to protests. It has, however, remained a poll promise of the BJP and is likely to be tabled during the ongoing winter session of the Parliament.
