BHU stir against Muslim professor Firoze Khan: Bigotry that goes against Mahamna’s ideals

Banaras Hindu University | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights BHU students’ protest against the appointment of a Muslim to teach Sanskrit reveals acute parochialism Their demand is unconstitutional, unethical and against the creative impulses of humankind Medieval history is replete with examples of Muslim scholars doing tremendous work in Sanskrit

When the distinguished Madan Mohan Malaviya was collecting funds from all strata of society to build a world-class university in Varanasi, he received a letter from Shivdaspur, the famous red light area of the city. Prostitutes demanded to know why Mahamna had excepted them from the privilege of contributing funds for such a noble cause. Agreed that they lived in the dark shadows of society, was there no hope for them to ever volunteer for a moral deed that would benefit society and spread enlightenment. Were they such pariahs; why were they being discriminated against?

Immediately acknowledging their argument to be valid, Mahamna graciously asked them for donations. Sex workers came out in large numbers and donated their jewellery, which Pandit Malaviya gratefully accepted, for the construction of the university. Great men don’t have narrow minds; they have large hearts and a broad vision that is all-encompassing.



Madan Mohan Malviya | Pic Credit: Twitter/@ashokgehlot51

One is thus struck by the pettifoggery of students who are protesting the appointment of a Muslim, Firoze Khan, as the Assistant Professor in Sanskrit Vidya Dharma Vigyan by the University. Their argument is that only a Hindu should be selected for the post. The moot point is about how any language is the preserve of only one religion, so much so that it disallows others to read, study or teach it? Not only is their argument unconstitutional, but it is also unethical and against creative impulses of humankind.

Learning and teaching are the loftiest ideals of human life; to forcibly exclude someone from this advantage is an act of depravity.

Dr Firoze Khan apparently has impeccable credentials for the job and all the qualification that is academically required to select him for the post. He had even won the Rajasthan government’s Sanskrit Yuva Prathiba Samman and was picked for the post from among 10 candidates who had applied.

Firoze Khan hails from a family with deep roots of Hindu influence. His father Ramzan Khan, who holds the Shastri qualification in Sanskrit, is immersed in Krishna bhakti, sings devotional songs and does Gau Seva in the Shree Ramdev Gaushala Chetanya Dham in Bagru, his hometown in Rajasthan.

Claiming that Sanskrit runs in their veins, Ramzan Khan revealed that his father too used to sing bhajans in temples and jagrans and composed many pieces in the praise of Hindu deities.



Mahamna's statue at the entrance to BHU | Pic Credit: BCCL

The resistance to Firoze Khan’s appointment thus feels all the more intolerable and unjust. It undercuts the ‘Ganga-Jamuna tehzeeb’ of the country and particularly of Varanasi where the music doyen Ustad Bismillah Khan played in adoration of his beloved Ganges. It won’t be surprising then if these very students who are opposing the University’s move enjoy the most soul-stirring bhajans sung by Mohammad Rafi in their spare time.

It begs for attention that many Muslim rulers throughout history have patronised the Sanskrit language and funded many opuses. Notably, Aurangzeb’s brother Dara Shikoh translated Upanishads into Persian, Abd-al-Qadir Badauni translated the Ramayana and Mahabharata and the famous Al Beruni learnt Sanskrit in the 11th century and wrote the Kitan-ul-Hind. All these scholars helped take the bounties of the Sanskrit language to Persia and the Middle East. The book Zij-al-Sindhind is also the Arabic translation of Sanskrit texts and many related to health and Ayurveda such as ‘Sushruta Samhita’.

Meanwhile, BHU Chancellor Justice Giridhar Malaviya has defended the appointment of Professor Firoze Khan and said that the late Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya would have backed the university’s move had he been alive. It needs reminding how Madan Mohan Malaviya had himself selected Maulvi Mahesh Prasad to take the Urdu-Arabic-Persian department of BHU to greater heights and no one had protested.

These uncalled for demonstrations by the BHU students have scathed the reputation of the country and the sentiments of millions of minorities who love Sanskrit and Hindu culture as their own.

A hurt Ramzan Khan admitted that he felt “insulted” by the opposition to his son’s placement and it was for the first time in his life that he was made to feel like a “Muslim”. If even one truly secular citizen with love for his motherland and its ethos feels this way, the damage is irredeemable.
