6 missed calls and a loss of Rs 1.86 crore; businessman conned in Mumbai

The police officials have lodged a case against unidentified persons under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Mumbai: In a recent case recorded from the commercial capital, due to a SIM card swap a textile merchant lost at least Rs 1.86 crore. Reportedly, the amount was illegally transferred from his account by unidentified persons to various bank accounts across the country.

According to news agency PTI, the incident came to light when the victim approached the BKC Cyber Police Station with a complaint on Friday. The victim hailed from Mahim in Central Mumbai.

The PTI report claimed that the official police complaint stated that the intervening night of Thursday-Friday, the textile merchant's cellphone stopped functioning after some missed calls. Meanwhile, the next morning he found that his bank account was almost looted during the night hours. Although his bank was by rules linked to his mobile phone.

The merchant lost almost Rs 1.86 crore in the process. The amount was fraudulently transferred from his account through RTGS/NEFT (electronic fund transfer systems) by unidentified persons to 24 accounts of various banks in Delhi, West Bengal, Jharkhand and some northern states.

Also Read: Uttar Pradesh: Elderly priest found hanging from pole near temple, police investigation underway

Immediately, the businessman rushed to his bank and tried to stop the money transfers. The bank somehow managed to bring back Rs 20 lakh and was also able to freeze some more amounts.

The police officials have lodged a case against unidentified persons under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code. These are related to cheating, impersonation acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention and also relevant provisions of the Information Technology Act.

The police suspect the accused persons got access to the businessman's unique SIM number and initiated a SIM swap and then moved his money to other bank accounts through multiple transactions.
