BHU protest latest news: Students end dharna, but with riders; Sanskrit department reopens

File picture | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The BHU students had been protesting against Firoze Khan's appointment, saying only a Hindu can teach Sanskrit at the BHU The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh expressed disagreement with the agitating students Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Dinesh Sharma supported Firoze Khan's appointment

Varanasi: The Banaras Hindu University (BHU) students, protesting against the appointment of a Muslim professor in the Sanskrit department, on Friday ended their dharna but with a warning.

The agitating students have decided to wait for 10 days for the BHU administration to file a written reply against the issues raised by them.

"We have given 10-day time to the BHU administration to accept our demands, which include shifting Professor Firoze Khan to another faculty. If our demands are not fulfilled, we will revive our agitation on a larger scale," said Shubham Tiwari, one of the protestors.

Notably, the Sanskrit department of the BHU had reopened yesterday despite the protests. "The Faculty of Sanskrit Vidya Dharma Vigyan, Banaras Hindu University, has reopened," the BHU tweeted on Thursday.

The students had yesterday handed over a memorandum containing a few questions to the BHU administration. They further decided to end their dharna after chief proctor OP Rai and the head of the department gave them a 10-day time to respond to the questions.

The students had been protesting against Firoze Khan's appointment, saying only a Hindu can teach Sanskrit at the university. Despite the Varanasi university’s support, Khan has not been able to take classes.

The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) too expressed disagreement with the agitating students.

Earlier today, even Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Dinesh Sharma supported Khan's appointment.

"Teachers do not have any religion. Students can always raise questions about the appointment process, whether merit has been compromised in the selection process of the teacher. But students cannot raise questions about the religion of teachers," Sharma said.

Recalling his own student days, Sharma said that he was taught Sanskrit by one Waliullah Khan at the Government Jubilee Inter College, Lucknow.

"Recently, I felicitated Waliullah Khan Sir at a function held in my school. It was such an emotional moment for me to honour own teacher who shaped my life," he said.

The BHU administration has reiterated a number of times that Firoze Khan's appointment was as per the rules set by University Grants Commission (UGC) and there was no question of removing him.

A section of students has been protesting against Khan's appointment as an assistant professor in the SVDV faculty since November 7.
