Political vendetta behind CBI raids: Manipur Congress

Guwahati, Nov 22 : The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) conducted simultaneous raids at the official and private residences of former Manipur Chief Minister Okram Ibobi Singh in Imphal and Thoubal since Friday morning even as the opposition Congress in the northeastern state indicated political vendetta behind the move.

The raids were regarding alleged misappropriation of government funds to the tune of Rs 332 crore of the Manipur Development Society, meant for development work in the state, sources said.

The CBI sleuths remained tight lipped over the issue and refused to comment.

Sources, however, said that the raids continued for five hours at multiple locations including the residences of the former Manipur Chief Minister.

"The raids at Ibobi's house started at the former Chief Minister's official residence at Babupara and private residence at Thoubal Athokpam Makha Leikai at around 7.30 a.m.," sources said.

The raids took place on Friday when the former Chief Minister was in Delhi to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill and the Naga Accord at Jantar Mantar.

"The raids are clear reflection to threaten and silence the Opposition. The timing of the raids also makes it clear that they are driven by political vendetta," said spokesman of the Manipur Congress Ningombam Bupenda Meitei.

A few days back, while addressing a press conference in Guwahati, senior Congress leader Jairam Ramesh said that the BJP is using a trident of CBI, ED and Income Tax (IT) directorate to get a majority in the Rajya Sabha.

The CBI has registered a case against Okram Ibobi Singh, who was the then Chairman of the Manipur Development Society, Y. Ningthem Singh, former Project Director of MDS, D.S. Poonia, IAS (Retd.), the then Chairman of MDS, P.C. Lawmuknga, IAS (Retd.), the then Chairman of MDS, O. Nabakishore Singh, IAS (Retd.), who was the then Chairman, S. Ranjit Singh, Administrative Officer, MDS and others on the request of the Manipur Government and further notification from the Centre.
