Assam farmers' body, ULFA protest against Citizenship Amendment Bill

Bill is unconstitutional and communal and that is why people are opposing it: KMSS leader Akhil Gogoi | Photo courtesy: Hemanta Kumar Nath

People are carrying out massive protests in Assam and other parts of North East against the proposed Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

On Friday Assam's farmers organisation Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS), pro-talk leaders of United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) and many other organisation staged protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in Guwahaiti, Assam.

Thousands of KMSS -- an influential farmers organisation in Assam -- staged massive protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill and marched to Raj Bhawan in Guwahati.

The KMSS protest was led by its advisor Akhil Gogoi. With him, his supporters shouted slogans against Modi government with a demand to withdraw the bill.

"The bill is unconstitutional and communal and that is why people are opposing it," Akhil Gogoi said.

Akhil Gogoi said that if the bill is passed then about 1.90 crore Hindu Bangladeshis will come to Assam leading to a demographic disturbance in the state.

Protesters holding cards with "Assam opposes Citizen (Amendment0 Bill" written on them | Photo courtesy: Hemanta Kumar Nath

"If this bill is passed then the North East India will be finished. I think that all the democratic people of India, who believe in the Constitution and democracy, they should be opposed this bill," Akhil Gogoi said.

Pro-talk ULFA leader Anup Chetia said that if the bill is passed then the indigenous identity, culture and languages will be finished in the North Eastern region.

"We are strongly opposing the Citizenship [Amendment] Bill. If this bill is passed then the indigenous identity, culture and languages will be finished not only in Assam but all over the North Eastern region. All the indigenous people of North East are now united," Anup Chetia said.

The pro-talk ULFA leader requested the Centre to exclude the North Eastern region from the purview of the bill.
