Farmers’ outfit miffed with governor’s inaction on Mahadayi tribunal order

HUBBALLI: Disappointed with being kept in the dark about the action initiated to resolve the Mahadayi dispute in the aftermath of an appeal submitted to the governor ’s chief secretary on October 17, members of Rait Sena Karnataka on Friday warned of filing a writ petition against the former. The outfit’s president Veeresh Sobaradmath also took exception with the governor’s lackadiscial approach towards solving the longstanding dispute.“Governor Vaju Vala has enough time to spare to drop in at Gujarat Bhavan once every two or three days, but not enough to listen to the pleas of farmers. We have collected concrete information about the governor’s regular visits to the Gujarat Bhavan in West Bengaluru. Traffic movement in this part of the capital is severely affected whenever he visits the bhavan. We are not opposed to the governor meeting his people, but he must lend an ear to the grievances of the farmers. He did not even receive a memorandum after the farmers staged a protest in the state capital,” Sobaradmath said.Questioning the need for constituting a committee to resolve niggling issues in implementing the order of the disputes’ tribunal, Sobaradmath asked, “What is the need for constituting a committee when the tribunal has passed its order? The focus must be on implementing the order of the tribunal. Forming another committee translates to wasting more time. The central government, and those we have elected to the Lok Sabha are politicising this issue.”The farmer leader challenged the four MPs of North Karnataka – PC Gaddigoudar, Shivakumar Udasi and Union ministers Suresh Angadi and Prahlad Joshi – to issue a notification endorsing the implementation of the tribunal’s order within a fortnight.“MPs from Karnataka are afraid of their counterparts from Goa, which elects only two members to the Lok Sabha. Our leaders provoked the Goa government into raising an objection over the order,” Sobaradmath alleged.Fakeerappa Jogannavar, Guru Rayangoudar, Vardangouda Patil, Mallikarjun Alekar, Shivangouda were among those who were present alongside Sobaradmath at the media interaction.
