Naidu draws line for errant MPs

editorial@tribune.com

Ravi S Singh

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, November 22

A visibly moved Rajya Sabha Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu on Friday drew the threshold line for members regarding indiscipline and misconduct which disrupt House proceedings. He also cautioned that he might penalise those members guilty of breaching the condtuct.

He emphasised that neither he nor the House would be pressured by tendentious conduct and comments of members. In fact, Naidu had made similar comments yesterday, and also said he was make a note of members indulging in misdemeanour, and had stressed he would be guided by rules.

Immediately after the conclusion of the Zero Hour today, Naidu rose on his feet to observe that some members indulge in protests and continue with their comments against the Chair’s decision while the proceedings are on.

“I will name him,” Naidu said, adding that, “I am saying this out of agony” and “conviction”, keeping the dignity and public image of the House.

“If you go on making running commentary, it is not fair,” Naidu said referring to members displaying placards and symbols on the floor.

He objected to a member displaying newspaper advertisements, a water purifier and a breathing mask during a discussion on “air pollution and climatic change” in the House yesterday.

He cautioned he would “name” the member breaching norms of behaviour in future. Also, he said that from coming Monday, questions of guilty member, which are listed be raised during Question Hour of the Member, will not automatically carried forward to another day. It will be done with only with special permission of the Chair.

Today during the Zero Hour, AAP’s Delhi MP Sanjay Singh persisted with his verbal jousts with Vijay Goel when he raised the air pollution in Delhi. The BJP leader objected to AAP government in Delhi for apportioning blame of air pollution to stubble burning in Haryana, Punjab and West Bengal.

The AAP MP continued with his counter comments in spite of being dissuaded by Naidu. Digvijay Singh of the Congress also protested against the Chair for on not being allowed to make his point on an issue during the Zero Hour. Naidu reacted against members questioning the Chair of “fairness” in its decision. Naidu noted that some members write letters to him, but he comes to know of them through newspapers. He attributed such acts aimed to influence the Chair.
