Protests, torch rallies across upper Assam against CAB

DIBRUGARH: With the Centre all set to try to pass the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the ongoing winter session of Parliament, there were multiple protests across the upper Assam districts in the last 24 hours.Members of the All Assam Muttuck Yuva Chatra Sanmilan took out a protest rally against the bill in Tinsukia town on Friday. The protesters rallied in front of the Tinsukia deputy commissioner's office and raised slogans against the bill. Similarly, the All Assam Muttuck Students' Union staged a three-hour sit-in demonstration at Tinsukia town in protest against the proposed legislation.The All Assam Moran Students' Union (Aasu), in a press meet held at Tinsukia on Friday, warned the Centre not to impose the bill on the people of Assam, arguing that the proposed legislation will have a disastrous effect on the indigenous people.On the other hand, activists of the Asom Jatiyatabadi Yuva Chatra Parishad (AJYCP) took out torch rallies at Jagun, Digboi, Tinsukia and Duliajan towns on Friday. Similarly, members of the All Assam Students' Union (Aasu) also took out torch rallies in Dibrugarh , Tinsukia and Sivasagar on Thursday evening. The students' body also threatened to intensify its agitation against the bill in the coming days."This is a time of great crisis for the people of Assam. People must unite against the bill, which is a big threat to the culture, language and identity of the Assamese people. We cannot allow Assam to become a dumping ground of Hindu Bangladeshis. It is a conspiracy to turn the Assamese community into a linguistic minority and make us politically weaker. I appeal to every single citizen of the state to support us in our movement," Aasu Dibrugarh district general secretary Sankar Jyoti Baruah said.The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016 seeks to grant Indian citizenship to Hindus, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Parsis, who have fled from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after facing religious persecution and entered India up to December 31, 2014. The government has listed the bill in its items of business for the winter session of Parliament.
