Shiv Sena should hit the streets over BJP government formation in Maharashtra: Congress' Digvijaya Singh

Digvijaya Singh | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Bhagat Singh Koshyari should come forward and clarify whether he has a letter of NCP's support: Digvijaya Singh Majority should be tested only on the floor of the House and not at Governor's house: Singh Congress, NCP and Shiv Sena filed a writ petition in the Supreme Court against the action of Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari

New Delhi: Senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh has advised the Shiv Sena to "take to the streets" of Mumbai to protest against the formation of a new BJP-led government in Maharashtra.

He further claimed that NCP leader Ajit Pawar, who took oath as deputy chief minister along with CM Devendra Fadnavis, had joined the new government alone, adding that no other NCP MLA was with him.

"This is a challenge before (Shiv Sena chief) Uddhav Thackeray, that he show the Shiv Sena's strength in Mumbai," IANS quoted Singh as saying.

Asked whether the Congress will participate in the protests, he said, "Yes, Congress will also join in."

None of the NCP MLAs are going to join Ajit Pawar, who has gone with the saffron party alone," the senior Congress leader claimed.

Lashing out at Devendra Fadnavis Singh said that he often raised the issue of corruption cases against Ajit Pawar while campaigning during Maharashtra assembly elections but now they have joined hands. What will happen to these corruption cases? he asked.

Calling the formation of government in Maharashtra unconstitutional, the Congress leader said that the BJP had adopted similar tactics in Goa, Meghalaya and Manipur.

The Congress leader also demanded that governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari should come forward and clarify whether he has a letter of NCP's support signed by its Maharashtra unit president Jayant Patil.

Governor should also clarify whether he has a letter of support by NCP MLAs, said Singh.

Citing Supreme Court's directives and Sarkariya commission report Singh said that the majority should be tested only on the floor of the House and not at governor's house.

In a surprise move which stunned the NCP-Congress alliance and Shiv Sena, Fadnavis took oath as Chief Minister of Maharashtra and NCP leader Ajit Pawar was elected as his deputy.

The political development forced the leaderships of three parties to call meetings to decide on the next course of action. Late in the evening, the NCP had removed Ajit Pawar as the leader of its legislative party and Jayant Patil.

Later, Congress, NCP and Shiv Sena filed a writ petition in the Supreme Court against the action of Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari to allow the formation of a BJP-led government. The top court is set to hear the matter tomorrow at 11:30 am.
