Fact Check: Photo of Dalit activist goes viral with misleading claim

In comment section, many people have taken post sarcastically, but some others have taken it seriously

Amid the ongoing protests by Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students over hostel fee hike and other issues, the photo of an elderly man has gone viral on social media.

It is being claimed along with the photo that Delhi Police assumed him to be the parent of a JNU student, but when they stopped him from entering the university citing "riots inside the campus", he said he is a student himself.

"Delhi Police stopped this man from entering JNU, saying, 'There is a riot going on inside the campus. Parents and guardians cannot visit for some days.' The man replied, 'But I'm a JNU student.'" - read the caption along with the photo posted by Facebook user "Rakesh Krishnan Simha".

Screenshot of the viral post

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found that the man in the photo has nothing to do with JNU. He is Professor Kancha Ilaiah, a writer and Dalit ideologue from Telangana.

Till the filing of this story, the post was already shared more than 750 times. In the comment section, many people have taken the post sarcastically, but some others have taken it seriously.

AFWA found some users in the comment section pointed out that the man in the photo is Professor Kancha Ilaiah. Taking this as a clue, we checked out his photos and reached out to him for confirmation.

Professor Ilaiah confirmed to us that the photo is his and the claim is bogus. He said he never studied in JNU and will file a complaint against the post.

Professor Ilaiah is a writer and Dalit rights activist. Before his retirement, Ilaiah was the director of the Centre for Social Exclusion and Inclusive Policy at Maulana Azad National Urdu University (MANUU) in Hyderabad. He also holds a PhD in Buddhism.

Since the protests by JNU students started last week, many unrelated images have been going viral on social media, linking them to university students and protests. Many images of protesters have also gone viral with misleading claims.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Delhi Police assumed an elderly man to be the parent of a JNU student, but he told them he is a student himself. Conclusion Man in the viral photo has nothing to do with JNU. He is a well-known Dalit activist. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
