Assam: Professor, accused of molestation, hides in toilet as students stage protests

On Friday, violent protests were staged at the college (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights An FIR has been registered against a professor in Assam Students of the college staged protests within the campus after they learned about the accusation made against the professor The professor tried to take shelter in a toilet when the students threw slippers at him He has been arrested and further investigation is underway

Silchar: The professor of a college in Assam was detained on Friday for molesting girl students. The professor has been identified as Partha Sarathi Das. "We have detained Partha Sarathi Das and launched an investigation into the allegations, Debojit Nath, additional superintendent of police (Karimganj) said.

Partha Sarathi Das is employed as a professor in the Botany Department of the college. On Friday, violent protests were staged within the premises of the college after an FIR was filed against the teacher for molesting girl students. Students threw shoes and slippers at the accused. To escape from the students, the professor hid inside a toilet. However, the agitated students dragged him out of there.

The police reached the spot when they were informed and arrested Partha Sarathi Das. They took the accused professor to the Karimganj Sadar police station for further investigation.

Even as the accused was arrested, the students protested against him and organised rallies. The students put barricades on college road and demanded strict action against the accused. Rakesh Deka, district magistrate, reached the college after the students refused to stop the protests. Deka pacified the protesters and assured them that stringent action will be taken against Partha Sarathi Das.

Professor visits researcher's hostel at night, sends lewd messages

In November this year, a research scholar accused her professor of sexually harassing her. The accused was employed as a senior professor at an engineering institute in Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh. The PhD scholar alleged that the accused used to visit her hostel late at night and asked the warden about her whereabouts.

The accused professor allegedly used to stare at the PhD scholar, stalk her and even made sexual advances towards her. Tired of being harassed, the woman turned to the director of the college, following which, her complaint was forwarded to the women's grievance cell and the accused was arrested.
