Rampaging monkeys turn against humans in violent turf war attacks like 'Planet of the Apes'

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

Menacing monkeys are terrorising villagers and baying for human blood in a battle for supremacy, in a year that has sparked angry protests across India.

The macaques of India are getting angrier and more violent according to Iqbal Malik, a primatologist and environmental activist based in New Delhi who says they have suddenly turned aggressive because of human interference.

As well as human activity encroaching on the usually peaceful primates natural habitats, scientists decision to enact a mass surgical sterilisation program may have also backfired, according to recent reports.

In a recent tragedy a baby boy died after a monkey dropped a stone on his head earlier this month.

The primate picked up the rock on a terrace at the home of the infant, aged four months, in northern India.

The boy was on the ground floor with his parents when the stone is said to have either thrown by the animal or slipped from its paws.

It comes amid a spate of savage monkey attacks this year, leading to civil unrest.

In May the people of Badnawar, northern India, took to the streets to demand action after a monkey went on a rampage through the town, attacking and biting residents in a nine-day reign of terror.

One victim, a 60-year-old named as Nathuram, later succumbed to his injuries and died. The fact no anti-rabies treatments are available at the local hospital has further angered locals.

Protesters blocked traffic, causing major disruption which stirred police into action. They also, according to the Times of India, laid the deceased man’s body in the street.

Police commander DC Singh promised people immediate action, which resulted in the lifting of the blockade.

Elsewhere in India in March, primates killed their victims in the space of 24 hours through two communities.

According to reports, the animals chased people in the Kathail village in the Chandausi region, located in the north of the country.

Here, they attacked a 60-year-old mum-of-seven as she was standing on her open terrace, causing her to fall to her death.

The woman – named locally as Launshree – was rushed to hospital but declared dead on arrival.

The problem has become so bad in the eastern country that scientists declared a mass sterilisation program in 2006 to keep the numbers of macaques down.

The population may have decreased from 3.2m in 2003, to 2.2m by 2015, but it hasn't made the species any less agrees, in fact it may have made matters worse.

Malik told Gizmodo: “The rhesus macaques, generally speaking, are a harmless and peaceful species.

"They live in troops, with each troop consisting of infants, sub-adults, sexually mature adults, and the elderly. Infants stay close to their mothers up to the age of six months, and the mother-infant bond is extremely strong.

“Reports of violence among rhesus macaques mostly emerge from cases of chaotic fissioning, breaking of groups, and separation of mothers and infants.

"Large-scale deforestation destroys their natural habitats, resulting in the fragmentation of groups and causing monkeys to move towards rural and urban areas in search of food."

As well as this, the decision to carry out a mass sterilisation program may also be to blame for the aggressive displays in recent years ,Malik believes.

"The sterilization itself is innocuous, if done right. However, the forest department’s haphazard approach to the trapping and release of monkeys and their treatment before and after the operation, could be the real reason behind the problem,” she said.

"The rhesus macaques are a strongly tribal species, she said. When individual monkeys are trapped and separated from their tribes, it disrupts an intricate communal bond.

(Image: Youtube)

She continued: "This is especially pronounced in the case of young juveniles who make for easy catches as they are separated from their mothers. When the monkeys are reintroduced into the open, they find it difficult to fit in, causing them to look for alternate sources of food near human habitations. It also makes them violent and temperamental."

The problem is being so bad in some instances the monkeys are even forming organised gangs who lie in wait to pounce of their victims.

In July a business man in Nikunj Goyal, from Vrindavan, parked his scooter and was walking to his front door when he was viciously attacked by a gang of macaques, in moment captured on CCTV.

Footage showed Nikunj turning a corner where a group of monkeys were lying in wait, hanging around near a dumpster.

One monkey suddenly charged towards him before jumping onto his back and grabbing his legs as he approached the entrance to his home.

He fell to the ground in the struggle and eventually made a run for it as the group gave him an evil stare.

The problem is not helped in India, as they are considered sacred by the Hindu religion and are regularly fed with bananas and pampered by devotees, meaning their numbers continue to rocket.

It is also illegal to kill monkeys under international law, so a cull is out of the question – but until scientists come up with a solution the turf war between monkeys and humans will carry on unabated.
