UPPCL employees end strike after UP govt assures return of power staff's money invested in DHFL

After the Yogi Adityanath-led Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government promised to return the money of Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited (UPPCL) employees in connection with the investment of over Rs 2,600 crore of their provident funds in scam-hit housing finance firm DHFL, the agitating employees ended their strike.

Speaking to India Today TV, the acting president of UP Power Officers Association Awadhesh Verma said, "The employees across the state ended their agitation on Saturday evening and have resumed work after the government's order promising that it will return our money. The members of our association met state power minister Shrikant Sharma and principal secretary Arvind Kumar on Saturday. Later in the evening order regarding assurance of returning the money has been issued."

"UPPCL has also paid money to some employees who applied for their PF amount. The UP government has recommended a CBI probe but the agency has still not taken over the investigation. We want the CBI inquiry to begin immediately. The order issued by the government has come as a huge relief for the protesting employees across the state," Verma said.

Meanwhile, the Congress continues to demand action against state power minister and other top officials of the department.

UP Congress leader Dwijendra Tripathi said, "The government should take responsibility for the scam instead of continuing the blame game and targeting the previous regime. Action should also be taken against Srikant Sharma and other top officials for the transfer of hard-earned money of the UPPCL employees in a tainted company which has taken place under the BJP rule."

State BJP spokesperson Alok Awasthi said, "The decision to invest in DHFL was taken by the previous Samajwadi Party government led by Akhilesh Yadav. Investment also began before the BJP came to power in the state. We have arrested five people including former top officials in connection with the matter. The government constantly reiterated that the money of UPPCL employees will be given back to them and now it has been given in writing. A fair probe is being done and strict action is being taken against those responsible."

In an order issued on Saturday, state power secretary Arvind Kumar said, "If the money is not received from DHFL under the legal process, then the power corporation of the government will pay the PF money of the employees."

The state power corporation employees were boycotting work since November 18 to protest against the alleged scam. Five people including former MD of UPPCL AP Mishra, former director (finance) Sudhanshu Dwivedi, trustee PK Gupta have been arrested by the economic offences wing (EOW) of the UP police.
