Fact Check: Old photo goes viral as protest against hike in JNU hostel fees

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found that the viral photograph is almost three years old.

Amid the ongoing protests by students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) over hostel fees hike and other issues, social media is flooded with photos and claims linking them with the agitation.

A picture of a woman holding a placard saying "RSS Murdabad" is going viral with the claim that if the protest is against fees hike, why are banners calling out the RSS? Many people in the comment section have linked it to the ongoing protests by JNU students over hostel fees hike.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found that the viral photograph is almost three years old. It was clicked in Delhi when some students' organisations were protesting outside the RSS headquarters against the suicide of Rohith Vemula, a PhD scholar at University of Hyderabad.

The post by Facebook user "CA Bipin Singh" has been shared more than 200 times till the filing of this story. The archived version can be seen here. The photo is viral on Facebook with similar claims.

AFWA PROBE

To verify the claim along with the viral photo, AFWA ran a reverse search and found a news article published by Catch News in February 2017.

According to the report, a group of students was protesting outside the RSS headquarters in Delhi against the death of Rohith Vemula, who committed suicide on January 17, 2016.

We also found other media reports with the viral photo narrating the same story.

Many unrelated images have been going viral on social media linking them to the ongoing agitation by JNU students. "AajTak" has debunked some of them.

Therefore, it is clear that the viral photo is almost three years old and has no relation with the ongoing protests by JNU students against hostel fees hike.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim A viral image of protest is related to JNU hostel fees hike. Conclusion The image is almost three years old. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
