Coimbatore: Police arrest two men while they try to break open ATM

The two accused have been identified as G Kumar and T Mohan (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights On Sunday afternoon, two men allegedly tried to rob an ATM The police nabbed the two men while they were trying to break open the machine The two men are construction workers

Coimbatore: Two construction workers were arrested in Coimbatore while they were trying to break open an ATM. The accused were trying to break open an ATM kiosk located near Athiapalayam Pirivu. The accused were caught after alert bank officials learned about the robbery and informed the police.

The two accused have been identified as G Kumar and T Mohan. G Kumar is a native of Cuddalore while T Mohan hails from Thanjavur. The two used to work together at a construction site in Athipalayam Pirivu.

At around 1.30 am on Sunday, T Mohan and G Kumar went to the ATM kiosk with the intention to steal cash. They were trying to break open the machine when someone saw them. The person informed the officials of the bank in Hyderabad. Following this, the officials called the police and told them about the incident.

The control room used their walkie talkie to inform the patrol team about the two accused. A team of officials reached the area and caught the two construction workers.

The police also checked the CCTV footage of the kiosk and confirmed that the two accused were trying to rob the ATM. A senior official familiar with the case said, "We have identified one of the detained persons in CCTV footage. Further investigation is on. "

Robbers cut open ATM machine with gas cutter, loot Rs 10 lakh

A similar incident came to light from the national capital in July this year when three robbers managed to cut open an ATM and stole Rs 10 lakh. The accused threatened the security guard deployed at the ATM with a gun. The accused locked the guard inside a bathroom. He has been identified as Mukesh Kumar.

The incident surfaced after another guard came to relieve Mukesh Kumar (the first guard) from his shift and noticed that the ATM had been vandalised. Allegedly, one of the robbers held Mukesh at gunpoint while the other two used a gas cutter to open the ATM. They fled with cash worth Rs 10 lakh while Mukesh was locked in the bathroom.
