BTM residents up in arms against illegal borewells

Ground Water Authority

Bangalore

BWSSB

I asked the borewell machine operator whether he had the required permission to dig the borewell. He said that he had it. When I insisted that he show me the letter, he refused to do so­ –Sateesh Jadhav, president, Sunshine Colony Residents Association

They say 3-4 borewells have been dug up in area without permissionA few residents of Sunshine Colony at BTM Layout staged a protest on Friday against other residents of the Colony, for digging borewells in the locality without seeking the permission of the(GWA).“Three to four borewells were dug up in the locality without permission a few days ago. Today one more resident started digging a borewell,’’ said Geeta Mary, joint secretary of Sunshine Colony Residents Association.As per norms, the land/building owner has to apply to the GWA, seeking permission and deposit Rs 500 at an authorised bank as fee for surveying the location. The GWA then assigns aWater Supply and Sewerage Board () engineer to visit the spot and submit a report.“We will give approval for digging borewells if there is no Cauvery water supply in that particular area. If it is found that there is sufficient supply of Cauvery water, we will reject the application,’’ said GWA Deputy Director G Jayanna. He said that permission from the GWA is mandatory for digging a borewell.“If the building/site owner digs up a borewell without permission, he/she is liable for a penalty of Rs 5,000 to Rs 10,000 or imprisonment up to six months, according to the Section 32(2) of the Karnataka Ground Water Act 2011,’’ he said.Meanwhile, residents of Sunshine Colony who were protesting the illegal digging of borewells said they had received threats from the accused.“I asked the borewell machine operator whether he had the required permission to dig the borewell. He said that he had it. When I insisted that he show me the letter, he refused to do so,’’ said Sateesh Jadhav, president, Sunshine Colony Residents Association.He said that a landowner had engaged around 20 thugs to intimidate them. The residents then registered a complaint with the MICO Layout Police.“I was surprised to see the police advising us to allow the landowner to go ahead with his plan. As of now, the digging has stopped but the machine is still there,’’ added Sateesh.Bangalore South-East Deputy Commissioner of Police Isha Pant assured the residents that she would initiate stringent action against those who had intimidated them.
