Chandrababu Naidu to hold protest against Modi government in Delhi on February 11

New Delhi:

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Wednesday called for a protest during the 2019 Budget Session of Parliament - from February 1 to February 13. Naidu said the Centre had cheated the state in the last five budgets and hence it is a ‘black day’. According to reports, he is expected to be present in the national capital on February 11 to participate in the protest against Modi-led NDA government. "February 1 is a black day for the state. The BJP-led government at the Centre has discriminated against the state at every step. Unless the BJP is trounced at the hustings, justice will not be done to Andhra Pradesh (AP)," the chief minister said.

The chief minister asked his party cadre to observe peaceful protests by sporting black badges and showing black flags when the Centre presents the budget for 2019-20. Targeting PM Modi over a report published in China Global Times, a newspaper in China, Naidu said failures of his government were being publicised even in China.

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu announces to hold protest against the Central government from February 1 to February 13. Agitation in Delhi will be on February 11. (File pic) pic.twitter.com/OCcExznVWM — ANI (@ANI) January 30, 2019

"The country has been pushed into chaos under Modi's rule. There is widespread antagonism towards Modi due to unemployment. People are opposing the BJP," he said.

Naidu alleged discrimination against the state with regard to the Central government releasing funds on Tuesday to various states through the National Disaster Relief Fund.

"Maharashtra has been given Rs 4,717 crore while AP got only Rs 900 crore for drought relief. Andhra suffered extensive damage running into thousands of crores of rupees due to cyclone Titli. Cyclone Phethai also caused severe destruction, but the Centre did not grant even a rupee," Naidu lamented.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
