NSUI demands student union poll in Agra university

Congratulations! You have successfully cast your vote Login to view result

AGRA: Students associated with the National Students Union of India (NSUI) staged a protest at Dr Bhimrao Ambedkar University's Paliwal campus on Saturday, demanding declaration of student union election. Later, student leaders handed over a memorandum to registrar KN Singh, asking him why the student union election was not being announced.The registrar assured student leaders that the issue would be brought to the notice of vice-chancellor Arvind Kumar Dixit.Student leaders alleged that varsity administration is delaying the election without any valid reason. Last year, Agra university administration had not conducted the student union election.NSUI state coordinator Ankush Gautam said, "A few days ago, when we had met the VC, he had promised that if any of the state universities conducts an election, then he will allow it here. Now, the Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith in Varanasi is going to conduct the student union election on November 28. We have brought this to the notice of the registrar and asked him to ensure that the promise made to students is fulfilled."NSUI district president Vilal Ahmed, "University administration is not interested in conducting student union election. We have been raising the issue for several months. The university authorities fail to provide answers to simple questions as to why they don't want the student body to get elected."NSUI member Ashish Kumar said, "Half of the academic session is over, still university administration is not taking interest in conducting the student union election. This is an attempt to muzzle the voice of students."Apoorv Sharma, NSUI spokesperson, said, "We are not going to give up on our demand to conduct the student union election. In case university administration fails to declare the election soon, then we will be bound to launch an indefinite strike."Meanwhile university public relation officer GS Sharma said, "For now, focus of the university administration is to conduct the semester exams. Following directions of the state government, the VC will take a call regarding conduct of the student union election."
