Congress MPs including 2 women allegedly manhandled by Lok Sabha marshals

Congress MPs including 2 women allegedly manhandled by Lok Sabha marshals

The incident took place on Monday when Congress MPs, including female members, stormed the well of the Lok Sabha and raised banners over the Maharashtra political drama.

news Politics

Two Lok Sabha MPs of the Congress party in Kerala — Hibi Eden and TN Prathapan — have alleged that they were forcibly removed from the well of the House and even manhandled by the marshals of the Lower House. On Monday, the Congress MPs stormed the well of the House, holding placards that read, ‘Stop murder of democracy’, protesting against the installation of Devendra Fadnavis-led government in Maharashtra.

As Speaker Om Birla ordered the removal of Hibi and Prathapan to restore peace, their colleagues and Congress MPs — Remya Haridas from Kerala and S Jothimani from Tamil Nadu — also joined the protest. What ensued was ruckus and in the alleged process of forcible removal from the well of the House, the MPs were allegedly manhandled by the Lok Sabha marshals. Following the commotion, the Lok Sabha was adjourned for the day, while the Rajya Sabha has been adjourned till 2 pm on Tuesday.

Speaking to the media, Jothimani, the MP from Karur constituency in Tamil Nadu, said, Congress’ acting President Sonia Gandhi accompanied her and Remya Haridas to the Speaker’s chamber and filed a complaint against the marshals while strongly criticising the incident.

“While we were peacefully protesting against the murder of democracy in Maharashtra, the security staff pushed and manhandled all of us, including the two of us (including Remya Haridas), the female members. There is no female security staff in the Parliament. Our safety and rights to protest were undermined within the four walls of the Parliament,” said Jothimani.

According to Remya, the MP from Alathur constituency in Kerala, the marshals yanked their hands. “The marshals were sent to the well of the House to remove us. We, the woman MPs, were manhandled and it is really painful. They did not even consider that we are women. Besides, we are peoples’ representatives and have the right to question if democracy is being challenged,” she told the media in New Delhi.

She alleged that marshals forcefully pushed Hibi Eden and TN Prathapan in order to snatch the placards from them.

Meanwhile, Hibi Eden (Ernakulam MP) and TN Prathapan (Thrissur MP) have been suspended following the clash with the marshals. The Speaker has said that the two MPs will be allowed in the House only after they tender an apology.

“We had raised a genuine issue (Maharashtra) in Lok Sabha and protested in a democratic manner. Unfortunately, we were taken out by marshals, who tried to take away our banners and pushed us forcefully,” Hibi Eden told the media, adding that they have filed a complaint with the Speaker. The two MPs are protesting outside the Parliament near Gandhi statue.

Two congress MPs Mr TN Prathapan and Mr Hibi Eden are protesting near Gandhi statue in the Parliament... Duo were suspended after they had clashed with Marshals... The duo alleged that Marshals manhandled their two women colleagues Congress MPs - Jyotimani and Ramya Haridas... pic.twitter.com/P2ntobiLMR — Supriya Bhardwaj (@Supriya23bh) November 25, 2019

On Monday morning, as the House started its proceedings, Opposition MPs led by Sonia Gandhi started protesting outside the Parliament, raising slogans.

Congress Party MPs hold a protest outside Parliament, against the illegal & undemocratic capture of the Maharashtra govt by the BJP. pic.twitter.com/OZ5hvRV3QQ — Congress (@INCIndia) November 25, 2019

Before the Lok Sabha was adjourned, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi said that although he wanted to raise a question in the House, “it does not make sense now as democracy has been murdered Maharashtra”.

.@RahulGandhi in Lok-Sabha, raises the issue of illegal formation of government in Maharashtra & Murder of democracy-



"I wanted to ask a question in the House but it doesn't make any sense to ask a question right now as democracy has been murdered in #Maharashtra" pic.twitter.com/KCks8oWdLe — Saral Patel (@SaralPatel) November 25, 2019

Meanwhile, the forcible removal and alleged manhandling drew sharp criticism from Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, Congress’ Leader in Lok Sabha. “Security personnel manhandled our women parliamentarians. We have never experienced this inside the Parliament. We will be waiting to see what action has been taken against responsible people,” the Congress leader was quoted as saying by PTI.

Union Ministers, on the other hand, have reportedly demanded strict action against the Congress MPs. The House cannot be a place of unruly behaviour. All parties must maintain the sanctity and traditions of the Lok Sabha,” Ravi Shankar Prasad said, reported NDTV.
