Gov administration assures KCCI of full support to Shimla loot victims

Srinagar

A delegation of the Kashmir Chamber of Commerce and Industry led by Sheikh Ashiq Ahmad, President on Thursday held a meeting with Vijay K Kumar, Hon’ble Advisor to Governor Satya Pal Malik.

The spokesman said that attack on the property and goods of Kashmiri Traders in Rohru, Shimla was brought to the notice of the Hon’ble Advisor. Sheikh Ashiq Ahmad requested the Hon’ble Advisor to consider taking measures for reassuring the Kashmiri Business Community operating outside the State that their lives and property are safe.

The Hon’ble Advisor assured the delegation that he would be taking up the issue with the Governor and also the Director General of Police, Himachal Pradesh. The Hon’ble Advisor also said that he would be proposing to include the facilitation of business community facing such regional problems to the already designated Liaison Officers for addressing issues of students functioning under the direct supervision of the Resident Commissioner, New Delhi. It may be mentioned that the above referred liaisoning infrastructure was constituted by the State Administrative Council (SAC) vide its decision dated November 14, 2018.

The Kashmir Chamber would also be taking up this issue with His Excellency the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir for the issuance of appropriate directions and interventions.

Sheikh Ashiq Ahmad while appreciating the efforts of the administration for the prompt response to the untimely snowfall in early November by declaring it as “Special Natural Calamity”, it needed to be ensured that the compensation reached the affected farmers at the earliest.

The delegation also raised the issue of complaints of harassment of business establishments by the Traffic Authorities and the multiplication of footpath vendors in the Central Business District. The Hon’ble Advisor asked the Divisional Commissioner, Kashmir to look into the issues raised by the Kashmir Chamber of Commerce and Industry by holding a meeting of all the concerned stakeholders.
