Delhi University: SOL students to give combined first & second semester exams

Students of Delhi University’s School of Open Learning will appear for their first and second semester exams, totalling eight papers, in May-June, officials said Monday. The decision, affecting 1.15 lakh students who were admitted to the university this year, was announced by the school Monday, following a High Court order on November 21.

A set of students had approached the court stating that the students had not been prepared by the faculty for the first semester exams, which were supposed to begin on November 24, due to hurried implementation of semester-based choice-based credit system (CBCS) in the school.

Read| DU’s school of open learning postpones first semester exams to next year

SOL was operating in the annual mode of examination till the last academic year. It decided to switch to CBCS, which is followed in regular colleges, on August 17, after the commencement of the academic session.

The counsel for the petitioners had stated that the contact classes arranged for students during the weekends had “commenced as late as” September 22 and had been cancelled “at least three times”. It also pointed out that the course material provided was “incomplete or illegible”.

Read| DU open school students can shift to regular colleges in second year

A report submitted by the V-C after the students moved court provided two alternatives — postpone the first semester exam to December or club it with the second semester exam. The petitioners chose the latter.

Meanwhile, officials from the School of Open Learning said that students preferred the former option.

“We had spoken to thousands of students, and they had said that they preferred the first option… However, we followed the court’s direction,” said Ramesh Bhardwaj, Officer on Special Duty, SOL.

But members of KYS, which had led the opposition against hasty implementation of CBCS, said students preferred exams in May-June. “The study material provided is so bad that postponing the exams by just a month is not sufficient,” said Bhim, a Delhi State Committee member of KYS.
