India summons Pak envoy after foreign minister Qureshi talks with Hurriyat leader

rajivbhatia82@gmail.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, January 30

India on Wednesday lodged a protest against a telephone call reportedly initiated by Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi with Mirawaiz Umar Farooq of the All Parties Hurriyat Conference.

Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale summoned Pakistani High Commissioner in Delhi Sohail Mahmood at 10.30 pm to convey “India’s condemnation in the strongest terms of this latest brazen attempt by Pakistan to subvert India’s unity”.

This was an attempt to violate Indian “sovereignty and territorial integrity” by none other than the Pakistan foreign minister said Gokhale in his protest note.

“The foreign secretary conveyed that this deplorable act has violated all norms for the conduct of international relations even by Pakistan’s own standards.

“The Pakistan foreign minister’s actions are tantamount to direct interference in the internal affairs of its neighbour,” said a formal Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) statement.

“The foreign secretary underscored that by this action Pakistan has confirmed yet again that it officially abets and encourages individuals associated with terrorism and anti-India activities.

“It has exposed to the entire international community Pakistan’s duplicity in professing their desire for normal relations with India on the one hand, while openly inciting anti-India activities on the other,” added the statement.

Earlier today, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq at Hurriyat office had asked for talks involving India and Pakistan and the Kashmiris.

“Kashmir dispute is a reality & so is the fact that all three parties have to be involved in its lasting resolution. No amount of denial can change either. GOI has to move beyond status quo &reach out to both Pakistan’s offer of talks &to Kashmiri’s plight,” he wrote on Twitter.

Officials said that the envoy was categorically informed by the foreign secretary that “India expects Pakistan to desist forthwith from such actions” and that persistence of such behaviour by its government would have “implications”.

India reiterated that its principled position remains the same that is “entire state of Jammu and Kashmir has been, is and shall remain the integral part of India”.

In his meeting, Foreign Secretary re-emphasised that Pakistan has no locus standi in any matter related to the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
