Marshals, MPs jostle in Lok Sabha

shalender@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, November 25

The Lok Sabha opened to ugly scenes on Monday morning. A section of MPs protesting in the well of the House and marshals jostled with each other inside the House.

A section of Opposition MPs were in the Well protesting against the ‘political developments’ in Maharashtra and shouting slogans against the Prime Minister, when half a dozen marshals tried to push the protesters back. The protestors resisted ensuing in an ugly jostle.

Ruling party MPs and a Union Minister had to intervene when heated words were exchanged between a young MP and one of the Marshals as the latter tried to physically snatch a placard of the MP. Speaker Om Birla called back the marshals and adjourned the House.

The Rajya Sabha, too, was adjourned for the day without transacting any substantial business. As soon as the House assembled for the day, members from Opposition benches were on their feet demanding a discussion on the developments in Maharashtra. But Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu rejected the demand saying the matter is being looked into by the Supreme Court.

When the agitated members continued with their protest, creating a din in the House, Naidu adjourned proceedings till 2 pm, but when the members reassembled, the scene again was no different, forcing Deputy Chairman Harivansh to adjourn the House for the day.

Meanwhile, Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury alleged that women parliamentarians of his party were ‘manhandled’ in the Lok Sabha when they were protesting in the Well of the House over the Maharashtra issue.

In the Lok Sabha, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi said democracy was ‘murdered’ in the state. Congress MP from Tamil Nadu Jothimani alleged that she was “manhandled”. “It is sad that Ramya Haridas and I were manhandled. We have lodged a complaint with the Speaker,” she told reporters.

Sources said Speaker Om Birla sought an apology from two Kerala MPs — PN Prathapan and MP Hibi Eden — for storming the Well of the House.
