Ruckus in Parliament; Sonia Gandhi leads protests

New Delhi: The power tussle in Maharashtra reverberated in Parliament on Monday as Opposition members staged vociferous protests, forcing adjournment of proceedings in both the Houses, even as Congress president Sonia Gandhi led a protest in Parliament premises against the BJP move.

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi set the tone for the protests in the morning when he refused to ask a supplementary question during Question Hour in the Lower House while two of his party MPs, Hibi Eden and TN Prathapam, carrying a big black banner that read ‘Stop murder of democracy’ entered the Well of the House.

Congress’ Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury alleged that women parliamentarians of his party were “manhandled” in the Lok Sabha when they were protesting in the Well of the House.

While in the Upper House, the Congress and other Opposition parties such as Left and the DMK shouted anti-BJP slogans after Chairman, M. Venkaiah Naidu rejected their notices under Rule 267 seeking setting aside of the business to take up the political developments in Maharashtra forcing an adjournment, Lok Sabha saw much more drama.

Shouting slogans and showing banners and placards in the Well, Congress MPs also jostled with marshals to foil an attempt to evict them.

The Congress MPs had stormed into the Well the moment proceedings began.

They raised slogans such as “Modi Government hai hai,” and waved placards with “Save Constitution” and “Save Democracy” slogans written on them along with a black banner that read “Stop Murder of Democracy.”

Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla, who had asked Congress MP Rahul Gandhi to ask his question during the Question Hour, urged the members to go back to their seats. However, as the banners and placards continued to be waved, he warned Congress MPs of action while asking them to remove them.

Meanwhile, Mr Gandhi got up and said that though he had come to ask a question, it has no meaning now as “democracy has been murdered in Maharashtra.”

As Congress members intensified their sloganeering and showing banners, a visibly agitated Speaker first warned Hibi Eden and T.N. Prathapan to “put down the pamphlets” else they will be “sent out”. Since these MPs did not yield to the request, Om Birla ordered removal of Eden and Prathapan — who were holding a big banner with 'stop murder of democracy slogan — by the marshals.

At this time, Congress women MPs particularly Ramya Hariharan and Jothimani tried to resist marshals and prevent them from removing Eden and Prathapan.

With so much ruckus Speaker adjourned the House first till 12 pm, then till 2 pm. This is the first time it was adjourned during the 17th Lok Sabha. In between the first and second adjournments, Sonia Gandhi was seen discussing the protest strategy with her party MPs. Later, while speaking to the reporters Om Birla said such a conduct by MPs was unacceptable and will not be tolerated.

It is learnt that the Speaker had sought an apology from Eden and Prathapan, who reportedly have refused to do so.

The two MPs are expected to be suspended for their conduct with sources adding that the possibility of suspending them for five years is also under consideration.

“I am hurt by whatever happened in Parliament today. It is unacceptable and won't be tolerated…I never want to adjourn the House, I always tried my best that house should function by taking everyone on board,” Birla said.

The Speaker may suspend Eden and Prathapan for storming the Well of the House and obstructing Parliament proceedings by shouting slogans and showing banners.

Meanwhile, Congress leader in the House Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury alleged that Ramya Hariharan and Jothimani were "manhandled" when they were protesting in the Well of the House. Jothimani said they have lodged a complaint with Speaker.

“Security personnel manhandled our women parliamentarians. We have never experienced this inside Parliament,” Chowdhury said.
