Parliament [UPDATES]: Constitution represents Dignity for Indians and Unity for India - PM Narendra Modi

Constitution Day events in Parliament - updates:

Opposition protest in Parliament premises

Sonia Gandhi-led Opposition parties protest inside Parliament premises by reading out the Preamble of the Constitution of India. Former PM Manmohan Singh and Congress leader Rahul Gandhi also present at the protest.

Commenting on the Opposition's boycott of Constitution Day events in Parliament, Manmohan Singh said: "It is not a disservice to the Constitution. It's a reminder to everyone that the constitutional norms are being violated by the present establishment."

President Ram Nath Kovind addresses Parliament

I convey my warm greetings on the occasion of 70th anniversary of the adoption of the ‘Constitution of India’, to all of you, and to all our fellow citizens in India and abroad.

President says the Constitution forms the basis of the largest democracy in the world. He adds the world has hailed the Indian democracy and election of 78 women to the 17th Lok Sabha was "proud achievement" for democracy.

While delivering his last speech in the Constituent Assembly on November 25, 1949, Dr Ambedkar had said that the success of the Constitution would depend upon the conduct of the people of India and the political parties.

The 'Constitution of India' lies at the foundation of the world's largest democracy. The rights and duties are two sides of the same coin.

Vice President M Venkaiah Naidu's Constitution Day speech

We constantly refer to the Constitution to shape our polity.

Every one of us should fulfil our duty, add to the beauty and make our country mighty.

Those sitting in the last row should be uplifted first.

Let us spread awareness about our constitutional duties, include them in the curriculum at an appropriate level.

Delhi: Parliamentarians at joint session of Parliament earlier today on #ConstitutionDay. pic.twitter.com/qNbfctjoup — ANI (@ANI) November 26, 2019

PM Modi's Constitution Day address in Parliament

November 26 is a historic day. 70 years ago, we had adopted our great Constitution. November 26 also reminds of the pain suffered during the 26/11 attacks in Mumbai. I pay tributes to the victims.

The dreams of the members of the Constituent Assembly took shape in the form of the words and values enshrined in our Constitution. In Parliament, people from all corners come and make their dreams come true.

I bow before 130 crore Indians who have never let their faith in India's democratic system get shaken. Indians have never let their Constitution get their negatively impacted.

The Constitution is the biggest and holiest of books for Indians. Constitution represents Dignity for Indians and Unity for India.

The Constitution of India highlights both rights and duties of citizens. This is a special aspect of our Constitution. Let us think about how we can fulfil the duties enshrined in our Constitution.

We cannot safeguard our rights without fulfilling our responsibilities. It should be our effort to emphasise on duties in our interactions with people.

Father of the Nation Mahatma Gandhi had understood the balance between the rights and duties.

As proud citizens of India, let us think about how our actions will make our nation even stronger. We the people of India are our Constitution's strength, its inspiration and its goal.

Proceedings begin in Parliament, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs Pralhad Joshi and Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla address a joint sitting of Parliament

Opposition to boycott Constitution Day celebrations

The Opposition has confirmed that it will boycott Constitution Day celebrations in Parliament. Congress leader K Suresh said: "The decision has been taken because the government is bypassing the Constitution. In the latest situation in Maharashtra, they are disrespecting the Indian Constitution.

Meanwhile, Samajwadi Party leaders are protesting at the UP Assembly on Constitution Day. They also raised the issues of farmers and law and order situation in the state.

Delhi: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi arrives at Parliament premises. Opposition parties will boycott President Ram Nath Kovind's address at the joint sitting of Parliament today, and will hold a protest in front of the Ambedkar Statue in Parliament. pic.twitter.com/WI0DJZdp8n — ANI (@ANI) November 26, 2019

Constitution Day celebrations in Parliament

India Tuesday marks the 70th anniversary of the adoption of the Constitution by the Constituent Assembly on November 26, 1949. India became a Republic on January 26, 1950 – the day the Constitution came into effect.

The ruling NDA government will be marking the 'Constitution Day' or 'Samvidhan Diwas' in the Central Hall of Parliament today. President Ram Nath Kovind, Vice President M Venkaiah Naidu, Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla and Prime Minister Narendra Modi will address a joint sitting of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha MPs on the occasion.

To celebrate the day, the President will also inaugurate a digital exhibition through video conferencing.

Meanwhile, some Opposition parties led by the Congress are expected to boycott the celebrations over the issue of Maharashtra political developments. The parties are likely to hold a protest over the matter.

As per reports, leaders of the Congress, Left parties, NCP, TMC, RJD, TDP and DMK are likely to hold a joint protest at the Ambedkar statue inside the Parliament complex. The parties are slated to meet ahead of the day’s session to take a final call on boycotting the 'Constitution Day' celebrations in Parliament.
