Governor and Chancellor of Maharashtra Universities Bhagat Singh Koshyari skips Mumbai varsity convocation

Chancellor of Maharashtra Universities

annual convocation ceremony

Mumbai University

Raj Bhavan

Mumbai University does an early convocation 01:19

Devendra Fadnavis

Ajit Pawar

Supreme Court

Varsity dignitaries wore a newly designed traditional dress for the first time as the convocation attire and students sported sashes

Yuva Sena members call off plan to stage protest.In the wake of the high-voltage political drama unfolding in the state every day, Maharashtra Governor andBhagat Singh Koshyari who was slated to preside over theof, skipped attendance at the function on Tuesday morning citing pressing gubernatorial duties.Sources told Mirror that Koshyari conveyed his inability to attend the ceremony to vice-chancellor Suhas Pednekar in person, when the latter went to visit him at theon the eve of the function.Yuva Sena members, who had planned to stage a protest with placards and a copy of Constitution, called off their demonstration after they found out that Koshyari would not attend the event. The outfit wanted to protest Koshyari’s decision to swear-inandas chief minister and deputy chief minister during the contested oath-taking ceremony that occurred on November 23.The varsity had already sent out invitation cards and displayed flex banners with his name. “Since he cancelled on Monday, we could not change it. The Governor attends the convocation in the capacity of Chancellor of Universities. He does not make a speech. He formally announces the conferring of degrees and gives medals. He also leads the academic procession with the ceremonial mace,” a university official said.In the Governor’s absence, Pednekar took over his role. This year Vinod Patil, director, Board of Examinations led the procession carrying the mace. University officials said the governor’s presence is not a mandatory practice at convocations and the absence was not unprecedented.The convocation ceremony started at 11 am. Earlier at 10.30 am, thehad ordered a floor test on Wednesday. “It would have been difficult for the Governor to change out of the convocation robes and leave the function midway given the political developments,” an official remarked.At Tuesday’s convocation, varsity dignitaries wore a newly designed traditional dress for the first time as the convocation attire. The new attire is not meant for students, who sported sashes.The varsity conferred DLitt (Doctor of Letters) on Avinash Biniwale, linguist, researcher and retired professor of Mumbai’s Elphinstone College. Around 1.7 lakh students received their graduate and masters’ degrees, over 400 got PhDs and MPhils and 19 students were awarded medals for academic excellence.
