Punjab: Discontent brewing in ruling party, again

Congress

JALANDHAR: Less than three months of the appointment of six MLAs as the chief minister’s advisers with the cabinet rank to tackle the brewing discontentment within the Congress legislature party (CLP), voices of dissent are again emanating from the legislators’ group. What’s more, this time these voice seem more open and embarrassing for the Congress leadership.

After the state tackled floods in some parts and later the celebrations for the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev, old issues and discontentment are raising head again in the party. Congress MLAs are also wary that with little progress in the Bargari sacrilege incident, any development related to the issue would again bring it back to the centre stage with the Punjab government having little to explain in its defence.

Trouble within the CLP and party circles had started brewing just after the parliamentary elections in May. The signs of discontentment had come out during the assembly session in August as chief minister Amarinder Singh had to face some plain speak from the minsters and some MLAs, which was earlier unthinkable.

Punjab was one of the few states in the country where the Congress managed to retain its ground in the Lok Sabha polls. However, within six months the state government is in news due to wrong reasons.

Amid the discontentment, MLAs had started organizing themselves. In the last week of August, a meeting of around a dozen MLAs had also taken place at the residence of one legislator in Chandigarh in which they discussed the political situation and expressed their concern that the party was losing perception battle despite winning eight of the 13 Lok Sabha seats.

It was amid such developments that CM’s camp diffused the developing political crisis by appointing six advisers in the second week of September and some tough posturing on the issue of CBI closure report in the Bargari sacrilege case.

After the 550th Parkash Purb celebrations are over, voices are out and that too from CM’s home district Patiala. MLAs Madan Lal Jalalapur and Nirmal Singh Shutrana openly said bureaucracy was not listening to them and they also raised issues about CM’s accessibility. Another MLA, Rajinder Singh, sent a shocker by alleging that his phone calls were being tapped.

According to sources in the state Congress, apprehensions prevail among ministers and MLAs that with little to show on the Bargari sacrilege incident, any next development in the case may further push it to the centre stage. “We have already lost the sting in our attacks on Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) on the issue as the probe has not progressed despite all the noise in the assembly session in August 2018. Now the issue can boomerang if it somehow comes to the fore again,” one Congress MLA said.


