TSRTC: Tension at depots as thousands of TSRTC staff detained, Auto News, ET Auto

HYDERABAD: Tension prevailed across many bus depots in Telangana, including Hyderabad, as police detained hundreds of TSRTC workers who attempted to rejoin duties on Tuesday morning. To stop the workers from resuming work, police beefed up security and barricaded the entry and exit points at all the 97 bus depots in the state.As many as 2,695 employees were detained from Hyderabad, Cyberabad and Rachakonda commissionerate limits alone, police said.Around 200 policemen were deployed at the Kukatpally bus depotOn Monday, the TSRTC Joint Action Committee called off their strike after 52 days, and asked the 48,000 protesting employees to resume work at 6am on Tuesday. But soon after the strike was called off, the corporation refused to take back the workers, setting the stage for another confrontation between the employees and the police. RTC authorities said they will act until the labour court decided on the legality of the strike.At Jubilee Bus Station (JBS) in Secunderabad, for instance — one of the biggest bus depots in the twin cities — police erected barricades and stopped every single person, including passengers, forcing them to show their ID cards to prove that they are not TSRTC employees. All those identified as RTC employees were detained after taking down their details.One of the detained employees, Srinivas, a bus driver said, “I have been working for 23 years. They cannot stop us from joining our duties. We did not commit any crime. This is humiliating.”Around 200 policemen were deployed at the Kukatpally bus depot, even as mild tension prevailed after about 10 employees, including women conductors, were taken into preventive custody for attempting to enter the depot. “They did not even let us enter the depot. We came to resume work, but we were not allowed to even wander near the depot,” said a detained driver.According to the depot manager, soon after the strike was called off, a few employees reached out to him for help.“We are using hired drivers to run the buses . While there are a few RTC employees who reached out to me asking to help, it is not in my hand. Suspecting clashes at depots, police have been deployed and buses have been running on time,” said N Narsimha, depot manager of Kukatpally bus depot.Tension prevailed at Barkatpura depot when a woman conductor fell and lost consciousness during the hustle between police and employees.“We have been instructed to detain the ‘self-dismissed’ RTC employees who try to enter the depots to join duty. We are conducting checks at the entrance of the depot and have been asking the hired employees to establish their identity,” said ACP Kukatpally, B Surendar Rao.RTC JAC convener, Ashwathama Reddy, said: “RTC management is not considering the high court direction that employees strike was not illegal.”
