Preparations in full swing at Shivaji Park as Uddhav Thackeray to take oath as Maharashtra CM today

Workers roll out a red carpet as part of the preparations at the Shivaji Park in Mumbai on Wednesday.

Shivaji Park located in Mumbai's Dadar, a ten-minute walk from the Shiv Sena Bhavan, has a long association with the Thackerays. The 28-acres ground will become more symbolic as Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray will take oath as Chief Minister at 6:40 pm on Thursday. He is all set to become the first from the Thackeray family to sit on the throne of Maharashtra's chief minister.

The swearing-in ceremony will be held at Mumbai's Shivaji Park, which holds deep historical relevance. Shivsainiks are emotionally connected to Shivaji Park as ever since the formation of the party, the Sena has been holding its annual Dussehra rally at Shivaji Park for the past five decades. It was here that Bal Thackeray, the founder and supremo of Shiv Sena, had addressed his first public rally back in 1966. Bal Thackeray was cremated in a corner of the Shivaji Park, which Sainiks rever as "Shivteerth"--a holy place.

Preparations in full swing at the Shivaji Park in Mumbai on Wednesday for the swearing-in ceremony of Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray as Maharashtra Chief Minister.

A memorial of the late Bal Thackeray is also constructed at the location and it is also the spot where the Sena supremo's funeral was held in 2012.

A sculpture of Meenatai Thackeray, the wife of Bal Thackeray, has also been put up at one of the park's entrances. The Bombay High Court on Wednesday raised security concerns over the swearing-in ceremony and said holding such functions at a public ground should not become a regular feature. You (authorities) have to also consider security aspect. You cannot put everybody's lives at risk, the court said. To prepare for the swearing-in ceremony to be held tomorrow, materials like chairs and bamboos to erect pandals will be brought in trucks this (Wednesday) evening. This means the park (ground) will not be available both today (Wednesday) and tomorrow (Thursday) for the public use, the court said. The high court had in 2010 declared the area as a 'silence zone' after the PIL was filed by the NGO.

Police personnel deployed at the Shivaji Park in Mumbai on Wednesday.

Around 2000 police personnel will be deployed at Shivaji Park for the swearing-in ceremony. "Adequate number of police personnel will be deployed at the venue as thousands of people are expected to attend the event," a senior Shivaji Park police station officer said.

Police personnel in civil clothes will be deployed, he said, adding that drones and CCTV cameras will be used to monitor the crowd. Senior police officers, including joint commissioner of police (law and order) Vinoy Choube, reviewed the security preparations at the venue on Wednesday, the official said. Officials also discussed issues such as vehicular parking for invitees and VIPs along with traffic management, he added.

National leaders cutting across party lines are being invited for the oath-taking ceremony. Congress president Sonia Gandhi, West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee, Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal and DMK leader M K Stalin have been invited for the event.

The Sena has also invited some 400 farmers, including members of families of agriculturists who committed suicide, party MP Vinayak Raut said.

- With PTI Inputs
