Ray of hope for 672 tenants of Patra Chawl; 9 developers, MHADA hold discussion on executing HC orders

Patra Chawl redevelopment project

Housing Development and Infrastructure Limited

HDIL

Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority

MHADA

Bombay High Court

rehab tenements

Patra Chawl tenants protest at MHADA office in Kalanagar

Sarang Wadhwan

Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative Bank scam

occupancy certificate

For the first time since their houses were demolished in 2010, the 672 tenants ofin Goregaon see a glimmer of hope. Nine private developers, who had purchased the land from) in the 42-acre redevelopment project, on Wednesday met) officials to discuss the cost of completing the rehab component as per theorders.Minutes before the meeting between the developers and the MHADA chief officer, B Radhakrishnan, at the Kalanagar office of the housing development authority, hundreds of tenants of Patra Chawl staged a protest, demanding possession of their homes.MHADA had terminated the development agreement with Guruashish Constructions, a part of HDIL group, in 2018 after the company failed to complete theas well the free sale component, Meadows, even after eight years. However, the HDIL sub-contracted the land to nine private developers where some of them built highrises. The nine developers then moved the Bombay High Court in February 2018 and obtained an order that restrained MHADA from any further “coercive action”.The matter remained pending before Justice SJ Kathawalla for nearly two years as first Guruashish and then HDIL went into insolvency. Last month,, one of the promoters of HDIL, was arrested in the. MHADA had refused to grantto the free sale buildings on its land until the rehab tenements and 2,200 tenements for MHADA were first constructed and handed over to it.On November 20, Justice Kathawalla directed Radhakrishnan to meet the nine developers to discuss and decide the approximate cost of construction of rehab portion and submit the minutes of the meeting in the court on November 29. The developers group, which included Kalpataru’s Parag Munot and EktaWorld’s Ashok Mohnani, discussed the estimated cost of completing the rehab tenements at Wednesday’s meeting. During discussions, MHADA pegged the estimated cost at around Rs 320 crore, excluding the rent arrears for over four years and the corpus fund of Rs 25 crore, while the developers estimated the cost at Rs 220 crore.Shiv Sena leader Subhash Desai, who was also present at the one of the two meetings, supported the tenants. “I told the officials that it is the legal and moral responsibility of MHADA to complete the rehab portion on a priority basis. A tripartite agreement was signed between the developers, MHADA and tenants, and people vacated their homes trusting that the government is involved in the project,” he said.
