Ahimsa, an enduring idea for strife-torn humanity

editorial@tribune.com

SANDEEP SINHA

“Log jab aap ko Bapu kehte hain, toh aap ko kaisa mehsus hota hai?”

“Mujhe lagta hai main buddha ho gaya hoon!”

On the 71st death anniversary of the Father of the Nation, one recalls the actor Ben Kingsley uttering these lines in the Richard Attenborough’s film Gandhi, when asked how he felt on being conferred this epithet by the masses.

More than seven decades after Mahatma Gandhi died, his methods and views remain relevant, having stood the test of time, reminding that his philosophy provides an enduring solution to the problems plaguing a heterogeneous country like India.

Dr Devraj Tyagi, Director, Gandhi Smarak Nidhi, Chandigarh, says “Majboori ka naam Mahatma Gandhi nahin, majbooti ka naam Mahatma Gandhi hai.” (Gandhi is not about helplessness, but strength). Dr Tyagi says when the Banaras Hindu University was inaugurated, Gandhi rallied against the princely classes and the British at the function, despite their being supportive of the cause, much to the embarrassment of the hosts. Only a man with inner strength could have done this as Gandhism is about jazba (emotions), he added. The prestigious Doon School endeavoured to train its students such that they spoke to the school peon, the Viceroy and Mahatma Gandhi with equal felicity.

The Gandhi Smarak Nidhi was initially set up to preserve and propagate Gandhian ideals and had men of eminence like Dr Rajendra Prasad, Sardar Patel and Jawaharlal Nehru as its patrons. In 1969, the Nidhi was bifurcated state-wise and the one in Chandigarh was set up as the Punjab Gandhi Smarak Nidhi. It was inaugurated in 1961-62 by Dr Zakir Hussain. There is one Gandhian institution in Patti Kalyana village near Panipat in Haryana where a lot of work is being done. Spread over 30 acres, a 100-bedded naturopathy hospital, a gaushala and a khadi centre are being run there.

And isn’t it a bit of a surprise that there is no statue of Gandhi at any public place in Chandigarh unlike other places in the country? Dr Tyagi says the rules in the UT do not permit installation of statues and busts at roundabouts or any other public place. So, the bust of the Father of the Nation has been installed at the Gandhi Smarak Bhawan, that too only recently, a decision taken after considering that statues can get damaged for lack of maintenance and also get caught in political storms as in the case of Aligarh, where a statue of Gandhi was shot at by a leader of the Hindu Mahasabha.

The criticism of Gandhi has mostly to do with the fact that his views have not been presented in the proper perspective, says Dr Tyagi, citing the example of the difference in the philosophy of Gandhi and Shaheed Bhagat Singh. Only the other day, a function was held to mark the release of a book on Bhagat Singh at the Gandhi Smarak Nidhi, attended by his nephew Dr Abhay Singh Sandhu. Dr Tyagi says their views centred on the use of ahimsa and himsa, non-violence and violence. Also, Bhagat Singh’s views find considerable resonance in the area as Punjab bore the brunt of the Partition. There was ethnic cleansing. Punjabis from West Punjab migrated to this side of the Radcliffe Line and suffered considerable damage, while Muslims from India did not migrate to Pakistan en masse. Kuldip Nayar, in his book “Beyond the Lines” recounts how his parents wanted to go back to their hometown Sialkot, only to be told that the Pakistan policy was not to have non-Muslims back.

While economic progress aided by science and technology has made it imperative to adapt to changes, its basic axioms have stood the test of time. No wonder, this Republic Day, the first prize for tableau during the parade went to Tripura for its float based on the theme of “Empowering rural economy in Gandhian way.” J&K and the Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR) won for their floats based on the themes “Gandhiji’s ray of hope—Our composite culture” and “Kisan Gandhi”.

Gandhi’s vision has endured. The pain he took to avoid the Partition was understood only when lakhs died, got uprooted and were scarred for life. Both Gandhi and Jinnah died within a year of the Partition but its futility had begun to sink in earlier with even Jinnah, otherwise a secular man, aghast at the mayhem the dissection had wrought.

“An entity conceived in hatred will last only as long as that hatred lasts. It will not be possible for Pakistan to accommodate all the Muslims of India. It will not be possible for the Hindus to stay, especially in West Pakistan,” Maulana Azad had warned.

Hopefully, the sub-continent now sees a glimmer of hope with talks of fruition of the India-Pak corridor at Kartarpur, courtesy religion. Divided over religion, it is ironical that the thaw is taking place over religion. It will be a tribute to Gandhi who wanted to see peace and harmony between the two countries.
