Punjab: Private university warden booked after hostel student dies; students' protest gets violent

PATIALA: A hostel warden of private University in Mandi Gobindgarh town of Fatehgarh Sahib district was booked under IPC sections after a student died on Wednesday night allegedly due to heart attack.Following the death of deceased identified as Hemant Mandal of Nepal, the students in large number gathered and took to violent protest on Wednesday night. The protesting students broke down some window panes of the hostel rooms immediately after Hemant's death.They alleged that hostel warden did not pay any heed to the request of students calling him for help. The students claimed that the warden was called numerous times to take Hemant Mandal to the hospital as he was wriggling with the pain but all in vain as he did not believed the students. The students further added that after the warden ignored all the calls they went down to trace the warden and pulled him towards the hostel room to make him realize Hemant's condition who was the first-year student of Civil Engineering department.Meanwhile, on Thursday evening, the students took out a candle march in protest against the university authorities. The district police have deployed a large number of cops in and around the university to avoid any untoward situation.The warden has been identified as Mohan Singh . There are around 1700 students living in the hostels of the university. The police claimed that the accused hostel warden was booked under sections of negligence causing death however, he managed to escape after the incident but the police teams were conducting raids to nab him."We are carrying out the raids to nab the accused booked under section 304 A of IPC. The students took out candle march however now the situation is under control. We have deployed the cops at RIMIT university to avoid any untoward situation. The family of the deceased has been informed about the death of Hemant due to heart attack and the dead body will be handed over to the family after the post mortem is conducted", said, Fatehgarh Sahib SP D Harpal Singh.Vice Chancellor RIMIT University AS Chawla said, "It was a cardiac arrest and all it happened in 7 minutes duration. We arranged all the necessities including Ambulances and other medical facilities and the student was rushed to the hospital but unfortunately couldn't be saved. However some students played negative role by creating ruckus."
