JNU protest: Students back on streets, protest near HRD Ministry

JNU students stage a demonstration to demand a complete rollback of the proposed hostel fee hike in New Delhi on November 29, 2019 | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The JNU students have been protesting against the hike in hostel fee for more than four weeks The Delhi Police have intensified the security around Doctor Rajendra Prasad road The JNU administration will take a final call on the issue

New Delhi: Thousands of Jawaharlal Nehru University students on Friday staged a protest near the Union Human Resource Development Ministry (MHRD) at the Shastri Bhavan, demanding that recommendations made by the government-formed panel on restoring normal functioning in the JNU, be made public.

The students have been protesting against the hike in hostel fee for more than four weeks.

"We have been saying for the first day that we want dialogue, and we have been demanding the rollback of the hostel manual, removal of vice-chancellor M Jagadesh Kumar…Once our demands are met, we shall call back our strike,” said student union leaders.

Later in the day, four office-bearers of JNU Students Union met HRD secretary R Subharmaniam.

"We met the secretary and were told that the Minister will meet us soon. The HRD officials told us that the report cannot be made public as of now. We informed them that the strike will continue," JNUSU president Aishe Ghosh told the agitating students.

The Delhi Police have sealed the roads leading to the MHRD. Triple layers of barricading can also be seen to ensure that protesters do not go beyond a point. Security personnel are also equipped with water cannons, in case the situation goes out of hand.

The Youth Congress, meanwhile, held a separate protest here with its members seeking the resignation of Bhopal MP Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur over her controversial statement in Parliament.

JNU students arrived at the protest venue in buses and claimed that they were not permitted to come out of the campus.

Earlier, the HRD Ministry had set up a committee headed by ex-University Grants Commission chief, VC Chauhan, to kick-start a dialogue with the agitating JNU students, who had accused the administration of averting talks over the hostel fee hike.

Other members of the high-powered committee are UGC secretary Rajnish Jain and NICTE member Anil Sahasrabudhe.

"There will be no more meeting with the students. We have understood their concerns and will keep them in mind while putting our recommendations," Jain said.

He further said that the JNU administration will take a final call on the issue.

The committee was formed after various attempts to pacify students could not produce any result. During one such protest, HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank' and JNU vice-chancellor Jagadesh Kumar were left confined within the campus for around five hours.

The JNU administration had previously declared a 50 per cent concession for the students belonging to the below poverty line (BPL) category. However, it was rejected by the agitators, who called it eyewash. They had further demanded complete rollback of the proposed hike in hostel fees.
