UGC draws proposal to regulate fee charged by Deemed Universities

The University Grants Commission (UGC) is drawing a proposal in order to regulate the fee charged by private deemed-to-be universities for professional programmes. The Commission will form a high powered committee which will determine the appropriateness of the fee charged by such institutions. As per the UGC Regulations 2019 (Fees in professional education imparted by private-aided and unaided institutions deemed to be universities), a deemed university can only charge as much fee approved by the high-level committee. The draft regulations for the same were made public on 28th November 2019 for feedback and comments.

The proposed committee to be set up by the UGC will consider a variety of factors including the cost of educating one student, salary and allowances to be paid to teaching and non-teaching staff, revenue surplus generated by the institution while determining the appropriateness of the fee charged. The proposed UGC draft says that the high-level committee will comprise of five members and will be headed by a former Vice-Chancellor or former head of a regulatory body like the UGC.

The other members will include an eminent educationist who holds the rank of a professor, an expert from the field of accountancy, a nominee of a statuary national regulatory authority and an officer of the UGC. The draft also says that the committee will be competent to charge a fine of upto Rs. 10 lakh for every violation, excluding the excess fee that the institution will be required to refund to the students.

A majority of the states in India have fee fixation committees and even laws for the fee charged by state private institutions for professional programmes. There is, however, no regulation of fees charged by private deemed universities that come under the union government. Presently, 90 out of the 127 deemed universities, are private institutions.

Also Read: JNU students to protest outside HRD Ministry today
