Pragya forced to apologise, twice

NEW DELHI: The controversy over BJP MP Pragya Singh Thakur's remarks on Mahatma Gandhi 's assassin Nathuram Godse is set to blow over with the sadhvi apologising twice in Lok Sabha - the second time after the opposition protested her bid to insert a clarification in her statement.Standing up in the post-lunch session, after a meeting of some members with Speaker Om Birla worked out the text of the apology, Thakur said: "I want to say only what I do for the country. On November 27, during discussion on SPG (Amendment) Bill, I did not call Nathuram Godse a patriot, I did not even take his name. Still, if someone is hurt, I express my regret and apologise."The opposition had objected to her intervention in the speech made by DMK's A Raja and accused her of praising Godse. Raja on Wednesday was speaking of "positive" and "negative" historical incidents - the assassinations of General Dyer by Udham Singh and of Gandhi by Godse. It was when he began to read a quote of Godse that Thakur interjected, drawing the opposition's ire.A recalcitrant Thakur appeared to hold her ground, saying she had been misquoted, which resulted in more disturbance on Friday when the House gathered for her to express regret. In her first apology, she targeted Congress's Rahul Gandhi without taking his name and claimed that her comments were twisted. "If my comments have hurt in any way, I regret and seek apology. But my comments in the House have been misrepresented and twisted," she said, adding that she respected and paid tribute to Mahatma Gandhi for his contribution to the country.Thakur, an accused in the Malegaon blast case, further said: "One member has publicly termed me a terrorist though I have not been convicted. It is even against the law to call me terrorist without conviction... It is an insult to a woman, a'sadhvi' and an MP."BJP MP Nishikant Dubey then urged the Speaker to allow a privilege motion against Rahul for calling a sitting MP a "terrorist". Outside Parliament, Rahul, however, brushed aside Thakur's comments. "Yes, I stand by my statement. What I have written on Twitter, Istand by it. Yes," he told reporters when asked if he stood by his statement against Thakur.Unsatisfied with Thakur's apology, Congress MPs protested and shouted slogans demanding her suspension from the House. Leader of Congress in LS Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury demanded Thakur tender an unconditional apology in the House which the country deserved.His references and use of a particular word were later expunged from the record. Amid the bedlam, the Speaker invited suggestions from members and then held a meeting with parties' floor chiefs after breaking for lunch. The text of the unconditional apology, which Thakur read out, was agreed upon at the meeting.When the House resumed, Thakur again touched off objections as she started her statement with having "borne the atrocities of enemies".The Speaker, however, asked her to limit it to her apology. Thakur then apologised.
