Despite notice to firm, condition of Rakh Bagh no better: BJP’s youth wing

LUDHIANA: The members of the Bhartiya Janta Yuva Morcha (BJYM) said that despite the tall claims of the municipal corporation (MC), the condition of Rakh Bagh in the city is no better. The civic body officials claims to have sent a notice to the private firm handling the maintenance of the park. The members of the BJP’s youth wing on Friday threatened to go on strike from next week and demanded a copy of the notice served to the firm.

The MC notice states that the firm cannot charge money for swings and rides in the park unless the members of the finance and contract committee takes a call on the rates. On November 6, the BJYM members had protested outside the office of the mayor seeking his explanation on whether or not commercial activities was allowed by the civic body in Rakh Bagh. The members had threatened to start a stir against commercial activities in case the MC will not streamline the rates. However, now the officials are claiming to serve two notices to the firm but the BJYM members claimed that notices did not bring any respite for the public.

President of BJYM Mahesh Sharma said, “Mayor Balkar Sandhu is claiming to have served notices to the company but I have asked for a copy of the notice by Monday. If I do not get the copy, I along with the district unit of BJP against the company.” He said it is a public park so rates should be nominal but here the rates for swings range from Rs 30 to Rs 100, but it should be reduced to half.

Sub-divisional officer of the MC Sunil Sharma claimed that they have served two notices to the company for not charging money from the public unless the F&CC members decide the rates of the new swings at the park. He said the F&CC members will be informed in case the company does not stop charging money from people.

Notably it was in an RTI application that the MC had revealed that company was not allowed to undertake any commercial activity in the park. Activist Rajesh Gupta who had a copy of the agreement claimed that the agreement between the civic body and private firm is going to end in 2020.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
