"Never In History": Devendra Fadnavis Leads BJP Walkout Before Floor Test

Maharashtra trust vote: BJP led by Devendra Fadnavis walked out of the state assembly.

Highlights Dilip Walse Patil was made temporary speaker ahead of a floor test

Mr Patil had replaced BJP's Kalidas Kolambkar as pro-tem speaker

A permanent speaker will be elected on Sunday

Former Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis on Saturday led a BJP protest in the Maharashtra state assembly against the selection of Nationalist Congress Party's Dilip Walse Patil as temporary speaker ahead of a floor test for the Shiv Sena-led government. Mr Patil had replaced BJP's Kalidas Kolambkar as pro-tem speaker and a permanent speaker will be elected tomorrow.

"Never in the history of India has ever pro tem Speaker was changed. Why was pro tem Speaker was changed? Never in the history of Maharashtra Assembly, trust vote was conducted without electing the Speaker. What was the fear this time?" Mr Fadnavis said, moments before the BJP staged a walkout.

Mr Fadnavis said that the special session was also in violation of the rules as it began without the ceremonial singing of 'Vande Mataram'.

"Assembly starts with Vande Matram and ends with National anthem when it is called. This session started without Vande Mataram that is the reason its violating the rules," he said.

He also alleged that the BJP members were informed late about the session. "We were intimated last late at night. Why was this done? Was it done because our MLA should not reach the assembly?" he said.

Responding to Mr Fadnavis, pro-tem Speaker Dilip Walse Patil said that the special session was being convened with the permission of Governor BS Koshyari and hence is not against the rules. "The governor has given the permission for this session last night, this session is as per rule and legal," Mr Patil said.

Mr Fadnavis alleged that Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray and other ministers were sworn-in in an "illegal" way. To which Mr Patil, said, "You are raising an issue which is of out of the house."

As the BJP walked out, Congress leader Ashok Chavan proposed the floor test in the house which the Shiv Sena-NCP-Congress alliance, known as the Maha Vikas Aghadi, won with 169 votes.
