Delhi girl sits on solitary protest over crimes against women in India

A woman, in her mid 20s, sat on a pavement near Parliament Saturday morning protesting over crimes against women, police said.

The woman identified as Anu Dubey was holding a placard with a slogan ‘why I can’t feel safe in my own Bharat’ while sitting on the pavement near Parliament gate number 2-3, they said.

Delhi: Anu Dubey, a young woman, who was protesting near Parliament over atrocities against women was detained by Police earlier today. A team from Delhi Commission for Women has reached the police station. Police has now released her from detention. pic.twitter.com/zqk3SED4mY — ANI (@ANI) November 30, 2019

This is justice which they can give if you dare to tell the truth &this brutal incident can't make news headline, the silence of our media and government is questionable,,thanks to @abpnews for uprising the silence #iamanudubey pic.twitter.com/LGh1m3chWE — Ram Sukhit Choudhary (@ChoudharySukhit) November 30, 2019

She was asked to go to Jantar Mantar to continue her protest, but when she refused, she was taken to the Parliament Street Police Station in a police vehicle and was seen sobbing, a senior officer said.

After some officers heard her grievances, she was released from the police station, they said. While interacting with media, Dubey said she wants to meet officials of the government. Swati Maliwal, the chairperson of Delhi Commission for Women, alleged that the woman was beaten by police.

#iamannudubey

Save the girls

Protesters are in jails for protest against gangrape happened in hyderabad..

Is this a country we want to live in???

Shame government, shame delhi police

For arresting and torturing annu dubey — Vishal Awasthi (@VishalA39669664) November 30, 2019

whole india is with u #Iamannudubey #bjp4india where is the Vikas in terms of Law of Rape??? — Amol Deepak Bhatt (@AmolDeepakBhat1) November 30, 2019

Bravo! Anu Dubey. All genders need to come forward and demand women safety. Let's ask- "Why do we women have to be afraid for our safety in our own country?" Why do you fail to protect us? Why the victim has to live in fear and not the rapist?#Priyanka_Reddy#IAmAnuDubey https://t.co/iUCxQXPznQ — Ekta Singh (@imektasingh) November 30, 2019

#IAmAnuDubey Rape is rape weather it is with women, men or Trans person. We are with you. pic.twitter.com/p3WfahqmO9 — Anand (@Anand33788058) November 30, 2019

“Troubled by the traumatic rape incident in Hyderabad, when a student wanted to raise her voice, she was detained and beaten up by the Delhi Police. I met the girl at the police station, she is scared. Will this be the fate of those who raise their voices? “The DCW will issue a notice over this shameful incident. An FIR should be lodged against those involved,” Maliwal tweeted. However, police denied the allegations. Dubey’s protest came a day after the charred body of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor was found on the outskirts of Hyderabad which sparked a national outrage. She was raped and killed allegedly by four men who had earlier deflated the tyres of her two-wheeler.

In Ranchi, a 25-year-old law student was allegedly gangraped by a group of armed men, following which all the 12 accused were arrested.
