Hyderabad vet rape and murder: Four accused sent to 14-day judicial custody; protesters call for death penalty, say 'hand them over if you can't do it'-India News , Firstpost

The protesters gathered outside Shadnagar Police Station in Hyderabad and raised slogans against the accused. Some even demanded that the accused be handed over.

The four accused in the brutal gang-rape and murder of a 25-year-old Hyderabad woman veterinarian have been sent to judicial custody for 14 days, according to several media reports.

As per a report in The News Minute, the Mandal Executive Magistrate passed the order at Shadnagar Police Station as the accused could not be produced at a fast-track court in Mahabubnagar. The magistrate was brought to the police station through the back door. The accused Mohammed Arif, Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu, Jollu Shiva and Jollu Naveen are likely to be shifted to Mahabubnagar jail, as per the report.

This came after a day of high drama which saw protests breaking out in Telangana on Saturday.

Some locals, including activists, staged a protest outside Shadnagar Police Station where the accused are lodged, raised slogans against them and demanded severe punishment for them. Some even demanded that the accused be handed over to the public.

"It is not enough if they are taken to court. They should be handed the same treatment what they did to the victim [sic]," a man said. "If you cannot do it, hand them over to us," another man said.

As per a report in The News Minute, some protesters raised slogans condemning the crime and demanded 'an encounter' of the accused. The article also said that a massive protest was led by students in Shamshabad, where the rape and murder occurred, demanding justice for the victim.

Police assured the agitators that they would ensure that the accused are convicted and urged the public to cooperate.

According to a report in the New Indian Express, several women's rights organisations organised a candlelight procession in Shadnagar. "Don’t allow the accused to be taken to court. They should be hanged for their offence,” some told the newspaper.

Meanwhile, doctors who conducted medical tests on the accused as per procedures, told reporters here the condition of the accused was normal.

The local bar association has resolved not to offer any legal assistance to the accused.

The 25-year-old veterinary doctor, who works in a state-run hospital, was raped and killed on the city outskirts on Thursday night allegedly by four lorry workers, who were arrested Friday night.

With inputs from PTI
