Watch: Locals protest over Hyderabad vet rape-murder case, throw slippers at cops

Hyderabad: Protestors and police clash during a demonstration demanding justice for the veterinarian, who was working at a state-run hospital and whose charred remains was found under a culvert, in Hyderabad, Saturday, Nov. 30, 2019. (PTI Photo)

A large number of people staged a protest Saturday outside Hyderabad’s Shadnagar police station, where the accused in the rape and murder of a 27-year-old Hyderabad-based veterinary doctor were lodged before being shifted to Chanchalguda Central Jail.

The four accused in the case have been sent in judicial remand for 14 days.

In a 10-second long video shared by news agency ANI, a huge crowd can be seen raising slogans against the accused and throwing slippers at cops.

“It is not enough if they are taken to court. They should be handed out the same treatment what they had done to the victim,” a man at the protest was quoted as saying by PTI. “If you cannot do it, hand them over to us,” another man said.

Read | Woman sits on solitary protest outside Parliament over crimes against women

Meanwhile, the police assured the agitators that they would ensure 100 per cent conviction to the accused and requested people to cooperate with them. The police later resorted to lathicharge on the crowd to disperse them.

Hyderabad: Footwear’s lie on the road after clashes between protestors and police (PTI) Hyderabad: Footwear’s lie on the road after clashes between protestors and police (PTI)

The charred body of the 27-year-old veterinary doctor, who worked in a state-run hospital, was found on the outskirts of the city on Wednesday night.

Editorial: Continuing violence against women is call for state to act, reminder to continue conversation about power, patriarchy

Using CCTV footage and technical evidence, the Cyberabad Police Friday arrested a truck driver, his assistant and two other persons.

The four have been charged under IPC sections 302 (murder), 375 (rape) and 362 (abduction).

The accused had planned the abduction after noticing that the victim had parked her two-wheeler at the Tondupally toll plaza. Assuming that she would come to pick it up later in the evening, they deflated the tyre.

“The accused had consumed alcohol and noticed the veterinary doctor parking her bike at the toll plaza around 6 pm. They hatched a plan. When the victim returned, one of the accused got down from his truck and told her about the flat tyre. After offering to help, another accused took the bike on the pretext of getting it repaired. Then, they forcibly took the victim into an abandoned room nearby, where she was raped,” Cyberabad Police Commissioner V C Sajjanar said.

Meanwhile, the vet’s family told the National Commission for Women (NCW) that the Hyderabad Police wasted precious time which could have been used to save life of the veterinarian, news agency PTI reported.

NCW chief Rekha Sharma said a team of the women’s panel visited the veterinarian’s family who told them that the police played a “negative role” in the case. The family members also said the police even alleged she had eloped with someone, Sharma said.
