Lone Teenage Girl Protests Outside Parliament, Asks ‘Why I Can’t Feel Safe In My Own Bharat’

After the bone-chilling rape and murder of a 26-year-old doctor in Telangana, a teenage girl sat on a protest on a pavement outside the Parliament in New Delhi Saturday morning.

She was holding a placard with a slogan ‘Why I can’t feel safe in my own Bharat’.

She was later whisked away by the Police in a police vehicle and was seen sobbing while going inside.

She was taken to a police station and asked to go home after a police officer talked to her.

Delhi: Anu Dubey, a young woman, who was protesting near Parliament over atrocities against women was detained by Police earlier today. A team from Delhi Commission for Women has reached the police station. Police has now released her from detention. pic.twitter.com/zqk3SED4mY — ANI (@ANI) November 30, 2019

Her protest comes a day after the charred body of a 26-year-old veterinary doctor was found on the outskirts of Hyderabad which sparked a nationwide outrage over safety of women in the country. The woman was raped and killed by four men who have now been arrested by the Cyberabad Police.

ANI

The men saw the woman parking her scooter near the toll plaza. One of them then punctured her scooter’s tire when she was not around while another offered to help her fix it when she was back.

He told her that all repairs shops were closed.

The accused then raped her and later set her body ablaze.

On Friday night, Cyberabad police arrested four accused in connection with the case. The accused have been identified as Mohammad Areef, Jollu Shiva, Jollu Naveen, and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu. The gory details of the crime emerged thereafter.

The three accused Jollu Shiva (20), Jollu Naveen (20) and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu work as lorry cleaners, while the prime accused in the Telangana rape and murder case, 25-year-old Arif is a driver.

The same day, in Ranchi, a 25-year-old law student was allegedly gangraped by a group of armed men, following which all the 12 accused were arrested.

The spot from where the woman was abducted is about 8km from the chief minister's official residence on the Kanke Road.

The locality also has the residences of the director general of police, chief justice of the high court and leader of the opposition in the Jharkhand assembly. The new police lines is also close to the area.

Police sources said the 25-year-old woman was chatting with her friend near a bus stop at Sangrampur village, 4km from the campus, when two men arrived on a bike and overpowered them at gunpoint and forcefully took the girl with them.

These horrific incidents have once again led to countrywide outrage over law and order situation and safety of women.
