Kerala grinds to a halt amid protests

Kerala grinds to a halt amid protests

MOSTLY PEACEFUL: About 900 people had been taken into custody, while an official said police were equipped with tear gas and water cannon to deal with any violence

Reuters, NEW DELHI and KOCHI, India





Conservative Hindu groups yesterday forced India’s southern state of Kerala to a standstill as they protested against the state government for allowing two women to defy an ancient ban and enter a Hindu temple a day earlier.

About 400 protesters, including some women, took to the streets of Kochi, the commercial capital of Kerala, in the early morning, backed by officials from Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, the ideological parent of the BJP.

Many stores and other small businesses were closed after the Hindu groups called for a state-wide stoppage.

Supporters of the Bharatiya Janata Party march in Kochi, India, yesterday to protest two women of menstruating age entering the Sabarimala Temple a day earlier. Photo: AFP

Most bus services were halted and taxis were refusing to take passengers, as some drivers said that they feared they would be attacked.

The Indian Supreme Court in September last year ordered the lifting of the ban on women of menstruating age entering the Sabarimala Temple, which draws millions of worshipers each year.

The temple has refused to abide by the ruling and subsequent attempts by women to visit it had been blocked by thousands of devotees.

In the early hours of Wednesday morning, two women were escorted by police into the temple through a side gate, catching the devotees off guard.

Protests against the women entering the temple erupted quickly.

A female police constable was attacked and molested by five protesters in one of the districts near Kochi on Wednesday, police said, while a protester died during a stone pelting incident in a southern district of the state.

Protesters were yesterday seen marching toward the main city junction to stage a sit-in protest, shouting slogans and waving flags, with streets deserted.

The protests remained largely peaceful, Kochi Range Police Inspector General Vijay Sakhare told reporters.

“We arrested more than 600 people on Wednesday from Kochi and four other adjoining districts, and took nearly 300 into preventive custody,” Sakhare said, adding that police were ready to offer protection to those who wanted to conduct routine business.

“Some protesters may turn violent, such as stone-throwing or blocking roads, and we are armed with riot gear and have tear gas and water cannons,” he said.

The Kerala State Government is run by left-wing parties and it has sought to allow women into the temple — a position that has drawn criticism from both of India’s main political parties, the ruling BJP and the opposition Indian National Congress.
