After Uddhav Thackeray stays Metro car shed project in Aarey, NCP suggests Goregoan as alternate site

NCP leader Nawab Malik | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights NCP leader Nawab Malik has suggested building a Metro car shed in Goregaon Uddhav Thackeray ordered stay on the construction of Metro car shed in Mumbai’s green lung, Aarey colony In October, cutting of trees in the Aarey Colony for the Metro car shed project had sparked massive outrage

Mumbai: Days after Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray ordered a stay on the construction of Metro car shed in Mumbai’s green lungs in the Aarey colony, NCP leader Nawab Malik has suggested building a Metro car shed in Goregaon.

Malik said that they have given a suggestion to the chief minister to build the car shed in the RPF Parade Ground of Goregaon.

Speaking to reporters, Malik said, "We have given a suggestion in Vidhan Sabha and to the chief minister to build a car shed in Goregaon's RPF Parade Ground. I suggested to Uddhavji that in Goregaon there is the Parade Ground of 102 hectares which is mostly used for marriage functions. The 60-hectare car shed should be made there. Uddhavji has given assurance to discuss this in a meeting and resolve this matter.”

"The car shed was decided by the earlier government to be built in Aarey Colony. Uddhav Thackeray stopped the work of the car shed. When Uddhavji took this decision then the Opposition was saying that the development work is stopped. The work of the Metro is stopped. I want to say that the development work is not stopped,” he was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

Thackeray, after taking over as the chief minister on November 29, had announced a stay on the construction of Metro car shed in Aarey Colony that saw a huge protest in October against the felling of trees for the project. "I have ordered to stop the work of Aarey Metro car shed project today. Metro work will not stop but till next decision, not a single leaf of Aarey will be cut," he had said at a press conference.

Slamming Thackeray for the decision, Leader of Opposition in Maharashtra Assembly and former chief minister Devendra Fadnavis had tweeted: “It’s unfortunate that the state government stayed Aarey Metro car shed work in spite of Honorable Supreme Court and Honorable High Court’s orders. This shows that the state government is not serious about Mumbai’s infrastructure projects. And ultimate sufferer is common Mumbaikar only.”

In October, cutting of trees in the Aarey Colony for the Metro car shed project had sparked massive outrage with hundreds of people staging a protest near the area to stop the work.

The matter had also triggered a political slugfest with many politicians, including the then ally and now rival Shiv Sena slamming the then Devendra Fadnavis-led government for the move.

Shiv Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray had said that there is no point of its Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to exit or speak on plastic pollution when Metro authorities are “senselessly” destroying the Aarey vicinity.
