Yogi govt orders probe against three senior officials in corruption case

The Yogi Adityanath government has ordered economic offence wing (EOW) probe against three senior officials including chief engineer of the public works department (PWD) for alleged irregularities in implementation of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana.

The state home department has confirmed that EOW probe has been ordered against chief engineer of the PWD RC Barnwal who is also acting head of the department, chief engineer of the Uttar Pradesh Rural Road Development Authority Sudhanshu Kumar and Ravindra Singh Gangwar, chief of the Rural Engineering Department.

The probe has been ordered after the Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister, in a meeting chaired with the concerned departments to review the condition of roads in October, directed the top officials to take action against the officers in places where the funds have been released for road construction but the work has not even started or the progress is extremely slow.

Meanwhile, the opposition has alleged that the corruption in the Yogi Adityanath government is increasing and the main agenda of the ministers and bureaucrats is to loot public money.

Speaking to India Today TV, UP Congress chief Ajay Lallu said, "The corruption is increasing under the BJP rule in the state. Inquiries are being ordered just to mislead the people. However, no action is being taken against the ministers and top officials who are involved in rampant corruption. The provident fund (PF) money of UPPCL employees has been invested in a tainted company but no action is taken against the state power minister and the principal secretary of the department. Similarly in the Home Guard scam no action has been taken against the department minister and senior most officials. "

"UP CM talks about zero tolerance against corruption but his claim is just a 'jumla'. The reality of this government is that the ministers and bureaucrats are only focusing on looting public money. Development of the state is not their priority," state Congress chief added.

Samajwadi Party MLC Udaiveer Singh said, "Tainted company DHFL gave donation to the BJP and in return hard earned money of the state power employees was invested. This a huge scam and the government has still not taken action against the real culprits. In other departments as well, BJP leaders are indulging in corruption. The mandate and trust of the people has been betrayed."

Responding to the charges levelled by the opposition, state BJP spokesperson Harish Srivastava said, "After taking charge as UP CM Yogi Adityanath and his ministers have adopted zero tolerance policy against corruption. We have given voluntary retirement to corrupt and non-performing officials. Many officers facing allegations of corruption are in jail. The opposition in the state is without any vision. Their leaders keep on levelling baseless allegations but they should realise that we have people's confidence."



Also read: Is the induction spree doing the BJP more harm than good? | India Today Insight

ALSO WATCH| BJP leader Vijay Goel violates Odd-Even, calls scheme election stunt
