After halting Aarey car shed project, Uddhav Thackeray orders withdrawal of cases against environmentalists

Aarey protest | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: Days after announcing a stay on Metro car shed project in Aarey colony, Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray, on Sunday, ordered to take back the cases filed against environmentalists for agitating against felling of trees for the work.

“I have ordered to take back the cases filed against many environmentalists, during the agitation against Aarey metro car shed,” the chief minister was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

Thackeray, after taking over as the chief minister on November 29, had announced a stay on the construction of Metro car shed in Aarey colony that saw a huge protest in October against the felling of trees for the project.

"I have ordered to stop the work of Aarey Metro car shed project today. Metro work will not stop but till next decision, not a single leaf of Aarey will be cut," he had said at a press conference.

In October, scores of environmental activists gathered in Aarey colony and staged huge protest after Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Limited (MMRCL) authorities started hacking trees for the construction of car shed for Mumbai Metro trains.

Last month, the Supreme Court extended the interim order by which it had stayed further cutting of trees in Mumbai's Aarey Colony for setting up the Metro car shed.

The activists, who tried to stop the authorities from chopping down the trees, were booked for offences of 'assault on a public servant to deter him from discharging his duty' and 'unlawful assembly' under the Indian Penal Code.

The matter had also sparked a political slugfest with many politicians, including the former ally and now rival Shiv Sena slamming the then Devendra Fadnavis-led government for the felling of trees.

Shiv Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray had said that there is no point of its Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to exit or speak on plastic pollution when Metro authorities are “senselessly” destroying the Aarey vicinity.

He had also extended his support to the activists who protested against the felling of trees for the Metro car shed.
