The best of November -- in images

As we have entered the last month of 2019, here's a rewind of the top moments in November.

An Iraqi female demonstrator takes part in ongoing anti-government protests in Baghdad, Iraq. Photograph: Ahmed Jadallah/Reuters

A man reacts as he tries to extinguish a burning Christmas tree at Festival Walk mall in Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong. Photograph: Thomas Peter/Reuters

US President Donald Trump holds what appears to be a prepared statement and handwritten notes after watching testimony by US Ambassador to the European Union Gordon Sondland as he speaks to reporters prior to departing for travel to Austin, Texas from the South Lawn of the White House in Washington. Photograph: Erin Scott/Reuters

The flooded crypt of St Mark's Basilica is pictured during an exceptionally high water levels in Venice, Italy. Photograph: Manuel Silvestri/Reuters

A child looks on as people wait for Pope Francis to conduct the Holy Mass at the National Stadium in Bangkok, Thailand. Photograph: Jorge Silva/Reuters

A zoo keeper carries a pelican to move it to its winter enclosure at Dvur Kralove Zoo in Dvur Kralove nad Labem, Czech Republic. Photograph: David W Cerny/Reuters

Demonstrators are pepper sprayed by a member of the security forces during clashes between supporters of former Bolivian President Evo Morales and the security forces, in La Paz, Bolivia. Photograph: Marco Bello/Reuters

US President Donald Trump poses with Vice President Mike Pence, First Lady Melania Trump and Conan, the US military dog that participated in and was injured in the US raid in Syria that killed ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, while standing with the dog's military handler on the colonnade of the West Wing of the White House in Washington. Photograph: Tom Brenner/Reuters

A child dances in front of a 'Lucid Motion' exhibition at Artechouse in Washington. Photograph: Yara Nardi/Reuters

A sadhu prostrates himself on a street as devotees and police officers walk past him after Supreme Court's verdict on a disputed religious site, in Ayodhya, India. Photograph: Danish Siddiqui/Reuters

Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray greets supporters after a swearing-in ceremony in Mumbai, India. Photograph: Francis Mascarenhas/Reuters
