Perverse: Telangana rape-murder victim's name becomes top trend on porn website

The charred body of the Telangana woman -- a veterinary doctor in her mid-20s -- was discovered early Thursday morning on the outskirts of Hyderabad

Last Thursday, news broke that a woman's body had been found charred to death near a highway on the outskirts of Telangana's Hyderabad. It later emerged that the woman -- a veterinary doctor in her mid-20s -- was gang-raped, smothered and set on fire.

And since then there has been anger all across the country. 'Our heads hang in shame' has been one of the popular slogans on many placards at several protests sites in the country.

That anger is now likely to intensify and that shame might turn into shock. For, the name of the veterinary doctor so brutally assaulted is the number one trend on a porn website that's quite popular in India.

No, we aren't kidding. As perverse as it sounds, it's true -- we checked ourselves.

The website in question has different homepages for different countries, with the homepage of each country throwing up pornographic videos most popular in the region. Tap on the 'India' version, browse to the 'Trends' section and bang -- right there at the top is name of the Telangana woman veterinary doctor who was trapped, gang-raped, smothered and set on fire by four men last week.

WHAT HAPPENED

The woman, who worked as an assistant veterinarian at a state-run hospital, was trapped and gang-raped and murdered on Wednesday near a toll plaza on the outskirts of Hyderabad. After being raped and murdered, the woman's body was set on fire and dumped under a culvert on Hyderabad-Bangalore highway in Shadnagar area of the Ranga Reddy district.

The crime took place on the outskirts of Hyderabad and is being investigated by the Cyberabad Police. Four men, aged between 20 and 24, have been arrested for the rape and murder of the woman.

According to the initial police probe, which has been accessed by India Today TV, the four men -- all lorry workers -- spotted the woman while she was parking her scooter at the Tondupally Toll Plaza outside Hyderabad Wednesday. The four, who were drinking while sitting inside a lorry, then allegedly made the diabolical plan to rape the woman.

One of the four then went and punctured the back tyre of the woman's scooter. A couple of hours later, when the woman returned to her scooter one of the men approached her and offered to help fix the puncture. The woman, suspicious of the man's motives, hesitated and even called her sister expressing apprehension.

However, the men gathered around her and dragged her to an isolated compound nearby. They then snatched her mobile phone, turned it off and forced her to drink alcohol. The four men then gang-raped the woman who fell unconscious during the ordeal.

Later when the woman regained consciousness, the men decided to kill her. One of them smothered her while another two went to purchase petrol from a nearby pump. The four then burnt the woman's body and dumped it under a culvert on the highway.

The woman's body was discovered Thursday morning and the four men were arrested by Friday. The Telangana government has promised the case will be tried in a fast-track court even as protests over the horrific crime rage across India.
