Layoffs Rise As Automobile Companies Are Using Slowdown As Excuse To Terminate Workers

India’s auto industry has been severely hit by the ongoing economic slowdown in the country and whereas about 4 lakh employees have already lost their jobs and several leading firms have been compelled to axe their shifts and stop production, the workers are protesting against the rising layoffs as well as the delay in the wage settlements for many manufacturing units.



The Times of India has reported that around 800 workers from different automobile companies, including Suzuki Motorcycles, Maruti Suzuki, Bellsonica Corporation, SPM Auto and others sat on an eight-hour-long protest outside the deputy commissioner’s office in Gurugram on Sunday.



The reason? They are fearful in the wake of continuing layoffs as they alleged that the companies are using the ‘economic slowdown’ as an excuse to terminate workers.



“On one hand they are hiring two general managers instead of one and, on the other hand, they are terminating the services of workers who are employed at a fraction of the salaries,” Atul Kumar, president, Bellsonica worker’s union, was quoted as saying by TOI.



The automobile industry forms the backbone of India’s manufacturing units and supports the livelihood of lakhs of people. A slowdown in the auto industry and layoffs have a ripple effect on truckers, cab operators as well as the retail business that caters to automobile parts.



The workers were seen carrying red flags and shouted slogans of freedom from the oppression of the companies and their ‘illegal practices’.



“During the festive seasons, there was a wait of days for the booking of automobiles. In such a scenario how can they justify the layoffs,” said Subhash Godara from Suzuki Motorcycles.



There were many others who attended the protest and they said that even if there was a slowdown, it is the responsibility of the government to take care of the workers.

“If there is a slowdown, why should the workers be worst affected. Why doesn’t the government step in and take measures for the welfare of the workers?” asked Shyamvir, a labour rights activist working in the region.



Meanwhile, the protest by the contractual workers at Honda Motorcycles and Scooters Private limited continues almost a month after around 650 workers were forcefully sent on leave. According to rough estimates, around 1,00,000 jobs have been impacted in the manufacturing and logistics sector due to the automobile slowdown and many union leaders now fear that there could be unrest in the area if the government doesn’t take any measures to address the workers’ concerns.



India's second-quarter GDP growth slowed sharply to 4.5 per cent, the weakest pace in more than six years, as manufacturing output hit a slump and consumer demand as well as private investment weakened. The major factor in the GDP fall was manufacturing contracting by 1 per cent. A separate data showed core infrastructure industries' output declining 5.8 per cent in October, the biggest contraction since at least 2005.


