Top 5 Current Affairs: 31 January 2019

Union Budget 2019-20: Full Budget vs Interim Budget



The Union Government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi would be presenting Interim Budget 2019-20 on February 1, 2019, the last budget of the NDA government before the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections.

The Interim Budget is also known as a vote-on-account or approval, which the government seeks from the parliament for essential spending for a limited period, the first four months of the fiscal year in which the elections are scheduled. The full-fledged budget is then presented by the new government.



Union Budget 2019: All you want to know about the Budget; Process of Budget approval



Finance Minister Piyush Goyal will be presenting the Union Budget 2019-20 on February 1, 2019. It will be the last Budget of the Modi Government before the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

This year, the government will present the Interim Budget, also known as ‘Vote on Account’ as it is close to the end of its term. An interim budget is usually passed by the Lok Sabha without discussion. Budget is an estimate of revenues and expenditure of the Government during a financial year (April-March).



Railway Minister Piyush Goyal awarded 4th annual Carnot Prize



Union Minister of Railways & Coal Piyush Goyal was on January 30, 2019 formally conferred with the fourth annual Carnot Prize by the Kleinman Center for Energy Policy at the University of Pennsylvania School of Design in New Delhi.



The Minister had previously been unable to accept the award in the United States of America, due to the unfortunate train tragedy that took place in Amritsar. Upon receiving the award, the Minister stated that “it is both a personal honour as well as a tribute to the efforts of all involved in this great work throughout India to be recognised with the Carnot Prize by the University of Pennsylvania”.



Piyush Goyal launches the IEA’s 'The Future of Rail' report



Minister of Railways, Piyush Goyal on January 30, 2019 launched the “The Future of Rail” report of the International Energy Agency (IEA). The Future of Rail is the first-of-a-kind report that analyses the current and future importance of rail around the world through the perspective of its energy and environmental implications.

The report reviews the impact of existing plans and regulations on the future of rail and explores the policies that could help to realise an enhanced future of the railways.



PM Modi inaugurates National Salt Satyagraha Memorial in Gujarat



Prime Minister Narendra Modi on January 30, 2019 dedicated the National Salt Satyagraha Memorial at Dandi in Navsari district, Gujarat to the nation, on the occasion of Mahatma Gandhi’s 71st death anniversary.



The Prime Minister also unveiled at the memorial site, the statues of Mahatma Gandhi and 80 Satyagrahis who had marched with him during the historic Dandi Salt March in 1930 to make salt from sea water against the British law.The memorial has 24-narrative murals depicting various events and stories from the historic 1930 Dandi March.
