Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray withdraws cases against Nanar refinery protesters

A day after withdrawing cases registered against green activists who tried to stop felling of trees in Mumbai's Aarey Colony, Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray has ordered to withdraw cases against the Nanar refinery's protestors.

Uddhav Thackeray's party Shiv Sena had opposed the oil refinery project in Ratnagiri and demanded its sacking. The project was stalled after Shiv Sena's protests. Now, CM Uddhav Thackeray has ordered the withdrawal of cases registered against all those who protested against the Nanar refinery project.

Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray orders to withdraw the cases registered against protesters who agitated against the Nanar Refinery project. pic.twitter.com/ANj4lAE0SP ANI (@ANI) December 2, 2019





On Sunday night, cases that were registered against green activists who had protested against the felling of trees in Mumbai's Aarey Colony were withdrawn, Uddhav Thackeray announced.

Cases were registered after clashes broke out between the police and green activists opposing axing of trees by the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Ltd (MMRCL) in Aarey Colony early October for construction of a metro car shed for the Metro-3 line.

"I have directed police officials to withdraw the cases registered against green activists who were protesting against chopping of trees in the Aarey forest area," Uddhav Thackeray told reporters.

CM Thackeray reiterated that he was not stopping any metro project in Mumbai.

Police had booked at least 38 protesters under IPC sections 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharging duty), 332 (voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from duty) and 143 (unlawful assembly).

Of them, 29 protesters, including six women, were arrested when some of them allegedly tried to obstruct the police personnel at Aarey from discharging their duty and manhandling them. A sessions court had on October 6 granted conditional bail to 29 protesters.
