JNU Fee Hike Protests: Students plan to boycott semester exams even as administration invokes rulebook

JNU Protests: Students plan to boycott the semester exams | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Students at JNU have been protesting against the new Hostel Manual which proposes a fee hike for over a month now. Student protests had escalated to a massive law and order situation when over 4000 students decided to march to the Parliament. Following the protests, HRD Ministry had set up a high powered committee but no resolution has been reached yet.

New Delhi: There seems to no end to the on-going lock jam between the administration of Jawaharlal Nehru University and its students. In the latest reports regarding the JNU Fee Hike protests, students have shared their intention to boycott the up-coming semester end examinations. This has been shared even as the varsity’s administration has shared its intent of firmly invoking the rulebook.

As per the JNU rulebook, students who do not meet the academic requirement in the soon to be conducted examinations can be removed. The JNUSU (JNU Student Union) on the other end has called for total ‘non-cooperation’ with the JNU administration over the hostel fee hike.

Centre for German Studies; Centre for Korean Studies; Centre for Japanese Studies; Centre for Political Science; Centre for the Study of Social Systems; Centre for Historical Studies (CHS); Centre for the Study of Regional Development; Centre for Informal Sector and Labour Studies; School of Arts and Aesthetics (SAA); Centre for Russian Studies; Centre for Persian and Central Asian Studies; Centre of Indian Languages (CIL); Centre for Social Medicine and Community Health; and Centre for Study in Law and Governance have reportedly agreed to boycott the examinations as per JNUSU VP Saket Moon.

Students have maintained their demand for a complete roll back of the new hostel manual which proposed a significant fee hike. A high power committee was also set up by the HRD Ministry which conducted meetings with the representatives.

Following the dialogues and the reports submitted, the Jawaharlal University Nehru Teachers' Association yesterday started a protest march to the HRD Ministry, demanding the report of the high powered committee be made public. The march, however, was stopped near Shastri Bhawan by police. A delegation of the JNUTA were escorted to the ministry, instead.
