DCW chief says Delhi Police stopped her hunger strike bid, shoots letter to PM Modi

Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) chief Swati Maliwal said on Tuesday that Delhi Police personnel stopped her from sitting on an indefinite hunger strike at Jantar Mantar against the Hyderabad rape-murder case and growing incidents of crime against women.

In a tweet, Maliwal wrote on Tuesday, "Police is not allowing us to sit at Jantar Mantar. Police barricaded the entire Jantar Mantar area the whole night and stopped us from putting up our tents, mike and toilets. They are openly saying they will not allow us to sit on a hunger strike."

The DCW chief further added, "Do women not have the right to even sit on a protest in this country? What is this fear that the central government has? Do we really have a democracy?"

Swati Maliwal had promised to start her indefinite hunger strike on Tuesday morning against the recent incidents of rape. However, she said police placed barricades and did not allow tents to be placed.

Maliwal and her associates reached Rajghat on Tuesday morning and told India Today TV, "Delhi Police officers have been constantly telling me they have orders from higher up that no hunger strike should be allowed here."

She however added that she will stick to her resolve of starting an indefinite hunger strike and will do the demonstrations wherever she finds space.

"The last time I sat on an indefinite hunger strike it went on for 10 days before the law on rape of minors was passed. I have written a letter to Prime Minister Modi as well and hope he can bring the nation together against such crimes," said Maliwal.

Speaking about her demands, Maliwal told India Today TV, "I want the police to be held accountable. The number of police personnel across the country has to be increased significantly and there should be a lot more fast-track courts to deal with crimes against women."

The DCW chief has said her hunger strike will continue till the government assures her that her demands will be fulfilled.
