J-K: Omar Abdullah urges Governor Malik to focus on work instead of doing politics

Srinagar (Jammu and Kashmir) [India], Jan 31 (ANI): National Conference leader Omar Abdullah on Thursday advised Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik to focus on work instead of indulging in politics.

The reaction from Omar Abdullah came after Governor Malik, while addressing a gathering in Akhnoor on Thursday, said that corruption is the biggest problem in Jammu and Kashmir and accused former chief ministers Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti of not wanting to “empower the state but themselves".

Omar, taking to Twitter, reacted: "Please stop with the insults & snide remarks Mr Governor. They do not behove a person in your position. It is only my respect for the office you occupy that stops me from repeating what all you told me when we met. @jandkgovernor. Please stop playing politics & focus on your work."



Please stop with the insults & snide remarks Mr Governor. They do not behove a person in your position. It is only my respect for the office you occupy that stops me from repeating what all you told me when we met. @jandkgovernor. Please stop playing politics & focus on your work https://t.co/yfUAxUafrP — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) January 31, 2019

The Governor said, “I cancelled two big deals. Corruption is the biggest problem in Jammu and Kashmir. It takes four months to move a file. When I and the Chief Secretary give jobs under the Statutory Rules and Orders, it doesn’t reach the beneficiaries until they pay Rs 1 lakh. In the Secretariat, people have been sitting for the last 15 years and they have eaten up this state with corruption."Malik said that he broke the protocol and approached PDP chief Mehbooba and NC leader Omar requesting them to participate in the Panchayat elections in the interest of the state but both turned it down.“These political parties (NC, PDP) are so double standard. I went to them by breaking the protocol. I went to Mehbooba Mufti and even Omar Abdullah. I told them these Panchayat elections will benefit and empower people of the state but they did not want empowerment of the people but their own empowerment. So they boycotted the polls but we decided to hold the elections,” said Malik.Urging the youths of Kashmir to shun violence and look for a peaceful future, the Governor said: “The politicians of Jammu and Kashmir don’t want peace. They want these youngsters should die, using which they can blackmail Delhi.”“There will be no compromise on terrorism. People have understood that gun culture will take them nowhere. Also, if you use the gun, we will not reply with flowers. Hurriyat leaders and these two parties (NC and PDP) should know that violence won’t change anything,” he said.Accusing the NC and the PDP of corruption, he said that the menace of corruption has crippled the government establishment in the state.He added that Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led central government is willing to fulfil all demands of the people of Jammu and Kashmir. He also urged the people of the state not to turn against the Army.“All these problems in Jammu and Kashmir have been created by some politicians in Delhi and some politicians of the state. These politicians say something in Delhi and something else in Kashmir. They sell the dreams of 'Azadi' to the people of Jammu and Kashmir. Jammu and Kashmir will remain here only. If you want ‘Azadi’ go to Pakistan.” (ANI)
