Awareness camps for school, college girls: Telangana minister's suggestion to curb rapes

The spot where police found the victim's charred body on Thursday | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights A veterinarian was abducted, gang-raped and murdered near Shadnagar on November 27 Her charred body was found the day after she went missing from near Tondupally toll plaza Two accused have been arrested and will be tried in a fast track court

Hyderabad: Days after the horrific gang-rape and murder of a veterinary doctor under the limits of Cyberabad police station shook the nation, concerned authorities in Telangana can be seen making hasty attempts to save face. One such attempt has been the formulation of a 14-point guideline that would somehow allow girls and women to protect themselves.

The idea was first floated by Hyderabad Commissioner of Police Anjani Kumar. Soon after, a letter in this regard was written by a state minister to Telangana Director General of Police M Mahendar Reddy. In his letter, the minister has urged the state's highest-ranking police official to organise awareness camps for school and college girls.

As part of this campaign, 'She Teams' will visit school and college campuses in order to raise awareness about crimes against women and how females can protect themselves. These teams will consist of police officers who have a history of handling harassment cases. In addition, the minister has also urged Telangana police to operate helplines which will help them prevent crimes against women.

However, no mention has been made or suggestions offered on how to improve law and order in the state of Telangana. The minister also failed to answer whether any such awareness camps will be set up for school and college boys. Meanwhile, protests are underway in full swing in Hyderabad where citizens and students are demanding justice for the 27-year-old veterinary doctor whose charred body was found near Shadnagar town on November 28.

A police investigation later revealed that she had been abducted by two men who took her to an isolated spot and took turns raping her. They then wrapped her body in a blanket and set it ablaze. Both of the accused have been arrested and charged under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the formation of a fast-track court has been ordered to hear the case.
