'Washington, New York have 3 airports each, why can't Delhi-NCR too?' BJP MP Mahesh Sharma on Jewar airport

Gautam Buddha Nagar MP Mahesh Sharma | Photo Credit: IANS

Zurich Airport International AG was on November 29, 2019, won the bid to develop the Noida International Airport at Jewar in Uttar Pradesh. In a conversation with Biplob Ghosal of Timesnownews.com, Bharatiya Janata Party MP from Gautam Buddha Nagar, Mahesh Sharma, who relentlessly campaigned for an airport in the area, shared his views on the project. Dr Sharma also spoke on the increasing traffic menace, garbage disposal problem, and pollution woes in Noida and Greater Noida.

Biplob: You always had Jewar airport on your priority list and now with the Zurich Airport International AG winning the bid to construct the airport, it is going to be a reality by the end of 2023 or 2024. What would you like to add on the issue?

Dr Mahesh Sharma: Airport at Jewar is the call of the day. Approximately, Delhi-NCR region comprises a population of six crores and if New York and Washington have three airports each, why can’t we have. So, we fought for this and whenever we used to talk about the airport, we were given the argument that no airport can be built within the 150 km radius of an existing airport. When I went through the guidelines I learned that a greenfield airport can be built within 75 km of the existing airport, and if need be the distance can be reduced to 50 km as well.

At that point in time, the Samajwadi Party was in power in Uttar Pradesh and BJP-led NDA at the Centre. We studied all the necessary documents and initially Bhiwadi, Agra and Rohtak were seen as viable for an airport. Thereafter, the Airport Authority of India (AAI) and the central government made a detailed study of all the aspects and everyone was convinced that Jewar would be the ideal place. Jewar had all the aspects which were needed for an airport – there was the scope of expansion of the airport, no high rise buildings, not that far from Delhi and also good road connectivity.

After seeing this feasibility, we got clearance from the Defence Ministry, Environment Ministry and then we approached the state government and convinced them about the project. However, soon BJP and its allies came to power in Uttar Pradesh. With BJP governments both at the Centre and the state, the process was expedited and I am happy that Prime Minister Narendra Modi on March 9, 2019 had declared that an airport at Jewar would come up soon. The good part of the project is that the project has been finalised without any resistance from the farmers. There were few people who tried to instigate the farmers, but they failed. I convey my thanks to all the farmers of the region and the future generation will always be thankful.

Biplob: Was any political party involved in instigating the farmers?

Dr Mahesh Sharma: There were people, there were vested interests, maybe political parties, but definitely, people of the area ignored their call and responded positively in favour of the airport. I personally conveyed it to PM Modi about the beginning of the two projects he had announced on March 9, 2019 (Jewar airport and Khurja Super Thermal Power Plant), and he too acknowledged it by sending a letter to me.

Biplob: Noida is grappling with traffic jams and in the coming years the problem would definitely aggravate. Is there any special plan to tackle this problem.

Dr Mahesh Sharma: Yes, it is a concern for all. There is a daily influx of people to Noida and Greater Noida. Definitely, we have to get a permanent solution to this traffic problem. But look at a few of the things happening today; for example, some traffic officials or any other administration officials are ordering to block a road to ease traffic. A holistic approach for this growing township and simultaneously we need to think about the easy connectivity of Noida and Greater Noida to the entire Delhi-NCR region.

Biplob: Delhi NCR, including Noida, is facing serious pollution hazards. Do you think government officials and the people’s representatives are fulfilling their duties in tackling this environmental hazard?

Dr Mahesh Sharma: I am a doctor and also been the environment minister so I very well understand the depth of this problem. Again I would say, a holistic approach is needed to tackle this issue. A la carte measures are not a solution. This a fast-developing township and construction work is at pace. Not only the construction activities but the increasing traffic, industry setups, all these need to be addressed in a holistic manner. Just stopping construction is not going to solve the purpose. Our next generation will definitely question us and the pollution problem needs to be addressed from a broader perspective with the involvement of all the concerned agencies.

Biplob: Do you think government representatives and officials should be held accountable?

Dr Mahesh Sharma: If one considers the pollution problem in a holistic manner, it is a responsibility of the citizens, town planners, politicians; it is a combined responsibility, but of course the basic responsibility lies with the administration. They have to plan measures that are conducive to all. At present just stopping things (for example the construction work), I am not happy with this. Think about the hardship of the labourers who work on daily wages.

Biplob: Kachera village was adopted by you under Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY). You faced some protests from the locals there. Can you throw some light into the incident?

Dr Mahesh Sharma: I adopted three villages, one of them being Neemka. One actually needs to visit this place and see how beautifully it has been developed. I am in the field of politics and people have vested interests. When I adopted Kachera village some development work started there, however, the locals had a tiff with the administration. They had sold their land to Ansals and now they wanted the compensation to be increased. This was a mutual understanding between the villagers and the builder, the government has got no role to play in this the incident happened one year back. The opposition parties played their role and walked off. Has the problem been solved, did the locals get compensation? It was all political.

Biplob: Garbage disposal is a huge problem these days. What is the plan for the waste management system in Noida?

Dr Mahesh Sharma: Can you imagine, in the initial days the town planners in Noida forgot to plan a sewage disposal area. There was no sewage disposal plant or a solid waste management system in place. The situation was such that the garbage was disposed of in any vacant land available. However, when people started inhabiting Noida at a fast pace, the officials realised the gravity of the situation and started running from pillar to post. However, the land was not there as it was sold out.

But I am happy that the administration has taken positive steps and started door-to-door garbage collection, they have identified garbage dump yard, made sewage treatment and solid waste management plan. The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has played a big role in all this. I am confident that the problem will be solved.
