Indian Army guilty of committing acts of Genocide in Kashmir: Buddhist Tribunal on Human Rights – KashmirWatch

KW reports from Shenzhen

Hong Kong – On a historic day for Buddhism and for human rights at an international level, on November 25 the Buddhist Tribunal on Human Rights has declared the Indian Army guilty of committing acts of Genocide in Kashmir among other charges, says a press release emailed to Kashmir Watch.

The Buddhist Tribunal on Human Rights was founded in early 2015 and acts as the judicial power of the Maitriyana Buddhist Community. Since then it has made historical and pioneering legal cases at the international level in matters of ethics and human rights, being, in fact, one of the first organizations to denounce the Myanmar Genocide against the Rohingyas. This organization constitutes the most important institution of Buddhist Law in the entire world. In fact, its Chairman said that “the Buddhist Law protects the fundamental values of peace and justice, judging and ethically sentencing those who commit international crimes against the sacredness of life.”

After 1 year of investigations carried out by the Prosecutor of the Buddhist Tribunal, in November 2019 the judgment of conscience was carried out against the Indian Army , although the accused authorities decided not to defend themselves faced with the accusations. The members of jury studied for several days an enormous amount of evidence, which demonstrated the surprising participation of the Indian Army in “Human Rights Violations, State Repression, Forced Displacement of Refugees, Mass Murder, Extrajudicial Executions, Violations of the rights of the child, Massive sexual abuse, Apartheid, Violations against Tribal Communities, Torture, Cruel and Inhuman Treatment, Kidnappings and Enforced Disappearances ”.

After voting of the jurors, the Chairman of the Buddhist Tribunal, H.E. Maitreya Samyaksambuddha, ruled the guilt of the Indian Army in committing “Crimes against Humanity, Genocide, Crimes against Peace, Ethnic Cleansing, Violations of Women’s Rights, Violation of Constitutional Law, Violation of International Human Rights Law, Violation of International Humanitarian Law, State Terrorism, Crimes against Democracy, Violation of Buddhist Law and Crimes against the Buddhist Nation ”.

Chairman Maitreya Samyaksambuddha, who is the historical creator of the Buddhist Convention on Human Rights, denounced that these “terrifying genocidal crimes and massacres” occur with total impunity provided by the government of India, violating local and global law. “Indian Army has committed crimes in a systematic and widespread way against unarmed civilians, forming —together with the police and paramilitary security forces— a truly violent and genocidal illicit association that is totally unconstitutional and contrary to international human rights conventions signed by India,” Maitreya Samyaksambuddha said.

The Buddhist Tribunal on Human Rights analyzed all kinds of crimes committed by the Indian Army , such as the mistreatment of refugees and Apartheid to tribal communities, although mainly the focus of the investigations was on crimes against the People of Kashmir.

In his historic judgment for Buddhism and the international community, Chairman Maitreya Samyaksambuddha said that the Buddhist Tribunal paid tribute to the thousands of Kashmir people who are being slaughtered by India, stating that the “Indian Army, together with police forces and paramilitary forces, has carried out thousands of Mass Murders and Extrajudicial Executions as a form of intimidation and social control against the People of Kashmir that are seeking independence and self-determination, by constantly resorting to murder and massacres of civilians —including children and women— who are later wrongly accused as Pakistani terrorists in a framework of covering up and impunity for mass killings. The Buddhist Law confirms that these Mass Murders and Extrajudicial Executions constitute acts of Genocide, Crimes against Humanity and State Terrorism. (…) the Indian Army constantly performs thousands of Kidnappings and Enforced Disappearances against the defenseless civilian population, implementing the same genocidal techniques that have been carried out by Armies such as that of Argentina, which is evident not only in the face of the thousands of disappearances that have occurred for decades, but also in the face of the macabre discovery of thousands of massive graves, incinerating or disfiguring the bodies and then burying them in a framework of systematic and widespread impunity for those who commit human rights violations, violating both the right to life as well as the rights to the Truth, to justice and reparation of the families of the victims, who are threatened with death so that they do not make any kind of judicial claim. The Buddhist Law confirms that these Kidnappings and Enforced Disappearances constitute acts of Crimes against Humanity, Crimes against Peace and Violation of International Humanitarian Law. (…) the Indian Army has carried out Torture and Cruel and Inhuman Treatment to thousands of detainees in custody, including torture of children and sexual torture of women and men, often resulting in the illegal death of detainees, something which then it accuses people of having died by suicide or natural causes, all of which is covered up by the judicial and governmental system within the framework of a culture of unconstitutional impunity through the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) that guarantees total immunity to the Indian Army and security forces to be able to detain, torture, shoot and kill without being tried by local and international courts. The Buddhist Law confirms that these Tortures and Cruel and Inhuman Treatment constitute acts of Crimes against Humanity and Violation of International Human Rights Law. (…) the Indian Army has committed Massive Sexual Abuse of women, girls and elderly women, entering the homes of defenseless civilians, carrying out sexual assaults and rapes that produce irreparable psychological traumas, and even subsequently threatening of death to the victims so that they do not report to justice the sexual atrocities committed by the Criminal Indian Army, all of which is used as a powerful genocidal weapon that punishes, humiliates and destroys the conscience, honor, and integrity of people and communities under a framework of total impunity for these genocidal criminals. The Buddhist Law confirms that these Massive Sexual Abuses of women, girls, and elderly women constitute acts of Genocide, Crimes against Humanity and Violations of Women’s Rights. (…) the Indian Army has carried out State Repression and Violations of Human Rights, occupying and militarizing Kashmir and denying its right to democratic self-determination, violating civil and political rights and creating an institutional system contrary to the empire of Law and Justice in which international crimes against the Kashmir population are carried out with total impunity, allowing the Indian Army full immunity to carry out kidnapping, torture, sexual abuse, disappearance and murder of hundreds of thousands of people within the framework of a tyrannical state contrary to Freedom, Equality and Fraternity. The Buddhist Law confirms that this State of Repression and Violations of Human Rights are Crimes against Democracy.”

Chairman Maitreya Samyaksambuddha also denounced that the crimes of genocide committed against the People of Kashmir are not a new behavior by India, but are similar to the genocides that India and Brahmanism committed in the past against Buddhist Peoples, when hundreds of years ago they would have caused the extinction of these peaceful communities through acts of “genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity”.

Maitreya Samyaksambuddha declared: “Brahmanism has maintained for centuries a fascist Apartheid regime in which it hostilely held the supremacy of its caste over other communities and social classes, greatly weakening the Buddhist Nation through crimes against humanity that were the greatest disaster in the history of India, destroying thousands of temples, altars, statues, schools and sacred scriptures, killing thousands of Buddhist masters and practitioners, and appropriating thousands of territories and monuments of the Buddhist Sangha.” For this spiritual master, the Armies of India promoted the Extermination of Buddhists. “The Buddhist survivors of this massive destruction were expelled to other countries, or were forcedly absorbed and assimilated by Brahmanism, being marginalized from the communities of India and confined in ghettos where they were converted into the lower caste of the Untouchables as Ambedkar confirmed it”. Maitreya Samyaksambuddha, Chairman of the Buddhist Tribunal, considered that the Hindu Civilization has violated human rights, “has behaved like a Criminal and Genocidal Civilization that has desacralized, oppressed and exterminated the Great Buddhist Nation and other spiritual communities (…) hegemonic and warmongering Brahmanism committed systematic and widespread acts of hate, persecution, genocide, and apartheid against peaceful and egalitarian spiritual communities. (…)The Buddhist Law confirms that the government of India, after the genocides carried out by its armies, is legitimizing violations of the right to equality, non-discrimination, and freedom of religion and thought, all of which are fundamental rights in India’s own Constitution. (…)The Buddhist Law demonstrates that while the Constitution of India theoretically protects the rights of all citizens, on the other hand, the daily practice of the State clearly shows discrimination in favor of Hinduism and against Buddhism (and Islam as well), which violates International Human Rights Law in the same way that the Indian Army also violates it through its genocidal acts in the Holy Land of Kashmir. (…) the Buddhist Law must spread its internationalist voice to denounce and condemn these acts of Discrimination, Apartheid, and Genocide that happened in the past and continue to happen in contemporary India. (…) if the civic-military forces of the Hindu Hegemonic Power continue to oppress and marginalize the minorities of India, as is the case of tribal peoples, the Dalit People, the Kashmir People and the Islamic People, then a repetition (karma) of the most terrible crimes and exterminations in history will continue to occur (…) betraying not only the Buddhist Law but also the very Constitution of India, and converting the Holy Land of Gautama into a genocidal kingdom of terror and blood.”
