Death of 30 cattle in fortnight sparks controversy in Anand

Local farmers have accused Amul Dairy for the cattle deaths

Vadodara/ Anand: Back-to-back death of cattle in Tranol village of Anand district is turning into a major controversy in Charotar.

With death of two more cattle heads on Tuesday, the number of deaths in the milk-rich belt of central Gujarat has touched 30 since mid-November.

While teams of animal husbandry branch of Anand district panchayat and Amul Dairy are on their toes ever since reports of livestock death started surfacing, local farmers union have accused Amul Dairy for providing substandard quality cattle feed, which it alleges is resulting in the deaths.

Officials of the animal husbandry department said that a majority of cattle have died due to damage to their livers. “We have carried out postmortem of 18 cattle. Preliminary reports suggest cause of death may be due to hepato toxicity or toxicity. Locals are saying that the cattle died after feed consumption. But we have taken both samples of cattle feed and fodder. The samples have been collected from the owners as well as village dairy co-operative,” said Dr Snehal Patel, deputy director (animal husbandry) Anand district panchayat.

“We have sent the samples to the animal disease investigation office in Ahmedabad which in turn have sent the samples to Western Region Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Pune,” he said.Some samples have also been sent to reference laboratories at other areas and also pesticide residue laboratory of Anand Agricultural University.

After the initial deaths last month, more than 100 cattle were found to be affected. “Presently, there are four teams including two from our department and two from Amul. Currently, 30 animals are affected of which seven are critical while we are hoping that others will recover soon,” he said.

Bhartiya Kisan Union (A) however alleged that the animals started falling sick and dying only after consuming cattle feed provided by Amul Dairy. From submitting memorandums to the district administration to holding candlelight marches, the union has even demanded CBI probe into the deaths.

Amul Dairy officials said that the milk union supplies 1,600 tonnes of cattle feed across Anand and Kheda districts where it has a network of 1,200 village level dairy co-operative societies with 6.5 million farmer members who handle 1.1 million animals.

“If it was due to cattle feed, the impact would have been much larger. The analysis of the report from the pathology laboratory of veterinary college suggest that the cattle have died because of toxicity which happens over a period of time. Fungus on the fodder which would have developed due to prolonged wet season might have led to this,” said Amul Dairy’s chairman Ramsinh Parmar.


