Odisha minor's gang-rape sparks public outrage, protestors demand justice for victim

Women protesting against the spate of crimes against women. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Candle-light marches and protests are being staged across the country against over the spate of instances concerning crimes against women The minor's rape case in Odisha highlighted the grim reality as it involved a dismissed police constable Citing barbarity of the crimes, the opposition demanded the CM Naveen Patnaik's resignation

Bhubaneswar: After the Hyderabad veterinary doctor's murder and gang-rape case has triggered national outrage, the gang-rape of a minor in Puri has sparked protests across Odisha. Activists, opposition parties, students and women staged protests on Tuesday, demanding Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik's resignation and justice for the minor.

Meanwhile, candle-light marches and protests are being staged across the country against over the spate of instances concerning crimes against women of all ages.

The minor's rape case in Odisha highlighted the grim reality of the system as it involved a dismissed police constable. However, the police have arrested the dismissed constable- Jitendra Sethi and his associate Rajesh Sethi on Tuesday and further probe in the case is underway. Reportedly, criticising the incumbent government and the police department, a Bharatiya Janata Party leader told a media person that they doubt whether the minor victim will get justice as the heinous crime was committed by a dismissed constable.

He added that on moral grounds, CM Naveen should step down from his position. Meanwhile, the BJP state women wing president Pravati Parida targetted the state police in the wake of the suspension of two cops in Mayurbhanj for their failure to arrest the accused concerning rape case of a teacher.

Meanwhile, the body wanted to meet CM and sought for an explanation about the spate in cases concerning violence against women, minor girls. A police personnel was suspended on Monday for negligence in duty, which allegedly led to a rape survivor (a teacher) committing suicide in Mayurbhanj district. The officials stated that inspector in-charge Sarat Chandra Mahalik, posted at Jharpokharia police station, was suspended following allegations of inaction on the complaint filed by the rape survivor. Reportedly, on Sunday, sub-inspector PK Swain, the investigating officer of the rape case, was also suspended.
