No decision on fate of bullet train project so far: Uddhav Thackeray on clamour for scrapping plans

Uddhav Thackeray | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The Maharashtra CM took a review meeting of various ongoing infrastructure projects today Uddhav Thackeray earlier said he has ordered review of bullet train project We have not imposed any ban on any project in the meeting today: Uddhav

Mumbai: Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray, who took a review meeting of various ongoing infrastructure projects in the state earlier today, said that no decision has been taken on the bullet train project as yet.

Speaking to reporters after conducting the meeting, he said, “We have not imposed any ban on any project in the meeting today, there will be an emphasis on speedy implementation of all the projects. We have not taken any decision on the bullet train project yet.”

Earlier, Thackeray, who is also Shiv Sena chief had said he has ordered a review of the bullet train project which has faced stiff opposition from farmers and tribals whose lands are to be acquired.

The Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train project was launched by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Japanese counterpart Shinzo Abe in September 2017.

The bullet train will run at a speed of 320-350 kmph, and have 12 stations along its nearly 500-km stretch. Of the 508.17-km-long bullet train corridor, 155.76 km will be in Maharashtra, 348.04 km in Gujarat and 4.3 km in Dadra and Nagar Haveli.

Ever since the Thackeray-led government came to power in the state, it has ordered a review of several development projects approved by the previous Devendra Fadnavis-led government.

Besides this, the Shiv Sena-Congress-NCP alliance government in the state has also ordered a stay on the construction of the Metro car shed in Aarey and withdrawal of cases against environmentalists who protested against the felling of trees for the project.

The chief minister also commented on demands that those arrested in the Bhima Koregaon case last year should be released.

“Previous government had ordered the withdrawal of the cases in connection with Bhima Koregaon case. First, we are assessing if it was implemented,” Thackeray was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.
