Martyred soldier Aurangzeb's father set to join J&K BJP

Martyred soldier Aurangzeb's father Mohammed Haneef will likely be joining the saffron party in presence of PM Modi during his rally in Samba on Sunday.

Martyred soldier Aurangzeb's father Mohammed Haneef has decided to join the Jammu and Kashmir unit of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). He will likely be joining the saffron party in presence of Prime Minister Narendra Modi during his rally in Jammu's Samba district on Sunday (February 1).

Aurangzeb, a 44 Rashtriya Rifles soldier, was abducted and murdered by terrorists last year in June when he was on his way home to celebrate Eid with his family in Poonch. His bullet-ridden body was later found in Gusoo village in South Kashmir's Pulwama district. Aurangzeb's assassination had triggered massive outrage across the country.

Speaking to India Today TV on Thursday, Mohammed Haneef, who's an ex-serviceman, said that he was impressed with PM Modi's policies for the poor and together they throw out terrorists from India, which is why he has decided to become a member of the BJP.

"PM Modi has worked for the welfare of the poor. I want to join the BJP so that we can throw out the terrorists from the nation. I will take the membership of the BJP on February 3 in the presence of PM Modi. Till the time Kashmir-based politicians are at the helm in the state, the terrorism can't be eradicated. Only PM Modi can solve the problems in Jammu and Kashmir. We are Indians, there shouldn't be any talks with Pakistan," said Aurangzeb's father.

PM Modi is visiting Jammu and Kashmir on Sunday to inaugurate several developmental projects in the state. He will also address a massive public rally in Samba district.

Meanwhile, the BJP has welcomed Mohammed Haneef's decision. The party said that his induction will be a big slap on the face of terrorists and separatists in Kashmir.

"I want to salute martyr Aurangzeb and his father. He has taken a very bold decision. His decision to join the BJP will boost the morale of nationalist forces. I appreciate his decision," said Kavinder Gupta, senior BJP leader and former J&K Deputy CM while speaking exclusively to India Today TV.

On the other hand, the Congress has said that martyr Aurangzeb's father is free to join any political party, but the BJP should refrain from using the rifleman martyrdom for votes. "We salute martyr Aurangzeb and his father. He was a brave soldier who made the supreme sacrifice for the nation. Aurangzeb's father is free to join any political party.



But BJP shouldn't indulge in marketing his martyrdom for votes during elections," said Ravinder Sharma, chief spokesperson, J&K Congress.
