Karnataka bypolls: ‘BJP afraid to lose, thinking of doing another operation,' says Congress' Dinesh Gundu Rao

File picture: Karnataka Congress chief Dinesh Gundu Rao | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The campaign for the December 5 bypolls in Karnataka ended on Tuesday Congress leader Dinesh Gundu Rao said the BJP is demolishing the very fabric of democracy The results will be announced on December 9

Bengaluru: As campaigning for the bypolls to 15 Assembly seats in Karnataka on Thursday ended last evening, senior Congress leader Dinesh Gundu Rao on Tuesday lashed out at the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

The Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee president said that the BJP will face defeat in the elections. He further alleged that the party is thinking of doing another "operation", but added that it will not be tolerated by the voters.

The senior Congress leader also cited a survey as saying that the BJP will not get the numbers.

"The survey reports say that they (BJP) are not going to get the numbers. So they are thinking of doing another operation. But I am warning the BJP that people will not tolerate this. If they try to do this again, then I think there will be a huge reaction and things will go out of control in the state. There will be very serious consequences," said Rao.

When asked to comment on the BJP's door-to-door campaign in Karnataka, the Congress leader said: "Today, there is a totally negative approach against those people who have betrayed and defected. People know that they have indulged in immorality and are ethically wrong. People want to teach them a lesson."

"I hope people of Karnataka teach a lesson so that BJP's unconstitutional activities come to a halt," he further said, while claiming that the BJP is demolishing the very fabric of democracy.

Talking about the reports that claimed that the Congress will join hands with the Janata Dal (Secular) after December 9, Rao asserted that his party is contesting alone on all the 15 seats.

"After the results, we will see what we have to do. For now, we have to bring all the seats to our fold," he said.

Notably, former Karnataka deputy chief minister G Parameshwara had on December 1 said that there is a likelihood of the Congress-JD(S) alliance in Karnataka after the results are declared. Senior Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge had also indicated that the Congress is not opposed to ally with the JD(S).

The crucial by-elections for 15 out of 17 seats in Karnataka are scheduled to take place on December 5. The results will be announced on December 9.

The bypolls were necessitated because of the disqualification of 14 Congress and three JD(S) rebel legislators after they tendered their resignations from the Assembly in mid-July in protest against the then HD Kumaraswamy-headed coalition government's functioning. It had paved the way for the BJP to come to power.

The bypolls will take place in Athani, Chikkballapura, Gokak, Hirekerur, Hosakote, Hunsur, Kagwad, KR Pete, KR Pura, Mahalakshmi Layout, Ranibennur, Shivajinagara, Vijaynagara, Yellapura, and Yeshwanthpura.

By-elections in Muski (Raichur district) and RR Nagar (Bengaluru) Assembly segments have been withheld because of litigation in the Karnataka High Court over their results in the May 2018 Assembly elections.

The BJP and the Congress have fielded candidates in all the 15 Assembly seats, while the JD(S) is contesting on 12 seats.
