Hyderabad rape case: Trupti Desai protests asking why KCR hasn't met vet's family

Hyderabad rape case: Trupti Desai protests asking why KCR hasn't met vet's family

Trupti Desai and members of her social organisation, Bhumata Brigade, were detained by the police after they raised slogans against KCR.

news Protest

Mild tension prevailed close to Pragathi Bhavan, the residence and camp office of Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao in Hyderabad, after activist Trupti Desai tried to stage a protest on Wednesday morning. Trupti Desai and members of her social organisation, Bhumata Brigade, were immediately detained by the police, after they raised slogans against KCR, over the brutal rape and murder of a 27-year-old veteranarian in Hyderabad last week, that has shaken the country and sparked outrage.

Trupti, and several others, have also lashed out at KCR for his 'poor' response as he has largely remained silent on the brutal crime. On Sunday, the Chief Minister had said that he was pained by the incident, and directed officials to conduct the trial in a fast-track court and ensure that the accused get stringent punishment. But barring this, the CM has not offered any further comments. Additionally, what has angered many is that KCR is seen busy instead attending weddings, and is yet to speak to the family of the murdered woman.

On December 1, the Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) chief attended Khanapur MLA Rekha Naik's daughter's wedding, before flying to New Delhi to attend another high-profile wedding. He returned to Hyderabad on December 3. On December 4, KCR's convoy was seen leaving his camp office yet again. According to police officers at the spot, the Chief Minister was going to attend a wedding in Nalgonda.

Speaking to ANI before the protest, Trupti also pointed out, "CM of the state has time to attend weddings but he doesn't have time to visit the victim's family. We will be going to CM's office shortly, and we will demand answers from him."

#Telangana - Minutes after Activist @TruptiDesai20 protests at CM Office in Hyderabad for not meeting the #HyderabadHorror victim’s family, KCR leaves the office. Police, on ground, says CM is going to Nagole to attend a wedding and will be back by night. #Hyderabad pic.twitter.com/MSfXl6VOho — Rishika Sadam (@RishikaSadam) December 4, 2019

Trupti Desai, Bhumata Brigade, in Hyderabad :CM of the state has time to attend weddings but he doesn't have time to visit the victim's (woman veterinarian who was raped& murdered) family. We will be going to CM's office shortly, and will demand answers from him. pic.twitter.com/dOdEbUbfXK — ANI (@ANI) December 4, 2019

In a letter to KCR, Trupti said that the gangrape and murder reflected once again that women were not safe in society, and therefore there was a strong outburst of anger among people, against the heinous crime. She also made a list of demands, including that the "law should be strict and amended to ensure that those accused of such crimes must be punished within six months."

"Case should be conducted in a fast track court immediately and special prosecutor must be appointed as early as possible. Police protection should be provided to the deceased family. Witnesses of the case should also be protected," she added.

After the case came to light, the Bar Associations of Ranga Reddy and Mahabubnagar districts unanimously decided that they would not take up the case of the accused in court. Pointing out that this may prolong the trial, Trupti asked the state government to appoint an advocate for the accused, as it was bound by law to do so.

“Keeping protection and welfare of women in mind, police officials must take positive steps, so that the women in society feel safe," she added.

The veterinarian was gangraped and murdered by four truck drivers and cleaners near a toll gate close to Outer Ring Road at Shamshabad on November 27. According to police, the accused trapped the victim by deflating one of the tyres of her scooter and later offering to fix it. After killing the victim, they carried the body in their truck near Shadnagar town and set it ablaze.

The Cyberabad police on November 29 arrested all four accused and the next day a magistrate in Shadnagar town sent them to judicial custody. The accused are currently lodged in Cherlapally Jail in Hyderabad.

IANS inputs
