With postcards, transgender community urges President Kovind not to sign contentious Bill

Members of the transgender community protesting against the Bill in Bengaluru earlier this month | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Bill was passed by Rajya Sabha on November 26 Members of the community claim that the bill contradicts the SC's 2014 NALSA judgement Over 7,000 postcards have been written to the President urging him not to sign the Bill

Chennai: Earlier this month, the Rajya Sabha passed the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Bill amidst nationwide protests by subscribers of India's third gender. Members of the transgender community who have taken up this fight claim that the Bill falls short of achieving its main objective, the protection of trans-men and trans-women.

According to the Bill which has been passed in both houses of parliament, each transgender must secure a gender certificate from the District Magistrate. It sets aside the recommendation of a Standing Committee which suggested that this certification process be overseen by a Screening Committee comprising a chief medical officer, district social welfare officer, psychiatrist, government officer and member of the transgender community.

Now, the transgender community in Tamil Nadu has taken to a unique way to urge President Ram Nath Kovind not to sign the Bill passed in Parliament. For this purpose, the Tamil Nadu Rainbow Coalition (TNRC) along with a number of other groups is sending postcards to the President. According to a report by TheNewsMinute, as many as 7,000 postcards have already been sent by TNRC and members of various other transgender rights' groups.

The postcards read that the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Bill 2019 is not against the 2014 Supreme Court judgment in the NALSA case and is, therefore, unfair to the trans-men and trans-women. It further urges the President to "respect the voice of the unheard" by refusing to give the Bill legal validity.

Following the passage of the Bill in the Rajya Sabha on November 26, protests broke out across the country with members of the transgender community taking to the streets in Bengaluru and Chennai among other cities. Protestors claim that the Bill violates their basic rights and is contrary to the very precedent which recognised them as a third gender in 2014.
