Govt clueless about economy, PM 'incompetent manager': Chidambaram slams Centre a day after release from Tihar

P Chidambaram addressing a press conference in the national capital on Thursday. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The Supreme Court of India granted him bail on conditions that he should not make any public statements on the INX Media case Chidambaram had been arrested by the Central Bureau of Investigation on August 21 and sent to Tihar jail on September 5

New Delhi: Former Union Finance Minister and Member of Parliament from Rajya Sabha, P Chidambaram, slammed the central government on Thursday over the downward slide of the Indian economy in his first press conference, a day after getting released from the Tihar jail in connection with the INX Media case.

“The government is wrong. It is wrong because it is clueless. It is unable to look for the obvious clues because it is stubborn and mulish in defending its catastrophic mistakes like demonetisation, flawed GST, tax terrorism, regulatory overkill, protectionism, and centralised control of decision-making in the PMO,” he said in his opening remarks.

Attacking Prime Minister Narendra Modi, he said, “The Prime Minister is unusually silent on the economy, he is the incompetent manager of the economy, he has left it to his minister to do the answering. We pay close attention to the numbers which indicate a floundering economy,” he added.

The former finance minister said that the NDA government’s decisions are wrong and that ‘achhe din’ is “falling GDP”. “I will write extensively on the economic policies of the government that have failed us. Achhe din is the falling GDP. Impact of demonetisation and GST have not been rectified by the government.”

“We will be lucky to end the year if growth touches 5%. Please remember Dr Arvind Subramanian’s caution that 5% under this government, because of suspect methodology, is not really 5% but less by about 1.5%,” Chidambaram said.

Chidambaram said his conscience is clear. “My record as a minister and my conscience are absolutely clear. Officers who have worked with me, business persons who have interacted with me and journalists who have observed me know that very well. My first prayers after stepping out of prison were for Kashmiris who have been denied freedom. I am particularly concerned about the political leaders who have been detained without charges. Freedom is indivisible, if we must preserve our freedom, we must fight for their freedom.”

Chidambaram was given a warm welcome by his Congress party workers and was garlanded as soon as he stepped out of the prison on Wednesday evening after the Supreme Court granted him bail.

The veteran Congress leader heaved a sigh of relief and said he “breathed the air of freedom after 106 days” upon release and met interim Congress chief Sonia Gandhi along with his son Karti.

On Thursday, he reached the Parliament and joined other Congress leaders and supporters to stage a protest over rising onion prices.

Delhi: Congress leaders, including P Chidambaram protest in Parliament premises over onion prices. pic.twitter.com/R7TWn7UMKD — ANI (@ANI) December 5, 2019

The Supreme Court of India granted him bail on conditions that he should not make any public statements on the INX Media case. In addition to that, he has been asked to be available for interrogation and not leave the country without due permission from the apex court.

Chidambaram was arrested by the Central Bureau of Investigation on August 21 and sent to Tihar jail on September 5 in connection with the corruption case.
