After Nirmala Sitharaman, another BJP minister Ashwini Choubey says he's never tasted onions

Ashwini Choubey/ Twitter: @AshwiniKChoubey | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights On Wednesday, Sitharaman said that she came from a family that did not eat onion and garlic On Thursday, Congress protested outside the Parliament House against rising onion prices

New Delhi: A day after Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said that she comes from a family which has 'not much to do with onions and garlic', another BJP minister has joined the debate and said that he too never ate onions.

‘I’ve never tasted onions’, Ashwini Choubey, Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare said on Thursday. Earlier during the day, former finance minister and Congress leader P Chidambaram took a jibe at Sitharaman saying — "I thought the Finance Minister said yesterday she does not eat onions, she is not bothered... What does she eat? Does she eat avocado? She does not eat onions."

On Wednesday, during a debate in the Lok Sabha, Sitharaman said that she doesn't eat much of onion or garlic and hails from a family where these two vegetables are not much in use.

"I don't eat much of onion-garlic. I come from such a family which doesn't have much to do with onion", she said in response to disruptions by the Opposition benches. "Onion price surge was due to factors such as a reduction in the area of cultivation and production," she said. Dismissing the allegations by the Opposition parties, Sitharaman said that the government has taken measures to check the steep rise in onion prices including import options.

Meanwhile, Congress leaders P Chidambaram, Adhir Chowdhury, Gaurav Gogoi and others protested outside the Parliament against the rising prices of onions. Holding a basket full of onions, the Congress MPs shouted slogans which said — 'stop harassing the poor'.

"Today the price of onion is so high that if you buy a lot of onions in bulk, you may get Income Tax Notice. Petrol prices, diesel prices, onion prices all have hit the roof," Senior Karnataka Congress leader Dinesh Gundu Rao told news agency ANI.




