Protests across Assam against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, KMSS says will move SC if passed

Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS) chief Akhil Gogoi | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights If the CAB is not scrapped then people will overthrow the BJP government in 2021: KMSS chief Akhil Gogoi Indigenous people of the Northeastern states are worried thinking that the entry of these people will endanger their identity and livelihood Gogoi also said that the movements on the street will continue till the CAB is not scrapped

Guwahati: Protesters across Assam hit the streets against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill on Thursday with Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS) saying it would move the Supreme Court if it is passed in Parliament.

Workers from several social and youth organisations joined the KMSS for a massive rally demanding that the Bill be scrapped. Opposition Congress MLAs also demonstrated against the Bill in the Assembly premises.

The All Assam Students' Union (AASU), the All India United Democratic Front (AIUDF) and others also took out rallies across the state denouncing the Bill which is likely to be introduced in the Lok Sabha on December 9 and taken up for passage the next day, PTI reported.

KMSS chief Akhil Gogoi accused the ruling BJP at the Centre and the state of sacrificing the sentiment of the Assamese people for vote bank politics.

He further said that if the CAB is not scrapped then people will overthrow the Sarbananda Sonowal-led BJP government in 2021 when the state goes to polls.

The CAB seeks to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955, in order to grant Indian citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians coming to India after facing persecution in Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan.

The indigenous people of the Northeastern states are worried and afraid thinking that the entry of these people will endanger their identity and livelihood.

"If the 1.9 crore Hindus of Bangladesh come to Assam within a few years and attain Indian citizenship under CAB, the existence of the Assamese language will be threatened and the jobs and land will be taken away by them depriving the indigenous people," Akhil Gogoi said.

Gogoi also said that the movements on the street will also continue, adding that the state will never accept the CAB.

Leaders and supporters of the KMSS who were coming from other parts of the state to join the protest were detained by the police at various places.

In Assam’s Nalbari district, AIUDF workers staged a rally and burnt effigies of Union Home Minister Amit Shah and Assam Chief Minister Sonowal.
