Odisha in grip of mining mafia: CM Arvind Kejriwal

BHUBANESWAR: Delhi chief minister and AAP convenor Arvind Kejriwal on Thursday accused the Naveen Patnaik government of looting the state in collusion with the BJP and the Congress.“The state is in the grip of mining mafia during the long BJD rule. The BJP, the Congress and the BJD are in a coalition to loot the state. There is no opposition here,” Kejriwal said, while addressing a public meeting here, organised by Samajik Nyaya Abhijan, a socio-political outfit. “They are all together sharing the state resources. They have made election here a farce,” the Delhi chief minister said.Flanked by expelled Congress leaders Srikant Jena and Krishna Chandra Sagaria, Kejriwal drew a comparison between health and education in Delhi with Odisha while making a scathing attack on Naveen. “Naveen should come and see how we have improved schools and hospitals in Delhi,” Kejriwal said, adding the same was achieved because of honest and efficient administration in Delhi.Making a pitch for his own party AAP here, Kejriwal said, “Odisha too can have better schools and better hospitals. It’s for people to vote for a government that can bring revolutionary changes.”Kejriwal said AAP is not a political party but a movement for second independence of the country to achieve what freedom fighters such as Chandra Sekhar Azad and Bhagat Singh had dreamt for India.Pointing out the high power tariff in Odisha, the Delhi CM said Delhi doesn’t produce power. “It buys whatever is required but power tariff is Re 1 per unit. Odisha is a power-producing state but people here have to pay Rs 5.75 per unit,” he said.The BJD, the BJP and the Congress countered Kejriwal. BJD spokesperson and MLA Samir Ranjan Dash said, “Kejriwal catapulted to power riding on the anti-corruption movement led by Anna Hazare. However, he demolished the dreams of people after coming to power in Delhi and not delivering on those promises. Now, he is doing an election stunt here by trying to put everybody else in the corrupt bracket.”While BJP’s Pritiviraj Harichandan said his party is playing its role as an opposition effectively, Congress spokesperson Satya Nayak said Kejriwal words have no relevance.
