My daughter's soul at peace now: Hyd vet's father

After all the four accused in the rape and murder of a woman veterinarian in Telangana were killed in an encounter with the police, the victim's father expressed gratitude to the police and said that his daughter's soul must be at peace now.

IMAGE: A poster is seen at a candle-lit march by the resident doctors and medical students from All India Institute Of Medical Sciences to protest against the alleged rape and murder of the woman on the outskirts of Hyderabad. Photograph: Anushree Fadnavis/Reuters

"It has been 10 days to the day my daughter died. I express my gratitude towards the police and government for this. My daughter's soul must be at peace now," he said.

Senior police officials have arrived at the site of the encounter.

WATCH: I express my gratitude towards the police for this, says Hyderabad vet's father

The accused were killed by the police when they tried to escape while being taken to the crime spot.

"The accused were killed in a police encounter at Chatanpally, Shadnagar today in the wee hours, between 3 am and 6 am. I have reached the spot and further details will be revealed," Cyberabad Police Commissioner V C Sajjanar said.

The doctor was brutally gang-raped and killed by four persons before they burnt her body in Shamshabad area on November 27.

The four accused were in judicial custody at Cherlapally Central Jail in Hyderabad.

Meanwhile, the mother of the Delhi 2012 gang rape, Asha Devi, said that the Telangana police who shot dead all the four accused in the rape and murder of the veterinarian in Telangana while they were allegedly attempting to escape custody, "did a great job".

"I am extremely happy with this punishment. Police have done a great job and I demand that no action should be taken against the police personnel," Devi said.

WATCH: No action should be taken against the police personnel, says Nirbhaya's mother

"I have been running from pillar to post for the last seven years to get justice in Nirbhaya case. I appeal to the justice system of this country and the government, that Nirbhaya's culprits must be hanged to death, at the earliest," she added.
