Bigg Boss 13 fame Tehseen Poonawalla REACTS on detention by police; Says, 'Officials took selfies with me'

Tehseen Poonawalla, who made headlines with his small stint in the Bigg Boss 13 house, has again making the noise. But, this time not for his remarks on BB 13 housemates, but his personal-professional life. For the unversed, the political analyst made waves on social media with his recent protest against the Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman. Yes, Tehseen protested against the FM's remarks on the surging prices of onions that she made in the parliament. Not Tehseen, but many civilians were agitated after a video of Nirmala ji stating that she is not affected by the rise in prices of onions as her family doesn't consume them, started doing rounds.

The FM's remarks did not go down well with Poonawalla, who decided do go for a weird yet unique "wheelchair and onion" protest. He also mentioned that he will not break any rules, but will raise his voice against the government by taking to the streets as it is the need of the hour. However, things did not go the way Tehseen wanted them to, and he was rather detained by the cops. Yes, the Delhi Police detained Tehseen Ponawalla for his protest.



ALSO READ: Bigg Boss 13: Tehseen Poonawalla SLAMS Asim Riaz for fighting with Sidharth Shukla and calls him a 'Snake'

Talking about the incident with India Forums, Tehseen said that FM's remarks in the parliament of her family not eating onions, must be condemned as it shows her arrogance and ignorance. He said that the lay man is hugely affected by the rising prices of onions and thus he decided to take a sack of onions along with a wheelchair to protest against the happenings. Without any reason, the Delhi Police detained him as he was peacefully sharing his views with the media. He added that when he challenged the officials to file an FIR against him and asked him about which law he broke, they had a bizarre reaction. They officials took selfies with him and asked him to leave the premises.

What do are your thoughts on the entire controversy? Do you think Tehseen did the right thing? Drop in your suggestions and let us know.
