Delhi: Police use water cannon on protesters demanding justice for Unnao rape-murder victim

Police use water cannons to disperse protesters demanding justice of Unnao rape and murder victim | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The Police on Saturday used water cannons on protesters who held a candle march from Raj Ghat to India Gate demanding justice for Unnao rape and murder victim. The police resorted to the coercive action after some of the protesters in the candle march tried to jump police-installed barricades.

The Delhi Police said the protesters did not have permission to go beyond the Arun Jaitley Stadium. Astonishingly, the police department in its defence said that protesters were carrying a torch and therefore the police had to use water cannon.

"Inhone mashaal jalayi hui thi toh woh police personnel pe mashaal aag phek rahi thi toh usko bhujane ke liya use kiya. Unke pass yahan (near Arun Jaitley Stadium) se aage jane ki permission nahi hai. They had lit a torch and its flames were coming towards the police personnel. So we used the water cannon in order to extinguish that," MS Randhawa, PRO, Delhi Police was quoted by the news agency ANI as saying.

Protests are being held in several states including Delhi after the 23-year-old rape victim who was set on fire in Unnao on Thursday died a day in Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital on Friday. The victim suffered 90 per cent burns after she was burnt alive by five men on Thursday.

The victim was attacked outside Sindpur village in Unnao district when she was on her way to the court in Rae Bareli for the hearing in the rape case. Out of the five men who attacked her two were out on bail in the rape case filed by her against them. She was allegedly raped by Shivam Trivedi and Shubham in December who constantly threatened her to take the case back.

Delhi: Protesters who are holding a candle march from Raj Ghat to India Gate try to jump barricades. https://t.co/7eJ9NwQheW pic.twitter.com/oe8sMiXviK — ANI (@ANI) December 7, 2019

Unnao also witnessed protests when UP cabinet ministers went to meet the family members of the victim. The members of the National Students’ Union of India (NSUI), the student union wing of Congress, clashed with police personnel deployed there against UP ministers Kamal Rani Varun, Swami Prasad Maurya and MP Sakshi Maharaj visiting Unnao rape victim's residence.

UP Minister Kamal Rani Varun said the district administration will give an exgratia compensation of Rs 25 lakh to the family of the victim. She also announced that as per family’s demand a house will be allotted to them under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana.
