Unnao: Police detain protesters after UP ministers, MP Sakshi Maharaj heckled

UP ministers Kamal Rani Varun, Swami Prasad Maurya at Unnao | Photo Credit: ANI

Unnao: Amid flaring nerves, protesters and police personnel and clashed and politicians in Unnao a day after the rape victim from the district died in a Delhi hospital.

Sakshi Maharaj, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Member of Parliament (MP) from Unnao and some UP ministers were heckled by protesters on Saturday when they reached to meet the family members of the victim at her residence.

Members of the National Students’ Union of India (NSUI), the student union wing of Congress, clashed with police personnel deployed there in order to protest UP ministers Kamal Rani Varun, Swami Prasad Maurya and MP Sakshi Maharaj visiting Unnao rape victim's residence.

The NSUI members raised slogans against the visit of UP ministers. The police detained several members of the student body and whisked them away from the scene.

#WATCH Unnao: National Students' Union of India (NSUI) members being detained by police, while they were protesting against the visit of Ministers Kamal Rani Varun, Swami Prasad Maurya and MP Sakshi Maharaj to Unnao rape victim's residence. pic.twitter.com/mkDZo5lUeA — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 7, 2019

The protesters who chanted ‘go back, go back’ slogans sustained as police used coercive measures to disperse the crowd.

Earlier in the day, Uttar Pradesh Yogi Adityanath said the death of the rape victim was “extremely said”.

“Whatever investigation the victim's family wants, we will do it. The names that have been taken by the victim, action will be taken against them. No culprit will be spared. It is not a subject of politics,” said Maurya after meeting the relatives of the victim at her residence.

The 23-year-old was attacked Thursday morning while she was on her way to the court by the accused Shivam Trivedi and Shubham who allegedly raped her in December.

UP Minister Kamal Rani Varun said the district administration will give an ex-gratia compensation of Rs 25 lakh to the family of the victim. She also announced that as per family’s demand a house will be allotted to them under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana.
