After calling pan-India NRC a 'conspiracy', AAP to hold protest at Jantar Mantar on Sunday

AAP leader Sanjay Singh said that the national NRC plan of the BJP is a conspiracy (representational photo) | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Singh was also a part of the Opposition meeting which deliberated upon how to counter the Citizenship Amendment Bill BJP leaders have vehemently stated that the NRC will be implemented across the country

New Delhi: Calling the government's plans to implement a nationwide NRC as a "conspiracy", the Aam Aadmi Party will be holding a protest at Jantar Mantar on Sunday. Senior AAP leader Sanjay Singh said that the demonstration will be led by party's Purvanchali unit head Gopal Rai.

"If the National Register of Citizens (NRC) is implemented across India, where will people from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar residing in different parts of the country for decades go as they would not be able to prove their residentship before 1971," Singh, a Rajya Sabha member, was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.

"Our Purvanchali unit headed by Gopal Rai will sit on a protest at the Jantar Mantar on Sunday against the NRC's implementation which the government is planning to carry out in the whole country," he said.

Singh was also present during a meeting of the Opposition parties which deliberated upon strategies to counter the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) in Parliament next week.

The opposition to NRC as well as CAB comes just a day ahead of the planned tabling of the CAB in Parliament. On Wednesday, the Union Cabinet cleared the draft Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) to be tabled in Parliament. Opposition parties including Congress, TMC and the Left have already stated that they will oppose the contentious Bill in the House. Interest groups from the Northeast have already been protesting, claiming that the Bill contradicts with the Assam Accord of 1985, which sets March 24, 1971, as the cut-off date for deportation of illegal Bangladeshi immigrants.

CAB, which aims to grant citizenship to non-Muslim communities from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh, who have been displaced from those countries due to religious persecution, was passed by the previous Lok Sabha. However, it could not be tabled in the Rajya Sabha due to protests.
