Why everyone should get behind the campaign for a biryani emoji

“Emoji are a global curated visual language. Because it’s global, you want it to accurately represent the base of users,” says Jennifer 8 Lee, part of the Unicode consortium through Emoji Nation, a lobby group aiming to improve global representation on emoji keyboards. “More parts of the world are being represented by emoji,” she explains. “That’s not so unexpected because you’re starting with very few.”

Any applications for new emoji must be made in writing, using a form that looks at whether the emoji is distinctive from what is already there, how much demand there is likely to be, and whether it is a flash in the pan or something more permanent (imagine the ghosts of fidget spinners and Tamagotchis past that would gum up our emoji keyboards if that last requirement wasn’t there).

A proposal for a VR headset has been rejected for a lack of staying power, while other, mundane objects that don’t pop off the screen are turned down because they’re a bit boring (see: hummus). Applications can be held up for cultural or political reasons (a group of activists has been campaigning unsuccessfully for a Tibetan flag emoji), or because they’re not fleshed out enough. Some are even temporarily halted because of the opposite reason: a Finnish application for a sauna emoji had to be redesigned because the naked bodies depicted in the original application would have offended more conservative cultures.

The biryani campaign would certainly match the requirements for longevity and demand – with hundreds of years of history, and hundreds of people taking to the streets to campaign for it, and a 42,000-strong petition on Change.org. But it may struggle with the first requirement: distinctiveness. “I wonder if it’s too close to the rice and curry emoji that’s there,” says Melissa Thermidor, who has lobbied successfully for a number of emoji to be included on phones, including the sari.

But Thermidor is supportive of the campaign. “If you think about places like India, with more people having access to the internet and using these tools and wanting to see themselves, that level of self-reflection is important,” she says. “I think the idea of a mobile phone transcends everything. People want to be seen, and that’s what it boils down to. That desire to be seen.”
