Rahul Gandhi to hold two rallies in Jharkhand on Monday to get voters’ support for Congress-JMM-RJD alliance

Rahul Gandhi, Congress leader | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights On Monday, Rahul Gandhi is scheduled to address two rallies in Jharkhand for the third phase of state elections The first rally will be held at Barkagaon, Hazaribagh and the second will be at Mesra in Ranchi This will be the second visit of the former Congress president in the state to campaign for the Assembly polls

New Delhi: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi is scheduled to address a public rally in Jharkhand on Monday for the ongoing Assembly polls in the state. The first rally will be held at Barkagaon, Hazaribagh and the second will be at Mesra in Ranchi.

The Congress has released an itinerary for the rallies of the former Congress president. It stated that at 12:30 pm, Rahul Gandhi will address a rally at High School Ground in Barkagaon which falls in Hazaribagh district. The second rally will be at 1:45 pm at Mesra Ground in the state’s capital, Ranchi.

This is the second time Rahul Gandhi is visiting the state to campaign for the Assembly polls. Before this, he had addressed a rally in Simdega on December 2.

The Congress is contesting the Assembly polls in alliance with the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM) and the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD). Out of the total 81 seats in the Assembly, Congress is contesting for 31 seats while the JMM and the RJD are contesting for 43 and seven seats respectively.

In Assembly elections of 2014, the BJP allied with All Jharkhand Students Union (AJSU) and won 37 seats while its partner AJSU secured five. But this time both the allying partners are contesting separately.

Jharkhand is having Assembly polls in five phases out of which two have already concluded and the third one is scheduled on December 12.

The second phase in which 20 constituencies voted concluded on Saturday in which the Congress and Jharkhand Mukti Morcha contested in six and 14 seats respectively while the BJP contested in all the 20 constituencies.

The second phase also witnessed a few incidents of violence despite the deployment of security forces in the polling constituencies and it led to a person’s death.

The Congress’ campaign is based on the economic slowdown that has hit the country and lowered the GDP figures to 4.5 per cent in the second quarter (July-September) of 2019-20 and apathy towards the tribals in the state.

Counting will be done on December 23.
