Sadhvi Pragya cancels Rajgarh visit, Congress put up Gandhi posters for welcome

BHOPAL: BJP Bhopal MP Pragya Singh Thakur, who had warned that she would visit Biaora (Rajgarh) to meet Congress MLA Govardhan Dangi for his alleged threat to set her ablaze, cancelled her visit after senior leadership asked her to avoid controversies. In Biaora, Dangi had put up Gandhi posters to welcome Sadhvi.On Saturday, Pragya had staged a dharna outside the Kamla Nagar police station seeking register an FIR against Dangi for his remarks. She later ended her protest saying she would continue her fight for her rights.On Sunday, Dangi put up posters and banners of Mahatma Gandhi across Biaora town with party workers playing Gandhi bhajans at several places. The Congress also held a peace march in the town to spread the message of non-violence. Dangi said he always followed Bapu's teachings of non-violence and would welcome Pragya if she comes to Biaora to meet him. “I had said something against her (Pragya) for which I have apologised. Being a follower of non-violence, I would welcome her in Biaora. We have put up banners and posters all over the town with the message of non-violence and peace. We will welcome her like a guest," Dangi told reporters.Dangi was agitated over Thakur's alleged remark regarding the assassin of Mahatma Gandhi during a discussion in Parliament and had protested by burning her effigy in Rajgarh, During the agitation, Dangi had said, "We will not just burn her effigy. If she sets her foot here, we will burn her too."After Dangi's remarks, Thakur had tweeted that she would reach his residence in Multanpura in Rajgarh on December 8 at 4 pm. After drawing flak, Dangi had expressed regret on his remarks saying he has been follower of non-violence all his life and would welcome Thakur if she arrives in Rajgarh.When contacted, Pragya's assistant Upma Singh told TOI, "Pragya could not reach Rajgarh because she will attend Parliament on Monday. If she would visit Rajgarh today, she will not be able to reach New Delhi to attend the Parliament session."Sources said that the BJP national leadership has cautioned Pragya to avoid controversial remarks. Her Biaora (Rajgarh) visit could have triggered unrest as there were speculations over possibility of a clash between Congress and BJP supporters. The Rajgarh police had also made heavy bandobast in view of Pragya's visit to thwart any untoward incident. On instructions by the national leadership, Pragya had also ended her dharna at Kamla Nagar police station on Saturday night.
