Citizenship (Amendment) Bill: Opposition protests, calls it a ‘cab ride with a divisive driver’

Protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: As the National Democratic Alliance government on Monday introduced the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 in the Lok Sabha, protests were held inside Parliament complex as well as elsewhere in the national capital against the legislation.

Indian Union Muslim League MPs held a protest in front of the Mahatma Gandhi statue in Parliament premises. The All India United Democratic Front (AIUDF) took to the streets at Jantar Mantar to protest against the amendment Bill, with its members holding placards reading the move was against the idea of India.

"We reject this Bill. It is against the Constitution and against Hindu-Muslim unity," Badruddin Ajmal, Lok Sabha AIUDF MP from Dhubri, Assam, said.

The Congress party has also dubbed the CAB “unconstitutional”. The Congress attack was led by leaders Kapil Sibal and Abhishek Singhvi.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 provisions Indian nationality for persecuted minorities - including Hindus, Christians, Sikhs, Parsis, Jains and Buddhists - from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh, three Muslim-majority nations in India’s neighbourhood.

Sibal wrote on Twitter: "CAB is a cab ride with a divisive driver to destabilise, destroy our polity values-- both societal and constitutional with an eye only on political dividends Hath milao Desh bachao! (sic)."

Singhvi tweeted: "Congress opposes CAB tooth and nail in present form because its against the constitution designed by the visionaries of a modern and plural society making India of Mahatma Gandhi different from our next door extremist neighbours (sic)."

The opposition to the CAB is largely on the ground that Muslims have been left out and that the proposed legislation is at odds with the Constitution of India that does not differentiate between citizens on the basis of religion.

Former BJP ally Shiv Sena has, though, backed the Bill. Shiv Sena's Rajya Sabha MP Sanjay Raut said on Twitter: "Illegal intruders should be thrown out."

He, however, added: "Immigrant Hindus must be given citizenship, but Amit Shah, let's give rest to allegations of creating vote bank & not give them voting rights, what say? And yes what about pandits? have they gone back to Kashmir after Article 370 was removed?"
