Dragged, punched, lathicharged: JNU students accuse police of atrocities as march to Rashtrapati Bhavan foiled

JNU students lathi-charged by police in Delhi | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Students of the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), who have been protesting against hostel fee hike for over a month now, were on Monday baton-charged by the Delhi Police for defying orders to march towards the Rashtrapati Bhavan. The students wanted to seek an appointment with the President to seek his intervention in the matter.

Reports said during the commotion as police went on a lathi-charge spree against the students, president of the JNU Students' Union Aishe Ghosh was pushed off a police vehicle. As the students clashed with the police in the evening, Ghosh says she was pushed from a police Gypsy vehicle while she was addressing the students.

News agency IANS reported that the police also warned the media against covering the incident and recording footage of the scuffle, stating that "something will happen" if they disobey the police orders. Reports said some video journalists were also manhandled during the incident.

"Students have been detained earlier, we were detained earlier, but this is illegal. We were dragged, punched, kicked and thrashed with lathis before they threw several agitating students in PCR vans," Ghosh told the media.

Earlier in the afternoon, the students were stopped by the police in South Delhi's Bhikaji Cama Place area. The police there rained lathis on both male and female students.

The JNU students' protest caused massive traffic snarls on the Ring Road in South Delhi near Bhikaji Cama Place.

Prior to the start of the march, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation had closed entry and exit at three metro stations in central Delhi as a precautionary measure. Entry and exit were stopped at Udyog Bhawan, Lok Kalyan Marg and Central Secretariat metro stations on the request of police.

"As advised by Delhi Police, entry & exit at Udyog Bhawan, Lok Kalyan Marg and Central Secretariat have been closed. Trains are not halting at Udyog Bhawan and Lok Kalyan Marg," the DMRC said on Twitter.

#WATCH: Police resorted to lathicharge after a clash with protesting Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students, who were marching towards Rashtrapati Bhawan to meet President over fee hike issue. pic.twitter.com/sAbuN05n2q — ANI (@ANI) December 9, 2019

Apart from the protest by students of the Jawaharlal Nehru University over hostel fee hike and other issues, the Delhi Congress was holding a protest to express solidarity with the Unnao rape victim.

The JNU students’ march to Rashtrapati Bhavan started from the campus located in South Delhi. The students wanted an appointment with the President and seek his intervention in the hostel fee hike matter. It may be noted that the President is the visitor of the university.

Delhi: Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students march from JNU campus to Rashtrapati Bhawan seeking to meet President over fee hike issue. pic.twitter.com/BV98gWA8EL — ANI (@ANI) December 9, 2019

Security was tightened around the JNU ahead of the march. The students claimed that in view of the march, the Delhi Police had closed all gates of the university.

The traffic police had also barricaded roads leading to the university. Baba Gangnath Marg is closed for vehicular traffic due to students' protest and the long march, the Delhi Traffic Police said.

The students, who have been demonstrating for more than a month now over the issue, have given a call for the boycott of upcoming semester exams. The JNU administration has warned students against boycotting exams.

The Ministry of Human Resource Development had formed a three-member panel to explore ways to break the deadlock at JNU and mediate between the agitating students and the administration. The committee has submitted its report to the HRD Ministry.
