High voltage transmission tower issue: Farmers’ talks with govt, power grid corpn officials fail

Tirupur: The Federation of Farmers’ Associations, which had been opposing the move to set up high voltage transmission towers on agricultural lands, said it was not satisfied with the talks with the state government and the Power Grid Corporation of India authorities that was held in Chennai on Thursday.

Its members said they were disappointed with the state government for not taking any step to stop the erection of high voltage towers until their issues were addressed. They said they would decide on the next course of action in consultation with all the farmers’ associations.

After holding talks with the government and the power grid authorities led by electricity minister P Thangamani, state secretary of Tamil Nadu Vivasayigal Sangam P Shanmugam told reporters that the minister had accepted their take on the impact of erecting transmission towers on farmlands, but he said there was ‘no other alternate’.

“We have put forward our two main demands before the authorities - the government should ensure that rentals are fixed for the high voltage towers already established in the project and the remaining lines should be laid as underground cables,” he said.

The authorities, however, said underground cables could not be laid if voltage was more than 400KV, he told TOI. “Pointing out that such high voltage lines could be laid underground only for short distances, they said the model won’t suit the ongoing project. They also said the central government was unlikely to agree to it, as it would cost 10 times higher than setting up transmission towers.”

Shanmugam said the minister has promised to represent their demands to the central government. “The minister said he will help get more compensation for the affected farmers. But we were not satisfied with the talks.”

After 14 days of continuous protests in seven venues across the state, the farmers had earlier scheduled to stage a protest in front the state assembly on Thursday. But the called off the protest to participate in the talks. tnn



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
