51,000 MP Congress workers to join Bharat Bachao rally

BHOPAL: Madhya Pradesh Congress on Monday said that 51,000 party workers will join the Bharat Bachao Rally under the leadership of Sonia Gandhi at the Ram Lila Maidan in New Delhi on December 14. Speaking to reporters, state PCC treasurer Govind Goel said, "From the time BJP-led NDA took over the reins of the Centre, the country's economic and social structure has undergone massive damage. Even constitutional institutions have been adversely affected."Goel said that about 51,000 enthusiastic party workers and leaders, led by chief minister Kamal Nath , will join the Bharat Bachao rally on Saturday. Special trains, buses and SUVs will take the Congress workers to New Delhi. Sources said that target of 1,000 workers has been set from every district of the state - there are 52 districts. However, more workers are likely to reach from districts closer to the capital mainly from the Gwalior-Chambal and Rewa divisions."The Congress party's rally is to save the country from BJP's corruption, widespread unemployment , hunger, economic recession , industrial lock-outs, closing businesses of small traders and increasing offences against women and children," Govind Goel said. He argued that "hurriedly-implemented" demonetisation GST and other economic policies of the Narendra Modi-led government has resulted in severe fiscal crisis."In our country, people used to be happy eating rotis with onions. Today that same onion is costing Rs 200/ kg," the state Congress treasurer said. "The economic stagnation is fearful as the BJP-led Centre is selling gold from our federal reserves and has withdrawn Rs 1.76 lakh crore from the Reserve Bank. The party that claims that Congress did nothing in 60 years is now preparing to sell PSUs established from the times of Jawaharlal Nehru. There was a time when even sewing machines and needles had to be imported."Goel added that to have a BSNL sim in one's mobile phone was regarded a status symbol and today, the state-owned telecom company is facing closure. Congress said that along with workers, all cabinet ministers, legislators, state and district level office-bearers, frontal organization members will join the rally in New Delhi.
