Will check influx with own methods: KSU

The KSU has so far detected 10,000 outsiders who had entered Meghalaya and pushed them back

“We have decided that from now we will regulate the entry of outsiders into the state on our own,” KSU president Lambokstarwell Marg-nar said after the union’s central executive committee meeting.

The Khasi Students’ Union (KSU) on Monday said it would adopt its own strategies to check influx into Meghalaya, with the Lok Sabha voting in favour of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

The KSU leader said there are 700 units of the students’ union all over the state. He added that the KSU has so far detected 10,000 outsiders who had entered Meghalaya and pushed them back.

Margnar lamented that the “comprehensive mechanism” adopted by the state government to check influx was yet to materialise.

According to him, the construction of the entry/exit points was still in its infancy.

The district task force, which comprises traditional heads and other government officials and is headed by the deputy commissioners, was notified only this year, while the act was passed in 2016.

Under the Meghalaya Residents Safety and Security Act, 2016, entry/exit points will be set up along the border with Assam. It also mandates setting up of district task forces.

“The notification to form the district task force was brought only this year when the act was passed in 2016,” the KSU president said.

Asked if the Meghalaya government really means to oppose the nill, Margnar said, “If the government opposes the bill, it should show its intent by proposing laws to protect the state from influx.”

The KSU president added that the effects of the bill will not be seen immediately but its consequences will be seen after 10 years. He said some years ago, former MP of Bangladesh Nationalist Party, Salahuddin Ahmed had sneaked into India and was arrested from the city.

Later, the members of the KSU burnt effigies of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and home minister Amit Shah in protest against the bill.
