Viral clip triggers protests against Education Minister

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Patiala, December 9

Hundreds of government schoolteachers across the state wore black ribbons as a mark of their protest against Education Minister Vijay Inder Singla on Monday. They were protesting as he allegedly used derogatory language for teachers in Barnala on Saturday. The video of the incident has gone viral on social media.

Teacher unions demanded an apology from the minister for using "profane" language against B.Ed TET-pass teachers. They said they would burn effigies of the minister across the state on Tuesday and Wednesday.

Vikram Dev, member, Democratic Teachers Front, said, “The protest will continue till he apologises to the teachers for his profanity. It is sad that Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh has not taken any action against the minister.”

Randeep Sangatpura, member of TET-pass unemployed teachers' union, said, “We will gherao the minister's residence in Sangrur on December 15. He has insulted the teaching fraternity, he should resign immediately from his post.”

Meanwhile, during a protest in Amritsar, Ashwani Awasthi, president of the Democratic Teachers Union of the district, said, “Teachers deserve respect. They are responsible for nation-building. We observed the protest to reclaim our dignity.”

BOX

The incident

On his way to attend a function in Barnala, Education Minister Vijay Inder Singla was intercepted by B.Ed TET-pass unemployed teachers who were protesting in support of their demand for amending the eligibility criteria. When the police couldn't tackle the protesters, he got infuriated. As soon as he got off his car at the function, he allegedly started directing the Barnala DSP to thrash the protesters and remove them from the spot while using swear words.

BOX

Minister denies charge

Denying the allegation, Education Minister Vijay Inder Singla, has said, “I didn’t have any interaction with the protesting teachers on Saturday. I was going to attend a function to discuss education system in the state with 100 best private schoolteachers of Malwa.” He said he had asked the DSP to tackle the menace of drugs in the area. “Someone related it with the teachers. We are doing our best possible for teachers to bring changes to the system,” he added.

Quote

Harpal Singh Cheema, Leader of Opposition, said, “The language used by the minister speaks volumes about the attitude of the state government towards the teachers. He should immediately resign from the post. We will meet the Governor to seek his suspension.”
