Chandrababu Naidu shuns cream-coloured shirt for black, says 'blood boiling over injustice meted out to AP'

Ahead of the Union Interim Budget, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister, Chandrababu Naidu held a protest from the state's capital, Amaravati.

Perhaps, on a rare occasion, on Friday, Naidu shunned his trademark cream-coloured shirt to full black and posed in different angles for the camera before going to attend the Assembly session.

As part of protests, programmes announced a few days back, Chandrababu Naidu and his MLAs chose 'black' to attend the assembly session.

They were sporting black to show their support to the protest called in by Pratyeka Hoda Sadhana Samithi (PHSS), demanding special status for the state.

While Naidu wore a black shirt and white pant, several of his MLAs were in full black attire and also had badges in Telugu criticising Centre on Special Status issue.

Amaravati: Andhra Pradesh CM N. Chandrababu Naidu reached state assembly wearing a black shirt to protest against the Central Govt. The CM wore a black shirt showing support to the protest called in by Pratyeka Hoda Sadhana Samithi (PHSS), demanding special status for the state. pic.twitter.com/44P0nZlMLS — ANI (@ANI) February 1, 2019

Delhi: Telugu Desam Party (TDP) MPs dress in black to protest against the central government ahead of the presentation of the interim #Budget2019. They are protesting in Parliament premises demanding special category status for Andhra Pradesh. pic.twitter.com/ANy29nazko February 1, 2019

During the session, Naidu said, "My blood is boiling over the injustice meted out to Andhra Pradesh by the Centre."

"Today, February 1, is being observed as 'Protest Day' in Andhra Pradesh," he added.

"Blood boiling over injustice meted out to AP," the CM further said.

TDP members were the only ones to be present in the Assembly along with the BJP MLAs, as the YSRCP MLAs have stopped attending the sessions for a long time.

On the other hand, the Congress Party, which doesn't have a single member in Assembly and in the Parliament from Andhra Pradesh is trying to make its presence felt by actively participating in Bandh which is being observed all across the states.
