Protests against Citizenship Amendment Bill turn violent in Assam

Massive protests erupted in Assam after Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2019 was passed in Lok Sabha on late Monday night with 311 MPs voting in favour and 80 against it.

The protests are being carried out by All Assam Students' Union (AASU) in Dibrugarh and North East Students' Organisation (NESO) which also called for a 12-hour bandh in Guwahati.

Assam: People stage protest in Jorabat against #CitizenshipAmendmentBill which was passed in Lok Sabha, yesterday. pic.twitter.com/gEZjGkvMBE — ANI (@ANI) December 10, 2019

Meanwhile, angry protesters set ablaze tyres and also stopped vehicles plying on roads as a way to express their anger against the passage of the bill.

Several shops and markets were closed amid the bandh call in Guwahati.

After hours of debate and high drama, the Citizenship Amendment Bill was passed in Lok Sabha on late Monday night. The Bill was introduced in the Lower House by Union Home Minister Amit Shah, who point by point explained and exerted upon the importance of the Bill and its requirement in the country.

Several members of the opposition said that Bill was against the minorities, however, rebutting to opposition's claim, Home Minister Amit Shah said that it was not against the minorities and nighter it was a political move.

The Bill proposes to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955. It was discussed amid huge uproar from Opposition parties and protests in northeast states. The Bill was now be tabled in Rajya Sabha to get its nod.

The House witnessed a fierce debate with AIMIM Chief Asaduddin Owaisi even tearing a copy of the Bill, calling it unconstitutional. "Ye aur ek partition hone ja raha hai (One more partition is about to happen). This Bill is against the Constitution of India and disrespect to our freedom fighters. I tear the Bill, it is trying to divide our country," he said.

Responding to the questions, Amit Shah said that "Under no dimension, this bill is unconstitutional, or is against Article 14."

Defending the government, Shah also added that there will be no discrimination on the basis of religion. "The Hindu population was 84% and in 2011, it was 79%. In 1991, the Muslim population was 9.8% & today it's 14.23%. We have done no discrimination on the basis of religion and in the future as well, there will be no discrimination based on religion," he said.

The Home Minister also stated that Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK) and its residents belong to India. "Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK) is ours, the people there are also ours. Even today, we have reserved 24 seats for them in the Jammu & Kashmir assembly," he informed the House.
