Judge, Jury and Executioner | India Today Insight

Seldom has the mainstream media been on the same page in the two Telugu states since the polarising began in the run-up to the Andhra Pradesh-Telangana reorganisation in 2014. But on December 7, 2019, all the dailies had the killing of the four youth accused in the rape-murder of 27-year-old-veterinarian Disha in the suburbs of Hyderabad as the banner headline on the front pages. 'Bullets deliver judgment' is how the popular daily Eenadu described it. Namasthe Telangana and Sakshi, party mouthpieces of the ruling Telangana Rashtra Samithi and the YSR Congress in the two states, simply screamed 'Encounter' printed in bold red on the front page. 'Encounter' is not a new word in the two states, indeed some would say it's part of the lexicon of even the unlettered here, serving as a euphemism for state-sponsored and extra-judicial killings.



For nearly five decades, encounter killings have been a familiar story here, ever since the police joined up with the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) to put down the earliest rebellion steered by LWE (left-wing extremist) Naxalites in the north coastal Srikakulam district. The militants mounted an organised campaign against the state and also incited innocents to attack the police. While some of these extremists were killed in shootouts during combing operations, others, including LWE suspects and sympathisers (particularly those passing on information about police movements), were nabbed and shot dead at point blank range.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Why Assam is protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Bill?



The extra judicial killings of the Emergency years (1975-77), during the tenure of Congress chief minister Jalagam Vengala Rao, forced the state into a corner. At the insistence of the Janata Party government in Delhi, it was forced to appoint the Justice V. Bhargava Inquiry Commission to inquire into the killings of over 300 people in 'staged encounters' . At least one case, where the ponderous retired Supreme Court judge from Allahabad travelled, with willing media in tow, to the encounter site where four men were tied to trees and shot in the Girayapalli forests of Medak district became a sensation in 1977.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | The Pawar-Fadnavis Rivalry

From what he saw first-hand and the depositions, including that of police officers and civil libertarians, Bhargava delivered a scathing indictment of the police department's untold excesses. However, he had to pack his bags and leave Hyderabad without completing his task because of the obstructive tactics adopted by the state. But it still resulted in the post-Emergency Dharma Vira Commission on police reforms (it included the legendary IPS officer K.F. Rustamji) which led to numerous measures for responsible and responsive policing.



While this led to a lull in the encounter killings, the founding of the People's War Group in 1980 by Kondapalli Seetharamaiah led to police-LWE tensions escalating again. It stayed that way, even after the PWG merged in 2004 with an antagonist in the Naxal power struggle, the Maoist Communist Centre of India (MCC). The new outfit was called the Communist Party of India (Maoists). However, the evolution of a more professional police assisted by superior technology and firepower contained the LWE expansion and drove its leaders into the Bastar region of Chhattisgarh where it is still a force, especially around the Abujhmad plateau.

Meanwhile, the encounter killing techniques learnt were coming in handy in other contexts. In April 2000, the erstwhile Andhra Pradesh police shot dead Azam Ghori, alleged Pakistani ISI agent, in Jagtial town of Karimnagar. In November 2002, they killed dacoits K. Satyanarayana and Sammaiah in an encounter at Palamakula in the erstwhile Ranga Reddy district. In March 2004, alleged criminal Ch. Venugopal was shot dead near Ammuguda in the Hyderabad. Again in the city, in May 2008 they gunned down a gangster, Aziz Reddy, in Jubilee Hills and in July 2008 they 'extortionist' G. Suresh met his end in near Begumpet.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Implementing NRC and Citizenship Bill fraught with challenges

Then, in a celebrated case, on December 10, 2008 (International Human Rights Day, no less), three youth who were allegedly involved in acid attacks on two engineering college girls were killed in an encounter in Warangal following a state-wide uproar over the dastardly attack. What happened during that 'encounter' is not clear even now but the police was said to have opened fire in self-defence, killing the three on the spot as they tried to attack the police and escape. While one of the girls succumbed to the burns, the other survivor is still to recover from the trauma. Incidentally, Cyberabad police commissioner V.C. Sajjanar, in whose area the Chatanpally encounter took place on December 6 this year, was superintendent of police, Warangal, at the time.

In another bizarre incident, on April 7, 2015, five persons associated with radical organizations such as SIMI including Vikaruddin Ahmed, an accused in the murder of two police personnel, were shot dead while they were being brought from Warangal jail to Hyderabad for a court hearing. They had allegedly tried to snatch weapons from the police who claimed to have killed them in self-defence. There were 17 police personnel guarding the accused. The encounter took place a week after two SIMI activists shot dead two policemen and injured three others while trying to escape at Suryapet. Civil rights activists claimed it was a staged encounter and that the five men, who were handcuffed, were killed to avenge the policemen's deaths. Also, on April 7, the police shot dead 20 Tamil Nadu red sander smugglers in the Seshachalam forests of Chittoor district after they allegedly attacked the police company. This is three days after two SIMI activists, Aslam Ayub and Ejazuddin, part of a seven-member SIMI gang that fled from the Khandwa prison in Madhya Pradesh, were killed in an encounter at Janakipuram in Suryapet district in which a police constable was also killed. Another incident in August 2016, possibly the most sensational till the Chatanpally killings last week, was of Naxalite renegade Mohammed Nayeemuddin whose criminal activities included land-grabbing and extortion, allegedly with the help of conniving police officials.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Pragya Thakur and the power of controversy

This litany of encounter killings is why opinion is divided on the Disha rape-murder case. Reactions in the state ranged from jubilation to criticism even as the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) took suo motu notice and deputed investigators to probe the killings. The seven member NHRC team is led by a woman IPS officer, Manzil Saini. Significantly, since 1993, as many as 2,560 cases of extra-judicial killings have been recorded in the country, of which the 1, 224 were found to be fake encounters by the NHRC. This means every second encounter was staged. With Chatanpally barely 39 kms from the Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, the Disha saga could very well become a case study for some years to come for those joining the Indian Police Service.

Clearly, the numbers are alarming and, therefore, doubts will remain as to whether the four men (who were apparently not handcuffed) did as the police claim attack them, snatch two firearms and open fire, forcing them to fire in self-defence at Chatanpally. The Telangana government has constituted a Special Investigation Team to probe the 'encounter' deaths to clear the air. This is besides the mandatory magisterial inquiry. Tollywood may not be far behind in chasing the Chatanpally killings. A maverick filmmaker like Ramgopal Varma may well reconstruct the entire episode in the near future.

READ | Hyderabad rape accused misled us, snatched weapons; killed in retaliation: Top cop

READ | Hyderabad rape-murder accused shot dead in early morning police chase: How events unfolded

READ | Hyderabad shooting echoes in Telangana HC, Supreme court

WATCH | Hyderabad rape-murder: CCTV shows moment woman was taken away in truck
