Top Developments: Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019 passed; protests in some parts of country

The US Commission for International Religious Freedom (USCIR) has urged the US government to consider sanctions against Amit Shah. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Lok Sabha passes Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019 after heated debate Congress opposed the bill calling it unconstitutional and 'divisive' Home Minister Amit Shah says no citizen needs to fear the Bill

New Delhi: The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019 was passed by Parliament Monday midnight amid heated debate and high drama. Sparks flew thick and fast after All India Majlis-e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen (AIMIM) chief and Hyderabad MP Asaduddin Owaisi tore up the copy of the bill calling it 'worse than Hitler's law'. The bill was passed by 311-80 vote. However, the passage of the Bill has sparked protests in some parts of the northeast. The Bill is likely to be presented before the Upper House of Rajya Sabha on Wednesday.

The bill has divided the opposition too with Shiv Sena, the Congress ally in Maharashtra, voting in favour of the move. The bill makes it easy for the non-Muslim minorities living in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan to get Indian citizenship.

Let's take a look at top 10 developments regarding the bill

1. With the passage of the bill, Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian living in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, who entered India on or before 31 December 2014 can avail Indian citizenship.

2. Home Minister said in Parliament that neither Muslims nor the people from the north-east need to fear the Bill. Shah said the Bill is aimed at helping the migrant minorities.

3. Amit Shah said the bill did not include Muslims under its purview as the community is not a minority in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan.

4. AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi protested the bill and termed it unconstitutional during the debate in Parliament. He also tore up the copy of the bill which was slammed by the BJP members.

5. Congress too strongly opposed the bill saying it is against the constitution envisaged by Bhimrao Ambedkar. Party MP Shashi Tharoor accused the BJP of propounding the Pakistan founder Mohammad Ali Jinnah's theory.

6. On Tuesday, a 12-hour bandh was called in Assam protesting the bill. All Assam Students' Union (AASU) held a protest in Dibrugarh against the Bill.

7. Home Minister Amit Shah says in Parliament that many areas of north-east have been left out of Citizenship (Amendment) Bill after objections by some groups.

8. The Citizenship Amendment Bill has now reduced the period to avail Indian citizenship to 5 years from the previous 11 years for non-Muslim applicants.

9. Minutes after Lok Sabha passed the Bill, Prime Minister Narendra Modi congratulated Lok Sabha for the passage of the bill. He said, "Delighted that the Lok Sabha has passed the Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2019, after a rich and extensive debate. I thank the various MPs and parties that supported the bill. This bill is in line with India's centuries-old ethos of assimilation and belief in humanitarian values."

10. After the passage of the Bill, the US Commission for International Religious Freedom (USCIR) expressed its displeasure saying the 'bill erodes the tenet of democracy". The USCIR has urged the US government to consider sanctions against Amit Shah.
