Manipur exempted from ambit of Citizenship Amendment Bill: What is the Inner Line Permit regime?

Residents of Manipur holding a rally demanding inclusion under the ILP regime. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Prior to HM Shah’s announcement, the ILP system was extended to three Northeastern states – Mizoram, Nagaland, and Arunachal Pradesh ILPs can be applied for either online or physically, and also include the dates of travel, and regions which one is allowed to visit The three states that experience the highest rates of migration are in fact Assam, Meghalaya and Tripura – none of which fall under the ILP regime

Union Home Minister Amit Shah’s announcement to bring Manipur under the Inner Line Permit regime on Monday, sparked huge celebrations in the state’s capital of Imphal. Describing the day as marking a “historic occasion”, the BJP-led Manipur government announced a state-wide holiday on December 10. In light of the Centre’s announcement, Manipur People Against Citizenship Bill -- a group of 88 organisations formed to resist the CAB -- also opted to withdraw its “total shutdown”.

Manipur is the latest of four states currently under the Inner Line Permit (ILP) regime. The ILP is a mandatory document required for any Indian citizen looking to reside or visit regions protected under the ILP system. Prior to HM Shah’s announcement, the ILP system was extended to three Northeastern states – Mizoram, Nagaland, and Arunachal Pradesh. An ILP includes an expiry date that disallows an Indian citizen (who does not belong to the state) from overstaying. ILPs can be applied for either online or physically, and also include the dates of travel, and regions which one is allowed to visit.





How is the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) and ILP connected?

The CAB permits non-Muslim persecuted minorities from Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan to enter India and gain citizenship. Several Northeastern states have resisted the Bill arguing that an influx of migrants would result in a dissolution of each state’s unique culture, heritage, identity, and traditions, not to mention changing the states’ ethnography.

With ILP implemented alongside CAB, migrants who enter India from its Northern neighbour countries may claim citizenship, but will not be permitted to relocate and settle in states under the ILP regime.

Interestingly though, the three states that experience the highest rates of migration are in fact, Assam, Meghalaya and Tripura – none of which fall under the ILP regime. Prior to his announcement, Home Minister Shah had held meetings with student, civil and political leaders from Assam, Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh where he, reportedly, provided assurances that states under the ILP regime, and others who enjoy autonomous administration under the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution will be protected from the Bill. On November 1, Meghalaya passed an ordinance mandating registration for individuals visiting the state for over 24 hours, however, which other rules visitors are expected to abide by are still unclear.

Following the passing of the CAB in the Lok Sabha on Monday, protests and rallies erupted in Assam, with an eleven-hour bandh between 5 am and 4 pm put into effect by various student, cultural and religious bodies.


