Jinnah or Congress, who partitioned India in BJP book of history?

In the mid-night passage of the Citizenship Amendment Bill in the Lok Sabha, Union Home Minister and BJP president Amit Shah revived the debate as to who was responsible for Partition of India in 1947.

The Congress divided the country on the basis of religion, said Amit Shah in the Lok Sabha while justifying that the Citizenship Amendment Bill that leaves out Muslims among illegal migrants from the purview of granting Indian citizenship.

The BJP has maintained a similar position on the Partition of India putting entire blame on the Congress in general and Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru in particular.

However, this gives an incomplete picture of the BJP's stand on the Partition of India. The other half of the picture depends on the BJP's stand on Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan.

JINNAH, THE VILLAIN

The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and the BJP have for long been "fighting for Akhand Bharat" (an undivided India) that includes Pakistan and Bangladesh. Former BJP stalwart and poet-politician Atal Bihari Vajpayee wrote one of his more popular poems on the eve of Partition of India exhorting people to work for "reuniting Bharat that lays partitioned".

The RSS and the BJP blamed Jinnah for stoking Hinduphobia among Muslims and walking away with a piece of India in 1947. They held the view for decades before a shift was visible particularly after the BJP-led NDA lost power in 2005.

The case of Lal Krishna Advani is a case in point. In a 2003-interview, Advani had said, "Mohammed Ali Jinnah was successful in creating a fear complex in the mind of Muslims to pave the way for Partition on religious grounds."

JINNAH CAST AFRESH

This view had the backing of the RSS. It became clearer two years later when he visited Jinnah's Mazar (grave) in Karachi in 2005 where he praised the founder of Pakistan as "secular" and "a great man". Jinnah's campaign for a separate country for Muslims was not mentioned.

The RSS was up in the arms. The opposition was so vehement that Advani was forced to step down as the BJP president. This looked befitting for the BJP whose party cadres and some of the leaders had used "Jinnah ki aulad" (literally, the offspring of Jinnah) to target hardline Muslim leaders.

Four years later, another BJP stalwart Jaswant Singh faced the wrath for praising Jinnah in his book, Jinnah: India Parition Independence. In the 2009 publication, Jaswant Singh declared Jinnah was "demonized" for Partition of India while Nehru's policies were responsible for it.

Jaswant Singh was expelled from the BJP, with the party issuing statement that said, "The important role of MA Jinnah in the division of India, which led to a lot of dislocation and destabilisation of millions of people, is too well-known. We cannot wish away this painful part of our history."

Ironically, the line espoused by Jaswant Singh - picking up the thread left by Advani - seems to be the BJP's stand today.

FROM JINNAH TO CONGRESS

In August 2009, former RSS chief KS Sudarshan attempted to pin the blame of Partition of India on Mahatma Gandhi while still admitting that Jinnah had been "brainwashed" by the British colonial rulers into demanding Pakistan for Muslims.

Officially, the RSS, however, maintained that Jinnah was responsible for Partition of India. RSS mouthpiece, the Organiser wrote in 2009 that Jinnah was a frustrated, piqued and egoist person, who insulted Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru and other Congress leaders for their correct and nationalist stand of not accepting Muslim League as the sole representative body of the Muslims.

RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat too echoed the same voice in 2009. Reacting to Jaswant Singh's assessment of Jinnah's role in Partition of India, Bhagwat had said, "It is not a question of opinion. It is a historical fact that he [Jinnah] was responsible for Partition and he triggered 'direct action' [in which many people were killed]."

Direct action was a call given by Jinnah to push for his demand for Pakistan. The call saw communal violence at large scale in 1946.

THE FINAL SHIFT

Come 2013, Jinnah responsible for Partition debate was reignited by Vajpayee at a condolence meeting for paying tribute to RSS leader HS Sheshadri. This signaled that the RSS-BJP might have made the transition to absolve Jinnah - partially if not fully - of the "sin" of Partition of India and make the Congress stand public trial for what happened in 1947.

Quoting from a book authored by Sheshadri, Vajpayee said, "Jinnah's or anyone else's life for that matter cannot be evaluated looking at only one phase of his life, Jinnah had been secular for a long time before he turned communal and led the movement for the partition of India."

By 2019 Lok Sabha election, several BJP leaders had started blaming the Congress and Nehru for Partition of India. During election campaign, Guman Singh Damor claimed Partition of India was avoidable but it required backing down by Nehru.

He said, "If Nehru had not insisted during Independence, then this country would not have been divided into two parts. Muhammed Jinnah was an advocate and a scholar. If Jinnah would have been made the PM, then the country wouldn't have been divided."

Damor's claim was not contested by the BJP. What Amit Shah told the Lok Sabha during debate on the Citizenship Amendment Bill was a kind of endorsement of what Damor claimed in May this year, and for what Advani and Jaswant Singh were made to pay price 10-15 years ago, and what Vajpayee hinted at during his final active days as a politician.

Also Read | Does Citizenship Amendment Bill violate fundamental right to equality?

Also Read | Amit Shah tables Citizenship Bill amid protests, blames Congress for Partition over religious lines

Also Read | Congress hits back at Amit Shah, says Savarkar propagated idea of Partition

Also Read | Rewriting Indian history an old Amit Shah preoccupation

Also Watch | Lok Sabha passes Citizenship Amendment Bill: How leaders reacted


