JNU protest intensifies after police lathicharge students; NSUI students hold 'Chhatra Adhikar' rally

NSUI students protesting against the hostel fee hike | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights NSUI students were protesting against the JNU hostel fee hike and condition of educational institutions in the country Reportedly, several of the agitating students were detained by CRPF personnel present at the spot

New Delhi: A day after Delhi Police allegedly lathicharged Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students protesting against the hostel fee hike, Congress' student wing National Students' Union of India (NSUI) on Tuesday staged a protest against the university administration and the police. Reportedly, the agitating students were once again lathicharged and detained by the police.

Several NSUI students held 'Chhatra Adhikaar' rally in the national capital to protest against the condition of educational institutions in the country and demanding a complete rollback of the recently increased JNU hostel fee.

Due to the protest, traffic movement was closed on Ashoka Road from GPO side and both carriageway of Jai Singh Road, confirmed Delhi Traffic Police.

In dramatic visuals, the agitating students were seen being detained and whisked away by CRPF personnel. While speaking to Times Now, several students claimed that they were lathicharged by the police and slammed the Modi government for increasing the hostel fee.

Meanwhile, JNU International Students' Association wrote to Course Professors at JNU requesting the to find alternative measures of academic evaluation at earliest for international scholars. The letter further stated, "Situation of deadlock exists across campus, it has led to the cessation of academic evaluations and assessments."

Earlier on Monday, police allowed the agitating JNU students to march till Sarojini Nagar bus depot in the national capital, however, things turned ugly when the students began to push their march towards Rashtrapati Bhavan. The police had to resort to lathicharge after a clash with the students.

The students protest began last month after the administration announced a significant increase in the JNU hostel fee. However, after weeks-long agitation by students, the university administration announced that it will roll back the hike in fee.

Despite the administration's announcement, the students have continued their protest demanding a written assurance over the rollback of the fee hike.
