NRC & CAB: The Politics of Hate

NRC & CAB: The Politics of Hate

Amit Sengupta Tuesday, 10th December 2019, 5:07 pm

Is it this vicious phenomenon, so transparently negative and replete with hate politics, going to be the trump card of the BJP-RSS in 2024.

A sociology professor of a prominent college in Mumbai was approached by a few of her Muslim students last week. They seem troubled and full of anxiety. Their disturbing query: “How do we procure documents to prove that we are Indian citizens?”

The female professor, not a Muslim, was shocked. She said that they must concentrate on their studies and exams and not bother about these documents. However, they were adamant and restless, wondering from where there parents and grandparents will get the documents to prove their Indian identity.

Then the professor told them categorically and in a firm voice: “Don’t worry about the documents and the fear psychosis being spread all over. Concentrate on your studies. I too have no certificate. My mother too can’t prove her Indian identity except for the fact that we were born and brought up here and we are Indians and no power on earth can deny us this reality.”

Click Here to Follow DoolNews on Twitter

If this is the troubling phenomena in Mumbai, in a prestigious college with educated students coming from well-settled middle-class families, you can well imagine the state of the mind of people who are marginalized and voiceless, across the deep interiors of India’s rural, Adivasi and small-town landscape, and in the ghettos and slums of urban India.

Is it this vicious phenomena, so transparently negative and replete with hate politics, going to be the trump card of the BJP-RSS in 2024, with the majority population being forced to polarize in communal and xenophobic terms, almost like what Adolf Hitler did in Germany with the Jews, the Serbs did with the Muslims in Bosnia/Serbia and what the Israelis are doing on a daily basis in the occupied land of Palestine?

In many ways, the military occupation and siege of the Muslim population in Kashmir since August 5 seems to be the xenophobic model they are planning to apply in entire India. Besides, both the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill (CAB) seem to be the test case for the BJP/RSS to profile, identify, ghettoise, isolate, imprison in detention centres and concentration camps and deport or throw out Muslims, and only Muslims, who have already been tacitly branded as ‘Second Class Citizens’.

This has been their perverse experiment in Gujarat after the state-sponsored genocide of innocent Muslim citizens in 2002 with Narendra Modi at the helm. And this has been the RSS dream even during the freedom movement in which it did not participate.

However, if one community is in fear and social crisis, the entire society will be restless, unsure, on the brink. And this has been proved by the divisive NRC process in Assam.

This mass phobia was witnessed by this reporter in the interiors of Assam and in the borders of West Bengal and Bangladesh. Tens of thousands of citizens, both Hindus and Muslims, including indigenous and ancient communities like the Rajbongshis and tribals, would run from pillar to post with tattered documents to prove their identities.

Click Here to Subscribe DoolNews YouTube Channel

A Muslim mother of 70 would be in jail declared as a ‘foreigner’ or a ‘D-Voter’ (Doubtful Voter) under the NRC process or by the Foreign Tribunals (allegedly manned by openly partisan BJP sympathisers), but her young adult sons and husband would be Indian.

A Muslim husband of a starkly poor family would be in jail declared as a foreigner, but his brother would be a bonafide Indian citizen, even while there will be no food to eat in their bare hut and their girls would drop out of school or work as temporary daily wagers for sundry low paying jobs. An elderly Hindu Rajbongshi woman of over 60 was picked up by the police, but her husband was declared an Indian citizen. Such cases were rampant all over Assam.

In Assam many women found themselves pushed to the wall, mostly poor and illiterate women. In a rural society where documents are generally not preserved or procured, and where there are no education or birth certificates for women, how do they prove their identity? I met a young pregnant woman who spent months in jail and was released only after the intervention of the apex court. Her suffering cannot be measured in words. Indeed, thousands of women are suffering in Assam, especially poor and uneducated women, and those who live in remote villages.

The village postmaster, the neighbours, or local sarpanch might know them, but where do they get the documents to prove that they were born and brought up in pre or post-independence India, after 1951, in that particular village or small town? Or, after the cut-off date of August 24, 1971, as per the Assam Accord signed by the All Assam Students Union (AASU) and the then prime minister Rajiv Gandhi, which is the cut-off date accepted by all concerned in Assam and by the NRC and the Supreme Court?
