Andhra Pradesh observes daylong shutdown, Chandrababu Naidu wears black shirt to assembly

Andhra Pradesh observed a day-long shutdown on Friday coinciding with the presentation of the interim Union Budget.

The protest was called for by the Pratyeka Hoda Sadhana Samithi (PHSS) demanding the grant of Special Category Status (SCS) to the state.



"We called for the bandh today to draw the attention of the entire country to the plight of Andhra Pradesh because of the callous attitude of the Centre in fulfilling the promises to accord SCS," says PHSS chairman Chalasani Srinivas.



Buses of the AP State Road Transport Corporation were off the roads since morning, while shops and other businesses, besides schools and colleges were closed.

Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu, his cabinet colleagues and TDP legislators wore black shirts to show their solidarity with the protest while attending the day's proceedings of the ongoing budget session of the legislative assembly.

The chief minister wore black to the Legislative Assembly as a sign of protest against Prime Minister Narendra Modi's step motherly treatment meted out to Andhra Pradesh and for breaking all promises including special status tweeted Nara Lokesh, Naidu's son, who is the state's Panchayati Raj and Information Technology minister.



The ruling Telugu Desam Party, (TDP), Congress, CPI, CPI (M) and several organisations have backed the shutdown. But the main opposition party, the YSR Congress and Pawan Kalyan's Jana Sena, which have maintained that all parties should rally behind any call to demand SCS stayed away because the TDP was supporting the shutdown.



Political party activists were joined by students in staging protest demonstrations in Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam, Rajahmundry, Guntur, Tirupathi, Anantapur, Kurnool and other towns across the state. Universities and other academic institutions put off examinations scheduled for the day.



TDP pulled out of the BJP-led NDA government at the Centre last year after it had ruled out granting SCS. This has become a nettlesome issue between the Centre and the state as the then Prime Minister Manmohan Singh had announced in Parliament that the residual state of Andhra Pradesh would be accorded SCS following the bifurcation of Andhra Pradesh to create Telangana in 2014.



Chief Minister Naidu, who has also accused the Narendra Modi government of going back on commitments made in the Andhra Pradesh Reorganization Act, 2014, is now planning to lead the protest in New Delhi on February 11.

PHSS chief Srinivas appealed to Naidu to unite all political parties for the Delhi protest which will continue until February 14 by when the budget session of parliament will conclude.

Meanwhile, Naidu in his daily video conference with party activists has called for the protests to continue begun on February 1 till February 10 in the state.
