Bandh Over CAB Halts Northeast, US Commission For Sanctions Against Amit Shah + More Top News

Just as the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Bill sailed through the Lower House of Indian parliament, voices of dissent and protests, which had already gained momentum prior to its introduction in the parliament, found further resonance in the northeastern flank of the country. The region has seen massive protests against the bill introduced by Home Minister Amit Shah.

It has resulted in an 11-hour northeast bandh called by an umbrella body of students' organisations of the region to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. News agency PTI reported from Guwahati that the protests began at 5 am on Tuesday morning. Read More

US Commission Suggests Sanctions Against Amit Shah

Stating that the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill which was passed in the Lok Sabha on Monday is a "dangerous turn in the wrong direction" the US Commission for International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) has sought American sanctions against India's Home Minister Amit Shah.

"If the CAB passes in both houses of Parliament, the US government should consider sanctions against the home minister Amit Shah and other principal leadership," the commission said. Read More

Toxic Air, Water Is Making Life Shorter Anyway, So Why Hang Me? Asks 2012 Delhi Gang-Rape Convict

As atrocious as it may sound, one of the death row convicts in the 2012 Delhi gang-rape case has argued for a review of his sentence citing the toxic air and water quality in the national capital.

Akshay Kumar Singh, one of the four death row convicts moved the Supreme Court Tuesday seeking review of its 2017 judgement which confirmed the death penalty to all of them in the case. Read More

UP Becomes Latest To Provide Free Drop At Night

Ever since the brutal gang rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor in Hyderabad last month, there has been a lot of talks about the safety of women in India, especially those who have to travel at odd hours, from and for work.

Now the Uttar Pradesh government has launched an initiative to ensure the safety of women in the state. Starting from Tuesday, women travelling alone late at night to their destination can avail a police escort. Read More

Unabated Acid Attacks Continue To Corrode Indian Women

A day before a rape survivor was burnt alive by two of her rapists while she was on her way for court hearing, a 30-year-old woman was attacked by acid by four men in Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh, for refusing to withdraw her complaint for rape against them from court.

The survivor suffered 30 per cent burns and is currently undergoing treatment at a Meerut hospital. Earlier in November, two bike-borne men attacked a 23-year-old female staffer of Punjab National Bank while she was on her way to work in Ghaziabad’s Mohan Nagar area. Read More
