In letter to UP Congress workers, Priyanka Gandhi calls for protests against Citizenship Bill

Terming the passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the Lok Sabha an effort to implement the "vidhaan" (law) of the RSS, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra has written to party workers in Uttar Pradesh, urging them to register strong protests against it.

In the letter, Gandhi wrote that because of the faulty policies of the BJP government, economic activities in the country have come to a standstill, trade has been destroyed and unemployment has reached a new high, Uttar Pradesh Congress chief Ajay Kumar Lallu said on Tuesday.

"Priyanka Gandhi Vadra has written a letter to all the party workers. In the letter, she has termed the passage of Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the Lok Sabha an effort to implement the law (vidhaan) of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh. The Bill does not intend to view people equally, instead it advocates seeing them in a discriminatory manner," Lallu said.

The BJP knows that it cannot control the slowdown in the economy and hence, is opting for the 'divide and rule' policy of the British, she was quoted as saying in the letter.

"Destroying India's Constitution will affect every religion, caste and culture. If we allow this to happen today, then tomorrow, this government will target every person, institute, culture, caste and religion which does not endorse the Sangh's 'vidhaan'," she said.

Making a fervent appeal she wrote, "It is the duty of every citizen of this country not to allow destruction of India's Constitution, and also not allow implementation of the Sangh's 'vidhaan'. To defend the Constitution, every worker of the Congress should take a pledge to agitate in every village and city in the country to courts and in Parliament."



She also urged every Congress worker in the state to fight with full strength to save the Constitution, Lallu said.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
