Infant dead, 20 injured as anti-Citizenship Amendment Bill protesters clash with police in Northeast

Several vehicles along with public properties were damaged in the protests in Guwahati and other parts of the state | Photo courtesy: Hemanta Kumar Nath

An infant died on his way to hosipital as anti-Citizenship Amendment Bill protests in Northeast turned violent on Tuesday leaving 20 injured.

In state capital Guwahati, at least six protestors were reportedly injured when the police resorted to lathicharge and fired tear gas shells. A few more protesters were injured during clashes with the security personnel in Jorhat, Golaghat and Nagaon.

The protestors in Guwahati had set up a blockade and burnt tyres to protest against the controversial Citizenship Amendment Bill.

According to the reports, the incidents took place at Down Town, Six Mile and Maligaon area in the capital city of Assam.

The North East Students' Organisation (NESO) -- an umbrella organisation of different students' unions of the region -- on Tuesday called for an 11-hour Northeast bandh to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

Several vehicles along with public properties were damaged in the protests in Guwahati and other parts of the state.

Meanwhile, security deployments have increased in many places including Guwahati following the violent protests.

Normal life came to standstill in Assam on Tuesday in spontaneous protests by people during 11-hour statewide bandh | Photo courtesy: Hemanta Kumar Nath

On the other hand, district administrations have imposed Section 144 in several districts in Assam including Tinsukia, Sonitpur and Lakhimpur districts following the ongoing protests against the bill. The exams in Gauhati University and Dibrugarh University in the state have also been postponed.

Indian Railways said that eight trains have been cancelled and another eight trains were short terminated due to indefinite 'Rail Roko' (stop the trains) by various organisations and associations in Tinsukia division in Assam.

Indian Railways: 8 trains have been cancelled and 8 trains short terminated, due to indefinite 'Rail Roko' by various organisations and associations in Tinsukia division in Assam. ANI (@ANI) December 10, 2019

ANTI-CAB PROTESTS ROCK NORTHEAST, INFANT DIES ON CHOKED ROAD

Large parts of the Northeast on Tuesday simmered with protests by students' unions and Left-democratic organisations against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, with choked roads leaving an ailing two-month-old baby dead on way to hospital.

Huge processions were taken out in different areas of Guwahati, with protesters raising slogans against the emotive legislation.

The protesters also burnt effigies of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Home Minister Amit Shah and Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal.

The amendment bill seeks to give relief to illegal non-Muslims who migrated to Assam as well as the rest of India.

(With inputs from PTI)
