Shutdown in Northeast, furore across nation as Citizenship Amendment Bill set for Rajya Sabha test today

A group of protesters burn copies of Citizenship Amendment Bill near Janatar Mantar in New Delhi on Tuesday. The bill set to be tabled in Rajya Sabha on Wednesday (PTI image)

The contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill will be put to test in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday even as the proposed legislation faces protests across the nation.

Northeast states were hit by massive bandh called by student bodies as demanded the withdrawal of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, which seeks to provide refuge to non-Muslim migrants from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan. Protests were also witnessed in New Delhi, where protesters ransacked Janata Dal United's office and Jaipur, where anti-Cab protesters burnt the copies of the bill.

Several leaders and eminent citizens spoke out against the legislation as they claimed that the bill was unconstitutional and discriminatory.

Northeast against CAB

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 or CAB has received widespread condemnation from several states in North East even as Home Minister Amit Shah has assured that regions with tribal populations have been kept out of the purview of the bill.

According to the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, non-Muslim minorities, who fled religious persecution in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan and moved to the country before December 31, 2014, will be accorded Indian citizenship.

It, however, exempted tribal areas of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram or Tripura, as included in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, and areas covered under The Inner Line Permit system, notified under Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation, 1873.

However, the student bodies in northeastern states are demanding a complete withdrawal of the bill.

Assam:

Normal life was paralysed in Assam's Brahmaputra Valley during the shutdown that was led by the All Assam Students' Union and the North East Students' Organisation (NESO).

Several Left-leaning organisations, including the SFI, DYFI, AIDWA, AISF and AISA had also called a shutdown separately. Huge processions were taken out in different areas of Guwahati, with protesters raising slogans against the emotive legislation.

Agitators engaged in a scuffle with security forces near the Secretariat and Assembly buildings in Assam when they were prevented from moving forward, police said. Three protesters sustained injuries as they tried to prevent workers of Oil India Ltd (OIL) from entering their offices in Duliajan.

Around 20 people were injured in protests across Assam.

Also read | Why Assam is protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Bill? | India Today Insight

Tripura

The bandh threw normal life out of gear in Dhalai, West Tripura and Khowai districts with residents remaining indoors while attendance in offices was thin. Train services in the entire state came to a halt and vehicular movement was affected.

Internet services have been suspended in Tripura for 48 hours from 2 pm on Tuesday to prevent mischief mongers from spreading rumours, an official notification said.

An ailing two-month-old baby died at Bishramganj in Sepahijala district while being taken to a hospital as agitators had blocked vehicular traffic, police said.

Arunachal Pradesh

Educational institutions, banks, commercial establishments and markets were closed while public and private vehicles were off the roads in most places in Arunachal Pradesh in response to the strike called by the All Arunachal Pradesh Students' Union (AAPSU).

Attendance in government offices was almost nil during the bandh which began at 5 am, officials said.

Also read | Northeast bandh over Citizenship Amendment Bill, massive protest in Assam

Manipur

The shutdown called by the All Manipur Students' Union (AMSU) from 3 am to 6 pm elicited an overwhelming response, and the organisation has warned it would intensify the agitation if the bill was not immediately withdrawn.

Incidents of tyre burning and vandalisation of vehicles were reported in Meghalaya capital Shillong, as protesters lobbed Molotov cocktails at a police vehicle damaging it in Mawlai area, East Khasi Hills district deputy commissioner MW Nongbri told PTI.

Additional police and CRPF forces have been deployed in sensitive areas, officials said.

Nagaland

Members of Naga Students Federation (NSF) also staged a sit-in outside Raj Bhavan to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, even as the NESO, which called for a bandh in the northeast, exempted the state from the stir, in view of the Hornbill Festival.

Raising slogans against the legislation, the NSF -- apex students' body in Nagaland -- sought its immediate withdrawal, outside Raj Bhavan. Volunteers from various colleges, along with former NESO general secretary NSN Lotha, also joined the sit-in that lasted for one-and-half hours.

Delhi

The Northeast Students' Union also staged a protest against the bill at Jantar Mantar and people from various walks of life and across organisations joined the stir.

The CPI(M)'s Delhi state committee members also held a protest at the same venue against the contentious bill. Communist Party of India (Marxist) MPs had earlier held a protest near the Gandhi statue on the Parliament premises. Members of the Left party were seen carrying banners, saying "CAB waapis lo" (withdraw the CAB) and "Dharm aadharit CAB nahi chalega" (won't accept a CAB based on religion).

Several protesters under the banner 'United Against Hate' also raised slogans against the Bill and the government at Jantar Mantar. Protestors barged into the office of the Janata Dal (United) in the area over Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar's support to the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

The protestors burnt a copy of the Bill and were carrying placards that read 'Withdraw CAB Permanently'.

Also read | Implementing NRC and Citizenship Bill fraught with challenges

Students in Assam stage protest against CAB. the protests in Dibrugarh had turned violent as protester clashed with security forces. At least 20 people were injured in clashes across Assam. (PTI image)

Rajasthan

A similar scene was witnessed in Rajasthan's capital Jaipur, where protestors burnt the copies of the Citizenship Amendment Bill and demanded its withdrawal.

Maharashtra

While Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray slammed the government for not answering his party's queries on the issue, activists in Pune appealed to the state government to move Supreme Court against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

Some social welfare organisations have sent a joint letter to Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray through Pune district collector.

"The bill is unconstitutional. The Centre can't make such important changes in the legislation on its own. It is in violation of the Constitutional norms. We appeal to the state government to file a petition in the Supreme Court for scrapping the bill," reads the letter.

Shiv Sena had earlier suggested that people who will become citizens through the new provision should be given voting rights after 25 years.

Also read | Citizenship Amendment Bill: A protest for some but hope for many Hindus, Sikhs who left Afghanistan

600 eminent citizens write to govt against CAB

Several academicians, former bureaucrats and judges, writers, artists and scientists have expressed outrage over the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill calling it "divisive" and violative of the Constitution and asked the government to withdraw it.

In separate letters and petitions, they asserted that the proposed legislation threatens the federal framework provided by the Constitution and will fundamentally alter the character of the Indian republic if it comes into force.

In an open letter, about 600 writers, artists, activists, former bureaucrats, ex-judges asked the government not to betray the Constitution.

The signatories include historian Romila Thapar, author Amitav Ghosh, actor Nandita Das, filmmakers Aparna Sen and Anand Patwardhan, activists Yogendra Yadav Teesta Setalvad, Harsh Mander, Aruna Roy and Bezwada Wilson, former Delhi High Court Chief Justice AP Shah and the country's first CIC Wajahat Habibullah among others.

"All of us from the cultural and academic communities condemn this bill as divisive, discriminatory and unconstitutional. It will, along with a nationwide NRC, bring untold suffering to people across the country. It will damage, fundamentally and irreparably, the nature of the Indian republic. This is why we demand that the government withdraw the bill.

"This is why we demand that the government not betray the Constitution. We call on all people of conscience to insist that the Constitutional commitment to an equal and secular citizenry be honoured," the letter states.

Also read | Is Citizenship Bill a ghar wapasi license? What makes it so controversial?

Rajya Sabha test for CAB

The stage is set for a mercurial debate on the Citizenship Amendment Bill as the opposition has decided to oppose the bill tooth and nail.

As one leader of the opposition put it - "This is the House of Elders, we might not have the numbers, but we have no shortage of intellect" - Kapil Sibal and Derek O'Brian will be the first two speakers in the six-hour debate.

Does the government have numbers to pass CAB?

The government's confidence in the Rajya Sabha stems from the sheer strength of numbers where it's tally could reach 127 against a 113 of the opposition. The 127 mark will also include a vote in favour of the bill by the Janata Dal-United (6), AIADMK(11), BJD (7), YSRCP (2), TDP (2), seven Independent and nominated members, apart from 83 of the BJP. Two of the members of the ruling government might be absent due to health reason.

The current strength of the House is 240 and the government will need more than half the votes to win this one that means 121.

The opposition is hoping that players like the Samajwadi Party (9), the Bahujan Samajwadi Party (4) TRS (6) who have far voted against the bill in the Lower House will be present in full strength unlike in the past.

Also watch | Will Citizen Amendment Bill pass Rajya Sabha test?

Congress sources told India Today TV that the party leadership was not impressed by the Shiv Sena voting in favour of the bill in the Lower House and a clear message has been sent to its new ally from Maharashtra. That explains Shiv Sena's shift in its stand in less than 24 hours.

"We need to change this notion that one who supports the bill and the BJP is a patriot and one who opposes it is anti-national. The government should answer all the issues raised by us on the bill," Uddhav Thackeray said to a question.

Clearly, the battle lines are drawn as the Congress, Trinamool and BJP have issued three-line whip to their members to be present in the House on Wednesday.

Also read | Why the nationwide NRC proposed by Amit Shah is being criticised

Rahul Gandhi, who came in late-night to vote on the bill on Monday, said it was an attack on the founding principles. "The #CAB is an attack on the Indian constitution. Anyone who supports it is attacking and attempting to destroy the foundation of our nation," he wrote on Twitter.

The Congress has asked all its state units to take out protest marches against CAB. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra called it 'India’s tryst with bigotry and narrow-minded exclusion was confirmed'.

The Janata Dal United has been divided over the crucial bill with the likes of Pawan Verma and Prashant Kishore appealing to Nitish Kumar to reconsider the decision.

"I urge Shri Nitish Kumar to reconsider support to the #CAB in the Rajya Sabha. The Bill is unconstitutional, discriminatory, and against the unity and harmony of the country, apart from being against the secular principles of the JDU. Gandhiji would have strongly disapproved it," he tweeted.

The controversial CAB was passed in the Lok Sabha on Monday by 311:80 vote.

(With inputs from Mausami in New Delhi in Guwahati and PTI)

Also read | India hits back after US panel USCIRF slams Citzenship Amendment Bill: Neither accurate nor warranted

Also watch | Assam protests Citizenship Amendment Bill
