8 trains cancelled, 8 others short-terminated as anti-CAB protests bring Assam to grinding halt

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The train services were disrupted due to indefinite 'Rail Roko' by various organisations and associations in Tinsukia division Assam saw huge protests by hundreds of people during the 11-hour statewide bandh on Tuesday against CAB The contentious Bill was passed in the lower house of Parliament on Monday

Tripura: As the violence erupted in Assam on Tuesday against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, which was passed on Monday night, the Indian Railways cancelled eight trains and short-terminated eight others due to an indefinite 'Rail Roko' staged by various organisations and associations in Tinsukia division of the northeastern state.

On Tuesday, normal life came to a grinding halt in the state following huge protests by hundreds of people during an eleven-hour statewide bandh called by students' unions and Left-democratic organisations against the contentious Bill.

The contentious Bill, which was passed in the lower house of Parliament with 311 votes in favour of, and 80 against it on Monday, seeks to grant Indian citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Christians, Parsis, Buddhists, Jains from three neighbouring countries – Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan. According to the proposed legislation, non-Muslim migrants who fled their respective countries and came to India before December 31, 2014, due to religious persecution, will be given Indian citizenship. The Bill will be tabled in the Rajya Sabha today for clearance.

Hours after the passage of the Bill in Lok Sabha, protesters took to streets in large numbers in Assam, and in some places, they even set ablaze tyres. The agitators, in some areas, also raised slogans against Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal and took out his ‘funeral processions’ for his ‘failure’ to oppose the Bill.

Guwahati, Jorhat, Dibrugarh, Pathshala and Lakhimpur were among those affected, with protesters clashing with the police in some areas. Assam finance minister Himanta Biswa Sarma was reportedly shown black flags by members of the All Assam Students Union when he visited Diphu Medical College in Karbi Anglong district.

In the wake of the protests, several shops, markets and financial institutions kept their shutters down while schools and colleges were also shut down in the districts of Dhemaji, Lakhimpur, Tinsukia, Dibrugarh, Sivasagar, Jorhat, Majuli, Morigaon, Bongaigaon, Udalguri, Kokrajhar and Baksa districts, news agency PTI reported.
