As anti-CAB protests paralyse Assam, CM Sonowal warns 'divisive forces not allowed to destabilise state'

Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Assam came to a standstill on Tuesday due to an 11-hour bandh against CAB The contentious Bill was passed in the lower house of Parliament on Monday The chief minister said no one should allow "divisive forces" to destabilise the state

Tripura: As normal life was paralysed in Assam due to huge protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill on Tuesday, Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal asked protesters to not spread "misinformation" over the proposed legislation.

The northeastern state came to a grinding halt yesterday due to a day-long statewide strike called by nearly 20 organisations against the legislation.

Addressing an event in Tripura, the chief minister said no one should allow "divisive forces" to destabilise the state.

"In order to put Assam strongly on the world map, we all must work dedicatedly. Building a robust work culture in the state should be the prime objective of everyone and youths must not be misled to join agitations," Sonowal was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.

Assam came to a standstill on Tuesday due to an eleven-hour bandh called by students' unions and Left-democratic organisations against the contentious Bill.

The contentious Bill, which was passed in the lower house of Parliament with 311 votes in favour of, and 80 against it on Monday, seeks to grant Indian citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Christians, Parsis, Buddhists, Jains from three neighbouring countries – Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan. According to the proposed legislation, non-Muslim migrants who fled their respective countries and came to India before December 31, 2014, due to religious persecution, will be given Indian citizenship. The Bill will be tabled in the Rajya Sabha today for clearance.

Hours after the passage of the Bill in Lok Sabha, protesters took to streets in large numbers in Assam and in some places they even burnt tyres.

Agitators also engaged in clashes with security forces near the Secretariat and Assembly buildings in Assam when they were stopped from moving forward, police said. Protests also disrupted the train services across Assam as picketers blocked the tracks. They also raised slogans against Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal in some areas, and took out his ‘funeral processions’ for his ‘failure’ to oppose the Bill.

Assam’s capital Guwahati, Jorhat, Dibrugarh, Pathshala and Lakhimpur were among those affected, with protesters clashing with the police in some areas. In the wake of the protests, several shops, markets and financial institutions kept their shutters down while schools and colleges were also shut down in the districts of Dhemaji, Lakhimpur, Tinsukia, Dibrugarh, Sivasagar, Jorhat, Majuli, Morigaon, Bongaigaon, Udalguri, Kokrajhar and Baksa districts, news agency PTI reported.
