Kabootar Khana near Khar market sealed by BMC after residents complaint of asthma, TB

kabootar khana

Khar market

BMC

respiratory ailments

pigeon feathers

jeweller Chandanlal Parmar

Jeev Daya Charitable Trust

Bombay high court

The kabootar khana, on the junction of 1st Road and 7th Road in Khar West, is also embroiled in a legal tangle between brothers

Mirror had reported on residents’ complaints about the spot being a breeding ground for diseases.Residents who have been opposing anearheaved a sigh of relief as thesealed the place yesterday. Residents have been complaining that the spot was responsible for spreading infection, leading to. The elderly were the worst hit with many cases of asthma and two cases of tuberculosis being reported in the area due to theand droppings in the air.The kabootar khana, on the junction of 1st road and 7th road in Khar west was being allegedly commercially misused byunder the aegis ofof which his elder brother Kanhaiyalal Parmar is the founder. Kanhaiyalal moved a petition in thein November against Chandanmal, on the alleged misuse of a traffic island reserved for beautification into a kabutar khana for commercial gains.In a report on December 9, Mumbai Mirror had reported about the pigeon feeding menace and how local residents had protested against the functioning of the kabootar khana since the last three years.Confirming the BMC action, Vinayak Vispute, assistant commissioner, H West ward said, “We have sealed the kabootar khana. The activity of feeding pigeons has been stopped as it was the main issue. Looking at the hurdles and the court cases as well as the health and hygiene point of view, it has been stopped.”Kanhaiyalal Parmar told Mirror that having the kabootar khana at that spot was wrong. “People were so inconvenienced. This was misused for commercial purpose. My brother made Rs 25000 per day.”Despite several attempts Chandanmal Parmar remained unavailable for comment.Anandini Thakoor of H West Citizens’ Federation, who got many complaints from residents about the kabootar khana posing a health hazard, said, “Finally this nuisance of pigeons has ended. This is a major relief to residents who complained of asthma and other respiratory disorders. The area on which the kabootar khaana was set up was BMC land and given to the traffic department for a traffic island.”
