It's a criminal attack on Northeast: Rahul Gandhi attacks PM Modi, Amit Shah over CAB

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi once again attacked the Modi government over the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill -- CAB -- terming it a "criminal attack on the Northeast", just hours ahead of scheduled Rajya Sabha debate on the bill.

"The CAB is a attempt by Modi-Shah Govt to ethnically cleanse the North East. It is a criminal attack on the North East, their way of life and the idea of India," Rahul Gandhi tweeted. "I stand in solidarity with the people of the North East and am at their service," he wrote.

FOLLOW LIVE UPDATES ON CITIZENSHIP BILL

Home Minister Amit Shah will table the controversial Citizenship Amendment Bill today in Rajya Sabha at 12 pm. This comes after the bill was passe by Lok Sabha on Monday with 311 votes in favour. The bill was opposed by 80 MPs in Lok Sabha. This is the second time this bill was passed by the Lok Sabha. Last time, the government failed to bring the bill in the Upper House even though it had been passed by the Lok Sabha in the last session, just ahead of Lok Sabha elections.

The bill has already sparked major protest across the Northeast. The chief opposition to the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill is that it discriminates on the basis of religion by identifying only non-Muslims refugees as those who would be eligible for Indian citizenship.

The Northeast states yesterday witnessed 11 hours shutdown called by an umbrella body of students' organisations of the region to protest against the bill.

Multiple stretches the protesters burned tyres to block roads. Even the city police chief faced the heat. Guwahati police commissioner Deepak Kumar was gheraoed by the agitators in the main town while he was passing through to assess the law and order situation of the protest called by youth bodies.

As the government moves the bill in Rajya Sabha today, the Congress will most certainly oppose the bill and one can expect the debate to be fiery and heated.

Meanwhile, Rahul Gandhi has once again made his stand clear on the bill and said he stands "in solidarity with the people of the Northeast".

Also Read | India hits back after US panel USCIRF slams Citzenship Amendment Bill: Neither accurate nor warranted

Also Read | Northeast bandh over Citizenship Amendment Bill, massive protest in Assam

Also Read | Infant dead, 20 injured as anti-Citizenship Amendment Bill protesters clash with police in Northeast

Also Read | CAB stir: Bandh agitators clash with security forces in Assam, train services affected

Also Watch | Is Citizenship Amendment Bill constitutional?
