CM Naidu protests injustice to AP; shutdown, protests in state

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Naveen S Garewal

Tribune News Service

Hyderabad, February 1

Life was thrown out of gear across Andhra Pradesh as a near total state sponsored shutdown was observed to protest against Central government’s “injustice” to the state.

Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu himself wore a black shirt to mark the protest the call for given by the “Special Status Sadhna Samithi” (SSSS) and supported by all the ruling Telugu Desam Party (TDP), main opposition YSR Congress, Congress and the left parties.

Across Andhra Pradesh the Road Transport Corporation (RTC) buses stayed off roads, leaving lakhs of passengers stranded. Chambers of Commerce also supported the call, and shops and business establishments remained closed for the day. Employees Unions also supported the buses affecting the attendance in the government offices. Schools and colleges were also closed.

Political parties held sit in protests and demonstrations in Vijaywada, Visakhapatnam and several other cities of Andhra.

In Andhra legislative assembly, the anger against the Centre was palpable, with Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu dressing in black to mark his protest—the first time in his over four decade political career that he was dressed in a colour other than his customary light yellow cotton shirt.

“Do you want to eliminate Andhra Pradesh from the map of India? Are you planning to wipe out anybody who speaks against you?” an angry Naidu asked while addressing the state assembly session.

Lashing out at the BJP government at the centre, Naidu wanted to know what exactly the Modi government had done for the state in his term.

“Do you think the Telugu people don’t have self respect and honour?” he asked the Centre. “Are we not paying taxes to the Centre?”

He said compared to Gujarat and Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh was not given any assistance by the Centre, and pointed out that massive funds were given to Hyderabad, Bengaluru, Chennai and other cities.

In an unprecedented outburst Naidu also asked the BJP’s floor leader in the state assembly, Vishnukumar Raju to shut up when he claimed that Centre had given more than promised to Andhra Pradesh.

Charging the BJP with doing grave injustice and discrimination against the southern states Naidu recalled that during the Congress rule if the prime minister was from North India, President would be from the south.

Defending his decision to go with Congress, Naidu said that he would join hands with anybody who supports the cause of the state.
