Protests against CAB continue in Assam

Guwahati: Protests against the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill continued for the fifth week in Assam as scores of people lead by the All Assam Students Union (AASU) came out to streets holding torch lights late Thursday.

The opposition Congress also took out similar rallies across the state vehemently opposing the Bill. Lead by AASU chief advisor Samujjal Bhattacharyya and president Dipanka Nath, the protestors raised slogans against the bill, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal and the BJP-led governments in the state and the Centre.

They also demanded Sonowal to stand with the people of Assam and take action to stop the Bill from being passed.

The Asom Gana Parishad, which withdrew support to the ruling BJP in the state over the Bill on January 8, has decided to support the 70 organisations, led by the Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS), agitating against the Bill.

The AASU chief said they will continue their protest against the Bill. “If the bill is passed in the Rajya Sabha, it will render the Assam Accord null and void and will also make the National Register of Citizens updation process meaningless,” Bhattacharya asserted.

Pro-talk ULFA leader and general secretary Anup Chetia, who was also present at the rally, said the “contentious Bill threatened the existence, language, culture and heritage of the Assamese people”.

Three KMSS activists protest naked

Three activists of the KMSS staged a nude protest outside the Secretariat building here, adjacent to the assembly, on Friday against the contentious bill.

Security personnel were caught off guard when the protesters got down from a car near the secretariat and stripped, a police officer said.

They raised slogans against Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal and Finance Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma, he said.

Policemen rushed to cover the protesters with blankets and took them into custody before whisking them away from the high-security area, the officer said.

“The main gate leading to the secretariat has been shut for the time being to prevent protesters from entering the premises and security arrangements have been intensified in the area,” he added.

DCP Amanjit Kaur told reporters that all three protesters have been arrested and necessary measures taken to prevent recurrence of such incidents. The agitators, before being whisked away, said the nude protest was symbolic as the BJP governments in Delhi and the state were trying to strip Assam’s people of their identity, culture and language.

Echoing similar sentiments, a senior KMSS member said, “We hope that the protest shames the government and the bill is immediately revoked.”

Last month too the KMSS had staged similar protests outside Parliament as well as in Jorhat and Tinsukia districts of Assam. (PTI)
