Gorkha Janmukti Morcha protests against Citizenship Amendment Bill in Darjeeling

The Gorkha Janmukti Morcha (Binay Tamang faction) on Wednesday jointly with workers of the TMC staged a protest in front of the district magistrate’s office against the Citizen Amendment Bill (CAB).

Burning a copy of the Bill, Binay Tamang said, If the Rajya Sabha also passes the bill today, it would be a very unfortunate thing for the citizens of the country and the Gorkhas.

Opposing both CAB and NRC, he said, Various treaties with Bhutan and Nepal have made matters complicated here and clauses 5, 7, 14 of the CAB will affect the people here. Through this bill, the central government is trying to divide the country on the basis of religion.

Although the constitution provides for the protection and safeguard of the tribal people and various groups in India about 1 lakh of the people whose names were excluded from the NRC list of Assam were Gorkhas, he said attacking home minister Amit Shah.

Tamang threatened indefinite protests starting from December 18 across Darjeeling hills. We will also gherao central government offices in the GTA area from 23rd to 27th, the GJM leader announced.

Meanwhile, Opposition parties led by the Congress in Rajya Sabha on Wednesday described the Citizenship Amendment Bill as unconstitutional, alleging it discriminates against refugees on the basis of religion and cautioned the government that the proposed legislation would not stand judicial scrutiny.

Initiating the debate on the Bill, Congress leader Anand Sharma attacked the BJP saying the manifesto of any political party cannot be above the Constitution of India.

The ruling BJP has claimed that it had won "mandate" on the basis of its manifesto which clearly talked about the amendments to the citizenship law.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, which has already been approved by Lok Sabha, proposes to give citizenship to Hindus, Christians, Parsis, Jains, Buddhists and Sikhs facing religious persecution in Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan.
