Which way will the JD(U), Sena & TRS swing? Internal wrangling, flip-flops add drama to CAB Rajya Sabha debate

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut participates in the Rajya Sabha debate on Citizenship Amendment Bill, on Wednesday. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The JD(U)’s decision to vote in favour of the Bill in the Lok Sabha has not gone down well with some party leaders TRS has announced its opposition to Bill in both Houses of Parliament The changed political landscape of Maharashtra has clearly played a role in Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray’s flip-flop

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, which is being debated in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday, is set to become the law of the land this week once the Upper House passes it and it is sent for Presidential approval.

The Bill has already been passed by the Lok Sabha, where the BJP had a comfortable majority. In the Rajya Sabha, though the BJP-led NDA is quite confident of crossing the halfway mark, the voting is expected to be a tighter affair as the NDA, by itself, doesn’t have a clear majority.

How do the numbers stack up in Rajya Sabha?

The Rajya Sabha has a sanctioned strength of 245, but five seats are currently vacant, bringing the effective strength to 240. So, in order to pass the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the Rajya Sabha, the Modi government needs 121 votes (assuming all 240 members vote, which may not be the case, with some abstaining and a few staging a walkout).

The BJP, the largest party in the Rajya Sabha, has 83 MPs. Among its NDA allies, the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) has 11, Janata Dal United or JD(U) has six; Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) has three, while the Lok Janshakti Party, Republican Party of India-Athawale, Asom Gana Parishad, Bodoland People's Front and Paattali Makkal Katchi have one MP each.

The total adds up to 108, which includes the six JD(U) votes.

Meanwhile, the Congress-led UPA and other parties opposed to the Bill (including the Bahujan Samaj Party) add up to 102.

So, on paper, both sides are short of the halfway mark.

Here is where it gets interesting. How the MPs of three parties –BJP ally JD(U), the Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) and the Shiv Sena, a former BJP ally – vote, could make it a close call.

How will JD(U), TRS and Shiv Sena vote?

The JD(U)’s decision to vote in favour of the Bill in the Lok Sabha has not gone down well with some party leaders, with Pawan Varma and Prashant Kishor voicing dissent against the move.

Kishore, ace election strategist and national vice-president of the JD(U), tweeted: “Disappointed to see JDU supporting #CAB that discriminates right of citizenship on the basis of religion.”

Varma, on his part, has urged JD(U) president and Bihar chief minister Nitish Kumar to reconsider his support to Bill, describing it in a tweet as “unconstitutional, discriminatory, and against the unity and harmony of the country”.

However, the JD(U) has already announced its intention to vote for the Bill in the Rajya Sabha as well. The six votes of the party, which appears to be divided over the Bill, could be crucial for the passage of the Bill.

Until last week, the TRS was undecided over the Bill, with some reports indicating that party president and Telangana chief minister K Chandrashekar Rao was tilting towards supporting the Bill.

But, on Monday, a few eyebrows were raised when the TRS announced its opposition to the Bill in both Houses of Parliament. The party has six MPs in the Upper House.

TRS Lok Sabha MP Namma Nageshwar Rao said it would accept the Bill only if the “bias against Muslims” was removed. Interestingly, the TRS was believed to have had an informal electoral understanding in the Assembly polls with the AIMIM, whose chief Asaduddin Owaisi tore the copy of the Citizenship Amendment Bill in the Lok Sabha on Monday.

The Shiv Sena’s is the most curious case of all. Known for its staunch Hindutva stance on most issues, the party, which has three MPs in the Rajya Sabha, actually voted in favour of the Citizenship Amendment Bill in the Lok Sabha, but has had a change of heart within 48 hours, and is all set to vote against it in the Upper House.

The changed political landscape of Maharashtra, where the Sena has formed a government with the ‘secular’ NCP and Congress, has clearly played a role in Sena chief and chief minister Uddhav Thackeray’s flip-flop on the Bill.

Still advantage NDA?

Nevertheless, irrespective of how these three parties finally vote, the numbers are still in favour of the BJP, given the crucial support it has from some of the non-aligned parties such as the Biju Janata Dal (7 MPs), YSR Congress Party (2 MPs) and Telugu Desam Party (2 MPs). The fact that the last two, bitter political enemies in Andhra Pradesh, are both on the side of the NDA tells a story of its own.
