Citizenship Amendment Bill clears Rajya Sabha hurdle; 'landmark day for India', hails PM Modi

Rajya Sabha passes the Citizenship Amendment Bill 2019 | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The bill was passed by 125 vs 105 votes in Rajya Sabha On Monday, the Lok Sabha passed the bill with 311 vs 80 votes Shiv Sena, once an ally of the BJP supported the bill in Lok Sabha, but staged a walkout in RS, thus indirectly helping the government in passing the bill

New Delhi: The Citizenship Amendment Bill, which seeks to give citizenship to non-Muslim migrants from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh was passed in Rajya Sabha on Wednesday. The contentious bill that witnessed massive protests in the Northeast against it, was cleared by the Upper House with a majority of 125 vs 105 votes. Shiv Sena, once a key ally of the BJP, and which also voted in favour of the bill in Lok Sabha, staged a walkout.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi hailed the passage of the bill and said that it was a 'landmark day' for India. "A landmark day for India and our nation’s ethos of compassion and brotherhood! Glad that the CAB 2019 has been passed in the Rajya Sabha. Gratitude to all the MPs who voted in favour of the Bill. This Bill will alleviate the suffering of many who faced persecution for years," PM Modi said in a tweet.

Home Minister Amit Shah, who vociferously defended the bill in both the Houses of the Parliament on Monday and Wednesday, thanked those who supported the bill.

A landmark day for India and our nation’s ethos of compassion and brotherhood!



Glad that the #CAB2019 has been passed in the #RajyaSabha. Gratitude to all the MPs who voted in favour of the Bill.



This Bill will alleviate the suffering of many who faced persecution for years. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) December 11, 2019

As the Citizenship Amendment Bill 2019 passes in the Parliament, the dreams of crores of deprived & victimised people has come true today.



Grateful to PM @narendramodi ji for his resolve to ensure dignity and safety for these affected people.



I thank everyone for their support. — Amit Shah (@AmitShah) December 11, 2019

Earlier during the day, the Rajya Sabha witnessed a heated debate over the bill. Opposition benches including Congress, TMC, RJD criticised the bill, with many calling it 'unconstitutional' and 'undemocratic'. "There is an eerie similarity between the CAB and the citizenship laws passed in Nazi Germany in 1933-34," said TMC MP Derek O'Brien. Later, after the passage of the bill, O'Brien also warned that the Act, once formed, will not be implemented in West Bengal.

"This government is ramming through this Bill to advance its Hindutva agenda. This is a sad day. I am absolutely clear that this law will be struck off," said Congress leader P Chidambaram, currently out on bail in the INX Media case.

Countering the Opposition's attack, Shah said that partition on the 'basis of religion, was a big mistake' committed by the Congress party. "There is no appreciation of the fact that people from six religions have been included. But, the focus is only on why Muslims are not included. Can followers of Islam in Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan be called minority? No. When the religion of the State is Islam, then, chances of persecution of Muslims is lesser," Shah said.

Slamming the Congress over their opposition to the bill, Shah said that the party's comments 'look like' Pakistan PM's comments. Meanwhile, massive protests rocked northeastern states, especially Assam, where internet services were suspended after incidents of violence in Jorhat, Golaghat, Dibrugarh, Tinsukia, Sivasagar, Bongaigaon, Nagaon, Sonitpur and other districts. Interestingly though, all the MPs from northeastern states, except for Sikkim, voted in favour of the bill.

The bill, which was passed by the Lok Sabha with 311 vs 80 votes on Monday, will now be sent to the President of India for assent, after which it will become a law.
