Will BJP's Pankaja Munde disclose her plans today?

Senior BJP leader and former minister Pankaj Munde will be holding a rally today at Beed(Marathwada) on the occasion of the birth anniversary of her late father Gopinath Munde. Pankaja Munde has been organising this event for last five years but this year the rally has already generated a lot of curiosity in the political circles.

Is Pankaja Munde leaving BJP for the Shiv Sena? This is the question that has got even the BJP nervous.

The speculation arose ever since Pankaja wrote a controversial post on Facebook stating that in the changed political scenario there was the need for her to see how she could chalk her future path ahead and serve her people.

Senior BJP leaders have been asserting that there is nothing wrong in the family and that Pankaja is very much in the BJP camp. But what has fueled the speculation of her contemplating leaving the party is the fact that her Twitter bio still doesn't have the Lotus, BJP symbol.

Moreover, on Tuesday, she 'skipped' the BJP core committee meeting in Mumbai as well. Senior BJP leader Chandrakant Patil, however, insisted that she had informed the party of her absence as she had to oversee the preparations in her home constituency.

It is an open secret that Pankaja isn't happy with many in the party. She has also stated in the recent past that she lost the Parli seat to her cousin and NCP leader Dhananjay Munde because some BJP leaders didn't want her to win the seat.

A few days back when India Today TV had asked Pankaja if she was joining Shiv Sena she had said that she would elaborate all her plans during the December 12 rally but when asked why her Twitter bio didn't have the party symbol she sounded evasive and said, "There are some people in the party who wish to keep me away from acquiring the important post. Is this the reason why the rumours are being floated about my leaving?"

Pankaja comes from the Vanjara OBC community and the BJP leadership fears that there will be considerable OBC vote bank erosion if she were to leave the party. But the problems for the BJP don't just end here.

Another senior party leader, Eknath Khadse, once considered number 2 in the party rank after Devendra Fadnvais too, has left the party worried with his latest statements.

Khadse, who was a minister in the Fadnavis cabinet, had to resign after he faced allegations of land grabbing. He wasn't given a ticket to contest the Assembly polls. And now he has alleged that some BJP leaders were behind his daughter's defeat in the assembly elections.
