Where there’s a will, there’s a ‘Bill’: BJP Assam leader Himanta Biswa Sarma lauds PM Modi, Amit Shah for CAB

Assam BJP minister Himanta Biswa Sarma. | File image | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Prime Minister Narendra Modi hailed the passage of the Bill, calling it a ‘landmark day for India’ Union Home Minister Amit Shah said ‘the dreams of crores of deprived and victimised people has come true’

Guwahati: Even as his state continues to be on the boil, Assam minister and Bharatiya Janata Party leader Himanta Biswa Sarma hailed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill that was passed by the Indian Parliament on Wednesday.

Taking to social media platform Twitter, Sarma said, “Congratulations PM Sri Narendra Modi and HM Sri Amit Shah for the passage of Citizenship Amendment Bill 2019 in the Rajya Sabha. Where there’s a WILL, there’s a BILL & a way!”

Congratulations PM Sri @narendramodi

and HM Sri @AmitShah for the passage of #CitizenshipAmendmentBill2019 in the #RajyaSabha.



Where there's a WILL, there's a BILL & a way! — Himanta Biswa Sarma (@himantabiswa) December 11, 2019

Two days after the contentious Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha with 311 votes in favour and 80 against, the upper house of Parliament, the Rajya Sabha, cleared the Bill by 125 vs 105 votes on Wednesday.

PM Modi hailed the passage of the Bill, calling it a ‘landmark day for India’. “A landmark day for India and our nation’s ethos of compassion and brotherhood! Glad that the CAB 2019 has been passed in the Rajya Sabha. Gratitude to all the MPs who voted in favour of the Bill. This Bill will alleviate the suffering of many who faced persecution for years,” Modi said in a tweet.

“As the Citizenship Amendment Bill 2019 passes in the Parliament, the dreams of crores of deprived and victimised people has come true today. Grateful to PM Narendra Modi ji for his resolve to ensure dignity and safety for these affected people. I thank everyone for their support,” Union Home Minister Amit Shah said in a post on Twitter.

The Army was deployed in four districts of Assam on Wednesday as the northeasten state erupted further following the passage of the Bill in both houses of Parliament. The security forces conducted flag marches to restore peace. Tens of thousands of people took to the streets to protest against the CAB and clashed with the police amid reports of arson. Indefinite curfew has been imposed in Guwahati and Dibrugarh.
