Citizenship Bill clears Rajya Sabha test: How Indian media covered it

The passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in Rajya Sabha has led to massive protests in Guwahati, Assam. (Photo: PTI)

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill or CAB was cleared by the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday amid boiling protests in several parts in the Northeast.

Rajya Sabha voted 125 to 99 in favour of the bill, which seeks to give citizenship to all non-Muslim migrants who have faced religious persecution from three countries-Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh.

While Hindu refugee communities cheered the passing of the bill, large parts of the Northeast hit the streets to protest against it.

Having said that, the front pages of today's newspapers in the country carried the news of the development, but almost all of them had an accompanying picture of the anti-CAB protests taking place in Guwahati and other areas in Assam.

'CITIZENSHIP AMENDED'

The Hindustan Times newspaper carried news about the passage of the bill in Rajya Sabha with the headline: 'Citizenship Amended'. It, however, carried a contrasting picture showing the large-scale protests that have broken out in the Northeast, especially Assam.

'CHANGE IN CITIZENSHIP DHARMA'

The Indian Express newspaper also carried the passage of CAB in Rajya Sabha as its lead story juxtaposed with a picture of the massive protests in Guwahati, Assam.

'CAB PASSES RS TEST...INDEFINITE CURFEW'

The Times of India newspaper also carried the passage of CAB in Rajya Sabha as its lead story. But it also mentioned about an indefinite curfew and deployment of the Indian Army in Guwahati due to the ongoing protests against the bill.

'OUR TYRST WITH THE DARK AGES'

The Telegraph newspaper strongly criticised the passage of CAB in Rajya Sabha as it compared it to the dark ages.

One of the things which stood out in comparison with other newspaper publishers was the saffron-white-black colour combination chosen for the three-deck headline.

Telegraph's front page carried a story, which said that the Rajya Sabha passed the bill but even BJP allies are "fidgety". It also carried another story about the ongoing anti-CAB protests in Guwahati.

'CAB CLEARS TEST...OPPOSITION TO KNOCK SC DOOR'

The New Indian Express also carried the passage of CAB in Rajya Sabha as its top story with the headline: "CAB clears Parliament test, Oppn to knock SC door". Like most of the publications above, it also went carried a picture of the large scale protests that are expected to escalate further on Wednesday.




