Civic Apathy in Vellore! Body of 25-year-old carried by foot for 7 km due to lack of roads

On Tuesday, S Munuswamy came in contact with a live wire and was electrocuted (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Villagers in Nekkanamalai carried the body of a man back to his village on Tuesday The villagers carried the body by foot and covered a distance of 7 kilometres They had to carry the body as there is lack of road connectivity in the village

Vellore: A group of locals living in Nekkanamalai, Vaniyambadi in Tirupattur district carried the dead body of a man for around 7 kilometres due to the lack of roads. The locals carried the body of the deceased in a cloth cradle from Komanampatti Junction to his house.

On Tuesday, 25-year-old S Munuswamy came in contact with a live wire and was electrocuted. After his death, Munuswamy was taken to the Coimbatore Government Hospital for a post-mortem. Munuswamy's body was taken to his village in a hearse vehicle.

Around 10.45 pm, the vehicle stopped at Komnampatti Junction as it could not go any further. The vehicle could not take Munuswamy's dead body back to his village due to lack of road connectivity. Following this, Munuswamy's relatives were informed about the situation.

As no other option was available to them, Munuswamy's relatives reached the spot, formed a cloth cradle and carried his body back to his village. The 25-year-old's body reached his village around 2 am. He was cremated by 3 am. The relatives of the deceased walked for seven kilometres to take his body back to the village.

A local social worker told The Times of India that despite repeated complaints from the villagers, the administration has not constructed a road in Nekkanamali. He said that the villagers had even boycotted elections in the past, but to no avail.

The social worker said, "Revenue officials have also promised us several times that work will be taken up, but nothing has been done so far. We have no other option other than to return our government IDs, including ration cards, Aadhaar cards and Voter IDs if the district administration fails to construct a road to our village." After the incident, Vandana Kark, Tirupattur sub-collector assured that the demands of the locals will be fulfilled at the earliest.
