Vox Sentences: A deadly shooting, an apparent hate crime

The news, but shorter. Your daily wrap-up for the day in news. Subscribe to get Vox Sentences delivered straight to your inbox.

This story is part of a group of stories called

Vox Sentences is your daily digest for what’s happening in the world. Sign up for the Vox Sentences newsletter, delivered straight to your inbox Monday through Friday, or view the Vox Sentences archive for past editions.

Shootout at a cemetery and a kosher market

vox-mark Sign up for the newsletter Sentences Get the news, but shorter, in one daily newsletter. Thanks for signing up! Check your inbox for a welcome email. Email (required) By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Notice and European users agree to the data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page Subscribe

Bill won’t let Muslim migrants become citizens in India

Protesters are taking to the streets in India after Parliament passed a controversial citizenship bill that excludes Muslim migrants. [ Al Jazeera ]

] Under the newly passed Citizenship Amendment Bill, all religious minorities except for Muslims are afforded an expedited citizenship application. [ Washington Post / Joanna Slater and Niha Masih ]

] In his reelection campaign, Prime Minister Narendra Modi promised to deliver this bill to his Hindu nationalist base. [ Reuters / Devjyot Ghoshal ]

] Critics of the bill see it as discriminatory and exclusionary. Muslim MP Asaduddin Owaisi called the bill “worse than Hitler’s laws and a conspiracy to make Muslims stateless.” [BBC]

Miscellaneous

Verbatim

After 80 days, it’s time that for one day, for the citizens of Israel, we sit and have a serious discussion about forming a broad unity government. It’s not too late.” [Likud’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu spoke to his rival, Blue and White’s Benny Gantz, about avoiding a third Israeli election this year]

Listen to this: A letter to Twitter

How start-up culture fails its employees and customers. [Spotify]

Read more

Brands are getting more “woke.” Who actually benefits?

Why humans kiss, explained

The Nobel went to economists who changed how we help the poor. But some critics oppose their big idea.

Pentagon halts operational training for Saudi military students after Pensacola shooting

Europe now has its own Green Deal
