Citizenship Bill protests: Assam on boil; two dead, internet services suspended across 10 districts

Assam Rifles managing the situation in the restive areas of Assam and Tripura. Prompt action by columns helped bring normalcy | Photo Credit: ANI

Guwahati: A day after Parliament cleared the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, the northeastern state of Assam remained on the boil with arson and violence being reported from several parts. Internet was suspended in 10 districts for 48 hours starting 12 noon Thursday, to prevent "misuse" of the social media to disturb peace and tranquillity, and to maintain law and order. Two people died in a hospital in Guwahati after they reportedly succumbed to bullet injuries.

PM Narendra Modi accused the Congress of trying to fuel tensions in the Northeast, saying that the politics of the grand old party and its allies depends on illegal immigrants. The PM also assured the people of the state that no one can take away their rights, unique identity and beautiful culture.

The Indian Army, meanwhile, conducted flag marches in Guwahati and other areas to control the deteriorating law and order situation. Guwahati and Dibrugarh district have been placed under indefinite curfew till further orders.

Citizenship Amendment Bill fallout:

10.15 pm: Home Minister Amit Shah assures IPFT that their concerns over CAB will be addressed

Union Home Minister Amit Shah assures a delegation of Indigenous People's Front of Tripura (IPFT), a BJP ally, that Modi government would try to address their concerns over Citizenship (Amendment) Bill

10.00 pm: Mobile and internet services suspended across 10 districts of Assam

Kumar Sanjay Krishna, Additional Chief Secretary (Home and Political Dept) Assam: Mobile internet service suspended for 48 more hours in 10 districts (Lakhimpur, Tinsukia, Dhemaji, Dibrugarh, Charaideo, Sivasagar, Jorhat, Golaghat, Kamrup (Metro) and Kamrup) of Assam.

9.45 pm: DMK chief MK Stalin announces protest against CAB in Tamil Nadu

In a statement, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) President MK Stalin today announced protest in all districts of Tamil Nadu against Citizenship Amendment Bill on December 17.

9.15 pm: Doubts over Citizenship Amendment Bill not baseless, says Assam Speaker Hitendra Nath Goswami

Doubts over Citizenship Amendment Bill not baseless, there is a strong possibility of it creating division: Assam Speaker Hitendra Nath Goswami

9.06 pm: Meghalaya CM Conrad K Sangma postpones scheduled meeting with Union Home Minister Amit Shah

Meghalaya CM Conrad K Sangma postpones scheduled meeting with Union Home Minister Amit Shah as his cabinet colleagues couldn't reach Guwahati airport to board a plane to Delhi, amid curfew and violent protests in Assam

9.01 pm: Assam Handloom Minister Ranjit Dutta's house at Behali in Sonitpur attacked

RTI activist and peasant leader Akhil Gogoi arrested in Assam's Jorhat district, says official. Assam Handloom Minister Ranjit Dutta's house at Behali in Sonitpur attacked by protestors opposing the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill: Police

8.57 pm: A delegation from Tripura of Joint Movement Against Citizenship Amendment Bill today met Home Minister Amit Shah and discussed their concerns over CAB. They were assured by HM that their concerns would be addressed. After his assurance, they have called off their strike.

8.49 pm: Maintain peace in the state, appeals Assam Governor

Assam Governor Jagdish Mukhi: I would like to request the students, brothers and sisters, protesting against Citizenship Amendment Bill in Assam, to not lose control while registering their protest, and maintain peace in the state... Central govt has given an assurance on the floor of the House to protect the interests of Assam. They have also given the assurance to protect the culture, language and rights of the natives of Assam as per Clause 6 of the Assam Accord.

8.37 pm: (JMACAB) calls off stir

Anthony Deb Barma, Convenor of Joint Movement against Citizenship Amendment Bill (JMACAB) says, "Today he (Amit Shah) called us because we had called for an indefinite strike to protest against the #CitizenshipAmendmentBill...we have called off our indefinite strike."

8.16 pm: Indefinite curfew in Assam's Tezpur and Dhekiajuli towns

Indefinite curfew imposed in Assam's Tezpur and Dhekiajuli towns, news agency PTI reports citing officials. Night curfew in Jorhat, Golaghat, Tinsukia, Charaideo districts, says agency report.

7.41 pm: Two persons, protesting against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, die of bullet injuries

Two persons, protesting against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, die of bullet injuries at Gauhati Medical College and Hospital, says Official

7.23 pm: CAB direct assault on India’s secular character, won't implement, says Punjab CM

Punjab Chief Minister's Office: Terming the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) as a direct assault on India’s secular character, Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh today said his government would not allow the legislation to be implemented in his state.

7.16 pm: CAB protests spread to Shillong, curfew likely

CAB Protest spreading to Shillong. Tyres burnt in the middle of Motphran and stones are being pelted at police. Curfew could be imposed.

7.00 pm: Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) founder Brindaban Goswami resigns

AGP supported the Citizenship Amendment Bill 2019 against the decision of its general committee. Its founder Brindamab Goswami resigned on Thursday.

6.45 pm: Assam Director General of Police Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta appeals for peace

"We do not have anything to say if the protests are democratic. But I am appealing to the people not to take the law into their hands to create disturbances," Mahanta told

6.28 pm: Governor Jagdish Mukhi appeals for calm amid violent protests

"If the student community has any issues against the government they have every right to agitate but they should do it in a democratic and peaceful manner, without taking the law in their hands," Mukhi appeals.

6.18 pm: Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan says the state will not accept CAB

Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan: Kerala will not accept Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB). CAB is unconstitutional. The central government is trying to divide India on religious lines. This is a move to sabotage equality and secularism. (file pic)

6.14 pm: Abdur Rahman, Special IGP in Mumbai: Citizenship Amendment Bill is against the spirit of Constitution

Abdur Rahman, Special IGP in Mumbai: Citizenship Amendment Bill is against the spirit of Constitution. As the Civil Disobedience Movement, I have decided to not attend the office. Either my application for VRS should be accepted or my letter should be accepted as my letter of resignation.

6.08 pm: Inspector General of Police (Training & Armed Police), Assam is substantively posted as Inspector General of Police

Munna Prasad Gupta, Inspector General of Police (Training & Armed Police), Assam is substantively posted as Inspector General of Police (Training & Armed Police) for the purpose of drawal of salary etc & is allowed to function as Police Commissioner, Guwahati as additional charge

6.04 pm: ADGP (Special Branch) who was allowed to function as Police Commissioner, Guwahati, transferred

Deepak Kumar, who was substantively posted as ADGP (Special Branch) & allowed to function as Police Commissioner,Guwahati is transferred & posted as Addl Director General of Police (Training & Armed Police), Assam. He's also posted as ADGP (STF), as additional charge.

5:35 pm: No adverse affect on Assam - Himanta Biswa Sarma

Assam minister Himanta Biswa Sarma has assured that the Citizenship Amendment Bill will not adversely affect Assam. Instead, it will help refugees facing religious persecution, Sarma said. "Implementation of Clause 6 of Assam Accord promised by Amit Shah will create new hope of political stability in Assam," the minister told PTI.

5:20 pm: More violence in Assam, fuel rationing in Arunachal Pradesh

More incidents of violence have been reported from Assam in view of the passage of Citizenship Amendment Bill by Parliament. Stones were thrown at Assam Police chief Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta's convoy on GS Road in Guwahati. Further, in Chabua, MLA Binod Hazarika's residence was set ablaze and vehicles torched by anti-CAB protestors. Officials said the circle office has also been burned down.

Meanwhile, in Arunachal Pradesh, there are reports that fuel rationing is being done.

5:00 pm: CAB against indigenous people of Sikkim: Bhaichung Bhutia

Footballer turned politician Bhaichung Bhutia has termed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill as against the "interest" of the indigenous people of Sikkim as well as article 371(F) of the Constitution which grants special status to the state.

4:50 pm: BJP to launch massive outreach programme to explain benefits of CAB to refugees

The BJP to kick-start a massive outreach programme to reach out to these communities so as make them aware about their rights and privileges after the Citizenship Amendment Bill was passed in the Rajya Sabha.

4:45 pm: MEA on Bangladesh Foreign Minister's comment on CAB

"There seems to be some confusion. We've explained that religious persecution is not happening under the present government. We have also acknowledged and we are aware that the present government in Bangladesh has taken several steps to address the concerns of minorities living there as per their Constitutional provisions," said MEA.

4:35 pm: Don’t think we need to respond to every statement said by Pak PM

“Don't think we need to respond to every statement of Pakistan PM. All his statements are unwarranted, he should rather pay attention to the condition of minorities in Pakistan than comment on internal matters of India,” said MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar on Pakistan PM Imran Khan Niazi remarks on CAB 2019:

4:26 pm: What about the fate of Goans who opted for Portuguese passport: Congress on CAB

A day after passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in Parliament, the Goa Congress sought to know what would be the fate of Goans who opted for a Portuguese passport.

4:20 pm: Shiv Sena's decision to stage walkout from RS reflects its change of heart: NCP’s Nawab Malik

NCP chief spokesperson Nawab Malik said that Shiv Sena's decision to stage a walkout from the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday reflected its "change of heart".

"This showed Shiv Sena's change of heart and the Congress should note this...the Shiv Sena is a different party...this will not have any effect on the longevity of the government which will complete its five-year tenure," Malik said.

4:16 pm: Shiv Sena's support to CAB in LS won't affect Maharashtra govt: NCP

The NCP has said that Shiv Sena's support to Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) in Lok Sabha won't affect Maharashtra government.

4:11 pm: 'CAB a step towards correcting historic wrong'

Utpal Parrikar, son of late Goa chief minister Manohar Parrikar, has backed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill (CAB), calling it a step towards correcting the "historical wrong". Taking to Twitter, he also said that the Bill was a "direct consequence of partition on religious lines".

4:00 pm: Modi wants to create an India that is 'scared', 'weak and divided'

In a scathing attack, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Thursday lashed out at Prime Minister Narendra Modi, saying the latter wants to create an India that is "scared" where people are "weak and divided".

"Narendra Modi wants an India that is scared. He wants the people of India to be weak and divided. He has become the Prime Minister only by dividing people on the basis of religion, caste, and region," he said at a public rally here.

3:40 pm: Actor Jatin Bora quits BJP

Actor Jatin Bora who was inducted into BJP has resigned from the party. This comes after singer Zubeen Garg appealed to Bora to resign from the BJP to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

3:30 pm: 'I won’t be able to entertain you the way I should in my present state of mind'

"Dear Delhi. I am very sorry but I have decided not to do the concert tomorrow at ‘imperfectoshor’ as planned! My home state Assam is burning, crying and under curfew! I won’t be able to entertain you the way I should in my present state of mind!" singer Papon tweeted.

3:25 pm: Clause 6 of the Assam Accord to be implemented in letter and spirit: CM Sonowal

“I assure that PM Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah have very categorically stated the centre is committed to implementing the Clause 6 of Assam Accord in letter and spirit to ensure the constitutional safeguard to the people of Assam politically, culturally,” said Assam CM Sarbananda Sonowal.

3:16 pm: ‘Firm belief that people will maintain peace’

He further appealed to the people of the state to maintain peace and tranquillity.

“It's our cultural, social and spiritual tradition. I have a firm belief that people of Assam, as usual, will maintain peace for all time to come,” the CM said.

3:10 pm: Situation aggravated by spreading misinformation: Assam CM

"Section of people trying to make the situation aggravated by spreading misinformation and misleading people by saying that 10-15 million people are going to take citizenship in Assam. It is false propaganda,” said Assam CM Sarbananda Sonowal.

3:00 pm: Cancelled my trip due to 'Buddijibi Debosh' and 'Bijoy Debosh'

“I had to cancel my trip to New Delhi as I have to participate in the 'Buddijibi Debosh' and 'Bijoy Debosh' and more so as our State Minister is out of the country in Madrid and our Foreign Secretary is in Hague,” said Bangladesh Foreign Minister AK Abdul Momen.

2:55 pm: Bangladesh Foreign Minister cancels his visit to India

Bangladesh Foreign Minister AK Abdul Momen cancels his visit to India. He was scheduled to visit India from December 12-14.

Momen had given a controversial statement saying, "They (Indians) have many problems within their country. Let them fight among themselves. That does not bother us. As a friendly country, we hope that India will not do something that affects our friendly relationship."

#WATCH PM Modi on #CitizenshipAmendmentBill2019: There're attempts to fuel tensions in Northeast, don't be misled by Congress. Assure every state of East & Northeast. The traditions, culture, language etc of Assam&other states won't be affected. pic.twitter.com/AUnkXXGEqK — ANI (@ANI) December 12, 2019

2:40 pm: 'I want to appeal to the people of Assam to trust Modi'

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has said the Centre is working for the people of Northeast and appealed to the people of Assam to trust him.

“I have visited Northeast more than these Congress leaders. The Congress is trying to mislead people in Assam saying that people from Bangladesh will infiltrate from Bangladesh,” said the PM.

2:30 pm: Guwahati police chief removed, several officers transferred

In a major reshuffle, the Assam government on Thursday replaced the Guwahati Police commissioner and a senior officer responsible for law and order in the state, amid violent protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

2:20 pm: Internet services in Assam suspended for another 48 hours

Internet services in Assam suspended for another 48 hours, beginning from 12 noon today: Additional Chief Secretary (Home and Political) Kumar Sanjay Krishna.

2:00 pm: Politics of Congress and its allies depend on illegal immigrants: PM Modi

There are attempts to fuel tensions in the Northeast region. Most of the region is out of the ambit of this bill but the politics of Congress and its allies depend on illegal immigrants.

1:55 pm: Don't be misled by Congress's statements: PM Modi

I assure every state of the East and Northeast. The traditions, culture, language etc of Assam and other states will not be affected at all. The central government will work with the state government for your development. Don't be misled by Congress's statements.

1:45 pm: Congress trying to fuel tensions in Northeast: PM Narendra Modi

There're attempts to fuel tensions in Northeast, don't be misled by Congress. Assure every state of East and Northeast. The traditions, culture, language etc of Assam and other states won't be affected.

1:36 pm: Angry protesters try to attack RSS office in Dibrugarh

Protesters today tried to attack the office of the RSS in Dibrugarh district and burned a few vehicles which were parked outside.

1:30 pm: Mamata Banerjee to hold a meeting with her party leaders on 20th December

West Bengal Chief Minister and TMC Chief Mamata Banerjee to hold a meeting with her party leaders on 20th December over Citizenship Amendment Bill 2019 and National Register of Citizens (NRC).

1:25 pm: List of trains cancelled in Assam

Due to agitation in Assam and North East (NF Railway), the following trains have been cancelled:

15909 Dibrugarh–Lalgarh Awadh Assam Express train cancelled. Consequently, the 15910 Lalgarh-Dibrugarh Awadh Assam Express train will also remain cancelled.

20505 Dibrugarh–New Delhi Rajdhani Express train will remain cancelled.

15903 Dibrugarh–Chandigarh Express train cancelled.

1:19 pm: Congress-sponsored Tripura shutdown evokes partial response

The 24-hour shutdown, called by Youth Congress to protest against the police lathi-charge on their activists agitating against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill (CAB) evoked partial response on Thursday. Around hundred picketers in West Tripura and Sepahijala districts were detained.

1:12 pm: 12 CRPF companies rushed to Assam from Kashmir

12 companies of the CRPF have been rushed to Assam from Kashmir. As per the CRPF sources, these companies were camping in the valley ever since article 370 was abrogated. It will now be moved to Assam to tackle the deteriorating law and order situation. Meanwhile, 15 more companies have been kept on standby and will be moved if required.

1:10 pm: 'Bringing Citizenship Amendment Bill courageous step'

“We want to thank Centre, PM Narendra Modi and HM Amit Shah for the courageous step of bringing Citizenship Amendment Bill. It is a big initiative of the present government to give honourable place to refugees (from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh) living in India. We welcome them,” said RSS general secretary Bhaiyyaji Joshi.

1:08 pm: Congress to move court against CAB

Congress has decided to move court against Citizenship Amendment Bill once it’s notified by President Ram Nath Kovind.

1:00 pm: CAB completely unconstitutional, headed towards SC: Manish Tewari

"It is definitely being challenged and I personally know of at least 10 different groups in the northeast who have approached our law offices to challenge the bill. It is headed to the Supreme Court," Congress leader Manish Tewari told PTI.

12:50 pm: Cops open fire on protesters in Lalung Gaon area in Assam

Police opened fire to disperse protesters at Lalung Gaon area today in which some persons were reportedly injured. The officer claimed that the protesters hurled stones and bricks at the policemen and when attempts to pacify them did not deter the mob, the security personnel opened fire at them.

12:40 pm: Congress MPs walkout in protest

Parliamentary Affairs Minister Prahlad Joshi accused the Congress of instigating violence in the region. After Joshi's remarks, Congress members walked out of the proceedings.

12:35 pm: Barring a few places entire region was in flames: Congress

The Centre has accused the Congress of instigating violence in the northeast after the passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in Parliament. This attack on the Congress comes after Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury raised the issue of violence in parts of the northeast region during the Zero Hour, saying barring a few places the entire region was in "flames".

12:28 pm: Unrest across country from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, says Ghulam Nabi Azad

“Unrest is across the country from Kashmir to Kanyakumari. But the worst situation is in northeastern states, as a result of the passage of Citizenship Amendment Bill 2019 in both Houses. People of the northeast, irrespective of religion, are against the bill,” said Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad.

12:15 pm: Tripura tribal parties call off protest

The tribal parties called off their protest after holding talks with Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb, who assured them saying that, he will take their concerns up with Union Home Minister Amit Shah.

12:10 pm: Maintain peace, don't get misled: Assam CM to people

"I appeal to the people to maintain peace and not get misled," said Chief Minister of Assam Sarbananda Sonowal.

11:58 am: Left parties to protest against CAB, NRC on Dec 19

Left parties to organise a protest against Citizenship Amendment Bill and National Register of Citizens (NRC) across the country, on December 19.

11:53 am: 'Misleading statements made by Rahul Gandhi yesterday over CAB'

“Misleading statements made by Rahul Gandhi yesterday tend to fish in troubled waters of Brahmaputra and trying to seek crutches of some of the disgruntled elements to revive their fortune,” said Jitendra Singh, Union Minister of State for Development of North Eastern Region.

11:45 pm: All passenger train operations to Assam, Tripura suspended

The Northeast Frontier Railway has announced the suspension of all passenger train operations to Assam, Tripura in light of protests and security situation.

11:40 am: Happy that Citizenship Amendment Bill has been passed in both the Houses: Ram Madhav

“We are happy that the Citizenship Amendment Bill has been passed in both the Houses of the Parliament and it will soon become an Act. It'll give great relief to millions of refugees who came to India decades ago and are living here as stateless people,” said BJP General Secretary Ram Madhav.

11:30 am: AAP MP Sanjay Singh gives 'Suspension of Business Notice' in Rajya Sabha

AAP MP Sanjay Singh has given 'Suspension of Business Notice' in Rajya Sabha under rule 267, on 'protest in Assam, Tripura and northeastern region over Citizenship Amendment Bill.

11:23 am: 'CAB will not affect Assamese language, culture'

“I am an Assamese; I will not do anything that may hurt the people of Assam. I want to assure everyone that Citizenship Amendment Bill that has been passed will not affect the culture and language of Assam,” said Union Minister and BJP MP from Dibrugarh, Rameshwar Teli.

11:15 am: Appeal to people of Assam to maintain peace: Assam BJP MP

Union Minister and BJP MP from Dibrugarh (Assam), Rameshwar Teli has said that his uncle's shop was set on fire and the boundary wall of his house was also damaged by protestors, last night around 11 pm. "I appeal to the people of Assam to maintain peace," he said.

11:10 am: Anti-CAB protesters defy curfew in Guwahati

Locals in Assam’s capital Guwahati defied the curfew in protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill with Army conducting flag march in the city. The Indian Army has deployed two columns of Assam Rifles in Tripura and the third column in Assam is on standby at the request of the civil Administration in Tripura and Assam.

10:55 am: IUML files writ petition in SC against CAB

A writ petition has been filed in the Supreme Court on Thursday by Indian Union Muslim League claiming that the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019, passed by the Parliament on Wednesday, violates Article 14 of the Constitution. Senior Advocate Kapil Sibal will represent IUML in the apex court.

10:45 am: Congress gives Adjournment Motion Notice in Lok Sabha

Congress MPs Adhir Ranjan Chaudhry, K Suresh and Gaurav Gogoi have given Adjournment Motion Notice in Lok Sabha, over 'unrest in northeastern states and law & order situation. Congress MP Ripun Bora has given 'Suspension of Business Notice' in Rajya Sabha under rule 267, over 'current situation of Assam and northeast region'.
