Amid protests over Citizenship Bill, Bangladesh Foreign Minister cancels his two-day India visit

Dhaka (Bangladesh) | Jagran News Desk: Bangladesh Foreign Minister AK Abdul Momen has cancelled his three-day visit to India beginning Thursday over the situation arising out of the passage of the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the Rajya Sabha.

This comes amid Bangladesh’s protests against the Citizenship Bill which was passed in Rajya Sabha on Wednesday with 125 votes in its favour while 105 MPs voted against the bill.

Meanhwile, Momen has said that has cancelled his India trip he had to participate in the 'Buddijibi Debosh' and 'Bijoy Debosh' and he might visit New Delhi in January next year.

"I had to cancel my trip to New Delhi as I have to participate in the 'Buddijibi Debosh' and 'Bijoy Debosh' and more so as our State Minister is out of the country in Madrid and our Foreign Secretary is in the Hague," news agency ANI quoted him as saying.

"Given increasing demand at home, I have decided to cancel the visit. However, I am looking forward to attending the next meeting in January. I am sending our DG to attend the event," he added.

According to an earlier advisory issued by the Ministry of External Affairs, Momen was scheduled to arrive here at 5:20 pm on Thursday.

Momen on Wednesday had said that the Citizenship Bill could weaken India's historic character as a secular nation and rejected the allegations that the minorities are facing religious persecution in his country.

"India is historically a tolerant country which believes in secularism (but) their historic position will be weakened if they deviate from that," Momen told reporters.

He said that Bangladesh and India are currently enjoying close friendly relations "that is termed as "golden chapter" of bilateral ties and "so, naturally our people (Bangladeshis) expect that India won't do anything that could create anxiety among them".

"Many important decisions of our country are taken by persons belonging to different religions...we never judge anybody by their religion," he had said.

"They (US) are being critical about that (as well) . . . they believe India weakened its position by doing it (passing the bill in Lok Sabha)," he added.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill or CAB has been passed by the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha. According to the legislation, members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities, who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, till December 31, 2014 facing religious persecution there, will not be treated as illegal immigrants but given Indian citizenship.

(With PTI inputs)

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
