Centre Committed To Implementing Clause 6 Of Assam Accord, Says CM Sarbananda Sonowal

New Delhi:

Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal in a video appeal to the people of the state Thursday said that they need not worry about the Citizenship Amendment Bill as their traditional culture, language, political and land rights will be protected by implementing Clause 6 of the Assam Accord.

Sonowal said that some people are trying to spread misinformation to mislead people and aggravate the situation. He said a committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of Justice (Retd) Biplab Sarmah, who has been given the task to prepare recommendations for ensuring the constitutional safeguards of the people of Assam.

The Centre has categorically stated that the recommendations of Clause 6 Committee will be fully implemented within a timeframe, the chief minister said. “The Committe will complete its work and submit its recommendations to the centre soon and it will be implemented soon after it is submitted. I believe that the people of Assam will get full protection,” he said.

“I firmly believe that the sensible people of Assam will never believe in the misinformations as they are generally peace-loving people ... We condemn those who are spreading misinformation and disturbing the peace of the state,” he said.

He also appealed to all sections of the society to come forward and create an atmosphere of situation of peace and tranquility in which the students can study and excel in their academic fields.

Assam continued to be rocked by violence and large scale protests against the contentious Bill, which has been passed by Parliament, despite the indefinite curfew in the city and Dibrugarh and the Army deployment in the two places besides in two other districts to contain the situation.

Earlier today, Bangladesh Foreign Minister A K Abdul Momen has cancelled his three-day visit to India beginning Thursday over the situation arising out of the passage of the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in Parliament, diplomatic sources said.

According to an earlier advisory issued by the Ministry of External Affairs, Momen was scheduled to arrive here at 5:20 pm on Thursday.

The Bangladesh Foreign Minister has cancelled his trip to India over prevailing situation following passage of the Bill, sources said.

There have been massive protests in Assam and several northeastern states against the proposed legislation which seeks to provide citizenship to non-Muslim persecuted religious minorities from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan.
