Assam CAB protest: MLA Binod Hazarika's house burnt; stones thrown at state police chief's convoy in Guwahati

College students along with locals burn tyres during their protest strike against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), in Tinsukia district of Assam | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal has urged people to maintain peace and calm Protesters burnt down the house of MLA Binod Hazarika in Chabua Stones were pelted at Assam Police chief Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta's cavalcade on the Guwahati-Shillong Road near Christian Basti

Guwahati: The protests in Assam against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, took an ugly turn on Thursday when protesters set the house of an MLA on fire. They even set fire to vehicles and the circle office.

According to officials, protesters burnt down the house of MLA Binod Hazarika in Chabua.

Meanwhile, stones were pelted at Assam Police chief Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta's cavalcade on the Guwahati-Shillong Road near Christian Basti.

The Assam government, meanwhile, removed two key police officers, including the Guwahati Police Commissioner. Munna Prasad Gupta replaced Deepak Kumar as the new Guwahati police chief.

Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal, in the meantime, urged people to maintain peace and calm.

"I assure the people of Assam full protection to ensure their identity as a whole," Sonowal said in a statement.

While appealing to people to "please come forward and create a situation of peace and tranquillity", the Assam Chief Minister said: "I hope the people will consider this appeal sensibly.”

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has also urged the people of the North East to maintain peace. He also hit out at the Congress and its allies for stirring confusion over the CAB. "I appeal to the people of North East not to get influenced by these people. Clause 6 of Assam will be safeguarded. We feel proud of the culture of Assam," the PM had said while addressing a rally in Jharkhand earlier today.

Earlier today, the Army carried out a flag march in Guwahati. In order to maintain law and order situation in the state, the authorities extended the suspension of Internet services across the state for another 48 hours from 12 noon on Thursday.

In the wake of the violent protests, most airlines cancelled flights to and from Guwahati and Dibrugarh. Train movement was halted too.

"IndiGo Airlines has cancelled one flight to Guwahati from Kolkata. The flights to Dibrugarh are being cancelled by most airlines due to the ongoing protests. However, IndiGo will operate a ferry flight to bring back the stranded passengers from Dibrugarh," a Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport spokesperson said.

Meanwhile, 40 companies of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) have been moved from Kashmir to the North East due to protests in the region against the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, was passed by both the Houses of the Parliament earlier this week.

The Bill seeks to grant Indian citizenship to non-Muslim refugees from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Pakistan, who have entered India on or before December 31, 2014.
