AASU to file petition against Citizenship Amendment Bill in SC: What makes the student body so influential?

Members of the AASU carry out a torchlight rally in Guwahati, opposing the Citizenship Amendment Bill. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The AASU is one of the oldest student and youth organisations in the country, having roots that extend into India’s pre-independence era Operating only within the geographical boundary of Assam, the organisation preaches a principle of secularism, calling for the embrace of all communities residing within Assam The National Register of Citizens (NRC) was, in fact, a by-product of the AASU’s demonstrations in 1985 which ultimately led to the Assam Accord

Shortly after the contentious Citizenship Amendment Bill passed in the Rajya Sabha on December 11, protests erupted in Guwahati, with the All Assam Students’ Union (AASU) pledging to approach the Supreme Court to file a petition to review the Bill. The AASU’s chief advisor, and advisor to the North-East Students Organisation (NESO), Samujjal Bhattacharya, slammed the Union government stating that the legislation will not be tolerated “under any circumstance.”

Student unions such as the AASU and NESO are plentiful in the North East and are officially recognised by the state governments. Historically, they have held significant authority in swaying policy decisions, through the application of strong pressure against the state government especially regarding matters regarding migration into the state, and protection of the North East’s culture and identities.





All Assam Students’ Union

The AASU is one of the oldest student and youth organisations in the country, having roots that extend into India’s pre-independence era. Operating only within the geographical boundary of Assam, the organisation preaches a principle of secularism, calling for the embrace of all communities residing within Assam. With members elected into the organisation supreme body by the students themselves, and as per its own Constitution, the AASU professes to maintain ethnic diversity. Moreover, labelling itself as a democratic organisation, the AASU claims that all its members get an equal say in electing members to the higher rungs of its hierarchy regardless of where they are located within the state. The organisation also does not align itself with any single political party. The AASU, along with its so-called “vigilante” arm, the Asom Sena, do not subscribe to the use of violence in their demonstrations.

The National Register of Citizens (NRC) was, in fact, a by-product of the AASU’s demonstrations in 1985 which ultimately led to the Assam Accord.

North-East Students’ Union

The North-East Students’ Union or NESO is an umbrella organisation consisting of several student organisations from across the region including the AASU, Mizoram’s Mizo Zirlai Pawl (MZP), Manipur’s All Manipur Students’ Union (AMSU), Mehgalaya’s Khasi Students’ Union (KSU), Arunachal Pradesh’s All Arunachal Pradesh Students’ Union and Nagaland’s Naga Students’ Federation (NSF) among others.

According to some activists, the birth of these student unions came about from a sense of disillusionment shared among the youth, with the prevalent socialist and centrist parliamentary parties that existed in the Northeast in the 1970s and 80s.






