Guwahati Becomes Epicentre Of Anti-CAB Protests, Thousands Hit The Streets & Defy Curfew

Defying the indefinite curfew clamped on the city, thousands of people converged in the heart of Guwahati to take part in protests against the contentious Citizenship Amendment Bill. The streets of Guwahati and other cities reverberated with anti-government slogans as thousands marched through the streets cocking a snook at security forces to attend protest rallies.



Eminent litterateurs, artistes, prominent citizens, lawyers, students and common people came from all parts of the city to participate in the meeting held also by Silpi Samaj (artistes forum) and took out a protest rally against the CAB.

Demonstrators setup a bonfire on a street as they protest against the governments Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), in Guwahati on December 11, 2019. AFP PHOTO.

The indefinite curfew has been imposed in Guwahati and Dibrugarh since Wednesday evening while the Army was called in at four places, including the state capital, Dibrguarh, Tinsukia and Jorhat districts in view of the large scale violent public protests against the legislation across the state.

Meanwhile, Bangladesh's Foreign Minister on Thursday postponed his trip to India after the passage of the Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2019, however, the Ministry of External Affairs here said the two developments are not related.

Speaking to the media, MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said Bangladesh's Foreign Minister A.K. Abdul Momen had conveyed that he had changed his programme on account of domestic issues pertaining to the commemoration of the Victory Day of Bangladesh on December 16.

"They have informed us about the postponement of the visit. They have also conveyed that the minister had changed his programme on account of domestic issues pertaining to the commemoration of the Victory Day of Bangladesh on December 16," Kumar said. He added that any speculation that this development is connected with the legislation adopted by Parliament regarding the Citizenship Amendment Bill is "unwarranted".

Guwahati resembled a garrison town with Army, paramilitary and state police personnel stationed in every nook and corner, watching helplessly, as frenzied mobs blocked roads with burning discarded tyres and menaced commuters by bludgeoning their vehicles with sticks and stones.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi appealed for calm and sought to assuage the concerns of protesters, insisting his government was committed to safeguarding their rights.

In a series of tweets, in both Assamese and English, the prime minister said he personally and the Central government are "totally committed to constitutionally safeguard the political, linguistic, cultural and land rights of the Assamese people as per the spirit of Clause 6."

Clause 6 of the Assam Accord guarantees to safeguard local rights, language and culture.

"I want to assure my brothers and sisters of Assam that they have nothing to worry after the passing of #CAB (sic)," PM Modi wrote on the microblogging site.

"No one can take away your rights, unique identity and beautiful culture. It will continue to flourish and grow," he wrote as the state plunged deeper into chaos and violence. Notwithstanding his words of comfort, internet services in 10 districts were suspended for anohter 48 hours beginning 12 pm to prevent "misuse" of social media to disturb peace and tranquillity, and to maintain law and order, officials said.

A police officer holds a tear gas gun during a protest against Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), a bill that seeks to give citizenship to religious minorities persecuted in neighbouring Muslim countries, in Guwahati, India, December 10, 2019. REUTERS phot

The Railways has suspended all passenger train services in Tripura and Assam and short-terminated long distance trains to the region at Guwahati following protests in the two states over the passage of CAB. After a railway station in Dibrugarh's Chabua, the hometown of the Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal, was set on fire late Wednesday night besides the Panitola railway station in Tinsukia, 12 companies of the Railway Protection Special Force (RPSF) have been dispatched to the region.

Activists shout slogans as they hold placards to protest against the government's Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), in Allahabad on December 10, 2019. AFP photo

An unspecified number of flights to the northeast including Guwahati were rescheduled or cancelled, an official of the Kolkata airport said.

Heads rolled in the police establishment because of incessant protests with the state's BJP government removing Guwahati Police commissioner Deepak Kumar and appointing Munna Prasad Gupta in his place. The additional director general of police (law and order) Mukesh Agarwal was also transferred and replaced by ADGP (CID) GP Singh.

Schools in Guwahati have been shut down till December 22 while all examinations have been currently postponed even as life has come to a standstill in the wake of violent protests.
