Police Opens Fire On Protesters In Assam, SC Orders Probe In Hyderabad Encounter + More News

Police opened fire to disperse protesters at Lalungaonn area in Guwahati on Thursday morning in which some persons were reportedly injured.



A senior police officer, attributed by news agency PTI, confirmed the reports of police opening fire on protestors. The officer claimed that the protesters hurled stones and bricks at the policemen and when attempts to pacify them did not deter the mob, the security personnel opened fire at them. Read More

Supreme Court Orders Probe Into The Hyderabad Encounter Killing

The Supreme Court has ordered a probe by a three-member commission into the alleged encounter in Hyderabad last week in which four men accused of rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor was killed.

The commission headed by retired Supreme Court judge VS Sirpurkar and includes Justice Rekha Prakash Sondurbaldota, a former Bombay High Court judge and former CBI director, DR Karthikeyan have been given six months time to submit a report to the apex court. Read More

Family Of Unnao Gangrape & Murder Victim Sit On Dharna

Refusing to take back their demand to meet Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath at their residence, the kin of Unnao gangrape and murder victim have restated their call. They have sat on a dharna near her burial ground.

The family of the kin have also demanded that the culprits be sent to the gallows within a week. The family members, on Monday, had stopped the district administration from building a concrete structure over the grave. Read More

Rains The Only Hope For Delhi As Air Quality Gets 'Severe'

The Air Quality in the national capital and adjoining areas which had been deteriorating over the past week touched 'severe' levels and has remained the same ever since.

On Thursday, the national capital woke up to yet another smoggy day and the overall air quality in Delhi was 407, which fall under the 'severe' category. An AQI between 0-50 is considered "good", 51-100 "satisfactory", 101-200 "moderate", 201-300 "poor", 301-400 "very poor" and 401-500 "severe". An AQI above 500 falls in the "severe-plus" category. Read More

8 Natives Reportedly Killed By Bengali Migrants In Tripura

Eight indigenous people/original inhabitants of Tripura, also known as boroks/Twiprasa were attacked and killed allegedly by the Bengali migrants. The incident was reported right after the contentious Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) 2019 was passed in the Rajya Sabha late last night.

Local sources tell that right after the passage of the Bill, which is now set to become a law, Agartala and other parts of the state erupted in celebrations. The migrant Bengalis reportedly burst firecrackers and lit the sky in jubilation. Read More
