In Pictures: Troops deployed to curb violent protests over Citizenship Amendment Bill



1 / 8 Members of the youth wing of India's main opposition Congress party burn a copy of Citizenship Amendment Bill. Thousands of troops were deployed in Assam on Thursday after violent protests overnight against the law that would make it easier for non-Muslim minorities from some neighbouring countries to seek Indian citizenship. REUTERS/Adnan Abidi



2 / 8 Congress party members shout slogans during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), a bill that seeks to give citizenship to religious minorities persecuted in neighbouring Muslim countries, in Ahmedabad. REUTERS/Amit Dave



3 / 8 Police officers try to detain demonstrators during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill in Agartala. Narendra Modi led government has said the bill was meant to protect besieged minorities from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan. REUTERS/Jayanta Dey



4 / 8 Demonstrators shout slogans during a protest against Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) in Guwahati. Resistance to the bill has been the strongest in Assam, where a movement against illegal immigrants from its neighbouring Bangladesh has simmered for decades. REUTERS/Anuwar Hazarika



5 / 8 Students display placards as they attend a protest against the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) in Kolkata. Critics say the bill the country's secular constitution by not offering protection to Muslims while others argue it will open India's northern states to a flood of foreigners. REUTERS/Rupak De Chowdhuri



6 / 8 Men ride a motorcycle past a damaged bus that was set on fire by demonstrators in Guwahati. Troops were moved into the state from other parts of India to restore calm, although protesters were back on the streets in other parts such as Morigaon, where they burnt tyres. REUTERS/Anuwar Hazarika



7 / 8 A man walks past damaged vehicles that were set on fire by demonstrators. Mobile internet has been suspended in 10 districts in Assam for 24 hours until 7 pm Thursday, the government said in an order, adding that social media platforms could potentially be used to "inflame passions and thus exacerbate the law and order situation." REUTERS/Anuwar Hazarika
