J&K HC issues notice to striking lawyers

J&K HC issues notice to striking lawyers

JAMMU, Dec 11 (JNF): High Court of Jammu and Kashmir has issued notice to striking lawyers to show cause as to why they should not be proceeded against for criminal contempt of court.

A Division Bench of Chief Justice Gita Mittal and Justice Rajesh Bindal has taken cognisance of the Lawyers' strike in the various Courts including the High Court, District Courts, Jammu and Kashmir Special Tribunal and Revenue Courts for an indefinite period.

The lawyers went on an indefinite strike on November 1 to protest against the administration's decision to divest the courts of powers to register various documents and vest the same with the Revenue Department.

The High Court received from the Principal District and Sessions Judge, Jammu that the main entrance of the District Courts building complex was blocked on 4th November, 2019 by certain striking 4 lawyers. On intervention of the Principal District Judge, the lawyers permitted few under trial prisoners and ladies to enter the Courts complex, but the same was blocked again.

"The Principal District Judge had to personally remain present at the entry gate on 5th November, 2019 to facilitate entry into the District Courts of lawyers willing to work, appear in courts as also under trial prisoners, litigants and public. However, at 11:30 am on the same day, the main gate was again locked by the striking lawyers. Once again, the Principal District Judge had to intervene and facilitate access into the building to the litigants, staff and public".

As per the Order, on 6th November 2019, the striking lawyers allegedly started physically checking identity cards of those who wanted to enter into the Court building. Yet again few staff members, under trial prisoners and some accused were able to enter the Court. As a result of the main gate being locked, the judges, staff and those who were inside the District Courts were confined therein by these striking lawyers.

The show-cause notices were issued to advocates Baldev Singh, Nitin Bakshi, Azhar Usman Khan and Mahinder Singh Palli for criminal contempt of court.

While issuing contempt notices, the Bench observed that conduct of these advocates of locking the District Court and preventing the litigants in civil cases, under trials and lawyers from accessing the courts is a very serious matter and can't be ignored. The quorum led by Chief Justice Gitta Mittal and Justice Rajesh Bindal observed that in view of the pronouncements of the Supreme Court that the very decision to proceed on strike; remaining absent from court and boycott of judicial proceedings; locking the courts, preventing entry to those wanting to enter are completely illegal rendering all persons responsible for the same for appropriate action as mandated by the apex court.

The bench observed that the conduct of the protesting lawyers is in blatant violation of the mandate of law and falls under the serious category of criminal contempt of court.

“We are reasonably hopeful that given the reminder of the legal position hereby, good sense and conscience of the members of the Bar would prevail and they would conduct themselves in accordance with law ensuring the rights of the public guaranteed under the Constitution of India,” the bench led by Chief Justice Gittal Mittal observed.

The protesting lawyers have been asked to file response as why they should not be proceeded against under rules 10, 11 of the Jammu and Kashmir Advocates (Regulation of Practice in the High Court and Subordinate Courts) Rules, 2003 as well as proceeded against for the acts which are penal under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code. They have also been asked to file a response within two weeks of the receipt of the notices. Registrar General High Court of J&K has been directed to procure from the Registrar Judicial, Jammu as well also from the Principal District & Sessions Judge, Jammu upto date reports regarding the position with regard to obstructions to access the court as well as CCTV video coverage recorded and photographs thereof. Registrar IT has also been directed to conduct an inquiry in the matter and submit a report in this regard to the court.
