Citizenship Amendment Act: Sparks fly thick and fast

Members from various organisations during a protest against passing of the Citizenship Amendment Bill, at India Gate in New Delhi.

Amid violent protests in Assam and elsewhere in the northeast against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), the political parties engaged in a bitter war of words. The government accused the Congress of instigating violence in the northeast following the passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in Parliament, evoking sharp reactions from the Opposition party.

In a series of tweets, in both Assamese and English, Prime Minister Narendra Modi appealed for calm and sought to assuage the concerns of protesters, insisting his government was committed to safeguarding their rights.

Congress took a dig at Modi's message of assurance for the people of Assam saying the people there "cannot read your message" as the internet has been cut off over the protests against the contentious Citizenship Amendment Bill.

In a tweet reply to PM Modi's message, Congress has said, "Our brothers & sisters in Assam cannot read your 'reassuring' message Modiji, in case you've forgotten, their internet has been cut off."

Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal warned that some people are trying to spread misinformation to mislead people and aggravate the situation.

"Section of people are trying to make the situation aggravated by spreading misinformation and misleading people by saying that 10-15 million people are going to take citizenship in Assam. It's false propaganda," Sonowal said.

In a veiled attack on opposition parties, BJP general secretary Ram Madhav asked people in Assam not to fall for propaganda that he said was being done by "vested interests".

He said the law and order situation in the state would be monitored and controlled by the state administration. BJP's IT cell in-charge Amit Malviya blamed Youth Congress for orchestrating violence in the name of people's protest against CAB. Meanwhile, the opposition parties are gearing up to keep the debate over CAB alive.

The Left parties will organise a nationwide joint protest on December 19 against CAB. The Communist Party of India, Communist Party of India (Marxist), Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist)-Liberation, All India Forward Bloc and the Revolutionary Socialist Party, in a joint statement, alleged that the bill completely violates the Constitution and aimed at destroying the secular democratic foundations of India.

To devise a strategy to counter the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, West Bengal Chief Minister and TMC supremo Mamata Banerjee convened a meeting of party MPs and MLAs on December 20. Mamata Banerjee has asked all TMC leaders and lawmakers to attend the meeting without fail, party sources said.

Stepping up attack against the central government, the Congress said the situation in the region was extremely disturbing, and what was happening there was a repeat of Jammu and Kashmir.

Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury raised the issue of violence in parts of the northeast region during the Zero Hour, saying barring a few places the entire region was in flames.

"Internet services have been discontinued. We are witnessing that Kashmir phenomenon has been replicated in the northeast region," he said.

Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury also said both these areas are of strategic importance and the government should take the deteriorating situation seriously. Registering their protest, Congress members along with that of DMK and TMC walked out of the House proceedings.
