With CAB, BJP has imperilled its stakes in NE

Arati R Jerath

Arati R Jerath

Senior journalist

Even before it has managed to douse the flames consuming Kashmir after Article 370 was withdrawn, the Modi government has lit another fire, this time in the eastern corner of the country, Assam, which has erupted in protests over the passage of the contentious Citizenship Amendment Bill.

The images flashing on television as the Bill was being passed in the Rajya Sabha had a surreal quality. In one half of the split screen, Home Minister and chief architect of the Bill Amit Shah was stoutly defending his brainchild as a move to correct another historical wrong: the partition of India on religious lines which he blamed, quite incorrectly, on the BJP’s favourite whipping boy, the Congress. In the other half were pictures of thousands of anguished Assamese on the streets, demanding that the Bill be scrapped.

It was as if these were two entirely separate events because the Home Minister seemed oblivious to (and quite unconcerned about) the eruption of people’s anger at Ground Zero. Indeed, so were the rest of the political parties which shredded

ideologies and principles to help the BJP lay yet another building block in the reconstruction of India as a Hindu nation.

Ironically, the government has had to rush paramilitary troops from the troubled Kashmir to the violence-hit Assam to quell the trouble on the streets. The official claim is that Kashmir is normalizing, so security forces can be spared. However, the reality is that the paramilitary is needed in large numbers because Assam is threatening to spin out of control as leaderless mobs attack RSS, BJP and AGP offices and homes across the state in a spontaneous outburst of rage against the ruling dispensation.

The story unfolding in Assam is depressingly similar to the one in Kashmir. Trains and air services have been disrupted. Internet has shut down. Vehicular movement is at a standstill. Curfew has been imposed in Guwahati and other towns. Schools and other educational institutions are closed. In other words, Assam could begin to look more and more like Kashmir unless the government manages to regain control of the situation quickly.

However, even if street protests subside, as they have in Kashmir, the consequences of the Modi government’s sledgehammer approach to enforce CAB are worrying because another part of India will have been alienated from New Delhi. Like in Kashmir, the overwhelming sentiment in Assam today is one of resentment as fears mount of a demographic change once CAB becomes law.

The Bill aims to remove the dubious tag of illegal migrant from Bangladeshi Hindus and fast-track Indian citizenship for them. Indigenous Assamese are concerned that the balance of power will pass into the hands of ethnic Bengalis after this, undoing the gains of the ‘anti-foreigner’ student protests led by AASU in the 1980s which led to the signing of the Assam Accord in 1985 with the then Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. The accord assured Assam that all those who entered the state after 1971, Hindu and Muslim, would be deemed illegal migrants, denied citizenship rights and relocated elsewhere to preserve the state’s ethnic and cultural identity.

The insensitivity of the current regime to local sentiment and aspirations is inexplicable. The BJP won power in Assam in 2016 after years of hard work by the RSS in the state. It was trumpeted as a huge achievement because the party had finally made inroads into the North-East. The collapse of the Congress in Assam, followed by the BJP’s victory in Tripura in 2018 consolidated the saffron march into new territories.

The BJP has negated these gains in one stroke with its insistence on pushing CAB despite warnings from local units. In both Assam and Tripura, the protests have taken an anti-BJP turn as agitators are singling out party leaders and RSS workers for attack. While the Congress has failed to capture the leadership of the agitation, reports suggest that remnants of the old AASU may regroup into a regional political formation to fight the BJP. Modi and Shah will have to chew on this as Assembly elections in Assam are not very far. They are due in the first half of 2021, along with Bengal.

It is increasingly evident that CAB has a two-fold agenda. One is the larger national goal of creating a Hindu nation by establishing religion as the basis for citizenship. The other is more immediate: the upcoming polls in West Bengal.

According to RSS estimates, there are over 70 lakh Hindu migrants from Bangladesh in West Bengal, most of them belonging to the Scheduled Caste Matua community. They influence voting patterns in three important border districts and were largely responsible for the BJP’s amazing performance in the state in the recent Lok Sabha polls. The party won 18 of the 42 seats, just four less than Mamata Banerjee’s Trinamool Congress.

Although the BJP lost all three recent assembly bypolls in Bengal because of Trinamool-inspired fears over CAB and NRC, party strategists believe that the passage of the citizenship Bill will help counter the scare. One of the reasons for Shah’s insistence on bulldozing CAB in the winter session of Parliament was to give the party enough time to craft it into its campaign for the Assembly polls.

It remains to be seen how much the BJP will gain in Bengal through CAB. However, it has certainly imperilled its political stakes in Assam and Tripura.

But more significant is the rise of regional sentiment as the BJP pushes its Hindu agenda. Kashmir may have always harboured a deep sense of alienation from New Delhi, but Article 370 gave a fig leaf cover to remain in India and yet be different. The withdrawal of that protection has renewed hostilities.

The BJP’s failure to form a government in Maharashtra reawakened a strong sense of Marathi pride which became the pretext for the formation of an unlikely alliance between the Shiv Sena, NCP and Congress, now in power in Mumbai.

And after CAB, Assam could be headed down the same road. The BJP’s One India project seems to be running into stormy regional feelings that its Hindutva proponents may have failed to fathom.
