CM announces Lingaraj redevelopment plan

BHUBANESWAR: Amid protests against the demolition drive around the Lingaraj Temple, chief minister Naveen Patnaik on Thursday announced a 66-acre Ekamra Kshetra (Old Town) redevelopment plan for the 11th century shrine and its periphery.Total nine projects, including preservation of heritage sites, development of parking space and preservation of heritage waterbodies, are part of the redevelopment plan. Around Rs 700 crore would be spent for the purpose, said an official after Naveen reviewed the issue here at a high-level meeting. Besides clearing the encroachments, process for which is on, the state government also requires some private land for the redevelopment plan, the official said.As his appeal to people in Puri to sacrifice their land helped the administration acquire private land around Jagannath Temple for development of a security zone, Naveen made similar appeal to the people in the city. He also announced a rehabilitation package for affected residents and vendors.The redevelopment plan includes a magnificent entrance to Old Town, renovation of Bindu Sagar Lake, development of four parking lots, Lingaraj heritage project and development of Kedar Gouri and Mukteswar temples. A heritage interpretation centre and e-auto programme are also part of the project. All the structures in front of the main entrance of the Lingaraj Temple will be removed for free passage of visitors. The front area of the shrine will be used for pedestrians while movement of vehicles will be restricted. The Lingaraj police station and temple trust office will be shifted to nearby places after the structures are demolished, said a works department official after Naveen’s announcement.Construction of road from Taleswar square to Badhei Banka square, development of road around the Lingaraj shrine, beautification and development of greenery around the temple, facilities for smooth darshan are also part the redevelopment package.Besides renovation of Bindu Sagar Lake, steps will also be taken for preservation of other heritage waterbodies like Kedar Gouri, Papanasini, Godavari, Kotitirtha, Ganga Yamuna and Devipadahara. A decision has also been taken to step up the security of the temple.The roadside vendors will get one-time assistance of Rs 30,000 in two instalments while they will also be rehabilitated in vending zones. The shopkeepers, whose structures have been pulled down by the administration, will get monthly assistance of Rs 10,000 each for 12 months. Subsequently, they will be accommodated in the market complex to be developed by Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation and state tourism department.
