Pankaja Munde quits core team, dares BJP to sack her

assembly election

NCP leader Dhananjay Munde

Gopinath Munde

Eknath Khadse and Prakash Mehta

state president Chandrakant Patil

Senior BJP leader Pankaja Munde holds a police baton during a rally on the occasion of the birth anniversary of her father Gopinath Munde in Parli, Beed

Devendra Fadnavis

With aim of not being ‘restricted’ to Parli, she’ll start statewide people-connect tour next month.Sharpening her attack against the BJP, Pankaja Munde—who has allegedly been sulking since her loss from Parli in theto cousin andin October—dared the party on Thursday to sack her.She said the BJP was free to decide on whether to keep her in the party.At a rally in Gopinathgad, a memorial of her father and BJP stalwart, in Beed district’s Parli to mark his birth anniversary, Pankaja also announced that she was resigning from the party’s state core committee, adding that there was no point in being a member of the team “in the absence of democracy”.Indicating that there would be no climbdown in her recent stance against the BJP, she said the party has ignored those who have worked for it for the past 40 years. “This was not the party culture. I want the old party back,” she said, pointing at senior BJP leaderswho were denied tickets for the assembly election this time. Former speaker Haribhau Bagde, former minister Mahadev Jankar, party leaders Pasha Patel and Prakash Mehta, andwere also present.Envisioning a bigger role for herself, she said will launch a statewide tour next month to connect with people and activists working on the ground. “On January 26, I will inaugurate an office of Gopinath Munde Pratishthan at Sukhada (her Worli residence) and keep a one-day fast on January 27 at Aurangabad. My tour will connect with different people. I am no longer restricted to Parli.”She said she has chosen Aurangabad for her hunger strike since a memorial to Gopinath had been planned there by the former BJP government. She clarified that the hunger stir will not be directed at any party or individual.Scotching rumours of joining another party, Pankaja said she didn’t come from a culture of backstabbing. “Why should I join another party? I belong here (BJP). This is my father’s party. Gopinath Munde made this a party of the masses,” she asserted.Khadse launched a direct attack on former chief minister. “Gopinath Munde had recommended Fadnavis’ name as the state president then. It was not expected from those who were made big leaders. Once, the BJP was called the party of upper castes. Munde took it to the masses,” he said.In the 1980s, BJP leader Vasantrao Bhagwat had brought OBCs into the BJP fold under the caste combination MADHAV formula— comprising Mali, Dhangar and Vanjari communities— in an attempt to shed the party’s upper caste image. His protégé, Gopinath, who hailed from the Vanjara community, continued his legacy and convinced many OBC leaders to join the party, emerging as a mass leader in the truest sense.Taking off from Pankaja’s allegation of BJP ignoring senior leaders, Khadse questioned why he was denied a ticket for the assembly election. “Did I commit any crime or get involved with corrupt activities? How long will I have to face such humiliation?” he asked the crowd. He also hinted at the possibility of leaving the BJP.Pankaja had given the first signs of rebellion last week, after staying silent for over a month since her shocking defeat, when she took to Facebook to talk about being upset with the party as well as about the changed political scenario. She also skipped the state BJP’s core committee meeting in Mumbai on Tuesday.Parimal Maya Sudhakar, a political analyst, said the MADHAV formula appears to be failing. “Earlier, the BJP was restricted to upper caste voters only. With the MADHAV formula, it gained leaders from OBC communities and expanded its base in Maharashtra. The BJP cannot expel these leaders and has no leadership to replace them. Despite such leaders’ opposition, Devendra Fadnavis has been appointed the leader of the opposition. Thursday’s show of strength was directed more against Fadnavis than BJP, and will damage the party’s image further,” he said.
