Bangladesh Protests Attacks on Its Diplomat, Removal of Chancery Sign Posts in Guwahati

New Delhi: Bangladesh has protested against the attack on the convoy of its senior diplomat and vandalisation of signposts of the chancery of its mission outpost in Guwahati by anti-Citizenship (Amendment) Bill protestors.

According to Bangladesh’s state news agency BSS, acting foreign secretary Kamrul Hasan had called Indian high commissioner Riva Ganguly Das to his office on Thursday evening.

Earlier on Thursday, Bangladesh foreign minister A.K. Abdul Momen had cancelled his trip to India at the last moment. He had earlier expressed concerns about the Citizenship Amendment Bill on Wednesday. However, both Bangladesh and India claimed that the cancellation was done due to scheduling issues.

Bangladesh home minister Asaduzzaman Khan Kamal also cancelled a private visit to Meghalaya after anti-CAB protests spread to the Northeastern state.

The amended Citizenship Act, for the first time, introduces a religious criteria for citizenship. It allows persecuted non-Muslim minorities from Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Pakistan to become citizens if they had migrated to India before December 31, 2014.

Following the summoning of the Indian envoy, a statement issued by the Bangladesh foreign ministry said that the foreign secretary “protested about the attack on the convoy of the (Bangladesh) assistant high commissioner and vandalisation of the signposts (of Bangladesh Chancery in Guwahati)”. Media reports said that one person had been shot by security personnel when the convoy was being attacked.

Also read: As Assam’s Anger Boils Over, Modi Tweets to a Land Without Internet, Sonowal Appeals For Calm

While the convoy was attacked on Wednesday when the Bangladeshi diplomat was going to the city from the airport, the two signposts, which were 30 yards from the chancery, were torn down on Thursday.

Hasan also called for the “protection of personnel and property of the mission by the host government”.

The Indian high commissioner assured Hasan that Indian authorities have been “immediately alerted to enhance security of Bangladesh chancery and its assistant high commissioner’s residence in Guwahati”, as per the Bangladeshi read-out.

Das told the Bangladeshi diplomat that India has “already taken enhanced security measures to protect the Assistant High Commission premise, its personnel and members of their families”.

The foreign ministry also added that it considers the two attacks as a “one-off incident” and it would “not affect the excellent bilateral relations that Bangladesh and India enjoy”.
