Citizenship Act 2019: Amit Shah's Meghalaya visit postponed; train services hit in Assam

File picture: Union Home Minister Amit Shah in the Lok Sabha | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights There is no let up in protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act The Passing out Parade of the last batch of trained police personnel has also been postponed Due to violent protests, the Northeast Frontier Railway has either cancelled or rescheduled 43 trains

Shillong/Agartala/Guwahati: In the wake of protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, Union Home Minister Amit Shah's December 15 visit to Shillong (Meghalaya) to participate in a function in North-Eastern Police Academy (NEPA) has been postponed.

"The Union Home Minister was supposed to visit NEPA to attend the Passing out Parade of the trained police personnel. But in view of the law and order situation in the northeastern region, especially in Assam, his visit was postponed," a top NEPA official has said.

Notably, the Passing out Parade of the last batch of trained police personnel has also been postponed.

"We would fix up the new schedule in consultation with the Union Home Ministry," added the official.

The NEPA falls under the Ministry of Home Affairs. Founded in July 1978, the NEPA is situated in northern Meghalaya’s Ri-Bhoi district.

The Academy is dedicated to teaching the police personnel of northeastern states and from across the country to safeguard the value of freedom.

Due to violent protests, the Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR) has either cancelled or rescheduled 43 trains, including Rajdhani Express, today.

As per the press release issued by NFR chief public relations officer Subhanan Chanda, the trains that have been cancelled included Kanyakumari Bibek Express, Guwahati Janshatabdi Express, Howrah-Kamrup Express, Humsafar Express, and Kanchanjungha Express.

“Rajdhani Express, which left New Delhi on December 12, would be short-terminated at Guwahati and would remain partially cancelled between Guwahati and Dibrugarh.”

New Delhi Rajdhani Express, scheduled for December 16, would remain partially cancelled between Dibrugarh-Guwahati and would commence its journey from Guwahati on December 17.

“A few trains of December 14, 15 and 16 would also remain cancelled in Assam," added the release.

Union Home Minister Amit Shah had on Thursday held separate meetings with top leaders of three Tripura-based parties -- Tripura People's Front (TSP), Indigenous People's Front of Tripura (IPFT), which is a junior ally of the ruling BJP, and Joint Movement Against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill (JMACAB), which is a conglomeration of many tribal parties.

President Ram Nath Kovind had on Thursday given his assent to the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, turning it into an Act.

As per the Act, members of Hindu, Jain, Sikh, Buddhist, Parsi and Christian communities facing religious persecution in Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan will be accorded Indian citizenship.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill was passed by Rajya Sabha on December 11 and by Lok Sabha on December 9.
