Bangladesh-India 'golden chapter in ties' rocked by Delhi's new citizenship law

NEW DELHI - India views its relationship with neighbour Bangladesh as being trouble free in a neighbourhood beset with multiple problems.

It is even said the two countries are enjoying a "golden chapter" in ties.

But that close relationship appears to have hit some turbulence, with Bangladesh Foreign Minister A. K. Abdul Momen and Home Minister Asaduzzaman Khan at the last moment cancelling separate visits to India. These came just a day after India's passage of the controversial Citizenship Amendment Bill that provides citizenship to persecuted Bangladeshi immigrants, among others.

The Bill, which sailed through Parliament with approval by the Upper House on Wednesday, became law on Friday with presidential assent. It provides citizenship to illegal immigrants belonging to the Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsis and Christian faiths - but not Muslims - from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan.

In Parliament, Home Minister Amit Shah had highlighted how the government was forced to bring in such legislation to protect persecuted minorities in the three countries including Bangladesh.

Mr Momen, who was to attend two conferences hosted by the Ministry of External affairs in a three-day visit starting on Thursday (Dec 12), had criticised the legislation.

He said the legislation, which has also faced criticism within India, "weakens India's historic character as a secular nation" even as he rejected assertions that minorities faced religious persecution in Bangladesh.

Muslims form an 89 per cent majority in Bangladesh, which also has people of other faiths including a large population of Hindus, numbering around 17 million, according to government statistics.

Mr Momen, according to the Bangladesh government, had opted to attend government functions marking Martyred Intellectuals Day (Dec 14) and Victory Day (Dec 16), key historic events that led to Bangladesh's independence in 1971.

Mr Khan had cancelled a visit to the state of Meghalaya in north-eastern India, where violent protests have broken out, particularly in Assam, against naturalisation of illegal immigrants of any faith.
