CAB protest comes to Delhi: 50 Jamia students detained, clashes turn violent

The students accused the police of using force against them | Photo India Today

Students of Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) University staged a protest against the controversial Citizenship Amendment Bill on Friday in New Delhi.

Students at Jamia Millia Islamia University pelted stones after which the police used tear gas shells to disperse the protesting crowd.

Students of the Jamia Millia Islamia University in Delhi clashed with the police personnel who interrupted their protest march opposing the Citizenship Amendment Act.

The protesters had called for a march to Parliament House from the university campus to express their opposition to the legislation.

Delhi: Students of Jamia Millia Islamia University stage protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. pic.twitter.com/hONNY2A2Pb ANI (@ANI) December 13, 2019

However, they were stopped near the varsity where protesters clashed with the police.

The students accused the police of using force against them.

According to a Twitter user, police resorted to lathicharge on students of Jamia Millia Islamia and used tear gas on protesters.

Brutal Lathi charge on students of #JamiaMilliaIslamia tear gas used on peaceful protesters things are uglier #CABProtests pic.twitter.com/u9pN03qg1d Dilsedesh (@Dilsedesh) December 13, 2019

Many Jamia students were also detained by the police during the anti-CAB protest.

Around 2,000 Jamia students in Delhi were protesting against CAB. Police barricades were broken soon after which the police resorted to lathicharge.

Videos circulated by students on social media showed police caning the protestors | Photo: India Today

Three policemen were left injured during the anti-CAB protest by Jamia students when the clashes turned violent.

Twitter user and Jamia resident Sania wrote on the social media site, "In spite of massive police presence and the violence earlier, the students refused to be cowed into submission. Stones all over the place, broken windshields. Students, journalists injured."

Here at Jamia right now and in spite of massive police presence and the violence earlier, the students refused to be cowed down. Stones all over the place, broken windshields. Students, journalists injured. These people are not going anywhere anytime soon.#JamiaFightsCab pic.twitter.com/cwlObyUA2F Sania Ahmad (@SaniaAhmad1111) December 13, 2019

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) had erlier said that as advised by Delhi Police, entry and exit at Patel Chowk and Janpath have been closed. Metro trains will not be halting at these stations. But according to a latest DMRC alert, entry and exit gates at all stations have been opened and normal services have resumed at all stations.

Security Update



As advised by Delhi Police, entry & exit at Patel Chowk and Janpath have been closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 13, 2019

According to a Delhi Traffic Police alert, traffic movement is closed on both carriageways from Jamia to Sukhdev Vihar and from Mathura Road to Sarai Jullena (both carriageways) and the following traffic diversion is advised for the commuters:

From Nehru Place Modi Mill flyover to turn left to Mathura Road.

From CV Raman Marg to turn right to Mathura Road.

From Jamia Nagar to take U-Turn to Shaheen Bagh to Road no 13A.

CAB PROTEST BY JAMIA STUDENTS TURNS VIOLENT

The Jamia Millia Islamia University turned into a battlefield on Friday after a students' march to Parliament House, to protest the Citizenship Amendment Act, was interrupted by police.

There was a clash between police and students after the protestors were stopped at the varsity gate.

The students, who were baton-charged by police personnel, alleged that the police also used tear gas to quell their march. The students also resorted to stone-pelting.

Videos circulated by students on social media showed police caning the protestors.

The police had cordoned off the road and protestors were seen climbing onto the barricades. The University's gate was later closed.

50 JAMIA STUDENTS DETAINED AFTER CLASH WITH COPS DURING CAB PROTEST

The Jamia Millia Islamia University turned into a battlefield on Friday after police and students, who wanted to march to Parliament House to protest the Citizenship Amendment Act, clashed with each other prompting Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) MLA Amanatullah Khan to reach the spot to take stock of the situation.

Fifty students were detained following a clash between police and students after the protestors were stopped at the varsity gate and prevented from carrying out their march.

"We were marching peacefully and police stopped us from marching. First, they lathicharged us asking us to move backwards. Then they pelted stones in response to which students picked up stones too," Onaihza, a law student at Jamia, said.

Another student alleged that police resorted to pelting stones and then used tear gas that resulted in many students being injured.

Police, however, denied the allegations.

"Students started their march. We had placed barricades which they broke and tried to jump over them. Then they threw stones at us forcing us to use teargas shells. The students have been detained and taken to Badarpur police station," a senior police official present at the stop said.

Area MLA Amanatullah Khan from the Aam Aadmi Party rushed to the spot to take stock of the situation.

(Inputs from Ram Kinkar Singh and Yogesh in Delhi, and agencies)
