Won't send anyone to Pakistan: Nitin Gadkari supports CAA 2019 amid heavy protests

Union Minister Nitin Gadkari | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Union Minister Nitin Gadkari said persecuted people who don't find place in any other country will be given citizenship The CAA, 2019, has faced stiff resistance as protests flared up in several states after the legislation was cleared by both the Houses of the Parliament earlier this week President Ram Nath Kovind signed the CAB, 2019 into a law late Thursday night

New Delhi: Union Minister of Road Transport and Highways and BJP leader Nitin Gadkari speaking about the CAA said India can't roll out a red carpet for foreign nationals. A day after President Ram Nath Kovind signed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, Gadkari said the government is not against Muslims and will ask nobody to go to Pakistan.

"The welfare of the country and politics should be kept apart. Should we spread a red carpet for the foreign nationals who are entering our country? They come here to acquire voting rights, buy properties".

"People of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain and Christian communities who don't find a place in any other country will be given citizenship. We're neither against Muslims nor we're asking anyone to go to Pakistan. There's nothing to worry. Rumours are being spread" Gadkari said.

Union Minister Nitin Gadkari: People of Hindu,Sikh, Buddhist,Jain&Christian communities who don't find place in any other country will be given citizenship.We're neither against Muslims nor we're asking anyone to go to Pakistan. There's nothing to worry. Rumours are being spread. https://t.co/xPxu0VWrQQ — ANI (@ANI) December 13, 2019

The Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), 2019, seeks to give citizenship non-Muslim immigrants from Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Afghanistan who took shelter in India after 2014.

There have been massive protests in various parts of the country as Opposition leaders allege that the law is aimed to cement the Hindu-nationalist agenda of the BJP at the policy level. The critics of the contentious law say that is unconstitutional as it discriminates on the basis of religion in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.

A day after two protesters were killed in police firing in Guwahati, violence reached West Bengal where dissenters laid siege to two railway stations.

As per official accounts, blockades were set up on tracks at the Uluberia railway station on Howrah. There was arson and vandalism at the railway station and a train driver was injured in the incident.
