They say nothing stays the same bags 'Suvarna Chakoram' award

Japanese movie 'They Say Nothing Stays the Same', directed by actor and musician Joe Odagiri bagged the 'Suvarna Chakoram' (The Golden Crow Pheasant) award at the 24rd edition of the International Film Festival of Kerala (IFFK).

The movie recites a poetic tale of idyllic rural life being threatened by change in an uncompromising visual style.

Brazilian director Allan Deberton was awarded the 'Rajatha Chakoram' (The Silver Crow Pheasant), for the best director for his movie 'Pacarrete', which brings out the bold dynamic life and dreams of an ageing artiste in a changing world.

Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan, who handed over the awards, quoted the life of renowned Argentinian filmmaker Fernando Solanas and urged the people to be more vigilant in contemporary Indian politics.

He reminded the packed Nishagandhi open air auditorium here about the life of Solanas, who once led protests against the government in Argentina.

Taking inspiration from Solanas, who was awarded the Life time achievement award, Vijayan said "India will not kneel down and we are not going to be silent".

He said Solanas was once injured during a protest and while being taken to hospital in an ambulance proclaimed that Argentina will not kneel down and he won't be silenced.

"There are attempts in our country to silence those who protest against undemocratic activities.

Solanas is right now in the Indian political sphere where Gouri Lankesh, Narendra Dabolkar and Kulburgi were shot dead for raising voice of dissent.

His presence is an inspiration to those who are politically conscious. We can use his words in the Indian scenario. India will not kneel down and we are not going to be silent," Vijayan said.

He also said that the movies of Solanas were a reply to those who allege that art mixed with politics will reduce the quality of the artist.

Director Lijo Jose Pelliserry's Jallikattu, who got a Special Mention for Direction and the Audience Poll Award,said he was grateful to all those who worked with him for the movies.

"I just want to say one thing. It's sad to see that India is reducing into a country with a narrow mindset," he said.

Malayalam movie 'Veyilmarangal' (Trees Under the Sun), directed by renowned filmmaker Dr Biju bagged the NETPAC Award for the best Malayalam film.

Fahim Irshad for Aani Maani bagged the FFSI K R Mohanan Award for Best Debut Director.

Solanas, after receiving the Lifetime achievement award said Kerala has a "very affectionate crowd.

"Thank you so much to all of you... This is my first travel to India and Kerala.

As always, we are enchanted by the generosity, the beauty and affection of India people and most of all the eagerness of wanting to learn. I want to thank you once again," he said.

The 24th edition of the IFFK witnessed around 186 films from 73 countries in 14 sections being screend.

The IFFK opened with Turkish filmmaker Serhat Karaaslan's debut film 'Passed By Censor' on the life of a prison official in charge of controlling letters prisoners receive.

The World Cinema section featured 92 films, including comedy thriller 'Korean Parasite', directed by Boong Joon Ho and the musical drama 'Les Miserables.'



Contemporary Masters in Focus had seven films of Swedish film maker Roy Anderson and French director Tony Gatlif, while Indian Cinema Now featured seven films portraying contemporary Indian society, The Malayalam section Now featured 12 films.

The festival paid homage to Girish Karnad, Lenin Rajendran, M J Radhakrishnan, Miss Kumari and T K Pareekutty for their contributions to Indian cinema.

Fourteen theatres in the capital city hosted the week- long gala, which was also disabled-friendly.

Differently-abled delegates and senior citizens aged over 70 were not required to wait in queues to enter cinema halls.

The Kerala Chalachitra Academy, the organisers,said over 11,000 delegates took part in the festival.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
