Citizenship (Amendment) Act: Muslim bodies hold march for dignity

NEW DELHI: Muslim organisations led by Jamiat Ulama i-Hind held a protest march at Jantar Mantar on Friday demanding the scrapping of the Citizenship Amendment Act. They said the legislation was an attack on the dignity and fundamental rights of Indian Muslims and sent a memorandum to the President of India expressing opposition to the newly enacted law.Mahmood A. Madani, general secretary of the Jamiat, described CAA as “communally inspired” and alleged it used religion as a legal criterion to determine Indian citizenship. He said the new law was “against the Constitution of India”, but exhorted the Muslim youth to maintain peace and tranquillity at this time. “To live a life of dignity we have to display courage as well as patience,” he advised.A memorandum submitted to the President of India later said the unstated objective of the legislations appeared to be to create a division in society on the basis of religion. “This violates the pluralistic fabric of India,” declared Madani.Larib Akram, a protester, added that the idea of India that had emerged from the independence movement was diminished by CAA. Another participant, Chandresh Kumar, who is pursuing his studies in the US, said the law was draconian and would unnecessarily alienate certain communities. “We cannot have a law prosecuting people on the basis of their religion,” asserted Kumar.Police said that a thousand people had been permitted to gather at Jantar Mantar, while the rest had to be stopped at Ranjeet Singh Flyover.In a statement later on Friday, the Jamiat said similar protests were held in cities and towns across the country. After the demonstrations ended, a memorandum was submitted to President Ram Nath Kovind through the district magistrates, district collectors and sub-divisional magistrates of the protest areas. In the memorandum, the Jamiat denounced the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019. “The stated intent of the legislation is to provide refuge to persecuted minorities from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, but it seems to camouflage discrimination and division on the basis of religion,” the memorandum stated.The protesters requested the President of India to use his good office to “stop the injustice” against Muslim community. Jamiat also appealed to the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice of the Act.
