JDU in tatters? Another party leader hits out at Nitish Kumar for supporting Citizenship Act

JDU MLC Gulam Rasool (in green) protests against CAA and NRC | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights After Prashant Kishor and Pawan Verma, another JDU leader has come out against party for supporting Citizenship Amendment Act Despite repetitive calls by several party leaders, Nitish Kumar issued a whip and directed his party lawmakers to support the contentious Act in Parliament

Patna: Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar-led Janata Dal United (JDU) played a crucial role in getting the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) passed in Parliament, however, this has caused a huge divide within the party. Days after JDU vice-president Prashant Kishor and national secretary Pawan Verma expressed displeasure at their party's decision to support the Act, another party leader on Friday took to streets to show his dissent.

Gulam Rasool Balyawi, JDU's Member of Legislative Council (MLC), was spotted raising slogans against the Act in a protest rally organised by Islamic organisation Edara-e-Sharia. Balyawi's protest came a couple of days after Nitish Kumar lent support to the now amended Citizenship Act despite his repeated requests.

Bihar: Janata Dal United's, member of state legislative council Gulam Rasool Balyawi (in green kurta), took part in a protest march in Patna against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct and #NRC, earlier today. pic.twitter.com/gQSvxPDVJH — ANI (@ANI) December 13, 2019

After JDU chief Nitish Kumar supported the Centre over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, party vice president Prashant Kishor launched a blistering attack on the Bihar CM and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

Kishor said that the BJP has a lethal combination of NRC and CAA in its hands to systematically discriminate and persecute people based on religion and he blamed the JDU for making it possible.

JDU national secretary Pawan Verma had called the Act "unconstitutional, discriminatory, and against the unity and harmony of the country". He also said that this was "against the secular principles of the JDU".

Despite strong opposition from several party leaders, Nitish Kumar issued a whip to his party leaders and directed them to vote in favour of the Act in Parliament. JDU leaders gave six crucial votes to the Act in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday after helping the Centre getting it passed in the Lok Sabha two days earlier.

The CAA provides for citizenship to non-Muslim refugees of Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan who arrived in India before December 31, 2014.
