Firing in Shillong as protesters turn unruly

They demanded scrapping of Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, extention of inner-line permit to the entire state and assent by governor Tathagata Roy to the Meghalaya Residents Safety and Security Amendment Ordinance, 2019, which requires people visiting the state for more than 24 hours to pre-register themselves.

A massive rally turned violent here on Friday evening as unruly protesters tried to enter Raj Bhavan, compelling security forces to fire tear gas shells.

In front of Raj Bhavan, leaders spoke for almost an hour. After CoMSO chairman Robertjune Kharjahrin said there would be a sit-in at the venue if the governor delays assent to the ordinance, the protesters demanded immediate assent and tried to enter Raj Bhavan. The security personnel then fired tear gas shells to disperse the protesters. The mob ran helter-skelter and some among them hurled stones. Unofficial sources said at least 63 civilians, including 23 women, were injured. Ten of them, including five seriously injured, were admitted to hospitals. At least four police personnel were also injured.

About one lakh protesters started the march from Motphran as the curfew clamped at 10pm on Thursday was relaxed from 10am till 10pm on Friday. Most of them came from the rural areas and joined the march organised by the Confederation of Meghalaya Social Organisations (CoMSO). They raised slogans all the way to the Raj Bhavan.

Unruly protesters torched a vehicle parked inside the youth hostel and smashed the windshield of a fire-tender.

Sources said security forces exercised maximum restraint through the protest march and in front of Raj Bhavan. But the crowd allegedly kept provoking them. The sources also said there were not enough security personnel as a few companies of paramilitary forces were sent to Jharkhand for election duty and to Garo hills and the crowd took advantage of this.

An office of the Meghalaya Transport Corporation at Jowai in West Jaintia Hills district was set ablaze.

The Meghalaya government opened helplines (7640908749, 9854028087, 0364-222855, 2227050, 9774618462) for people stranded in Guwahati, Calcutta and even in Shillong. Helicopter service between Shillong and Guwahati have been increased to three sorties daily. Calcutta-Shillong flights will resume from Saturday.

“The government has made adequate arrangements to provide relief materials in all the districts. The administration can be reached out for assistance, if required,” a government statement said.

Chief minister Conrad K. Sangma, who is in New Delhi, discussed the situation with his cabinet colleagues.

In Mizoram, a group of youths, under the banner of Zoram Revolution Movement (ZRM), staged a sit-in in front of the ruling Mizo National Front’s office in Aizawl. The protesters, mostly school and college students, chanted slogans and demanded the resignation of Mizoram’s lone Lok Sabha member C. Lalrosanga for “betraying the people of Mizoram” by supporting the law. The MNF defended its MP.

At least 53 protesters were rounded up by police following a clash with MNF workers. They were later released.

A ZRM leader said they were protesting against “unconstitutional” law and to show solidarity with the people of the Northeast. He said the state’s exemption from the act was not enough to protect it from influx.

In Arunachal Pradesh, the Rajiv Gandhi University Students Union and NERIST Students’ Union organised a peaceful mass rally. Thousands, including students and people from all walks of life, Arunachalees and non-Arunachalees, walked about 30 miles from the campus to Raj Bhavan in Itanagar. The protesters submitted a memorandum to the governor, demanding the law be revoked. Chief minister Pema Khandu directed officials to ensure strict checking of inner-line permit at all check gates.

Additional reporting by Henry L. Khojol in Mizoram and Damien Lepcha in Itanagar
