UP farmers call off protest, but vow to return to DND if demands not met

NOIDA: Farmers from six districts of western Uttar Pradesh, seeking enhanced compensation for their land acquired before 2013, agreed to temporarily withdraw their protest on DND flyway on Saturday evening. The breakthrough came after the district magistrate gave them a written assurance to facilitate a meeting with chief minister Yogi Adityanath.The farmers, who were camping on one side of the DND flyway with tractors, tents, food, etc, insisted that they would not leave the spot despite repeated negotiations with the district magistrate and senior police officers. As many as 10 SHOs, 10 police companies—five each from both Noida and Delhi Police—DM, SSP, SP (crime), city magistrate, SP (traffic) and over 200 police officers reached the spot to ensure that the farmers don't march to the PMO.Delhi Police had lined up ahead of the toll in the Delhi area with tear gas and bomb disposal squads on their toes. In a symbolic protest, the farmers raised their hands tied with bands, stating that the administration wanted to “suppress” their protest and arrest them. After many negotiations, the farmers agreed to leave the spot by 3 pm, but only after the DM agreed to hand over a written document signed by himself to get meetings arranged between farmers and the chief minister as well as Yamuna Authority. They also sought a CBI probe into the land acquisitions that took place between 2008 and 2012 during the BSP rule. They questioned the land acquistion in Ghaziabad’s Kachaira village for the hi-tech city project, the one at Mandola village for a housing project, land acquired in villages in Yamuna Authority area and for the Gail India pipeline project in Bihar.The land of 18 villages in Ghaziabad including Kachaira, totalling nearly 4,500 acres, has been acquired for the hi-tech city project in January 2010 from the farmers by the Ghaziabad Development Authority.At least 19 PILs were filed by the farmers in Allahabad high court against the land acquisition, but officials said there was an adverse order in the matter. Farmer leader Manvir Teotia said the farmers were unaware of the exact legalities of the agreement and hence they lost the case in the court. “Our main demand is to check whether the acquisition process was legal or not. A CBI probe should be ordered for the land acquisition carried out during the BSP regime,” he said.The farmers also demanded that the Yamuna Authority hand over the compensation to the farmers affected by the land acquisition in villages like Mirzapur, Achepur and Niloni as per the Allahabad high court order in January last year. “Farmers have still not got the compensation for this acquisition,” Teotia said.“A meeting with the builder and farmers on the issue of Kachaira village will be arranged on Monday-Tuesday. A meeting of farmers from Bihar with Gail India officials will be arranged on Wednesday,” reads a written statement issued by the DM later on Saturday.Some 50 farmers from districts like Aurangabad, Sasaram, etc had come to demand enhanced compensation for the land acquired in 2013 for the 29 km pipeline project passing through four states. They finally left the spot around 3 pm.The farmers, however, made clear that in case the meetings are not arranged and their demands not met, they will return to the DND flywaywithin a week.
