Gang-raped and blackmailed by four boys, girl approaches Patna police for help

Police in Patna are probing the matter (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights The girl has identified all of the four accused by name in her complaint to the police She has alleged that they recorded the heinous crime and used the footage to blackmail her Patna University students staged a protest today demanding that the accused be arrested

Patna: Police in the state capital of Bihar has registered a case against four boys in connection with the alleged gang-rape of a girl who approached local law enforcement on Friday. In her complaint, the survivor has alleged that the boys befriended, sexually assaulted and blackmailed her on more than one occasion.

According to Patna police, the accused took the girl to an isolated spot and forced themselves on her in October of this year. They recorded videos of the heinous act on their cell phones and used the footage to blackmail her into not reporting the matter to the police. However, her silence did little to deter their criminal intentions. Earlier this week, they called her to one of their residences and all four took turns raping her.

This is when she decided to approach Patna police and file an official complaint against the four accused. Senior superintendent of police (SSP) Garima Malik said that the girl's statement has been recorded in the presence of a magistrate under Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC). The complainant has also identified all of the accused by name and told investigators that she knew them even before they sexually assaulted her in October.

Students of Patna University staged a protest today, demanding speedy justice for the girl and stringent punishment for the accused. Meanwhile, the accused have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Information Technology (IT) Act. More details are awaited as this is a developing story. Similar instances where rape convicts have recorded the crime in cell phones in order to blackmail the survivor and threaten her from reporting the matter to the police continue to come to light from across the length and breadth of the country. These videos are often uploaded on social media websites by the culprits.
