‘Curfews in place, exercise caution’: US, UK, Israel and France issue travel advisory amid protests over CAA in northeast

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: Amid the violent protests in northeast -- that have claimed the live of three people so far -- the United States, the United Kingdom, France and Israel issued advisory to their citizens asking them to ‘exercise caution’ while travelling to the region for any purpose.

The US, in its advisory which was posted on the website of its mission in New Delhi, said that violent protests are going on in the northeast region and asked its citizens to ‘exercise caution’.

“Government curfews are in place in some areas. Internet and mobile communications may be disrupted. Transport may be affected in various parts of the region. Protests have also been reported in other parts of the country,” it said in its advisory.

The UK also issued a similar advisory asking its citizens to exercise caution while traveling to northeast India. It also noted there was an indefinite curfew in Guwahati and mobile internet services had been suspended in ten districts of Assam.

Also Read | ‘States have no powers’: Home Ministry official as five CMs refuse to implement Citizenship Act

“Demonstrations against the Citizenship Amendment Bill are taking place in some parts of the country. There have been reports of violent protest in Northeast India, especially in Assam and Tripura. An indefinite curfew has been imposed in Guwahati and mobile internet services have been suspended in ten districts of Assam,” the advisory read.

The Israeli advisory to its citizens asked them not to travel to Assam and other northeast states as violent protests are going over there against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act while the French advisory said that air transport to Assam was suspended and travellers should “stay away from any gathering, regularly follow the news and to respect the orders of the Indian authorities (curfew in particular)”.

The massive protests in northeast have claimed the lives of three people so far while several people have been injured. The protestors are demanding the withdrawal of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act which seeks to grant Indian citizenship to people of Hindu, Sikh, Jain, Parsi, Christian and Buddhist communities who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014, and facing religious persecution there will not be treated as illegal immigrants.

The act also says that refugees of the six communities will be given Indian citizenship after residing in India for five years, instead of earlier requirement of 11 years.

The bill was passed in Lok Sabha on Monday while in Rajya Sabha on Wednesday. According to the legislation, the bill will not be applicable in tribal areas of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, and Tripura as included in the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.

(With Agency inputs)

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
