Political parties in Kerala unite against Citizenship Act, to hold hunger strike

Political parties in Kerala unite against Citizenship Act, to hold hunger strike

CM Pinarayi Vijayan has taken a firm stand that the Citizenship Act won’t be implemented in the state.

news Citizenship Act

Political parties of Kerala, will come together to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) on Monday, December 16, by organising a hunger strike.

The new citizenship law cleared by the two Houses of Parliament, and signed by the President, is now known as the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019.

Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan, the ministers, Opposition leader Ramesh Chennithala and other political party leaders will take part in the hunger strike to be held at 10 am at matryr’s column in Palayam in Thiruvananthapuram. The protest will press the demands to withdraw the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and to protect constitutional values.

Pinarayi has been firm on the stand that CAA won’t be implemented in the state, for it communally divides people and has claimed that it is part of the Sangh Parivar’s agenda to set up a Hindu nation.

“It’s in the wake of the deep concern among the people about the Citizenship (Amendment) Act which slaughters the values of equality and secularism that were envisaged in the constitution, that Kerala unitedly moves towards the protest,” says a statement on Facebook by the CM.

Prominent personalities from cultural, art and literary fields will address the protest. People attached to various political parties and organisations will take part in the protest.

“The Citizenship (Amendment) Act that has been passed in both houses of the Parliament as per the Sangh Parivar agenda, has led to agitation in various parts of the country. This has divided citizens in the name of religion which has caused huge concern among people. Kerala has made it clear that the Act is anti-constitutional and can’t be implemented. For the nation to sustain, the constitution and its values must be protected. For this, a united voice of Kerala will be raised at the venue,” the post says.

In a press meet on Thursday, Pinarayi had said that through CAA, the Centre was trying to fulfil the wishes of Sarvarkar and Golwalkar to ‘divide India based on religion’.

Earlier, speaking to the media in Thiruvananthapuram, Chennithala said he will implead in the petition in the Supreme Court against the Act besides holding talks with all other parties over the CAA.

"I am speaking to Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan to say that there should be a joint fight in this against the BJP-led NDA who are pursuing the RSS agenda of dividing the nation. Likewise, I will speak with all political parties so that Kerala can jointly take on this," said Chennithala.

Of the 33 million Kerala population, Muslims account for around 20 per cent and Christians around 18 per cent of the state's inhabitants.

With IANS inputs

Read: Another pothole death in Kochi: HC asks govt how many more people should die
