IAS officer, who resigned over Kashmir, detained

IAS officer Kannan Gopinathan

Jammu and Kashmir

abrogation of Article 370

NRC and CAB

Indian Constitution

Kannan arguing with the police

Bharat Bachao Andolan

Akhil Bharatiya Parivar

All India Milli Council

Police did not allow protesters to even read out the Constitution, says Kannan Gopinathan.The Mumbai police on Friday detained former, who had resigned from service as a mark of protest against the restrictions imposed infollowing the, during a march against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.Deputy Commissioner of Police, Zone 1, Sangramsingh Nishandar, told Mirror that Gopinath was among a group of 15 to 20 people who had gathered outside Hotel Ambassador near Marine Drive to protest against the bill, which was passed by the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday.“A few people were protesting and we took them to the police station. They were let off after a couple of hours,” Nishandar said.Later, in a tweet, Gopinathan said the detention was illegal. “We were not even allowed to read the Constitution. Mumbai police detained us illegally and forcefully took us even before the protest began,” the tweet said.“Get out and regain your constitutional rights! Else it will be gone forever,” he wrote in another tweet, while posting a picture of himself and other protesters along with the police.“Why should I be scared? This is my country and I will not be silent when exercises such asare conducted,” Gopinathan told Mumbai Mirror. The CAB is biased and does great injustice to the Muslim community, he said. “It may be a win for BJP, but it is not a win for India or the.”Feroze Mithiborwala, the organiser of the protest, said the participants were peaceful. “We have started a campaign called ‘Hum Sab Bhartiya’,”he said.Mithiborwala said it was a small protest. “We were very small in number when the police detained us. They had to release us when many others congregated outside the station. Later all of us walked towards Churchgate.”The protesters arrested included Mithiborwala (), Fahad Ahmed (TISS), Amol Madame (), Nasirul Haq (All India Tanzeem I Insaaf) and MA Khalid ().Fahad Ahmed said around 150 TISS students walked from Churchgate to CSMT where they raised slogans. They then took a local to Govandi station. “We walked from Govandi station to the TISS campus. We were protesting against the CAB,” said one of the students.The Samajwadi Party (SP) has organised a similar protest at Azad Maidan today. Party MLA Rais Shaikh said SP leader Abu Azmi, youth leader Umar Khalid, Kannan and others will speak against the CAB at the protest. Shaikh said, “CAB’s passage is not about giving refuge to persecuted minorities. It is about making the Muslims of India stateless. Let’s raise our voice for what we call brotherhood.”Various organisations have called for a massive protest against CAB on December 19.
