Amid huge protests in Northeast, US top diplomat voices concern over implications of Citizenship Act

Protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019 | Photo Credit: PTI

Washington: As Northeast and several parts of India have been facing violent protests over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, a top US diplomat has voiced concern over the implications of the law, hoping the “government will abide by its constitutional commitments, including on religious freedom".

The senior American diplomat responsible for monitoring international religious freedom, on Friday, said that the US respects India's institutions but is concerned about the ramifications of the amended Act.

"One of India's great strengths is its Constitution. As a fellow democracy, we respect India's institutions, but are concerned about the implications of the CAB Bill," Sam Brownback, Ambassador at Large for International Religious Freedom, wrote on Twitter, days before next week's 2+2 ministerial between India and the US.

"We hope the government will abide by its constitutional commitments, including on religious freedom," he added.

External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar and Defence Minister Rajnath Singh are scheduled to visit Washington DC next week for the second 2+2 ministerial with their respective American counterparts -- Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Defense Secretary Mark Esper -- on December 18.

On Thursday night, President Kovind signed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 into Act, a day after it was passed in Parliament.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Act will grant Indian citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Christians, Parsis, Buddhists, Jains from three neighbouring countries – Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan who fled their respective countries and came to India before December 31, 2014, due to religious persecution.

Meanwhile, the United States and the United Kingdom have issued travel advisories for their citizens, asking them to "exercise caution" while travelling to the Northeast.

The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO), in a statement said: “Demonstrations against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) are taking place in some parts of the country. There have been reports of violent protests in North East India, especially in Assam and Tripura. An indefinite curfew has been imposed in Guwahati (Assam) and mobile internet services have been suspended in 10 districts of Assam.”

“Transport may be affected in various parts of the region. You should exercise caution if you're planning to travel in North East India, monitor local media for the latest information, follow instructions of the local authorities and allow more time for travel,” the advisory further stated.

The United States has also cautioned its citizens, currently staying in the northeastern states, asking them to avoid areas with demonstrations and civil disturbances.

"US citizens in the northeastern states of India should exercise caution in light of media reports of protests and violence in response to the approval of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. Government curfews are in place in some areas. Internet and mobile communications may be disrupted. Transport may be affected in various parts of the region. Protests have also been reported in other parts of the country. The US government has temporarily suspended official travel to Assam," the statement read, ANI reported.
