Bharat Bachao rally: 'Economy, BJP’s dictatorship, murder of democracy' among issues to be raised by Congress

Bharat Bachao rally I @iSamiakapoor | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi, former prime minister Manmohan Singh will also address the rally Preparation for the rally is underway at the Ramlila Maidan Delhi Congress president Subhash Chopra has claimed that over 50,000 people are expected to attend the rally

New Delhi: Ahead of Congress’ Bharat Bachao (save India) rally at Ramlila ground in Delhi on Saturday, party leader Rahul Gandhi said that they will flag several crucial issues during the mega rally, including the “economy of the country, which is in ICU, BJP government’s dictatorship and the murder of democracy”.

Taking to Twitter hours before the event, Gandhi said in Hindi: “I will address a mega rally, organised by the Congress party at Ramlila ground in Delhi on Saturday, against the dictatorship of the BJP government, the economy of the country, which is in ICU and murder of democracy.”

Besides Gandhi, Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi, former prime minister Manmohan Singh and other senior leaders, including Congress Working Committee members, will also address the rally.

Meanwhile, preparation for the rally is underway at the Ramlila Maidan with large hoardings of Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi being put up all around the rally venue.

The party has also made arrangements at Delhi airport and railway stations to receive Congress workers and leaders arriving from different parts of the country for the rally. Delhi Congress president Subhash Chopra has claimed that over 50,000 people are expected to attend the rally.

"Members of the Congress Overseas will join the Bharat Bachao Rally by demonstrating around the world. Our message to save India from divisiveness, arrogance and incompetence will be spread worldwide," tweeted the Congress.

During the rally, the Congress is also expected to attack the Central government over poverty, agrarian distress, soaring prices of essential goods, including onion, petrol and diesel.

The rally comes in the backdrop of recent historic decisions and judgments including, abrogation of Article 370, Citizenship (Amendment) Act and Ayodhya verdict.
