Amar Ujala calls CAB big BJP win, Bhaskar says opposition’s argument against it ‘fallacious’

Hindi

10 December, 2019: Dainik Jagran says that besides the Congress and other opposition parties, even some intellectuals are busy trying to prove that the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) is against the Constitution.

With this bill, India is going to decide who from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan will get Indian citizenship. It needs to be clear that this bill is not to give citizenship to people from across the globe. The opposition to it is that the bill discriminates in the name of religion. But it’s a fallacy because this bill keeps out even Tamil Hindus of Sri Lanka out of its purview.

Amar Ujala talks of Karnataka Chief Minister B.S. Yediyurappa’s big win in the bypolls. Of the 15 seats that went to the polls, the BJP managed to wrest 12 and this has strengthened Yediyurappa.

11 December: Dainik Jagran calls the misinformation being spread in the name of Citizenship Amendment Bill a “Shararat bhara dushprachar”. The paper says it’s the height of shamelessness for Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan to object to it when he leads a country notorious for ill-treating minorities because of their religion. Khan’s comment is not just interference in the internal matters of India, but also an effort to misled people, Jagran says.

Union Home Minister Amit Shah has time and again clarified that the bill has nothing to do with Muslims living in India, still, the misinformation continues. The paper also says that it was good that India gave a quick and firm response to the US Commission’s remarks on the citizenship bill. The Commission’s remarks were not just unnecessary but also lacked knowledge.

12 December: Dainik Jagran says the violence in the Northeast after the passage of the citizenship bill shows what can happen when misinformation is spread as most areas in the region are outside the purview of CAB. It says that not just political parties, but even some so-called intellectuals have been indulging in fear-mongering.

The government will have to take steps to curb this disinformation, Jagran says.

Amar Ujala calls the passage of this bill a big political win. It says the Narendra Modi government has shown that it doesn’t shy away from making big decisions and it is ready to face all tests — from protests in the Northeast to a challenge to its bill in the Supreme Court.

13 December: Amar Ujala talks of the clean chit given by the Nanavati Commission to the Gujarat government in the 2002 riots case. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who was the Gujarat CM in 2002, and some of his ministers were accused of fomenting riots after the Godhra train burning incident. The commission, however, found no evidence of involvement of Modi or his ministers.

The panel has, however, questioned the role of some police officers in the riots. A big lesson from that report is the need for the police to be more professional and responsible.

Dainik Bhaskar asks why there is so much fear over the citizenship bill. It says that after hearing the stories of persecution of Hindus in neighbouring countries, which Indian would not want to help them? This persecution is on the basis of their religion and the government has no option but to give them shelter and citizenship, it adds.

The opposition’s argument that leaving out Muslims from CAB’s ambit is an attack on secular credentials of the Constitution is fallacious, the paper says.

Dainik Jagran calls the review petitions on Ayodhya meaningless — “nirarthak yachikaye”. And by dismissing them the Supreme Court has punctured the effort of some parties to keep the Ayodhya issue alive due to their narrow personal or political gains. Those who filed the review petitions were not even the main respondents, says Jagran.
