Kerala turns into ‘war zone’ over Sabarimala row: 745 people arrested, over 100 injured; violence mars hartal

BJP workers hurl stones at the CPI office in Kochi during Kerala hartal over Sabarimala row | Photo Credit: PTI

Thiruvananthapuram: A day after two women Bindu and Kanakadurga, both in their 40s, entered the Sabarimala shrine, Kerala witnessed violence and unrest across the state. A dawn to dusk hartal or shutdown which began at 6 am on Thursday was mired with incidents of vandalism, clashes and stone pelting. The hartal was called by the Sabarimala Karma Samithi, an umbrella organisation consisting of pro-Hindutva outfits and was supported by mainstream political parties such as the Bharatiya Janata Party.

The Congress-led UDF observed a black day as a mark of protest over the entry of the two women into the hill shrine. Several hotels, shops and business establishments remained shut in the state while the KSRTC buses remained off the roads for the better part of the day. Sangh Parivar trying to make Sabarimala clash zone, says Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan

Violence mars Kerala hartal over Sabarimala row: 5 points

By the end of the hartal in the evening, the Kerala Police said that it had arrested 745 people while 628 people had been taken into preventive custody. A total of 559 cases were also registered in connection with the violence that took place during the hartal. Reports suggested that the Kerala Police initiated Operation Broken Window to nab the culprits who instigated violence during the shutdown. Protesters allegedly attacked and vandalised CPM office in Palakkad during the hartal. A country-made bomb was also hurled at Nedumangadu police station near Thiruvananthapuram, which left at least two policemen injured. At least 100 people were injured in the incidents of violence across the state, reports said. Clashes erupted between BJP workers and Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) workers at Vadanappally in Thrissur district, resulting in three BJP workers getting wounded. On the other hand, a car in the Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan’s car allegedly hit a Youth Congress member while he was protesting near the State Secretariat in Thiruvananthapuram. The Congress alleged that it was a “planned hit and run” case, a charge denied by the government. Meanwhile, CPI(M) accused the BJP and RSS of staging the hartal in Kerala and attacking its party offices. Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan accused the BJP-RSS of trying to convert Kerala into a “war zone” over the Sabarimala issue. He said, "It's the SC to allow women of all ages to the Sabarimala temple and its our responsibility to provide protection to the women. Sangh parivar is trying convert Kerala into a war zone. Govt is trying to avoid protest in Sabarimala. The two women who tried earlier only have entered the Temple now. They were forced to leave the temple owing to the protest at Sabarimala. In view of the violent state-wide protests in the state, Kerala governor has sought a report from the Left government over the Sabarimala issue. The Governor said, "Sought from Chief Minister an urgent Law and Order report on incidents of violence and destruction of private and public property in Kerala following the entry of two young women in Sabarimala Temple. I appeal to all sections of people to maintain calm and peace.”

On September 4, the Supreme Court had allowed the entry of women of menstruating age into the hill shrine of Lord Ayyappa, ending the traditional ban that restricted the entry of women aged 10 to 50. However, until Wednesday, no women in that age group had managed to enter the shrine due to the massive, and often violent, protests by the Sabarimala devotees.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
