CAA protestors vandalise buses, public property in West Bengal; police resorts to lathicharge

As northeastern states of India witnessed massive protests by people against the Citizenship Amendment Act 2019, protesters in West Bengal's Murshidabad turned violent in various regions of the district. According to reports, trains were stopped at Jangipur, Mahipal, Agardighi and Poradanga stations. The movement of trains from Lalgola to Plassey was stopped as well. Governments buses were vandalized in Sajurmod area of Suti police station. Protestors also torched down Sakrail railway stations ticket counter.

To control the law and order situation, police at Kona Expressway resorted to lathi-charge and used tear gas to remove the protestors, who were pelting stones and bricks on them.

On the other hand, Murshidabad's Imam Moazzam urged the agitators to maintain peace and calm. The organization's general secretary Abdur Razzaq and the district's Imam Moazzam De, went to different parts of the district and asked people to protest peacefully as well as register their protest in writing. It also appealed to protest without any violence so that the common people do not suffer.

Meanwhile, curfew in Guwahati from 9 AM to 4 PM. In Dibrugarh, there will be a curfew from 8 AM to 2 PM. The decision was taken to promote normalcy in the regions.

To keep the situation under control, Superintendent of Police (SP) of five districts - Kachar, Shantipur, Karimganj, Majhuli, Lakhimpur were also replaced.

As per reports, people are stepping out of their homes and normalcy is returning in the state.

Even though the restrictions have been slackened a bit, army and paramilitary columns posted in the region continue to carry on their routine march and inspection of Guwahati to prevent any violent protests or demonstrations.

Under the sixth schedule, tribal-dominated regions in Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, and Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland will be kept outside the purview of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. However, the tweak in the bill did not appease the student unions and civil society groups in Assam and other northeastern states. Massive protests were held by these groups in these regions over the bill's passage in the parliament.

The Act aims to provide for Indian citizenship to the Hindus, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Parsis from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after six years of residence in India instead of the current mandatory stay of 11 years even if they do not possess any document. Several from the Northeast have claimed that the Citizenship rules puts the indigenous identity of the Northeastern regions at risk by legitimising several migrants, even though the central government has refuted any such claim.
