CAA protests rock Nagaland; normal life hit as schools, colleges and markets shut

People from northeastern states protest at Jantar M antar, Delhi on Wednesday | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Normal life comes to a standstill in parts of Nagaland after the Naga Students’ Federation, on Saturday, called for a six-hour lockdown NSF condemned the amended Citizenship Act for not respecting the sentiments of indigenous northeastern people Only students appearing for exams, media personnel, medical staff on duty and those having weddings are permitted on roads by the protesters

Kohima: The Naga Students’ Federation, on Saturday, called for a six-hour shutdown as a mark of protest against the amended Citizenship Act. Schools and colleges have been closed and markets are shut. The vehicles have remained largely off roads in parts of the state.

The protesters have allowed movement of students appearing for exams, media personnel, medical staff on duty and those having weddings.

"The NSF totally resents the injustice done by the central government and we will never support the amended Citizenship Act, which is the latest weapon of the Centre to divide the Northeastern people on concessional lines," said Dievi Yano, NSF vice president.

NSF also expressed their resentment against three Naga MPs - Tokheho Yepthomi (Lok Sabha) and KG Kenye (Rajya Sabha) from Nagaland and Lorho S Pfoze (Lok Sabha) from Manipur, for supporting the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 in Parliament.

PTI reported that the officials have confirmed of no occurrence of any untoward incident in the Naga inhabited areas where the shutdown started at 6 am.

On Friday, a candle vigil that witnessed the participation of hundreds of people was organised by Dimapur Naga Students' Union along with the Joint Committee on Prevention of Illegal Immigrants.

The President, Ram Nath Kovind, gave assent to the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and turned it into an Act on December 12. The Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on December 9 and then the Rajya Sabha cleared it on December 11. The Act seeks to grant citizenship to members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities who fled from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan fearing religious persecution and entered India before December 31, 2014.

The people of Northeast fear that the amended Citizenship Act will change the demography of the region as it will grant Indian citizenship to the illegal Bengali-speaking immigrants from Bangladesh and therefore it will threaten the linguistic and cultural identity of the northeastern people.
