Citizenship Act Protests Rage Through Assam, Northeast

New Delhi: More protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act took place in Assam and other parts of the northeast on Friday.

However, there were no fresh cases of injuries during the day. Mobile phone and internet services also remained affected while people in Guwahati and Dibrugarh – which witnessed violent protests in the past couple of days – made use of the relaxation in curfew to buy essential items.

Over the past few days, at least two people have been killed and scores injured in violent demonstrations while a large number of vehicles have been torched.

Law to be challenged in court

In Guwahati, the All Assam Students Union (AASU) began a 10-hour hunger strike at the Chandmari field against the amended citizenship act, which received the assent of President Ramnath Kovind late on Thursday. A large number of people participated in this protest.

The body also declared that it would file a public interest petition in the Supreme Court against the new law. “There is no way Assam or Assamese people will accept it. Besides peaceful protests we will continue legal battle against the law,” AASU chief adviser Samujjal Bhattacharya was quoted as having said in reports.

Reports from the state also said other organisations like the Assam Public Works, which had petitioned the apex court for the update of the National Register of Citizens in Assam, have also decided to go in appeal to the Supreme Court against the amended law.

Assurances fail to impress

The amended law provides citizenship to all Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists, Parsis and Christians who came to India till December 31, 2014 from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan due to religious persecution.

The government has said the amended law would not apply to states protected by the ‘Inner Line Permit’, and areas covered under the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution – both of which impact a number of areas in the North East. However, protests broke out as some people in the region are opposed to opening up the area to migrants.

Widespread violence left at least two dead, several injured

Following the passage of the Citizenship Amendment Bill in Lok Sabha on Monday and in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday, large scale violence was reported from several parts of Assam. In Guwahati at least two people were killed and eight injured when police opened fire to quell violence. Similarly, incidents of violence were also reported from Dibrugarh and both these places were placed under curfew.

This morning, the curfew was relaxed for six hours during which people rushed to buy groceries, medicine and fuel. Large queues were also seen at ATMs.

Shillong sees protests

Agitations were also seen in front of Raj Bhawan in Shillong on Friday, where a large number of people gathered to register protests against the Act.

Several outfits in Meghalaya have demanded that the state be included among those in which an Inner Line Permit system is in place.

Arunachal Pradesh chief minister Pema Khandu on Friday directed state officials to ensure strict checking of Inner Line Permits in check gates across the state.

To visit the ILP-regime states, outsiders, including people from other states of the country, need to take permission. The amended Citizenship Act will not applicable to Arunachal Pradesh as the ILP system is in force in the state.

Students’ protests in Arunachal

Students’ unions in Arunachal Pradesh on Friday boycotted their examination to hit the streets across cities, seeking immediate revocation of the law.

Thousands of agitators, led by Rajiv Gandhi University Students’ Union (RGUSU) and Students’ Union of NERIST (SUN), marched from the varsity to Raj Bhavan, covering a distance of around 30 km on the hilly terrain.

Local people, along with those belonging to the Assamese community, also joined the rally at Itanagar to protest against the controversial law, most of them raising slogans against the BJP-led government at the Centre.

The agitators submitted a memorandum to governor B.D. Mishra, stressing that the amended Act would not be implemented in the state.

Army out, internet access blocked

The Army also took out flag marches in several parts of Guwahati.

Eight columns of the Army and Assam Rifles have been deployed in Assam, reported PTI.

Defence Public Relation Officer Lt. Col. P. Khongsai said the Army and Assam Rifles were requisitioned by the civil administration in Morigaon, Sonitpur and Dibrugarh districts besides Guwahati to arrest the deteriorating law and order situation.

The Army was called out on Wednesday as the protestors turned violent over the Bill.

However, normal life continued to remain badly affected as the government decided to extend the suspension of mobile internet services by another 48 hours.

Appeal for peace

In the wake of the protests, chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal assured the citizens that the Centre was committed to implementing Clause 6 of the Assam Accord that seeks protection for the state’s cultural and linguistic identity.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi also issued a tweet in this regard despite most people in the region not having access to internet services right now. Referring to the Assam Accord, on which little progress has been made in the last 34 years, he wrote: “The central government and I are totally committed to constitutionally safeguard the political, linguistic, cultural, and land rights of the Assamese people as per the spirit of Clause 6.”

(With PTI inputs)
