Citizenship (Amendment) Act seeks to divide country: Mahua Moitra

Chandigarh [India], Dec 14 (ANI): Amid the rising agitation over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA), 2019, Trinamool Congress (TMC) MP Mahua Moitra on Saturday condemned the Act, and stated that the Act "seeks to divide the country".



Speaking to ANI, Moitra said: "The Act is completely unconstitutional and seeks to divide the country. Earlier, the Assam Accord of 1985, which stated that immigrants from 1971 would not be citizens of India, was not based on religions. Around 19 lakh people were identified, out of which 12 lakh were Hindus."

She further stated that the CAA has now changed the date so that the majority of people from foreign states will get citizenship in the country.

"First the government made them prove they were Indians, now they are making them prove they are persecuted foreigners," she said.

Speaking on the issue of Chief Ministers of five states protesting against the CAA, Moitra declined to comment, stating that it was not her to comment on the issue.

On Rahul Gandhi's 'Rape in India' remark, Moitra said that he made a comment on the actual scenario of the country, which was not wrong.

"It is amazing that when the opposition wanted an adjournment for issues like Article 370 and CAB, they were not allowed that. Now, Gandhi makes one remark, and the Speaker allows an adjournment so that the BJP ministers can scream and shout," she alleged.

On Friday, Moitra had moved the Supreme Court seeking an urgent listing of her petition challenging the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019.

"By introducing a religion test in India's citizenship law, the Amendment strikes a body blow to the basic structure of India's constitution, specifically its non-denominational character; and is manifestly arbitrary, constitutionally immoral, both in letter and in spirit," her petition stated.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, which was passed by the Parliament earlier this week and has now become the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 following assent from President Ram Nath Kovind.

According to the Act, members of the Hindu, Christian, Sikh, Buddhist and Zoroastrian communities who have come from Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Bangladesh till December 31, 2014, and facing religious persecution there will not be treated as illegal immigrants but given Indian citizenship. (ANI)


