Fact Check: Photo of Eid procession in Bangladesh passed off as CAB protest in Mumbai

Photo of Eid procession in Bangladesh passed off as CAB protest in Mumbai.

Amid nationwide protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, a photo showing a large number of people under a flyover is spreading like wildfire on social media with the claim that it is a protest against the Act in Mumbai.



India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found that the viral photo has nothing to do with ongoing protests against the Citizenship Act. This is a month-old picture from Bangladesh.



Among others, Facebook page Hyderabad Star News 72put up the misleading post that has been shared more than 27,000 times till the filing of this story. The page is followed by almost 1.6 lakh users.

The post is viral on Twitter as well.

With the help of Yandex reverse search, we found a YouTube video related to the viral image. The video shows the same location and the procession as seen in the viral image. It was uploaded on November 10, 2019, and the title says the procession was for Jashne Julus’ in Bangladesh’s Chittagong.

Jashne Julus’ refers to a gathering by the Muslim community on the occasion of Eid-Milad-Un-Nabi, the birthday of Prophet Muhammad. This year, the festival was celebrated on November 9 and 10.

We found some more photos of the procession posted by Bangladeshi Twitter users.







A Bangladeshi media house called banglanews24 also covered this event.

Therefore, it is clear that the viral image is not from Mumbai but Bangladesh. However, on Friday, a large group of people did stage a protest against the Citizenship Act at Marine Drive in Mumbai.

The Citizenship Act provides for citizenship to persecuted religious minorities (Hindus, Sikhs, Christians, Buddhists, Jains and Parsis), even if illegal immigrants, from the three neighbouring countries of Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Picture of protest against CAB at Mumbai’s Mohammed Ali Road Conclusion Image is from Eid procession in Bangladesh JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
