9 Texas detainees on hunger strike

Nine men — up from six earlier this week — are being force-fed under court order in a detention center in El Paso, Texas, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement said.

One hunger striker, a 22-year-old man from India who called Associated Press on Friday, described how he is dragged from his cell three times a day and strapped down on a bed. He said a group of people force-feed him by pouring liquid into tubes pushed through his nose.

The man, who AP is identifying only by his last name Singh out of family concerns for his safety, stopped eating more than a month ago. In mid-January, ICE obtained court orders to begin non-consensual hydration and feeding, and so for weeks they've had nasal tubes inserted in their noses and IVs in their arms.

"They tie us on the force-feeding bed, and then they put a lot of liquid into the tubes, and the pressure is immense so we end up vomiting it out," said Singh. "We can't talk properly, and we can't breathe properly. The pipe is not an easy process, but they try to push it down our noses and throats."

Speaking through an interpreter, Singh said he has lost 50 pounds since he began his hunger strike to protest guards' unfair treatment of him and others from Punjab. He said they are being denied bond while detainees from other countries were released.

In a statement, ICE said it fully respects the rights of all to voice their opinion without interference.

"ICE does not retaliate in any way against hunger strikers. ICE explains the negative health effects of not eating to our detainees. For their health and safety, ICE closely monitors the food and water intake of those detainees identified as being on a hunger strike," ICE said.

The AP's reports on the force-feeding have garnered international headlines and angry responses from policymakers and human rights advocates.

U.S. Rep. Veronica Escobar, an El Paso Democrat, visited some of the men, tweeting their situation is "unacceptable."

Hunger strikes among immigrant detainees and court orders authorizing force-feeding are rare, said an ICE official.

Although the agency doesn't keep statistics on this, attorneys, advocates and ICE staffers who AP spoke with did not recall a situation at an immigration detention site where it has come to this.

Detainees' attorneys have said that up to 30 men have been on hunger strikes over the last month. ICE says 10 detainees from India and Nicaragua in El Paso have refused nine consecutive meals. The International Red Cross, American Medical Association and World Medical Association condemn force-feeding strikers as unethical.
