Citizenship Amendment Act protests in Delhi: 50 Jamia Millia Islamia students detained after clash with cops

#CitizenshipAmendmentAct protests in Delhi: Police use tear gas shells to disperse the agitating students of… https://t.co/XGo70YbWoa — TOI Delhi (@TOIDelhi) 1576241916000

Security Update Entry & exit gates at all stations have been opened. Normal services have resumed in all stations. — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) 1576238170000

Security Update As advised by Delhi Police, entry & exit at Patel Chowk and Janpath have been closed. Trains will… https://t.co/77pj7EewuD — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) 1576234616000

(With inputs from PTI)

CAB stir: Clash erupts between Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia students and police

NEW DELHI: A protest called by the Jamia Teachers' Association (JTA) of Jamia Millia Islamia against the Citizenship Amendment Act and the National Registry of Citizens (NRC), joined by hundreds of students, took a violent turn on Friday after some students tried to break the police barricades near the Jamia Stadium gate number 1.Fifty students were detained following a clash between police and students after the protesters were stopped at the varsity gate and prevented from carrying out their march.The university turned into a battlefield after students, who wanted to march to Parliament House to protest the Citizenship Amendment Act, clashed with police prompting AAP MLA Amanatullah Khan to reach the spot to take stock of the situation.The students, who were baton-charged by police personnel, alleged that the police also used tear gas to quell their march. The students also resorted to stone-pelting. However, the protesters alleged that police resorted to stone-pelting first and students threw stones in response to the attack.Scores of students of the varsity were assembled near the university in an attempt to march to Parliament.Police personnel had to push the students back and use several rounds of tear gas to disperse the protesters.The police had cordoned off the road and protestors were seen climbing onto the barricades. The university's gate was later closed.As a precautionary measure, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) closed the entry and exit points at Patel Chowk and Janpath metro stations following Delhi police's advisory, which were later opened."As advised by Delhi Police, entry & exit at Patel Chowk and Janpath have been closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations," DMRC said on twitter.
