Assam Congress leaders file petition in Supreme Court against Citizenship Act

'Action will be taken against any person or organisation found inciting violence'.

Key Highlights On behalf of Tarun Gogoi, P Chidambaram will file another petition on the same matter 'The exclusion of minorities from the ambit of this Act is an attempt by the ruling party to manipulate their majority in Parliament for political gains' Protesters in Assam and Tripura defied curfew to hold protests against the Act

New Delhi: Days after massive unrest in Assam, state Congress leaders filed a petition in the Supreme Court challenging the amended Citizenship Act.

On behalf of former Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi, former Union Minister P Chidambaram will file another petition on the same matter.

In their petition, leader of Opposition in Assam Assembly Debabrata Saikia, Barpeta MP Abdul Khaleque and Mariani MLA Rupjyoti Kurmi highlighted the "blatant attempt to nullify the sanctity of Assam Accord, alleging contradictions in the Act with the provisions of Article 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India".

They also questioned the distinction related to the perception of persecuted minorities as stated in the new act.

The petition further claimed that the Act was an attempt to impose a belief which in itself was a violation of the composite culture and age-old liberal values of the Assamese society, PTI reported.

The exclusion of minorities from the ambit of this Act is an attempt by the ruling party to manipulate their majority in Parliament for political gains, the petition further stated.

This petition comes at a time when law and order situation in Assam has deteriorated over the Citizenship Amendment Bill and its subsequent passage in both Houses of Parliament after which it received President Ram Nath Kovind's assent late Thursday.

Protesters in Assam and Tripura defied curfew to hold protests against the Act after which the Indian Army deployed Assam Rifles in Assam, including capital Guwahati.

On Saturday, Assam Director General of Police (DGP) Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta said that 85 people were arrested in connection with violent incidents during protests against the amended CAA.

He further said that the situation is under control adding that stern action will be taken against people indulging in violence.

"Incidents of stone-pelting, setting vehicles on fire and attacking life and property have been videographed. We will identify the persons involved and take action against them," the DGP told PTI.

Mahanta said that all the "bad elements" who had infiltrated the protests to create disturbances have been arrested.

"Action will be taken against any person or organisation found inciting violence," he said.

Observing that adequate forces have been deployed, the DGP said police acted with restraint during the agitations and took action only during extreme situations.

He also urged people not to believe or spread rumours.
