Citizenship Act Protests Intensify, DCW Chief Swati Maliwal Hospitalised & Other Top Stories

New Delhi:

Day After Balakot, India Was Ready To Attack Pakistan's Military Installations: Ex-Air Chief BS Dhanoa

In his first public remarks after leaving office, former Air Chief BS Dhanoa said India was ready to escalate the conflict along the line of control by targeting Pakistan’s military installations if Islamabad had been ‘successful’ in targeting Indian territory in response to New Delhi’s airstrikes on February 26. Read here…

On Hunger Strike, DCW Chief Swati Maliwal's Health Deteriorates, Shifted To Hospital

The health of Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) chief Swati Maliwal on Sunday deteriorated following which she was shifted to the nearby Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan Hospital. Maliwal’s who has lost around 7-kg weight so far, fell unconscious on Sunday. The DCW chief is on a hunger strike for over 10 days to demand capital punishment for rapists. Read here…

Another UP Shocker: Teenage Girl Raped, Set On Fire In Uttar Pradesh’s Fatehpur

Days after outrage across country over the death of a rape victim from Unnao, another rape victim was set ablaze allegedly by the accused in Uttar Pradesh’s Fatehpur district. The girl, 18, whose condition is said to be critical has suffered 90 per cent burn injuries and is being treated at a hospital in Kanpur. Read here…

Citizenship Act Protests: One More Death In Assam, Trains-Buses Torched In West Bengal

The death toll in the ongoing protests against the amended Citizenship Act rose to three in Assam after the driver of an oil tanker was killed when his vehicle was torched by a group of people in Sonitpur district on Friday night. Meanwhile, protesters set fire to about five trains, three railway stations and tracks, and at least 25 buses on Saturday amid spiralling violence in West Bengal. Suspension of Internet services across Assam was extended for 48 hours till December 16 though curfew was relaxed in Dibrugarh and Guwahati and also parts of Meghalaya, while a six-hour shutdown was observed in Nagaland. The UGC National Eligibility Test for candidates scheduled to appear in Assam and Meghalaya was postponed. Read here…

Citizenship Act: Upset Over JDU’s Stand, Prashant Kishor Offers Resignation To Nitish Kumar

JDU vice president Prashant Kishor handed over his resignation to the party chief Nitish Kumar on Saturday. Kishor, earlier publicly took a stand contrary to that of his party on the citizenship law. According to sources, Chief Minister Nitish Kumar has not accepted Kishor's resignation yet. Prashant, who has aired his concerns over the Citizenship Amendment Act, also deleted the party designation from his bio on Twitter. Read here…

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
