Varanasi: Missing teacher's body found after three days, family alleges rape

The woman's body was recovered by Chaubeypur police and was later shifted to Deen Dayal Upadhaya hospital mortuary. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Body of 24-year-old missing woman found from river in Varanasi Victim was a teacher and gave tuition classes to children at their homes Local residents alleged police delayed the filing of FIR and search of the victim

Varanasi: The body of 24-year-old woman, who went missing on December 11, has been found in a river under Chaubeypur police station limits in Varanasi district of Uttar Pradesh on Saturday. Meanwhile, the family of the victim has alleged rape with the woman.

Varanasi SP (City) Dinesh Kumar Singh has ruled out rape. "Rape has not been ascertained in postmortem reports. We are investigating the matter further," the SP told ANI.

Massive protests erupted in Chaubeypur area after the woman's body was found. The woman's body was recovered along Gomti river in the Dwarka area of the city, said a report in Times of India. The residents later blocked traffic at the busy Mari Mai crossing alleging inaction by the police.

The local residents also alleged that police delayed the filing of FIR and search for the victim. Later, a posse of cops was rushed to the protest site and tried to convince the protesters to call off their agitation.

The body of the woman was handed over to the family after the post-mortem. Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) has asked city SP DK Singh to probe into the case thoroughly.

Reports suggest the victim was a tuition teacher and used to teach children by visiting their homes. On December 11, the woman did not return home after giving tuition classes.

The victim's father alleged that Chetganj police and Sigra police indulged in jurisdictional disputes instead of looking for his daughter.

The woman's father identified as Prajapati alleged that Sigra police filed a missing person's case on December 12 but did not make efforts to trace his daughter.

The woman's body was recovered by Chaubeypur police and was later shifted to Deen Dayal Upadhaya hospital mortuary. The girl's family later identified the body and also staged a protest outside post-mortem house at BHU.
