As Assam reels under protests, CM Sarbananda Sonowal-led delegation to meet PM Modi, Amit Shah

Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The CM-led delegation will discuss the ongoing tension in the state with the prime minister and the union home minister The team will also apprise the two leaders about the present situation in Assam The northeastern state of Assam has been witnessing violent protests over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act

Guwahati: As violent protests over the amended Citizenship Act continued in the Northeast, Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal-led delegation will meet Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah “very soon” to brief them about the prevailing situation in the state.

“It has been decided that a delegation, under the leadership of Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal, will go to Delhi to meet Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah,” said Assam Parliamentary Affairs Minister Chandra Mohan Patowary, news agency ANI reported.

The decision to discuss the ongoing tension in the state with the prime minister and the union home minister and apprise them about the present situation was taken at a meeting of BJP MLAs and MPs in Guwahati.

“Today’s meeting also appealed to the people to maintain peace and order in the state,” he said.

Meanwhile, the chief minister said that he held a discussion with senior BJP leaders on “the present situation in Assam”

Sonowal tweeted that he discussed “the present situation in Assam in a meeting with my Cabinet colleagues, union minister Shri Rameshwar Teli, MPs, MLAs & @BJP4Assam president Shri @RanjeetkrDass in Guwahati”.

The northeastern state of Assam has been facing violent protests over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act with three rail stations, a post office, a bank, a bus terminus, shops, several vehicles and other public properties being torched or ransacked.

The violent protests that triggered on Wednesday night after the passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in Parliament have claimed the lives of three people so far.

Earlier, the CM had asked protesters not to spread "misinformation" over the Citizenship Act. Addressing an event in Tripura, Sonowal had said no one should allow "divisive forces" to destabilise the state.

He had also warned of taking strong action against people involved in arson and violence, saying vandalism has no place in any democratic process adding that it will not be tolerated.
