Protest was not on university campus, large number of locals participated: Jamia Millia Islamia PRO

Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) University administration on Sunday clarified that the recent protests against the Citizenship Act did not take place in the varsity campus and that a large number of locals had participated in the protests.

"Demonstration was not held in University campus nor was it protest of Jamia. A large number of locals participated in it. We held talks with students, now they are protesting peacefully," news agency ANI quoted the Public Relations Officer (PRO) of the university, Ahmad Azeem.

In the wake of violent clashes between students of Jamia Milia Islamia and Delhi police over the Citizenship Amendment Act 2019 (CAA), the university administration postponed the examinations scheduled for Saturday.

"All students of Odd semester of UG & PG programmes are hereby informed that the examination scheduled on 14th December 2019 stands postponed. The date of postponed papers shall be notified in due course of time," said a statement from the Office of the Controller of Examinations on Saturday.

On Friday, violent clashes broke out between the police and students of Jamia Milia Islamia (JMI), who were marching towards the Parliament to protest against the Citizenship law. According to reports, police resorted to lathi-charge and teargas shells were fired to stop them. At least 50 protesters were said to detained by the police.

As a precautionary measure, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) closed the entry and exit points at Patel Chowk and Janpath metro stations.

The Citizenship Act aims to provide for Indian citizenship to the Hindus, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Parsis from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after six years of residence in India instead of the current mandatory stay of 11 years even if they do not possess any document. Several critics have claimed that the Act discriminates against the Muslim community by excluding it. The claim has been refuted by Union Home Minister Amit Shah who tabled the Bill in the Parliament.
