Separatist, mainstream leaders placed under house arrest

Separatist, mainstream leaders placed under house arrest

SRINAGAR, Feb 2: Authorities today placed several separatist and mainstream leaders under house detention ahead of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s daylong visit to Kashmir amid heightened security arrangements.

Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi is scheduled to be on day long visit to Kashmir on Sunday to lay foundation stones for several developmental projects in all three provinces of the state including Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh.

While octogenarian separatist leader and Hurriyat (G) Chairman, Syed Ali Geelani continued to be under house detention, police this morning placed Mirwaiz Umar Farooq who heads his faction of Hurriyat (M) under house detention at his Nageen residence here.

Pertinently Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL) comprising Syed Ali Geelani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Mohammad Yasin Malik has called for a complete shutdown as a mark of protest against Modi’s visit to Kashmir on Sunday.

Taking to social networking site tweeter, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq wrote “Ahead of @narendramodi visit, panic buttons pressed by the authoritarian state and control tightened as searches and CASO conducted even in Lal Chowk! Today morning I was put under #House Arrest!”

Officials said the moved was aimed at preventing separatists from creating fuss on the arrival of Prime Minister.

Besides several other second rung separatist leaders have also been placed under house detention by the police to prevent them from leading or taking part in any protest which may disrupt peace.

President, Awami Ittihaad Party (AIP), Er Abdul Rashid was also placed under house detention by the police at his official residence here.

AIP Spokesman in a statement issued here said Rashid was placed under house arrest at his official residence here this morning after the later refused to go to the police station.

It may be in place to mention that Rashid the former MLA from Langate Assembly constituency has said that he will welcome Modi with black flags as a mark of protest against grabbing states natural resource by India.

Besides placing mobile bunkers and checkpoints at many places in Srinagar and the places Modi is scheduled to visit, authorities pressed into service drone fitted with cameras to conduct aerial survey.

In order to ensure the day pass off peacefully, authorities made heightened security arrangements on Modi’s visit with all security agencies operating in Kashmir have been put on high alert.

Frisking of pedestrians and thorough search of vehicles entering Srinagar continued with police having seized hundreds of two wheelers in the city on Saturday.

Police launched massive crackdown on bikers in parts of Srinagar city and seized hundreds of bikes ahead of PM’s visit to Kashmir.
