Despite Mamata's peace appeal, anti-CAA protests continue in Bengal; violence in North 24 Parganas, Howrah

A station in Howrah district ransacked

Key Highlights Sporadic incidents of violence were reported from Nadia, North 24 Parganas and Howrah Police teams have been rushed to the tension-hit areas to contain the situation West Bengal has been facing violent protests against the amended Citizenship law for the past two days

Kolkata: Turning a deaf ear to Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee’s appeal for peace, agitators in West Bengal, on Sunday, continued their protests against the amended Citizenship Act in several parts of the state for the third consecutive day.

Sporadic incidents of violence were reported from Nadia, North 24 Parganas and Howrah districts. In North 24 Parganas and Nadia districts, protesters blocked various thoroughfares and also set ablaze wooden logs on the streets in Amdanga and Kalyani areas, news agency PTI reported.

Violent protests were also reported in Deganga area of North 24 Parganas where agitators ransacked shops and burnt tyres on roads. Nadia district also witnessed similar protests with demonstrators blocking Kalyani Express Highway and burning copies of the amended Act. Tension also prevailed in Domjur area of Howrah district, parts of Burdwan and Birbhum, where protesters took out rallies and shouted slogans against the Narendra Modi government.

Meanwhile, police teams have been rushed to the tension-hit areas to contain the situation and disperse the agitators.

In the wake of the protests, internet services have also suspended in some parts of the state as a precautionary measure.

West Bengal witnessed violent protests against the amended Citizenship law for two consecutive days – Friday and Saturday with several trains, railway stations and tracks, buses, other government properties being set ablaze and damaged.

Protesters mostly targeted railway properties with Murshidabad, Malda and Howrah districts bearing the brunt of their ire. As per official sources, public property worth crores of rupees have either been destroyed or looted, PTI reported.

When the protests turned violent, Banerjee, who is a vocal critic of the Citizenship Amendment Bill, appealed to people to maintain peace and also warned of stern action against those involved in vandalising public property.

"Once again I appeal to all not to resort to violence and disturb public order, tranquillity and peace," said Banerjee on Saturday.

"It must be kept in mind that police stations, railway stations, airports, post offices, government offices, public transport and likes are public property. Vandalising public as well as private property in any form will not be tolerated and will strictly be dealt according to law," she added.

Meanwhile, the opposition BJP threatened to seek President's rule in the state if the "mayhem by Bangladeshi Muslim infiltrators continued."

BJP national secretary Rahul Sinha said if such a situation continues, the party would be left with no option other than seeking the imposition of President's rule in the state.
