CAA protests: Congress' Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury sparks controversy, calls Assam 'new Kashmir'

Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights 'It is a matter of concern that the entire Northeast, especially Assam region has been engulfed in violence' State government is committed to protect all genuine Indian citizens and the rights of the people of Assam: CM Sonowal 'Thwart the elements who are misleading the people on CAA'

New Delhi: West Bengal strongman Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, who has made a string of controversial statements ever since he was chosen as the leader of the Congress in the Lok Sabha, has sparked yet another row by calling Assam "the new Kashmir".

Talking to the media over protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act, Chowdhury said it was a matter of concern that the entire Northeast, especially Assam region has been engulfed in violence.

Calling the state a strategically important place for the country, he said that “on one hand, it is Kashmir Valley and on the other, the new Kashmir, Assam”.

Chowdhury’s statement comes after Congress president Sonia Gandhi on Saturday launched a scathing attack on the Narendra Modi-led NDA government over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, saying it would "shred the soul" of India.

Attacking the Modi-Shah government over the Act, she alleged that their sole agenda was to make people fight to serve their politics.

Sonia gave this statement at the party's mega "Bharat Bachao Rally" (Save India) at Ramlila Maidan yesterday.

She also asserted that Congress has always fought for people's rights and will always fulfil its duty till the last breath.

Meanwhile, Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal urged all sections of the society to prevent elements who are misleading people on the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019.

He further said that the state government is committed to protecting all genuine Indian citizens and the rights of the people of Assam.

“I call upon all sections of the society to thwart the elements who are misleading the people on #CAA and indulging in violence and together continue the growth journey of Assam,” Sonowal tweeted.

He further appealed to the people to maintain peace and harmony with regard to protest against the Act.
