‘Panipat’ screening held up in Rajasthan’s theaters

The movie ‘Panipat’, which is based on the Third Battle fought between the Maratha Empire and Afghan king Ahmad Shah Abdali in 1761, was held up in 36 theatres in Rajasthan. Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot has asked the Censor board to interfere to check for an “historical mistake”.

‘Panipat’, features Arjun Kapoor, Sanjay Dutt and Kriti Sanon in lead roles.

Earlier, several theatres here stopped screening Ashutosh Gowariker’s ‘Panipat’, amid criticism by Jat groups over the film’s portrayal of Bharatpur’s Maharaja Surajmal. Jat groups and political leaders, including state ministers, have criticised the portrayal of Maharaja Surajmal and demanded a ban on the film.The state government has also sought a response from film producers over objections to the movie.

the state government sought a response from film producers.

A delegation of the Jat community met Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Rajeeva Swarup, demanding a ban on the film. “The community leaders have expressed their sentiments against the film. We are seeking a response from the producers through the film distributor,” the officer said. He said the government would look into what it could do within the ambit of law. Meanwhile, protests against the film were held in Jaipur, Bikaner and Bharatpur.

In Bharatpur, Tourism Minister Vishvendra Singh, MLAs Wajib Ali, Mukesh Bhakar and Ramswaroop Gawadia demanded a ban on the film. Protesters damaged a lobby of a cinema hall in Jaipur.

A complaint was filed with the Mansarover police station against the film producers.

Complainant Ramavtar Palsania alleged that the producers had distorted historical facts and insulted Surajmal.

Meanwhile in Rohtak, Haryana the All-India Jat Aarakshan Sangarsh Samiti sought a ban on the film with its national president Yashpal Malik alleging distortion of historical facts. The organisation demanded legal action against the film producer besides a ban on it in Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and other places.

Earlier, Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot told reporters that sentiments of people should not be hurt and it would be better if the film was screened after people’s satisfaction. “I believe that art and the artists should be respected but they should also take care that any caste, religion, class, great personalities and gods are not insulted,” Gehlot said.

Arjun Kapoor plays the role of Sadashiv Rao Bhau, commander of the Maratha army. Bharatpur king Surajmal is shown as having denied help to the Maratha army.
