Death toll in anti-CAA protests in Assam reaches 4; Congress says 'New Kashmir'

Death toll in anti-CAA protests in Assam reach 4; Congress says 'New Kashmir' | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Two more persons succumbed to bullet injuries sustained in police firing in Guwahati, taking the death toll to 4 Protests began earlier this week as the Bill was cleared by both the Houses of Parliament The anti-CAA stir turned violent in Assam, West Bengal, New Delhi and a few other states

Guwahati: The death toll in Assam protests has reached four after two more persons succumbed to bullet wounds in Guwahati in police firing. As many as 27 people have reportedly been injured in the anti-Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) protests in the state which began on Wednesday.

Protests also engulfed the neighbouring West Bengal after President gave his assent to the contentious Bill on December 12 amid heavy protests in Assam and other north-eastern states.

Commenting on the ongoing protests in Assam, Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury said Assam has become the ‘new Kashmir’.

"It is a matter of concern that the entire Northeast region, especially Assam has been engulfed in violence which is certainly detrimental to the safety and security of the nation. Assam is recognised as a strategically important place for the country. On one hand, it is Kashmir valley and on the other, the new Kashmir that is Assam, both have been emerging as a great concern," Chowdhury told news agency ANI.

"The essence of deprivation, discrimination has been prevailing upon the minority people of my state, West Bengal. So this has become another area of major concern. I have already requested the state government to take all necessary measures in order to stop the escalation of violence," he added.

Meanwhile, Asom Gana Parishad (AGP), the BJP ally in Assam, who voted in favour of CAA said it will move the Supreme Court (SC) against the Bill. Assam Pradesh Congress Committee (PCC) President Ripun Bora on Sunday dubbed the move mere "eyewash" alleging that BJP and AGP are in connivance.

The CAA seeks to grant citizenship to refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan belonging to Hindu, Christian, Sikh, Buddhist and Parsi and Jain who fled their countries to escape religious persecution and entered India before on or before December 31, 2014.
