Denied Permission To Land Chopper, Yogi Adityanath Roasts Mamata Banerjee

Election 2019: Yogi Adityanath addressed the rally at Balurghat in north Bengal via phone

Highlights Yogi Adityanath was to address rally at Balurghat in West Bengal

He had to address the rally via phone

Days of Mamata Banerjee's rule in West Bengal numbered, he said

Denied permission to land his helicopter for a rally in West Bengal on Sunday, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath lashed out at the "anti-people" Trinamool Congress government in West Bengal, saying the days of Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee''s rule are "numbered".

Addressing the rally via phone, Mr Adityanath urged the leaders, who had attended the Trinamool Congress's January 19 opposition rally in Kolkata, to introspect on how democratic rights were being scuttled by the state government.

The UP chief minister who was scheduled to address the "Ganatantra Bachao Rally" at Balurghat in South Dinajpur district, more than 400 km from Kolkata, could not attend the rally after permission was denied for his chopper to land near the venue. Yogi Adityanath office said permission was withheld "without any prior notice".

"The TMC government didn't allow me to come and meet you all. That is why I had to resort to Digital India of Modi-ji to address you. This TMC government is anti-people, anti-democratic and have compromised with national security," Mr Adityanath said.

This is the second instance landing permission has been refused for a chopper carrying a BJP leader.

Earlier this month, permission was withheld for the chopper of BJP chief Amit Shah. The state government said the landing facilities were inadequate at the Malda airstrip. The BJP chief was forced to opt for a private helipad.

The TMC government is afraid of the BJP as it very well knows that its days in Bengal are numbered, Mr Adityanath said.

Alleging that the Trinamool government had "tried to stop Durga Puja" in West Bengal in order to pursue its appeasement policy, Mr Adityanath urged BJP workers to fight hard in order to ensure that the party forms the next government in the state.

"Mamata Banerjee should remember that she cannot misuse the government and its agencies in the state. It is shameful that government officials are acting as TMC cadres in the state," he said.

(With inputs from PTI)
