Delhi: Protests against CAA engulf national capital as 4 buses set ablaze by mob amid clashes with police

DTC buses set ablaze by protesters near Bharat Nagar over #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. One fire tender was rushed to the spot. Two firemen also injured. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights 4 DTC buses were set ablaze by a mob in South Delhi's Bharat Nagar The incident occured after police lathi-charged at students of Jamia Millia Islamia who protested against new citizenship law. The varsity students have distanced itself from the violence in Bharat Nagar AAP MLA Amanatullah Khan was earlier spotted in area where violent protests occurred

New Delhi: Four buses were torched by a mob in Delhi amid clashes between locals and police over the newly-enacted Citizenship law on Friday. Both the police and protesters pelted stones at each other as the stir in the national capital entered its third day on Sunday.

Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) buses were set ablaze by protesters near Bharat Nagar in South Delhi. One fire tender was rushed to the spot and two firemen were also injured.

Violence erupted on Mathura Road in South-east Delhi after police lathi-charged at students of Jamia Millia Islamia who were protesting the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA).

Delhi: Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) buses set ablaze by protesters near Bharat Nagar over #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. One fire tender was rushed to the spot. Two firemen also injured. More details awaited. pic.twitter.com/j6vH9tG8O4 — ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019

Aam Admi Party (AAP) MLA Amanatullah Khan along with his supporters sat on a dharna in Jamia Nagar area to protest against the contentious law. Delhi police alleged that the AAP MLA stoked the violence.

"The buses were burnt down on the other side of Amantullaah's protest site. His presence at the crime spot hasn't been established. But certainly can't deny his role since he is the local MLA," an officer of the Delhi Police said.



#WATCH Earlier today AAP MLA Amanatullah Khan was seen in the area in Delhi where violent protests took place, police sources tell ANI that they are investigating elements that caused violence. #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/3Guwak4sDJ — ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019

Agitators also turned to arson and the police used force to chase away the crowds. The police used batons to disperse the crowds.

Violence erupted on Mathura Road in Southeast Delhi following a clash between the police and Jamia Millia Islamia students who were protesting against the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

"Motorists coming from Badarpur side are advised to take Modi Mill Flyover from CRRI towards Nehru Place& those coming from Ashram Chowk side are advised to take Ring Road, Moolchand Flyover & BRT Corridor or DND Flyover," a traffic advisory said.

The students of Jamia Millia Islamia have disassociated themselves from the violence that has erupted today. The statement from the student community there said, "We have time and again maintained that our protests are peaceful and non-violent. We stand by this approach and condemn any party involved in the violence. We have maintained clam even when students have been lathi-charged and some women protestors have been badly beaten up. Media personal are a witness to these events. Violence by certain elements is an attempt to vilify and discredit genuine protests".

Huge traffic jams were reported in South Delhi area, from Ashram to Friends Colony to Kalindi Kunj.
