Anti-CAA protest in Delhi turns violent; protesters block roads, torch buses as cops fire tear gas

Protests in Delhi turned violent on Sunday as protesters blocking roads over the new citizenship law torched at least three buses in city's New Friends Colony area.

The protests were held in Jamia Nagar area near the New Friends Colony where protesters clashed with the police and torched government-owned buses.

Firefighting team was also attacked before they could reach the site. They eventually reached the spot and doused the fire.

The police fired tear gas shells at the protesters to disperse the crowd.

The protests were held by the people residing in the Jamia Nagar area which is predominantly-Muslim.

Noida-Delhi intersection at Kalindi Kunj in South Delhi was closed due to protests.

Delhi: Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) buses set ablaze by protesters near Bharat Nagar over #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. One fire tender was rushed to the spot. Two firemen also injured. More details awaited. pic.twitter.com/j6vH9tG8O4 — ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019

"Motorists coming from Badarpur side are advised to take Modi Mill Flyover from CRRI towards Nehru Place& those coming from Ashram Chowk side are advised to take Ring Road, Moolchand Flyover & BRT Corridor or DND Flyover," Delhi Traffic Police tweeted.

Mathura Road opposite New Friends Colony was also blocked by demonstrators, it added.

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) said it has closed the entry and exit gates of Sukhdev Vihar and gate no. 3 of Ashram in the advice of Delhi Police.

Entry and exit gates of Jamia Millia Islamia, Okhla Vihar and Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh were also closed the DMRC said trains will not be halting at these stations.

Earlier on Friday, students of Jamia Millia Islamia clashed with the cops as police used force to break the protest near the university.

Jamia students distanced themselves from the Sunday's protest, saying that their protests are peaceful and non-violent

"The students of Jamia Millia Islamia disassociate themselves from the violence that has erupted today. We have time and again maintained that our protests are peaceful and non-violent. *We stand by this approach and condemn any party involved in the violence*. We have maintained clam even when students have been lathi-charged and some women protestors have been badly beaten up. Media personal are a witness to these events. Violence by certain elements is an attempt to vilify and discredit genuine protests," a statement by Jamia students said.

The Citizenship Act aims to provide for Indian citizenship to the Hindus, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Parsis from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after six years of residence in India instead of the current mandatory stay of 11 years even if they do not possess any document.

Critics claim that the Act discriminates against the Muslim community by excluding the members of the community. The claim has been refuted by Union Home Minister Amit Shah who tabled the Bill in the Parliament earlier this week.

Violent protests have also rocked Northeast and West Bengal. The administration imposed curfew in Assam's several districts. It was, however, been relaxed on Saturday.
