CAA protests: Jamia students call for protest against police action, reach Delhi Police HQ

Soon after the violence in South Delhi during a protest against the amended Citizenship Act, police entered the Jamia Millia Islamia campus and blocked the university gates. (Photos: PTI)

The Jamia Milia Islamia University in Delhi has become the scene of mass violence as the Delhi Police cracked down on students protesting against the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act. The situation turned grave after the police entered the Jamia campus and fired teargas shells and lathicharged students.

Several videos circulating on social media show panicked students running as the police fire what appears to be teargas shells in the library of the university. According to ground reports, police also lathicharged the crowd, leaving many injured. In the ensuing violence, campus property was ransacked and buses were also set on fire.

The Jamia Milia Islamia University administration has alleged that the police entered the campus forcefully. Waseem Ahmed Khan, the Chief Proctor of Jamia Millia Islamia University released a statement saying, "Police have entered the campus by force, no permission was given to them. Our staff and students are being beaten up and forced to leave the campus."

LIVE updates on anti-CAB protest in Jamia Millia Islamia University

Soon after the violence in South Delhi during a protest against the amended Citizenship Act, police entered the Jamia Millia Islamia campus and blocked the university gates to nab some "outsiders" who had entered the premises to hide, sources said. Both the Jamia Millia students' community, as well as the Teachers' Association, have disassociated themselves with the violence and arson that took place near the university Sunday afternoon.

Those in university premises claimed the police also entered the library and "harassed" the students. There was a heavy deployment of police in and around the campus. "The Delhi Police has gheraoed Jamia students in the library. We do not subscribe to the bus burning incident which happened but those who did it were not from the varsity but outsiders. Innocent students are being targeted," a student told news agency IANS.

The Delhi Police reportedly entered the campus despite the JMI administration officially distancing itself from the violent protests in surrounding areas. The administration has claimed that Jamia students were protesting peacefully inside the campus premise and were not involved in the clashes that took place outside the campus.

Some others alleged that students have been detained by the police, but there was no confirmation from the Delhi Police, which said they were focussing on bringing the situation under control. Three public buses and a fire tender were set afire by the protesters during the violence and arson in New Friends' Colony.

Jamia students protest police brutality

Condemning the violence unleashed by the Delhi Police, a protest has been called at the Delhi Police headquarters at ITO in the national capital. The ITO will once again become the scene of mass protest, nearly a month after the police headquarters were circled by Delhi Police personnel airing their grievances against lawyers in the aftermath of Tis Hazari Court clash between police and lawyers.

The Jamia administration, however, reportedly dissuaded students and faculty from protesting against the Delhi Police. The Jamia Students' Union met the university's Teachers' Association and discussed the events of Sunday evening and the future course of action. The Students' Union and many other citizens have started arriving at ITO to protest the violence meted out by the police.

The JNU Students' Union has also released a statement calling for solidarity with the protest at ITO. "All students and citizens of Delhi are appealed to assemble at Delhi Police Headquarters, ITO at 9.00 PM tonight to ensure that the undeclared emergency in Jamia is lifted immediately. JNU students are appealed to mobilize immediately and assemble at Sabarmati Dhaba at 8.30 pm," a statement released by the JNUSU reads.

(with inputs from agencies)

ALSO READ | CAA protest rocks Delhi: Police enter Jamia Millia, teargas shells fired, Metro service disrupted

ALSO READ | Police entered Jamia Millia Islamia by force, students being beaten up: Chief proctor

ALSO WATCH | Anti-Citizenship Act protest turns violent in Delhi's New Friends Colony, 3 buses torched
