BJP to launch nation-wide protest against Congress, TMC for 'spreading rumours about CAA'

BJP working president JP Nadda | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights JP Nadda has issued a circular to state presidents of various state units to launch protests against Congress, TMC and Left parties for "spreading rumours about CAA" Meanwhile, West Bengal Governor has accused Mamata Banerjee govt of putting posters across the state against the implementation of NRC and CAA

New Delhi: Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) working president Jagat Prakash Nadda on Sunday directed state presidents of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, Kerala and Punjab to stage protests against Congress, Trinamool Congress (TMC) and Left parties. The circular issued says these parties are spreading rumours about the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

The passing of the contentious Act last week has triggered violent protests across the country with Assam and West Bengal facing the maximum brunt of it. Over a dozen petitions have been filed in the Supreme Court challenging the validity of the Act by various opposition parties, including Congress, TMC and CPI(M).

In Assam, BJP's ally Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) has announced that it will file a writ petition in the top court against the Citizenship Act. Elsewhere in Maharashtra, Shiv Sena, a former ally of BJP and vociferous proponent of Hindutva ideology, has refused to take a clear stand on the contentious Act.

Meanwhile, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has appealed the protesters to carry out their agitation without violence, but the BJP remains unimpressed by her efforts. The saffron party has even accused the TMC chief of inciting the violence for political gains.

West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankar, who is often at loggerheads with TMC government, asked the West Bengal CM to withdraw advertisements stating Citizenship Act and NRC will not be implemented in the state. He stressed that these advertisements are "unconstitutional and it is a criminal use of public funds".
