'No one should indulge in violence': Arvind Kejriwal appeals for calm as anti-CAA protest turns violent in Delhi

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal appealed for calm as a protest against new citizenship law turned violent on Sunday.

Protesters allegedly torched three buses in city's New Friends Colony area as they clashed with cops who fired tear gas at the crowd.

"No one should indulge in violence. Any kind of violence is unacceptable. Protests should remain peaceful," Kejriwal said.

Kejriwal's statement came amid reports that party MLA Amanatullah Khan was also at the demonstration site where residents of Jamia Nagar and nearby areas were protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

As reports claimed that students Jamia Millia Islamia were part of the protest, a student group disassociated themselves from the violence saying that their protests have been "peaceful and non-violent."

"The students of Jamia Millia Islamia disassociate themselves from the violence that has erupted today. We have time and again maintained that our protests are peaceful and non-violent. We stand by this approach and condemn any party involved in the violence," a statement by the student community of JMI said.

"We have maintained clam even when students have been lathi-charged and some women protestors have been badly beaten up. Media personal are a witness to these events. Violence by certain elements is an attempt to vilify and discredit genuine protests," they said.

Earlier on Friday, students of Jamia Millia Islamia clashed with the cops as police used force to break the protest near the university.

Viral videos on Twitter showed protesters pelting stones at buses and towards the cops. Firefighting team that arrived to douse the fire was also attacked by the protesters.

Police sources were quoted as saying by ANI that they are investigating elements that caused violence.

"Motorists coming from Badarpur side are advised to take Modi Mill Flyover from CRRI towards Nehru Place and those coming from Ashram Chowk side are advised to take Ring Road, Moolchand Flyover & BRT Corridor or DND Flyover," Delhi Traffic Police tweeted.

Mathura Road opposite New Friends Colony was also blocked by demonstrators, it added.

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) said it has closed the entry and exit gates of Sukhdev Vihar and gate no. 3 of Ashram in the advice of Delhi Police.

Entry and exit gates of Jamia Millia Islamia, Okhla Vihar and Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh were also closed the DMRC said trains will not be halting at these stations.

The Citizenship Act aims to provide for Indian citizenship to the Hindus, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Parsis from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after six years of residence in India instead of the current mandatory stay of 11 years even if they do not possess any document.

Critics claim that the Act discriminates against the Muslim community by excluding the members of the community. The claim has been refuted by Union Home Minister Amit Shah who tabled the Bill in the Parliament earlier this week.

Violent protests have also rocked Northeast and West Bengal. The administration imposed curfew in Assam's several districts. It was, however, been relaxed on Saturday.
