Jamia protest: Police says stones pelted at them, 6 jawans injured, situation normal now

The Jamia Milia Islamia University in Delhi became the scene of mass violence as the Delhi Police cracked down on people protesting against the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act. (Photo: ANI)

Protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act turned violent in Delhi on Sunday with the Delhi Police firing teargas shells and resorting to lathicarge.

The Jamia Milia Islamia University in Delhi became the scene of mass violence as the Delhi Police cracked down on people protesting against the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act.

Talking about the protest to India Today TV, DCP South east Delhi Chinmaya Biswal said that they are not against the university and that they had to scatter the raging crowd to maintain law and order.

LIVE updates on anti-CAB protest in Jamia Millia Islamia University

He said, "We are not against any university. Stones were pelted on us. We have scattered the raging crowd to maintain law and order. The proctor should check who the people are who have pelted stones at us. Now the situation is normal. Some people have been detained. Over 4000 people were protesting since morning. University students should not pelt stones. University is talking wrong. We are scattering violent mob."

The DCP also added that six of his men were also injured in the violence.

On being asked if the police fired at the protesters, Chinmoy Biswal, DCP South East said, "There has been no firing absolutely. It is a false rumour that is being spread. The mob caused arson, set motorcycles ablaze, it pelted stones at us.

"Our only interest is to push the mob back, so law and order can be restored in the area. We have no problem with university (Jamia Millia Islamia University) students," he added.

Defending his move on entering Jamia Millia Islamia campus, DCP South East said that the campus is not unified and is located on both sides of the road. "While we were pushing the mob back, they were going in the University & then were throwing stones from inside, so we were checking those places," he said.

Also Read | CAA protests: Jamia students call for protest against police action, to assemble at Delhi Police HQ

Also Read | Jamia protest: Woman journalist says cops pulled her hair, hit with baton, broke phone

Also Watch | Watch: Anti-Citizenship Act protest turns violent in Delhi's New Friends Colony, 3 buses torched




