As terror grips southeast Delhi, locals take refuge indoors

NEW DELHI: As police clashed with protesters, the loud cries prompted people to go into a lockdown mode in Sukhdev Vihar, Jamia Nagar and New Friends Colony . Locals described the scene as a battleground, with women and children rushing indoors as soon as the first sound of “explosion” was heard. Streetlights went off at a number of places, they said.Saima Naaz, a resident of Jamia Nagar, said things seemed fairly peaceful till around 5pm but took a turn for worse when police attacked the protesters who were moving towards Mathura Road. “They came towards the protestors and it appeared that they wanted to talk. Suddenly, they started attacking them and that is when things became violent. Vehicles were being set on fire and teargas shells ended up in houses too. We’ve been without electricity for over five hours and people are staying indoors out of fear,” Naaz said.Students at Jamia Millia Islamia said police started firing tear gas shells on the campus around 5.30pm, forcing students to take cover. Chandan Kumar, a student and member of All India Students Association, said he suffered serious injuries when the police shattered the windows of a washroom in the university. Other parts of the building were damaged too. “They stormed indoors and dragged us out. I know of at least 150 people who have been injured,” Kumar said, who was admitted at Alshifa Hospital in Okhla Mohammad Tauseef, another Jamia Nagar resident, said tear gas shells landed on the roof of his house, forcing family members to flee. “We had to use salt to combat the gas. It became terrible and we could not breathe. Even those who were not involved in the protest were ending up in the crosshairs,” Tauseef said.Ranjit Devraj, a resident of Sukhdev Vihar, said continuous explosions could be heard from 3pm, with people refusing to venture out. “We could hear explosions non-stop till about 6pm, after which a number of roads were blocked completely. The people were initially headed towards Mathura Road, but since it was blocked by the police, they moved towards New Friends Colony and this is when things got out of control. We came to know that buses had been torched too,” Devraj said.Locals were quick to welcome students from Jamia into their households. Reem Ashraf said while girls inside Jamia hostel were safe, they were restricted to the premises. “If anyone needs any assistance, please feel free to reach out. My home is very close to the university,” Ashraf said on social media.
