CAA protests: Police clash with students at AMU, internet snapped in Aligarh for 24 hours

CAA protests: Police clash with students at AMU, internet snapped in Aligarh for 24 hours

Aligarh Muslim University Registrar Abdul Hamid said the police entered the campus late Sunday night and clashes were reported from inside.

news Protests

Hundreds of students of Aligarh Muslim University protesting against the amended Citizenship Act clashed with police at a campus gate after which police used batons and teargas to disperse them. Aligarh Muslim University Registrar Abdul Hamid said the police entered the campus late Sunday night and clashes were reported from inside. "Hostels are being evacuated," he said.

Internet services have been shut down in Aligarh for a period of 24 hours.

Soon after the protest near the Jamia Millia University in Delhi, the students started gathering at the Babey Sir Syed Gate and shouted slogans against the law and police action on demonstrators in the national capital.

AMU Proctor Prof Afifullah Khan said some security personnel have been injured in brick-batting near the gate. Police said the student broke down the police cordon and sealed all gates to the campus.

Tension prevailed in the area as police used batons and teargas to control the situation.

Additional forces have been rushed in from adjoining districts, and the Rapid Action Force has also been deployed in the campus.

The Uttar Pradesh police stated that senior officers including the DIG are at the spot. “10-15 anti-social elements have been detained,” they said.

Aligarh police is lobbing tear at visibly violent AMU students. Students now receding back to Uni. pic.twitter.com/J02RHS5YGj — Ayush Tiwari (@sighyush) December 15, 2019

#WATCH Aligarh: Police fire tear gas shells at protesters outside Aligarh Muslim University campus after protesters pelted stones at them. (Note: abusive language) #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/lUiXJUtkRx — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 15, 2019

Video accessed by Firstpost shows police entering the #AMU campus.



Follow LIVE updates:https://t.co/axaZWjrKSz pic.twitter.com/kmEzpEFjhP — Firstpost (@firstpost) December 15, 2019

On Sunday night, the university’s administration announced that the institution will remain closed till January 5. “The university is closed from today (15/12/2019) till 05/01/2020. This is being done due to disturbances created by some antisocial elements for last three days," AMU Registrar Abdul Hamid said.

“All other offices will remain open as usual and the closure of the university is for the purpose of reading and examination only. The remaining examination will be conducted after 05/01/2020," the Registrar said in a statement. He said the schedule for examination will be notified later.

Earlier, AMU Proctor Prof Afifullah Khan had said some security personnel were injured in brick-batting near the gate.

Tension prevailed in the area as police used batons and teargas to control the situation.

This comes after the protest in Jamia Millia Islamia turned violent, leading to buses being torched. PTI sources said that at least 31 students were brought to a nearby hospital after the violence and 11 of them were admitted.

Soon after the violence, Jamia Millia Islamia Chief Proctor Waseem Ahmed Khan claimed that the Delhi Police entered the campus forcibly without any permission and beat up staff members and students who were forced to leave the campus.

Students are also protesting at Hyderabad’s Maulana Azad National Urdu University against the police brutality in Jamia and AMU, and have decided to boycott the exams

With PTI and IANS inputs
