Congress, allies stoking violence, says PM Modi

DUMKA/RANCHI: PM Narendra Modi on Sunday accused Congress and its allies of stoking violence in the name of protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). Speaking at a BJP rally in Dumka ahead of the last phase of elections in Jharkhand , Modi referred to vandalism and arson that began in Assam, Tripura and Meghalaya and later spread to Bengal and Delhi. “When Congress and its friends couldn’t stall the Citizen Amendment Bill in both Houses of Parliament, they resorted to such tactics.”“Going by the visuals on television, it is evident who is behind all these protests,” Modi said. “They can be identified by the clothes they are wearing. The entire nation is watching the way Congress and its allies are extending support to such flare-ups. The nation will not spare them,” he added. Modi, who termed the Centre’s decision to amend CAA as “1000% correct”, also accused Congress of shaming the nation by staging protests outside the High Commission of India in London on Saturday as part of its ‘Bharat Bachao Rally’.Referring to anti-India protests a few weeks ago, he said: “Earlier, Pakistan and its sponsored stooges used to protest outside the High Commission of India in London. They did so after the abrogation of Article 370 as well as after the SC’s verdict in the Ayodhya case. But this time, it (Congress) has shamed the entire country before the world by staging protests outside the High Commission of India against CAA. It’s a shame.”Modi said that in their effort to oppose him and BJP, Congress and its allies have now started ‘defaming’ the country. He said Congress has become so “blinded in their efforts to oppose BJP, that it doesn’t realise it is shaming the nation”.The PM accused Congress and its Jharkhand ally JMM of looting the tribals to fill their own coffers. “Neither Congress nor JMM has any roadmap or intention to work for the tribals. All they did throughout their life was fill their coffers and build palaces for themselves and their families,” he said.Attempting to reach out to tribals, Modi reiterated that under no circumstances their land would be taken without their consent. “I have come here to give you a guarantee that without your permission, no steps in terms of jal, jangal and zameen (water, forest and land) will be taken by our government.”
