Anti-CAA Stir: Delhi BJP files complaint against Manish Sisodia, Amanatullah Khan for involvement in 'riots at Jamia' | Highlights

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: A day after violent protests rocked Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia University and Uttar Pradesh's Aligarh Muslim University, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra -- KC Venugopal, AK Antony, PL Punia, Ahmed Patel and other Congress leaders -- has sit on a symbolic protests at India Gat over police action in the two universities.

Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday said that the violent protests on the Citizenship Amendment Act are "unfortunate and deeply distressing" and the government cannot allow vested interest groups to "divide the country" and "create disturbance".

Earlier in the day, Jamia Millia Islamia University Vice Chancellor Najma Akhtar said that the police entered the campus without permission on Sunday and they will register an FIR against the cops for assaulting the student.

"We will file an FIR against the entry of Police in our university campus. You can rebuild the property but you cannot compensate for the things the students went through. We demand a high level inquiry," she said while addressing a press conference on Monday.

Here are the highlights on protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act:

18:45 pm: Delhi Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) files complaint to Commissioner of Police Amulya Patnaik, against Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia, AAP MLA Amanatullah Khan & others. Complaint alleges their involvement in "riots at Jamia Millia Islamia, yesterday".

18:32 pm: 'Crackdown on students is attack on Constitution': Priyanka leads Congress' protest at India Gate

18:20 pm: Muslim Advocates Association has approached the Supreme Court challenging the Citizenship Amendment Act and asking to declare it unconstitutional.

18:12 pm: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra: Prime Minister should answer on what happened at the University yesterday, whose government beat up the students? He should speak on the sinking economy. His party MLA raped a girl, why hasn't he spoken on it?

18:11 pm: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra: Every person in Congress will fight against this tyranny and stand with the students.

18:11 pm: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra: Govt has given a blow to the Constitution. It's an attack on the soul of the nation, youth is the soul of the nation. It's their right to protest. I'm a mother too. You entered into their library, dragged them out and thrashed them up. This is tyranny.

18:10 pm: West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar has called Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee at Raj Bhawan in Kolkata tomorrow, to apprise him on the law & order situation in the state.

18:10 pm: Himanta Biswa Sarma, Assam Minister: In the Guwahati mob violence, we have witnessed a specific pattern. There is a huge involvement of people who are not citizens of Guwahati and who have come from the lower Assam districts.

17:59 pm: Himanta Biswa Sarma, Assam Minister: In entire Assam, 136 cases of vandalism & other related crimes have been registered. So far, police have arrested 190 persons in connection with recent incidents happening in Guwahati & in the entire state.

17:58 pm: Himanta Biswa Sarma, Assam Minister: In Guwahati, we have withdrawn the curfew & now there will be no curfew in the day time. However, night curfew will remain imposed until we review the situation & take a decision in this regard.

17:49 pm:

Delhi: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, KC Venugopal, AK Antony, PL Punia, Ahmed Patel, Ambika Soni & other Congress leaders continue to sit on a symbolic protest near India Gate over police action during students' protests in Jamia Millia Islamia & Aligarh Muslim University(Uttar Pradesh) pic.twitter.com/s0v9NWzvns — ANI (@ANI) December 16, 2019

17:30 pm: Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC): Entry & exit gates of Lok Kalyan Marg and Janpath are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations.

17:19 pm: Jagdish Tytler arrives for Congress' symbolic protest near India Gate over police action during students' protests in Jamia Millia Islamia (Delhi) & Aligarh Muslim University.

17:07 pm: Emmanuel Lenain, Ambassador of France to India: Citizenship (Amendment) Act is an internal matter of India and we respect that.

17:00 pm: State govts and UT administrations requested to take requisite precautionary measures to maintain law and order, peace and public tranquility. They have also been requested to take action against circulation of fake news and rumours on social media having potential to incite violence, reports ANI

17:00 pm: MHA has issued an advisory to States and UTs, in view of incidences of violence and damage to public property being reported from some parts of the country, it's imperative all required measures be taken to contain violence,ensure protection of life and safety of citizens, reports ANI

16:59 pm: Its objective is to give citizenship to persecuted religious minorities from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh. This Act poses no danger to citizenship of people of our country. Some are trying to flare religious tensions, it's sad Congress stands with them: Ravi Shankar Prasad

16:40 pm: "An applicant seeking Indian citizenship will have to apply for citizenship with required documents. The person will not become an Indian citizen automatically. Number of people who will be benefited by Citizenship (Amendment) Act will be clear after framing of rules; Rules to be framed soon," ANI quoted MHA sources as saying.

16:35 pm: Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC): Entry & exit gates of Patel Chowk, Central Secretariat and Udyog Bhawan are closed. Trains will not be halting at Patel Chowk and Udyog Bhawan.

16:30 pm: Delhi: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra & other Congress leaders sit on a symbolic protest over police action during students' protests in Jamia Milia Islamia (Delhi) & Aligarh Muslim University.

16:18 pm: This is a government that has attacked the rights of youths & students of the country. That is why, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra & other senior Congress leaders have decided to sit on a symbolic protest at the India Gate from 4 pm, for the next 2 hours: Randeep Singh Surjewala

16:09 pm: AP Siddiqui, Registrar, Jamia Milia Islamia, after Executive Council Meeting on yesterday's incident: It has been decided that we would recommend the Ministry of Human Resource Development to set up a high-level committee or initiate a judicial inquiry into the matter.

16:08 pm: Calcutta High Court asks West Bengal government to submit a report of measures taken by the government to ensure law and order in the state after December 13.

16:04 pm: 'Will never implement NRC or CAA, dismiss my govt if you want': Mamata Banerjee to Centre

15:39 pm: Government has attacked the constitution and students, they attacked students after entering the university. We will fight for the constitution, we will fight against this government: Priyanka Gandhi

15:16 pm: Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC): Entry & exit gates of Jamia Millia Islamia are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station.

14:59 pm: Delhi Police PRO, MS Randhawa: Around 30 police personnel received injuries, 2 SHO suffered fractures, one of our personnel is in ICU. 2 FIRs have been registered for rioting and arsoning. Crime Branch will investigate the matter from all angles.

14:59 pm: Delhi Police PRO, MS Randhawa: There are lot of rumours going around over this incident (violence near Jamia), I appeal to everyone especially students to not believe in rumours. Action will be taken against whoever is involved in this incident.

14:53 pm: Delhi Police PRO, MS Randhawa: Yesterday around 2 pm protest happened, locals also participated, our staff showed maximum restraint despite provocations. Around 4:30 pm some protesters went towards Mata Mandir marg and set a bus on fire.

14:45 pm: Ram Gopal Yadav, Samajwadi Party: I demand that an emergency session of the Parliament should be called, an amendment should be made to the Citizenship Amendment Act to see that no discrimination is done on the basis of religion or the Act should be revoked.

14:36 pm: Once I was alone. Today Delhi's CM says that he won't allow this. Bihar's CM says that he won't allow NRC, I tell him don't allow Citizenship Amendment Act too. MP's CM said that, Punjab's CM said that, Chhattisgarh's CM said that, Kerala'a CM said that, everyone has to say it: Mamata Banerjee

14:28 pm: Only BJP will remain here and everyone else will be made to leave-it's their politics. It'll never happen. India is everyone's. Agar sabka sath nahi rahega toh sabka vikas kaise hoga? Who is the Citizenship Act for? We're all citizens. Didn't you cast vote? Don't you live here?: Mamata Banerjee

14:27 pm: We will continue our protest till the Citizenship Amendment Act and National Register of Citizens (NRC) are withdrawn: Mamata Banerjee

14:21 pm: Lucknow: Nadwa college has been closed till 5th January, 2020. A protest had broken out at the college today, against Citizenship (Amendment) Act, reports ANI.

14:20 pm: Actor Kamal Haasan's party Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM) today filed a petition before the Supreme Court challenging the Citizenship (Amendment) Act2019

14:19 pm: 'Unfortunate and deeply distressing': PM Modi as protests rock Jamia Millia and AMU

14:00 pm: PM says Congress is behind it (protests). Had Congress been capable of inciting such violence, you wouldn't have been in power. It's a baseless allegation. I condemn it. Only the ruling party, PM, HM and their cabinet are responsible for it: Congress' Ghulam Nabi Azad

13:59 pm: We have arrested 21 persons in the matter. Named FIR has been lodged against 56 persons and others unidentified. The process of hostel vacation is on and 25-30 per cent of them have been vacated, rest expected to be vacated by evening: Aligarh SSP Akash Kulhary

13:52 pm: Police can't enter into university premises without permission of Vice Chancellor. If they weren't permitted, how did Police, which comes under Central govt, enter into the campus? We condemn it. There should be a judicial inquiry: Congress' Ghulam Nabi Azad

13:40 pm: 'Political blame will go, concerned about students of Jamia': Irfan Pathan

13:34 pm: Mamata Banerjee takes out rally in Kolkata against Citizenship (Amendment) Act and NRC.

13:13 pm: I am very worried over the worsening law and order situation in Delhi. To ensure peace returns to the city immediately, I have sought time from Home Minister Amit Shah for a meeting: Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal

13:13 pm: AP Siddiqui, Registrar of Jamia Millia Islamia, on reports that Police entered the mosque at the campus and also sexually assaulted girl students: Lot of rumours are being floated on social media. We can't confirm or deny all of them.

13:12 pm: Jamia Millia University Registrar AP Siddiqui on whether Police opened fire inside the campus: We talked to the Police Joint Commissioner and other senior officials on it, and they have strongly denied this rumour.

13:11 pm: Anti-CAA Stir | 'Will file FIR against cops for assaulting students': Jamia Vice Chancellor

12:58 pm: There has been a strong rumour that two students died, we deny this totally, none of our students died. About 200 people were injured of which many were our students: Najma Akhtar, Jamia Vice Chancellor

12:55 pm: We will file an FIR against the entry of Police in our university campus. You can rebuild the property but you cannot compensate for the things the students went through. We demand a high level inquiry: Najma Akhtar, Jamia Vice Chancellor

12:51 pm: There has been a lot of property damage in the University,how will all this be compensated? There has been an emotional loss as well. Yesterday's incident was unfortunate. I also appeal to everyone to not believe in any kind of rumours: Najma Akhtar, Jamia Vice Chancellor

12:51 pm: Jamia Millia Islamia vice chancellor J Najma Akhtar briefs the media over yesterday's incident.

12:48 pm: Meanwhile, the Kerala BJP has slammed the state-wide hartal called by a group of outfits on December 17 against the Centre's decision to implement the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), saying it was "unnecessary" and against "national interest."

12:39 pm: This (Police burnt buses) is an absolute lie. When mob was setting fire to properties, police tried to douse the fire by asking for water from residents. As far as the particular bus is concerned, Police saved it by using water from a bottle: DCP South East Delhi Chinmoy Biswal

12:38 pm: I appeal to Jamia students, that the image of University gets affected when anti-social elements join their protests. Protests should be peaceful and disciplined: DCP South East Delhi Chinmoy Biswal

12:21 pm: Former Assam CM & Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) leader, Prafulla Kr Mahanta: We are not going to support this. Everyone is opposing it. It'll violate Assam Accord & make indigenous people of Assam, a minority here. AGP opposes it. We will go to Supreme Court.

12:10 pm: Meeting of Jamia Millia University's Executive Council is underway in Vice Chancellor Najma Akhtar's office, over yesterday's incident

11:55 am: National Commission for Minorities Chairman: I also appeal to the protesters that protest isn't needed as Citizenship Amendment Act isn't against Muslims of India. If at all they're protesting, it should be done peacefully. If Commission feels the need to issue notice, it'll be done

11:50 am: National Commission for Minorities Chairman, Syed Ghayorul Hasan Rizvi on protests in Jamia Millia Islamia and AMU: I appeal to the protesters that such protests should not be done. I also appeal to the police that they should show some restraint and control the situation calmly.

11:45 am: Hyderabad: Maulana Azad National Urdu University (MANUU) students protest against Citizenship Amendment Act and in support of Jamia students.

11:40 am: There was stone pelting for about 30 seconds when around 150 people had come out to protest and raise slogans. Situation is normal now. Students are going back to their classrooms: ANI quoted Superintendent of Police Lucknow, Kalanidhi Naithani, as saying.

11:38 am:

Lucknow: Protests in Nadwa college against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. Police has closed the gate of the college from outside. Slogans in support of Jamia students raised by protesters. https://t.co/RJ0lURxir1 pic.twitter.com/v5jXw2JKB4 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 16, 2019

11:35 am: Earlier, violence also broke out in Uttar Pradesh’s Aligarh Muslim University after a clash erutpted between police and protesters erupted. The police officials said that the student broke down the police cordon adding that they have sealed all gates to the campus. Tension prevailed in the area as police used batons and teargas to control the situation.

11:26 am: Lucknow: Protests in Nadwa college against Citizenship (Amendment) Act. Stone pelting breaks out.

11:19 am: "No report has been sought by MHA from Delhi Police yet (on yesterday's Jamia incident) but the Ministry is in touch with the Delhi Police," ANI quoted Ministry of Home Affairs sources as saying.

11:12 am: Supreme Court agrees to hear on December 18 the pleas of Congress and of erstwhile Tripura royal Kirit Pradyot Deb Barman against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

11:11 am: "Opposition parties seek time from President Ramnath Kovind for a meeting to apprise him on the current situation in the country in wake of protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act," ANI quoted sources as saying.

11:10 am: 'Rioting must stop': SC to hear pleas on violence against students at Jamia, AMU tomorrow

11:03 am: CJI SA Bobde says 'Just because they happen to be students, it doesn't mean they can take law and order in their hands, this has to be decided when things cool down. This is not the frame of mind when we can decide anything. Let the rioting stop.'

10:57 am: Supreme Court will hear the matter tomorrow.

10:57 am: Senior Advocate Colin Gonsalves says 'A retired SC judge should inquire into the Jamia matter. CJI Bobde, 'we don’t want to see videos (when an advocate tells court that videos are there). If violence and destruction of public property continues, we will not hear it.'

10:56 am: Chief Justice of India SA Bobde, 'We will determine the rights but not in the atmosphere of riots, let all of this stop and then we will take suo motu cognizance. We are not against rights and peaceful demonstrations'

10:56 am: Senior advocate Indira Jaising mentioned Jamia Millia Islamia&Aligarh Muslim University incidents before a bench headed by Chief Justice SA Bobde. Jaising asks SC to take suo motu cognizance of the issue saying'It's a very serious human rights violation all over the country.'

10:38 am: A mega rally will be held today in Kolkata to protest against unconstitutional CABBill & NRC. It will begin at 1 pm near the statue of Babasaheb Ambedkar on Red Road & end at Jorasanko Thakurbari: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee

10:37 am: Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has taken cognisance of the situation from DGP OP Singh after protests outside Aligarh Muslim University campus yesterday, reports ANI.

10:30 am: Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan at LDF-UDF joint protest: The present atmosphere has been created by BJP-RSS, they are trying to implement their agenda. Situation in the country is volatile. Kerala is standing together against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

10:26 am: Two FIRs over property damage and riots have been registered by Police in connection with violence during protests in Jamia Nagar area yesterday, reports ANI.

10:15 am: Internet services which were to remain suspended till today morning, have been extended for another 24 hours, in 10 districts (Lakhimpur, Tinsukia, Dhemaji, Dibrugarh,Charaideo,Sivasagar,Jorhat,Golaghat, Kamrup (Metro)&Kamrup) of Assam.

10:09 am: 'We didn't call for protests, police wasn't able to differentiate between students and protesters': Jamia Vice Chancellor

9:54 am: Disturbed by reports from Delhi in the wake of anti CAB protests....urge (Home Minister) Amit Shah and (Delhi CM) Arvind Kejriwal to do all it takes to bring the situation under control and prevent it from escalating further: Punjab CM Captain Amarinder Singh

9:44 am: Anti-CAA Protests | AMU campus to be evacuated today, all students will be sent home: UP top cop

9:41 am: Curfew has also been relaxed in Guwahati today between 6 am - 8 pm, reports ANI.

9:40 am: In West Bengal, Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar has said that the advertisement, in which Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee states that NRC and citizenship law will not be implemented in West Bengal, is unconstitutional and a head of government can't use public money for such campaigns.

9:31 am: Anti-CAA stir: 4 buses torched, 6 cops injured, schools closed as protests rock Delhi's Jamia Nagar

9:25 am: The police is entering universities and thrashing students. At a time when this government should come forth and listen to the people, the BJP government is oppressing students and journalists in the northeast, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi. This is a coward government: Priyanka Gandhi said in a tweet in Hindi.

9:22 am: Anti-CAA stir: Protests near AMU turns violent, admin closes university till Jan 5

9:14 am: It is our constitutional right to protest. Anyone who protests in this country is called a Pakistani. See the condition of Northeast states today and now the fire has spread to Delhi. Still, the Prime Minister is not getting enough of the campaigns. We demand that the kind of violence done by the police on youth and the way police personnel resorted to lathi-charge, the matter should be investigated: Congress' Pawan Khera

9:11 am: Students start leaving from Jamia Millia Islamia University as the University is closed till January 5 following yesterday's incident.

9:07 am: A student of Jamia Millia Islamia University removes his shirt and sits at the gate of university demanding action against Delhi police following yesterday's incident.

8:55 am: Amid CAA protests, Delhi Police issue advisory, close traffic from Sarita Vihar to Kalindi Kunj

8:42 am: The Citizenship (Amendment) Act seeks to provide the citizenship of India to the religiously persecuted minorities except for Muslims from Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, who entered India before 31 December 2014 to become Indian citizens.

8:34 am: District Magistrate Saharanpur: Mobile internet services to remain suspended starting from 12 pm of December 15 until further orders, in order to maintain law and order.

8:15 am: "People should not pay attention to the rumours about Citizenship Amendment Act being spread by some vested interests," Yogi Adityanath said.

7:53 am: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath appealed to the residents of the state to maintain peace and harmony.

7:50 am: Meanwhile, a Jamia students' body claimed they had nothing to do with the arson and "certain elements" had joined the during the protest and "disrupted" it. They also accused the police of high-handedness.

7:46 am: All detained students have been released from Kalkaji and New Friends Colony: MS Randhawa, PRO Delhi Police

7:41 am: Meanwhile, internet services have been suspended in the Meerut until Monday to maintain law and order, said District Magistrate Anil Dhingra.

7:40 am: The AMU has announced that the institution will remain closed till January 5.

7:35 am: Meanwhile, 60 people were also injured in protests from Uttar Pradesh’s Aligarh Muslim University.

7:30 am: As many as 60 people were injured in protests in Delhi’s Jamia Millia Islamia University.

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
