All detained Jamia Millia Islamia students released from Kalkaji, NFC police stations after night of protests

All detained students of the Jamia Millia Islamia University (JMI) have been released from the Kalkaji and New Friends Colony Police Stations, the Delhi Police said in a statement on Monday. Students of JMI and Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) had organised a protest throughout Sunday midnight at the Delhi Police Headquarters, ITO, to protest against the alleged brutality of police personnel at the JMI campus on Sunday.

"All students detained from Kalkaji and New Friends Colony have been released," a statement by Delhi Police Public Relations Officer (PRO) MS Randhawa read, "Delhi Police also appealed to the protesters to end their protest. Buses have also been arranged to drop the protesters. Injured students will also be released after treatment."

Earlier, the Delhi Minorities Commission had issued an order to the SHO Kalkai Police Station to release all injured students of the Jamia Millia held at the police station. The Commission had also asked the police to take the injured students for treatment at a reputed hospital. "SHO Kalkaji will be responsible for any complications to injuries of the held students. Compliance report to be filed at 3 PM on December 16 at the Commission Office, failing which will attract appropriate action as deemed fit by the commission," stated the order by the Delhi Minorities Commission.

Several students had earlier been detained by the police following the conflict on Jamia campus. Both students and police personnel, including senior officials, have been injured in the clash.

Earlier on Friday, students of Jamia Millia Islamia clashed with the cops as police used force to break the protest near the university.

Viral videos on Twitter showed protesters pelting stones at buses and towards the cops. Firefighting team that arrived to douse the fire was also attacked by the protesters. The demonstrations were held to protest against the recently passed Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

The Citizenship Act aims to provide for Indian citizenship to the Hindus, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Parsis from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after six years of residence in India instead of the current mandatory stay of 11 years even if they do not possess any document. Several critics have claimed that the act actively discriminates against Muslims, a claim which has been refuted by the central government.
