Delhi: Violent protest near Jamia, Empty Buses set on fire

WEB DESK

Three buses have been set on fire and many damaged allegedly by those who were protesting against anti-Citizenship Act near South Delhi’s Jamia Nagar area.

Police used batons to disperse the protesters. An officer said that the area has been barricaded and they may have to use tear gas or water cannons if the situation is not controlled. Issuing a statement after the incident, the students of Jamia Millia Islamia disassociated themselves from the violence. “We have time and again maintained that our protests are peaceful and non-violent,” it said.

Earlier today, students of Jamia Millia Islamia and locals protested at Jamia Nagar against the amended Citizenship Act. Delhi Traffic Police tweeted that vehicle movement was closed from Okhla Underpass to Sarita Vihar due to the demonstration.

The demonstrators blocked Mathura Road opposite New Friends Colony, the traffic police said. Traffic from Badarpur and Ashram Chowk was diverted to alternative routes due to the road blockade. The varsity had turned into a battlefield on Friday with the students and the police clashing after the protesters wanted to march to the Parliament against the contentious amendment to the Act.

JMI denies involvement of its students

On today’s violent incident in the vicinity of Jamia Millia Islamia it is clarified that it happened during the protest organised by the people of the nearby areas and not by JMI students.

The university has already declared winter vacation and postponed semester examination after 13 December incident. A large number of students staying in hostels have already left and the Vice Chancellor Najma Akhtar appealed to the students to maintain peace.

Jamia Teachers Association condemn violence

Jamia Teachers’ Association condemn the violence in south Delhi, outside Jamia Millia Islamia. JTA is not part of any such violence. JTA also appeals to students, if any, to keep away from such direction-less protest lead by local political leaders. Jamia practices and preaches peace. JTA condemn all sort of violence near Jamia or anywhere in India.

A emergency meeting of extended Executive Committee is called in JTA office at 11:00 am on Monday (16.12.2019) to discuss misuse of Jamia’s name in the protests. Please make it convenient to attend the same.

Prof. Majid Jamil

Secretary – JTA

“The police have entered the campus by force, no permission was given. Our staff and students are being beaten up and forced to leave the campus,” said Waseem Ahmed Khan, Chief Proctor of the university.

In a statement released shortly after the violence, the students said, “We have time and again maintained our protests are peaceful and non-violent. We stand by this approach and condemn any party involved in violence”. The violence “by certain elements” was an attempt to vilify and discredit genuine protests, they said.

While the violence was on, Jamia Vice Chancellor Najma Akhtar appealed to the students to keep the peace and return to the campus “Everything will be all right but we can’t protect students if they leave the campus,” she told NDTV.

Later in the evening, the police were seen escorting a number of students to the local police station. Hands held above their head, they were seen walking along the footpath, hurried along by several policemen.

Metro operation on the city’s Magenta Line – where the university is located – was affected, with the entry and exit gates of five stations being shut. Sukhdev Vihar Station, Jamia Millia Islamia, Okhla Vihar and Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh, as well as Gate No.3 of the Ashram Station, were shut early on. Road traffic was also diverted from the area.

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal has condemned the violence. “No one shud indulge in violence. Any kind of violence is unacceptable. Protests shud remain peaceful,” his tweet read.

Violence had scarred parts of the country since the citizenship law – meant to facilitate grant of citizenship to religious minorities from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh living in India – was passed. Much of the violence had taken place in the northeastern states, Bengal and Delhi.
