Delhi Police release 50 detained Jamia Millia Islamia students; university to remain closed till Jan 5

Clashes between police and Jamia students on Sunday | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Police released 35 students from Kalkaji police station and 15 students from New Friends Colony police station The students clashed with police after the latter entered the university campus The university has been closed till January 5

New Delhi: The Delhi Police said 50 students who were detained on Sunday during the protests at Jamia Milia Islamia University in connection with the passage of the amended Citizenship Act, were released in the early hours on Monday from the Kalkaji and New Friends Colony police stations. Following the clashes, the university has been shut till January 5. Many students, fearing for their safety, have left for their homes following yesterday's incident.

The students were released after the Delhi Minority Commission (DMC), on Sunday night, directed the SHO of the Kalkaji police station to release the injured students or take them to a reputed hospital in the city for treatment, without any further delay. The commission further directed the police to get a compliance report ready by 3 pm today. DMC chairman, Zafarul Islam Khan also warned the police of strict action in case the directions are not complied with.

The detention happened after the students, who were protesting over the amended Citizenship Act, clashed with the police after public busses as well as police vehicles were set ablaze during the demonstrations. The police are said to have responded with using teargas and batons inside the university campus. Later, videos of police opening fire at the students, leaving them injured, surfaced online. However, police have been denying firing at the students.

Additionally, it was reported that multiple police personnel and students were injured during the clashes. Talking about the incident, police said that the protests started at around 3 pm on Sunday, after which the students were stopped police near New Friends Colony. The police then asked them to protest peacefully and return to the campus. It was further said that despite repeated requests, the students refused to go back, eventually leading to the police action.

A police officer was quoted as saying by a news agency, "When police pushed protesters back, they resorted to arson and torched two bikes, four DTC buses on Mata Mandir Marg. Protestors started pelting stones on police personnel near Holy Family Hospital.” He added that some people in the crowd had come prepared for arson. He also said that the police are trying to identify the anti-social elements that instigated violence in South Delhi and that the Delhi Police has been appealing to the public to maintain peace and order. "Stones were pelted from inside the varsity at police personnel, forcing them to use teargas to disperse the 'violent mob'," he said.

"The campus of Jamia university is very undefined. It is located on both sides of the road. While the violent mob was going towards the university, they were throwing stones from inside,” the officer said further, adding, "We entered the campus only to check these places from where stones were being pelted.”

Police have said that the involvement of the local AAP MLA, Amanatullah Khan, in the violence has not been established yet.
