Akshay Kumar clarifies on 'liking' a tweet on Jamia protests; says it was 'accidental'

Akshay Kumar on the violence in Jamia Islamia University

Key Highlights The violence and protests at New Delhi's Jamia Islamia University on Sunday night shocked the nation Akshay Kumar was recently trolled for liking a Tweet on the protests though he had immediately 'unliked' the said tweet The actor took to Twitter to clarify his stand and revealed that it was 'accidental' and that he had undone it immediately

Sunday evening witnessed protests and violence in New Delhi's Jamia Islamia University as a protest against the Citizenship Act. The protestors allegedly resorted to stone-pelting and violence, say police. When the protestors allegedly clashed with the police, the latter resorted to lathi-charge and teargas shelling. Images from the university continue to go viral on social media with people strongly condemning the act.

Akshay Kumar managed to find himself amidst controversy on social media after 'accidentally' liking a Tweet by a student from Jamia Islamia University. Clarifying his stand on the matter, Akshay went on to clear the air on social media.

Taking to Twitter, Akshay wrote, "Regarding the ‘like’ on the tweet of Jamia Milia students, it was by mistake. I was scrolling and accidentally it must have been pressed and when I realised I immediately unliked it as In no way do I support such acts."

Check out Akshay Kumar's Tweet here:

Regarding the ‘like’ on the tweet of Jamia Milia students, it was by mistake. I was scrolling and accidentally it must have been pressed and when I realised I immediately unliked it as In no way do I support such acts. — Akshay Kumar (@akshaykumar) December 16, 2019

It's reported that 51 people have been injured during the protests and have been admitted to Holy Family Hospital. The protests have come as a retaliation to the Citizenship Amendment Bill. For the unaware, the Bill seeks to 'amend the definition of illegal immigrants for Hindu, Sikh, Parsi, Buddhist and Christian immigrants from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh, who have lived in India without documentation,' reports the Economic Times.

On the film front, Akshay has been busy promoting his upcoming project, Good Newwz that is slotted to release on December 27. He will also be teaming up with Katrina Kaif for Rohit Shetty's Sooryavanshi. Khiladi Kumar will then be seen with Kiara Advani for Laxxmi Bomb that will also release next year.

Stay tuned for all the latest updates on entertainment, fashion and much more!
