Protests erupt across India over citizenship law

Protests erupt across India over citizenship law

Protests over a controversial new law on migrants are raging across several Indian cities, prompting police to clash with demonstrators.

The new law entitles non-Muslim migrants from three Muslim-majority countries to citizenship if they are facing religious persecution.

Police used tear gas and detained protesters in the capital Delhi as buses were torched and roads blocked.

Protests have raged across northern and eastern India since the law was passed.

Internet services have been shut down in several cities where protests are taking place. Universities across the country have resumed demonstrations on Monday.

Some critics say the law is anti-Muslim, while others - especially in border regions - fear large-scale migration.

Six people have been killed in the five days of unrest.

Over the weekend, demonstrators in West Bengal blocked key national highways while in Assam, the state government briefly lifted a curfew to allow people to buy essential goods.

The UK, US and Canada have issued travel warnings for people visiting India's north-east, telling their citizens to "exercise caution" if travelling to the region.

On Monday morning, protests resumed in Delhi's prestigious Jamia Millia Islamia university after students held a march which ended in clashes with the police on Sunday.

Around 35 students were detained by police on Sunday and released early on Monday morning.

It is still unclear who started the violence but stones were thrown at the police who retaliated with tear gas.

Local media reported that nearly 60 people, including students and police, were injured. At least three buses and several motorcycles were set on fire.

Students distanced themselves from the violence and some police officers privately admitted that local troublemakers were behind the trouble.

Previous Article Kim Kardashian accused of photoshopping Christmas card Next Article Cricket legend Tendulkar finds hotel worker who gave him batting advice

Print
