Delhi, Aligarh student protests: What happened during the Jamia Millia Islamia and AMU protests?

A damaged vehicle near Jamia Millia Islamia university. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Protesters, reportedly, set two police vehicles and four public buses ablaze in the upmarket New Friends Colony locality near the university As a show of solidarity with the students of Jamia Millia Islamia, scholars at Aligarh Muslim University began a peaceful march on Sunday evening Shortly before midnight on Sunday, anti-riot vehicles fielded by the Aligarh police were also seen arriving at the university

Chief Justice of India SA Bobde stated on Monday that the Supreme Court is willing to hear all pleas related to the protests and violence that erupted at Jamia Milia Islamia University and Aligarh Muslim University over the weekend, but only following the cessation of riots.

Protests against Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA)

What began as a peaceful protest by students of Jamia Millia Islamia against the Citizenship Amendment Bill passed by Parliament last week, soon took a turn for the worse when demonstrators clashed with the police. The Act, which grants citizenship to religiously persecuted populations from Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Pakistan (except those belonging to the Islamic faith), is viewed by opponents as a precursor to the implementation of a National Register of Citizens (NRC). Some sections of India’s Muslim community are protesting against the NRC believing it to be an instrument designed to invalidate their citizenship especially when implemented together with the CAA.





A section of the protesters, reportedly, set two police vehicles and four public buses ablaze in the upmarket New Friends Colony near the university. According to some reports, protesters began pelting stones at law enforcement personnel from within the university campus. The students, however, have since claimed that the brick-batters were outsiders who had no affiliation with the university.

The police used teargas canisters and batons to break up the protests but denied the use of firearms. However, uncorroborated videos showing police personnel allegedly firing tear gas shells at students, and students bleeding in the university bathrooms soon emerged on social media. Approximately 100 students were detained when the police entered the campus to quell the protests. Some reports state that approximately two dozen students, two firemen and several police officers were injured in the clashes. As per the latest reports, around 50 detained students from Jamia Millia Islamia were released in the early hours of Monday morning.

Tensions flare up at AMU

As a show of solidarity with the students of Jamia Millia Islamia, students at Aligarh Muslim University began a peaceful march on Sunday evening. They were confronted by the police at the gates of the university who, reportedly, used teargas, batons and water cannons to disperse the crowd. Visuals posted on social media also show police officers using lathis to smash two-wheelers near the university.

According to a university staff member, some security personnel were injured during the clashes; however, the extent of the injuries remains unclear. A mobile clip shared on social media also shows an officer of the Rapid Action Force injured. Shortly before midnight on Sunday, anti-riot vehicles fielded by the Aligarh police were also seen arriving at the university.
