Amid violence, PM Narendra Modi issues message: ‘CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion’

PM Narendra Modi speaks on CAA | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Amid raging protests across the country over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday described the violence over the issue as “unfortunate and deeply distressing”. The PM stressed that violence and arson have never been a part of the Indian ethos.

“Violent protests on the Citizenship Amendment Act are unfortunate and deeply distressing. Debate, discussion and dissent are essential parts of democracy but, never has damage to public property and disturbance of normal life been a part of our ethos,” PM Modi said in a tweet, posted on his personal Twitter account.

The PM categorically stated that the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 – passed by the Parliament last week – in no way affected the citizenship or rights of Indian nationals.

It may be noted that the law provides for the grant of Indian citizenship to minorities from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, who have faced religious persecution there and come to India to seek refuge, till the cut-off date of December 31, 2014.

#Breaking | PM @narendramodi condemns the anti-CAA protests.



'I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion', says PM Modi.



TIMES NOW's Megha Prasad with details. pic.twitter.com/xg0FuIxAMG — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) December 16, 2019

“The Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 was passed by both Houses of Parliament with overwhelming support. Large number of political parties and MPs supported its passage. This Act illustrates India’s centuries old culture of acceptance, harmony, compassion and brotherhood.

“I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. No Indian has anything to worry regarding this Act. This Act is only for those who have faced years of persecution outside and have no other place to go except India,” the PM stated.

He called on everyone to work together and defeat attempts by groups with a vested interest to create a divide in the society.

“The need of the hour is for all of us to work together for the development of India and the empowerment of every Indian, especially the poor, downtrodden and marginalised. We cannot allow vested interest groups to divide us and create a disturbance,” the PM tweeted.

“This is the time to maintain peace, unity and brotherhood. It is my appeal to everyone to stay away from any sort of rumour-mongering and falsehoods,” he added.

The PM’s remarks came as violence erupted on and near university campuses in several states. Clashes took place between students and police at the Jamia Millia Islamia university in Delhi, Aligarh Muslim University in Aligarh and Nadwa College in Lucknow.

Earlier, the amended citizenship law triggered widespread protests in the Northeast, especially Assam where four people have died in the violent protests.
