CAA not against Muslims: Chairman of National Commission for Minorities

Syed Ghayorul Hasan Rizvi, Chairman of National Commission for Minorities | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Syed Ghayorul Hasan Rizvi said that no protests are needed against the amended Citizenship bill He also said that the Commission would issue a notice if it sees the need to do so His statement came amidst the ongoing protests against the CAB that has now become an amendment into the Citizenship Act and is named CAA

New Delhi: Chairman of National Commission for Minorities, Syed Ghayorul Hasan Rizvi, while speaking about the ongoing protests in Jamia Milia and Aligarh Muslim University, made an appeal to the protesters saying that they should discontinue the protests. He also asked the police to calmly control the situation. He said, “I appeal to the protesters that such protests should not be done. I also appeal to the police that they should show some restraint and control the situation calmly.”

He further said that no protests are needed against the amended Citizenship Act and that the Act says nothing against the Muslims of India. He also said that if at all the protests have to be held, it should be done peacefully and that the commission would issue a notice if it thinks that it needs to do so.

Rizvi’s comment came in wake of the protests that have been happening over the amended Citizenship Act, at several places across the country, including Lucknow, Aligarh, Mumbai, Delhi, West Bengal and Assam. On Sunday night, protests turned violent as the students of Jamia Milia Islamia clashed with the Delhi police, causing detentions. In the due course, public vehicles and police vans were also set ablaze. Today morning, a lot of university students from various institutes came together in support of what happened in Jamia last night. Additionally, several students staged a protest in Jamia by standing shirtless in Delhi’s bone-chilling cold. The students also formed a human chain outside the university. Slogans of "Inquilab Zindabad" were raised as the students took out a march demanding CBI inquiry into the matter.

The bill became an act when it was given a go-ahead by the President last week. Since then, protesters have taken to roads to demand justice and to criticise the non-inclusion of certain communities in the bill. The government, however, has been telling the public to maintain peace and that the bill is not going to affect any citizen of India.






