Maha students express solidarity with Jamia, AMU students

Hundreds of students staged a protest march here on Monday to express solidarity with students of Jamia Millia and AMU protesting against the amended Citizenship Act.

Similar protest was held in Aurangabad, where students gathered at the Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University shouted slogans against "injustice" to students in Delhi.

Students from the Tata Institute of Social Science (TISS) in Mumbai gathered outside the college premises, carrying placards with anti-government slogans.

"The nation is dying while you are sleeping," read one of the placards. The students also shouted slogans against what they called "Godi Media".

They shouted slogans condemning "police brutality and violence" against the Jamia and AMU students. "The time has come to speak up guys," shouted a student.

Students assembled outside the institute in Deonar and demanded scrapping the National Register of Citizens and Citizenship Act.

Fahad Ahmed, a second year student of PhD said Delhi Police should learn a lesson from Mumbai Police.

"We assembled here in large numbers but none of the officers even touched any student. We are here against the government and brutality of Delhi Police," he told PTI.

"We are here since morning and protesting peacefully. We want Delhi Police officers to be held responsible for the Jamia incident," he said.

In Aurangabad, students gathered at the university to express solidarity with students of Jamia Millia and AMU protesting against the amended Citizenship Act.

Members of Students Federation of India, Satyashodhak Sanghatna and Samyak Vidyarthi Andolan participated in the protest.

Police officials issued notices to the protesters and instructed them not to hold a gathering in universiy campus, an official said.

As part of the agitation, members of the NSUI poured black ink over the board of Deen Dayal Upadhyay Kaushalya Vikas Kendra in the university campus, the official said.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
