While Bengal was Burning | India Today Insight

West Bengal exploded over the CAB-NRC issue a full two days after the BJP-led NDA government passed the Citizenship Amendment Bill in both houses of Parliament on December 11. For close to 48 hours, even as Assam and Tripura were getting singed, West Bengal was in an unusual lull. Chief minister Mamata Banerjee was in two minds on how the Trinamool Congress (TMC) should react. The dilemma was obvious in the attitude of the party MPs when CAB was debated in the Lok Sabha. Despite the party whip, eight TMC MPs abstained from voting in the Lok Sabha. They were neither questioned nor issued a show-cause.

Even as the party leadership dithered, the CM's nephew Abhishek Banerjee preferred to underplay CAB, obviously to prevent the BJP from further feeding into the Hindu polarisation (as it has done all through 2019, the culmination of which was the almost 40 per cent vote share the party got in the general election). By Friday, Banerjee made her stand clear when different minority groups, from Bengal and outside, decided to launch a movement against the CAB and NRC, sans any political banner. "That was also the initial brief from the Trinamool Congress leadership, keep their party flag out of our marches," says a leader of the Jamiat Ulema-e-Hind on condition of anonymity.

With the dilly-dallying over, she thundered from the venue of the recently concluded business summit: "So what if the bill was passed in Parliament? The state still has to implement it. We are not going to do that. I will lead a protest rally on Monday." =

Follow live updates on anti-CAB protests

By that time, the Jamiat and other minority groups (including Asaduddin Owaisi's MIM which is looking for a foothold in the state) had already hit the streets. News of localised vandalism like obstruction of highways and burning of tyres were a trickle initially but soon raged like a wild fire. The state apparatus watched by silently the "spontaneous reaction of the people", as state health minister and cabinet heavyweight Chandrima Bhattacharya put it.

There were no arrests, and no visible attempt from the administration (at least on Friday and Saturday) to tackle the mobs as they went on the rampage, blocking National Highway 34, vandalising railway ticket counters, railway platforms, toll plazas, setting ablaze as many as 17 government buses, five trains and railway stations. Mamata did appeal to the people, warning of strong action against those found destroying government property. "We are opposed to the CAB and NRC. We urge all to protest against it through democratic means. Vandalising public or private property will not be tolerated," she said but it was all too late.

But why was no strong action taken against the vandals? Why was the police not on top of the situation even after 72 hours, indeed why did they not even have the figures of how many were arrested? In fact, ADG (IG) law and order, Gyanwant Singh was still calling the widespread violence "sporadic incidents".

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Data Protection Bill: Govt breaks silence but secrecy remains

Political analyst and professor at Rabindra Bharati University, Biswanath Chakrabarty, says it all boils down to vote-bank politics. "With CAB and NRC, Mamata saw a great opportunity to secure her vote bank. The BJP is trying to consolidate the Hindu vote bank, so Mamata can't be doing a balancing act and allow some other party take the credit for siding with the minorities," he says.

Mamata has also not forgotten that the only reason the TMC increased its voteshare in the 2019 Lok Sabha election--by three per cent from the 40 per cent in 2014, even in the face of strong anti-incumbency-- was because 88 per cent of the 1.96 crore Muslim voters in Bengal voted for her.

"Going by the 2019 Lok Sabha results, we won 166 assembly constituencies out of which 98 were dominated by the Muslim population (Bengal has a total of 295 seats). We have to keep our Muslim vote bank secure now that quite a number of players, both from Bengal and Hyderabad, are keen for a share of it," says a senior Trinamool Congress leader on conditions of anonymity.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Why Assam is protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Bill?

Moreover, the Hindus never vote as a community. "The Hindus in Bengal vote for candidates after considering factors like leadership, development, the candidate's honesty, hopes of good governance etc. No matter what the BJP tries, the majority community vote will not all go to one side," says Chakrabarty.

Is this why Mamata has thrown in her lot with the Muslims again? After all, the community has been with her since 2011, when she came to power for the first time. In the past couple of months, though, she has found a strong competitor in Owaisi, who's taking an active interest in the state's Muslim vote. Obviously, she had to close down the field to the likes of the Hyderabad MP. Which is why, at last, the TMC decided to hand-hold the protest with Mamata's ministers taking out long marches and shouting their lungs out against NRC and CAB.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Why states are feeling the GST pinch

Meanwhile, it's all win-win for the BJP. Already the 51 assembly segments in North 24 Parganas, which includes the Matua community headquarters Thakurnagar in Bongaon, are celebrating. Matuas are the scheduled caste Hindu refugees who came from Bangladesh and settled down in North 24 Parganas, Nadia, parts of Hooghly, North Bengal and North Dinajpur. They number around 7 million now in India but still have family and friends in Bangladesh. It is quite understandable what the CAB--which guarantees Hindu refugees citizenship--means for them.

The saffron party is also sharpening its jibes over the Mamata Banerjee government's appeasement politics. "Bengal has been burning for two days but nothing is being done," said state BJP president Dilip Ghosh. BJP leader Rahul Sinha went a step further, calling for imposition of President's Rule since law and order in Bengal "has collapsed". Every side is trying to stoke religious sentiments, and all for political gain. Meanwhile, West Bengal, which stood out as a secular beacon even during the communal frenzy that followed the Babri Masjid demolition, has faltered.

READ | Delhi Police scared students with their brutality, will file FIR: Jamia V-C Najma Akhtar

READ | Unfortunate my party backed CAA in Parliament, may leave BJP-led Assam govt: Former CM Prafulla Mahanta

READ | Bengal anti-CAA protest: Demonstration against Citizenship law continues, roads blocked at several places

READ | At the stroke of the midnight, how universities across India united for Jamia students

READ | West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar calls Mamata Banerjee's rally against CAA unconstitutional

WATCH | Citizenship Amendment Act fear real or imaginary?


