7 Years After The Nirbhaya Case, Indian Women Are Still Afraid Of The Dark

She was returning home after watching Life of Pi on December 16, 2012 when Jyoti Singh boarded the bus which promised her safe passage. She was 23, it was Delhi, it was 9.30 PM. The last few hours of her life were soon relayed to us in the headlines. Such was the brutality of the crime that the ennui of the ‘rape capital’ was finally broken. We called her ‘Nirbhaya’, the one without fear, and protested in her name, demanded an end to the state’s apathy to crimes against women, an end to rape culture.

Today if the seventh anniversary of the incident and the capital is seemingly under duress, with Delhi Police itself accused of many instances of sexual harassment against protesting students of Jamia University. Meanwhile, the Nirbhaya verdict, which awarded the death sentence to the rapists, seems to be in limbo.

The Nirbhaya verdict

It was in July 2018 that Supreme Court today upheld its earlier verdict of the death penalty for the three men convicted in the gruesome gang rape and murder of Nirbhaya (a moniker given to her by the media and the public) in 2012. Mukesh, 29, Pawan Gupta, 22, and Vinay Sharma, 23, had earlier appealed that their death sentence be reduced to a life term. A three-judge bench will today hear the plea filed by convict Akshay Kumar Singh against the death penalty.

Do women in India feel safer?

The wave of protests spurred by the death of a 26-year-old in Hyderabad in November is proof that public outrage does not seem to bother the ruling government anymore. She too was waylaid by her rapists around 9.30 PM when she was on her way back home.

In response, the Andhra Pradesh cabinet approved a bill which promises to fastrack cases of crimes against women and children, and recommends the death penalty for heinous crimes. The ruling party at the centre did not even address the protests spurred by the rising instances of violence against women in the country.

Last year, a group of 30 women who decided to remember Nirbhaya were stopped by the police. They took the same route as her and were planning to march silently together from midnight to 2AM.The women were stopped by the Delhi Police who told them that they could not walk on the streets at night because it was unsafe for them. The irony of the situation was that the police’s approach was to inflict a curfew on women, instead of ensuring that women are safe on the streets at all hours. The onus of women’s safety continues to be placed on the women themselves, and as a result we are still afraid of the dark.




