Police lock students in colleges in India during demonstrations against 'anti-Muslim' migration laws

Police were pelted with stones by students in India today after they were locked in a college to stop them protesting against a new 'anti-Muslim' migration law.

Riot police locked the gates of an Islamic university in the northern city of Lucknow to stop furious students taking to the streets for a fifth day of demonstrations.

Six people have already died, including four shot by police, in the protests that erupted last Wednesday when the Hindu nationalist government passed laws to grant citizenship to millions of illegal immigrants - but not if they are Muslim.

Riot police locked the gates of an Islamic university in the northern city of Lucknow to stop furious students taking to the streets for a fifth day of demonstrations

Students wave placards and shout slogans at the Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama university in Lucknow where police were pelted with stones

Students protest at Jamia Millia Islamia university in the capital New Delhi where officers fired tear gas to break up the demonstration

At least 100 people were injured in clashes with police at Jamia Millia Islamia university in the capital New Delhi

Anger was further fuelled by allegations of police brutality at Jamia Millia Islamia university in the capital New Delhi on Sunday when officers fired tear gas to break up a protest. At least 100 people were wounded.

There were similar scenes at the Aligarh Muslim University in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh, where police also clashed with protesters.

Today students at the Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama university threw stones at police after they locked the gates. About two dozen students at another college in the city sneaked out to protest.

Troops continued to patrol the streets of Guwahati, the biggest city in the state of Assam, where four people have been shot by police during demonstrations.

Another was killed when a shop he was sleeping in was set on fire and a sixth after he was beaten up during a protest, officials said.

A placard lies on a table in the library at Jamia Millia Islamia university, in New Delhi, where police fired tear gas and smashed windows to break up protests

Students said they hid under desks and switched off the lights as police fired tear gas and windows were broken in the library at Jamia Millia Islamia university in the capital New Delhi

Around 5,000 defiant protesters took part in another demonstration in the city on Sunday where they sang, chanted and carried banners with the words 'long live Assam' as hundreds of police watched.

The new migration law states that religious minorities such as Hindus and Christians in neighbouring Muslim-majority Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan who have settled in India prior to 2015 will have a path to citizenship on grounds they faced persecution in those countries.

But Muslims are not given the same rights.

Najma Akhtar, the head of Jamia Millia, demanded an investigation into how police were allowed to enter the campus.

A man rides his motorcycle past a burning bus that was set on fire by demonstrators during a protest against a new citizenship law in New Delhi, India

The demonstrations are over legislation, passed by the national parliament on Wednesday, allows New Delhi to grant citizenship to millions of illegal immigrants - but not if they are Muslim

He said: 'It is not expected of the police to enter the university and beat up students.'

Students said they hid under desks and switched off the lights as police fired tear gas and windows were broken in the library.

Hundreds of people gathered outside the New Delhi police headquarters to protest against alleged police brutality and the detention of students. Police said they acted with restraint.

In India's capital New Delhi, a video shared on social media showed a bus on fire and police appearing to fire tear gas at protesters

In this photo taken on December 12, 2019 a bus and car drive past a burning barricade set up by demonstrators following protests against the Citizenship Amendment Bill in Guwahati

A woman is helped after she was injured during a protest against a new citizenship law, in New Delhi, India on Sunday

Rahul Gandhi, the leader of the main opposition Congress party, urged protesters to remain peaceful.

'The best defence against these dirty weapons is peaceful, non-violent Satyagraha,' he said in a tweet referring to the strategy of passive political resistance advocated by independence leader Mahatma Gandhi.

The most violent protests during the past few days took place in the northeastern state of Assam, where mobs torched buildings and a train station.

Policemen detain an injured student outside Jamia Millia Islamia university during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act in New Delhi, India

A burning bus is seen after it was set on fire by demonstrators during a protest against a new citizenship law in New Delhi, India

Police clash with demonstrators following a protest against the Indian government's Citizenship Amendment Bill in New Delhi

Protests were held in Mumbai's Indian Institute of Technology and Tata Institute of Social Sciences overnight and on Monday and more were planned at Bombay University and in the southern city of Bengaluru later in the day.

Some Bollywood celebrities like actress Konkona Sen Sharma, and directors Mahesh Bhatt and Anubhav Sinha, also criticized the police action on Twitter and called on others to speak up.

'We are with the students! Shame on you @DelhiPolice,' Sen Sharma tweeted.

Modi's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party denies any religious bias. It says the new law is meant to help minority groups facing persecution in the three nearby Muslim countries.

Modi has said the law has been passed by parliament and there is no going back on it. He told a rally on Sunday the decision was '1000 percent correct'.

Students raising their hands leave the Jamia Millia University following a protest against a new citizenship law in New Delhi, India

A man walks on a street as a bus is on fire following demonstration against the Indian government's Citizenship Amendment Bill. Footage of the fire was uploaded online
