Violent protests against Citizenship Act deeply disturbing, tweets Modi

Violent protests against Citizenship Act deeply disturbing, tweets Modi He assured people that the act does not discriminate against any religion

| New Delhi | Published 16.12.19, 10:55 AM

Prime Minister Narendra Modi called the violent protests across the country “deeply disturbing,” adding, it is against the “ethos” of the nation. Modi’s remarks, in a series of tweets on Monday, come a day after protests against the amended Citizenship Act escalated that led to a police crackdown on students of Jamia Millia University.

Advertisement

“Violent protests on the Citizenship Amendment Act are unfortunate and deeply distressing. Debate, discussion and dissent are essential parts of democracy but, never has damage to public property and disturbance of normal life been a part of our ethos,” Modi tweeted.

Violent protests on the Citizenship Amendment Act are unfortunate and deeply distressing.



Debate, discussion and dissent are essential parts of democracy but, never has damage to public property and disturbance of normal life been a part of our ethos. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) December 16, 2019

The Prime Minister put the blame on “vested interests,” in an apparent reference to the Opposition parties, including the Congress and the Left parties, saying that they were trying to “divide” the nation and “create disturbance.” In a rally in Jharkhand, Modi had blamed the Congress and other parties for “kicking up a storm” against the act. “The need of the hour is for all of us to work together for the development of India and the empowerment of every Indian, especially the poor, downtrodden and marginalised. We cannot allow vested interest groups to divide us and create disturbance,” he said in a tweeted.

The need of the hour is for all of us to work together for the development of India and the empowerment of every Indian, especially the poor, downtrodden and marginalised.



We cannot allow vested interest groups to divide us and create disturbance. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) December 16, 2019

The Prime Minister further appealed to maintain peace and stay away from “rumour mongering.” “This is the time to maintain peace, unity and brotherhood. It is my appeal to everyone to stay away from any sort of rumour mongering and falsehoods,” the Prime Minister tweeted.

This is the time to maintain peace, unity and brotherhood. It is my appeal to everyone to stay away from any sort of rumour mongering and falsehoods. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) December 16, 2019

Modi also assured people that the act does not discriminate against any religion and is for those who have faced persecution. “I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. No Indian has anything to worry regarding this Act. This Act is only for those who have faced years of persecution outside and have no other place to go except India,” Modi said on Twitter.

I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. No Indian has anything to worry regarding this Act. This Act is only for those who have faced years of persecution outside and have no other place to go except India. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) December 16, 2019
