CAA protesters can target Amit Shah, other ministers' residences: Intel alert

Police personnel conduct a march after the violent protests against Citizenship Amendment Act | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik shared the alert following which security has been intensified at the ministers' residences Demonstrators are also likely to hold protests at Vijay Chowk and India Gate Police Control Room vans, as well as New Delhi District Quick Response Team, have been asked to stay more cautious

New Delhi: The central intelligence agencies on Monday issued an alert, saying people who are protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 can target the residences of Union Home Minister Amit Shah and other ministers.

In the wake of the alert, the number of security personnel stationed outside Shah and other Central ministers’ residences has been increased.

The alert said: “In view of prevailing situation...the protesters may go to the residences as well as offices of Central Ministers for snap demonstrations."

Demonstrators are also likely to hold protests at Vijay Chowk and India Gate.

"They may also go to Vijay Chowk, Parliament Street, India Gate and old and new police headquarters and the residence of Home Minister (Amit Shah)," the alert, accessed by news agency IANS, stated.

Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik shared the alert following which security has been intensified at the ministers' residences.

"There is urgent need to brief and sensitise security staff, local police staff, and other personnel of security forces deployed at New Delhi District," mentioned a communication by the Commissioner of Police.

Patnaik further said that Police Control Room vans, as well as New Delhi District Quick Response Team, should stay more cautious.

"There is a very urgent need for sound deployment of security personnel around metro stations," Patnaik said.

It was also mentioned that there was a need to consistently monitor social media to keep a tab on fake news and videos.

"Adequate arrangements (should) be made by local police, including woman police personnel, traffic police, security and police control room should tackle any situation," added the alert.

On Sunday, Delhi witnessed huge protests against the amended Citizenship Act. There was a standoff between the Delhi Police and protesters at Jamia Millia Islamia.

Buses, as well as other vehicles, were torched in areas surrounding Jamia.
