Students, faculty in Hyderabad varsities worried about implementations of CAA and NRC combine

Watch: Students protest at Hyderabad Central University 01:05

Hyderabad

Maulana Azad National Urdu University

Telangana

Asaduddin Owaisi

Andhra Pradesh

Some students at the University of Hyderabad (HCU) and(MANUU) are in the grip of fear of the adverse implications if the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC) are implemented together. Even the faculty members and non-teaching staff at MANUU are worried.Series of developments -- criminalisation of triple Talaq, Article 370, Supreme Court's verdict on Ayodhya dispute, the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and the subsequent Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) -- have become a cause of worry among the minority community.“Though my family has been Indian for generations, if we fail to furnish the documentary evidence for it, we will be seen as aliens. Isn’t it a cause for worry?” asks a Muslim arts scholar from Kashmir studying at MANUU, while participating in a protest after boycotting the semester exam on Monday.The students say that they were not agitated to all other developments but for the NRC and CAA.“We are bound by the service rules and code of conduct. Otherwise, we would have been a part of the protesting groups. One can understand the conspiracy when the CAA and NRC are seen together,” said an official of the university. Several teachers and non-teaching staff members expressed their solidarity with the agitating students on Monday.However, students, particularly from the North-East in HCU have divergent views on NRC and CAA. While most of the students are worried about the repercussions, a PhD scholar belonging to the Bodo community said, “Political parties have been surviving on the citizenship issue by keeping it alive for decades. Now, that ends. Clarity will emerge.” He said that he has been in touch with his family members in Assam. “They have been witnessing unrest since 1985. They are confident that the situation would be brought under control.” A group of about 200 students last week took out a protest rally on the campus and sent those videos to their parents at home.Meanwhile, Leftist groups staged a protest on Hyderabad’s famous Osmania University campus on Monday evening denouncing the police brutality on students at Jamia Milia Islamia university in Delhi.The students are also analysing the (regional) parties that supported and opposed the CAA. As foris concerned, the ruling TRS party did not support CAA.’s Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (MIM) Party not only voted against the Bill in the Parliament but also challenged the Act in the Supreme Court. In, the ruling YSR Congress and the opposition Telugu Desam Party supported the Bill.
