PM visits J&K: Narendra Modi inaugurates projects worth Rs. 44,000 Crore; Electricity for all, mega push for education

PM visits J&K: Narendra Modi inaugurates projects worth Rs. 44,000 Crore; Electricity for all, mega push for education

Prime Minister Narendra Modi Sunday laid foundation stones for several development projects, including an All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and an Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC), in Jammu.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi Sunday laid foundation stones for several development projects, including an All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and an Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC), in Jammu.

Modi said setting up of new AIIMS would transform health care facilities and will also provide new opportunities to the youth.

The people of Jammu protested for almost two months for setting up of AIIMS in the region. The National Conference (NC) and the Congress also staged demonstrations in support of the demand. The proposed AIIMS will be a 700-bedded hospital.

The prime minister said Rs 750 crore has been granted to the state for setting up of five new medical colleges.

In addition, 15 acres of land has already been earmarked for setting up of a permanent campus in Kotbalwal area of Jammu city, he said.

The prime minister laid the foundation stone for 624-MW Kiru hydroelectric project in Kishtwar. It is a run-of-the-river project across the Chenab and once completed, it will generate 2272 million units of electricity annually.

He inaugurated the 9-MW Dah hydroelectric project. Located in Dah near village Datang, this project is a run-of-the-river scheme.

Modi also dedicated to the nation the 220-KV Srinagar-Alusteng-Drass-Kargil-Leh transmission system. The foundation stone of the prestigious project was laid by Modi in August 2014.

He laid the foundation stone for 1,640-metre span double-lane bridge over the Chenab river in Sajwal.

Prime Minister also laid the foundation stone of the new terminal building of KBR Airport in Leh.

He said that Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council is now more powerful due to which people of the region will not have to knock at Delhi's door for everything.

Here are few of the projects launched by PM Narendra Modi, take a look:
