Jagdish Tytler, accused in 1984 anti-Sikh riots, at Congress' march against police action during JNU protest

Jagdish Tytler at Congress march against police action during JNU march over CAA | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Speaking to Times Now, Tytler said that CBI as well as former HM LK Advani have given him clean chit Tytler further said that the case was being kept alive by the media

New Delhi: 1984 anti-Sikh riots accused Jagdish Tytler, on Monday, joined the protest led by Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra at India Gate against the police action during students' protest over the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in Jamia Milia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University (AMU). On being quizzed about his presence at the protest, Tytler said that he was given a clean chit during LK Advani's tenure as the Home Minister and added that only media was keeping the case alive.

"CBI has given me a clean chit four times. Now they are doing an inquiry. Inquiry on what? I want to ask the media, you are keeping it alive. Nobody else. Advani was the home minister, he gave me a clean chit. You question him," Tytler told Times Now.

KC Venugopal, AK Antony, PL Punia, Ahmed Patel and Randeep Surjewala were other leaders who joined the protest. "This is a government that has attacked the rights of youths and students of the country. That is why Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and other senior Congress leaders have decided to sit on a symbolic protest at the India Gate from 4 pm for the next 2 hours," Surjewala said during the day.

Tytler is accused of leading a mob that resulted in the death of three Sikhs. A special court in Delhi had, last month, pulled the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for a slow investigation into the matter. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (CMM) Harjyot Singh Bhalla had reprimanded CBI for the delay in recording the statements of Abhishek Verma, a controversial arms dealer, against Tytler, in connection with the case. The court had directed CBI to expedite the case in which Tytler was earlier given a clean chit.

According to official records, 2,800 Sikhs were killed during the riots across India — 2100 in Delhi — after the assassination of former PM Indira Gandhi by her Sikh bodyguards.


