600 AIMIM members charged with sedition: What is sedition and how is it defined under the IPC?

In September former JNU student leader Shehla Rashid was charged with sedition for her alleged false tweets against the Army. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Sedition law is defined in Section 124-A of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) Given its vague wording, it’s possible to slap a sedition charge in a wide variety of cases, if "disaffection" can be shown. Since it is “cognisable”, a person can be arrested simply by filing an FIR against him or her

Some 600 activists of the All India Majlis-e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen (AIMIM) who were protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in Lucknow have been charged with sedition.

The members of the Hyderabad-based party had led a protest march in Uttar Pradesh’s capital city on Friday. The police claimed they raised anti-India slogans.

The protests in Lucknow came amid student protests against the CAA in various cities including Delhi, Aligarh, Mumbai and Chennai, though the intensity of the demonstrations varied.

What is sedition law?

Sedition law is defined in Section 124-A of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), which states: “Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards the Government established by law in India” is liable to be punished with a maximum sentence of life imprisonment.

Given this vague wording, it’s possible to slap a sedition charge in a wide variety of cases, if "disaffection" can be shown.

Since it is “cognisable”, a person can be arrested simply by filing an FIR against him or her, and since it is non-bailable, the bail is subject to the discretion of the judge.

Introduced in the 19th century by the British, the law was used to jail several icons of the freedom movement such as Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru.

In 1922, when Gandhi was prosecuted for “bringing or attempting to excite disaffection towards the British Government” under Section 124-A, he said during the trial: “Affection cannot be manufactured or regulated by law…If one has no affection for a person or system, one should be free to give the fullest expression to his disaffection, so long as he does not contemplate, promote, or incite to violence.”

Interestingly, when he became prime minister, Nehru opposed this IPC section, describing it “highly objectionable and obnoxious”, and said it “should have no place both for practical and historical reasons”.

Individuals against whom it has been used

Critics of the sedition law say it is a fossil from the British Raj, and should be discarded. IPC Section 124-A has been used against a wide variety of individuals in recent years, including politicians. Some controversial examples are:
