India rocked by violent protests after bill blocking some Muslims from citizenship passed into law

V iolent protests are intensifying in India over a divisive citizenship bill, leaving some demonstrators injured after tear gas canisters were fired into universities.

Students have protested in cities across India at the bill, which has been dubbed anti-Muslim since it was passed in Indian Parliament last week.

The law in question allows for religious minorities, such as Hindus and Christians who moved to India from neighbouring Muslim-majority countries before 2015, to apply for citizenship - but followers of Islam cannot make use of the same protocols.

Critics say that the law undermines the secular nature of governance in the country.

The bill concerns people who have left Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Anger directed towards Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government was stoked by allegations of police brutality at Jamia Millia Islamia University in Delhi on Sunday.

The protests have turned violent. / AFP via Getty Images

Officers entered the campus in the capital and fired tear gas to break up a protest, leaving at least 100 people wounded.

Police officials in the north western province of Assam say officers shot dead five protesters in the state capital of Gauhati while attempting to restore order to a city that has been engulfed in demonstrations since last week.

In the northern city of Lucknow, students pelted stones at police who locked up the gates of a college to prevent them from taking to the streets.

Mr Modi called for calm, saying the protests were deeply distressing.

"Debate, discussion and dissent are essential parts of democracy but, never has damage to public property and disturbance of normal life been a part of our ethos," he said in a tweet.

Protesters are unhappy with how Mr Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party, left, is treating theMuslim population / Reuters

Cars were attacked in Delhi on Sunday and buses were set on fire.

The head of Jamia Millia demanded an investigation into how police were allowed to enter the campus.

"It is not expected of the police to enter the university and beat up students," Najma Akhtar told a news conference.

Students said police fired tear gas and windows were broken in the library and they ducked under desks and switched off the lights as advised by teachers. Police said they acted with restraint.

Protests have spread around the country (Reuters) / REUTERS

Rahul Gandhi, leader of the main opposition Congress party, said the Modi government was dividing Indian society through the citizenship law and a plan to launch a national citizenship register.

"The best defence against these dirty weapons is peaceful, non-violent Satyagraha," he said in a tweet referring to the strategy of passive political resistance advocated by independence leader Mahatma Gandhi.

Students at Delhi University said right-wing student groups linked to Modi's party were trying to intimidate them for protesting against the citizenship law.

Raniya Zulaikha, a student of political science at Ramjas College, said there were groups of students who entered the campus saying anyone who was protesting should leave the country, or go to Pakistan.

Sanija Mithran, another student of the college, said girls who were wearing the hijab were targeted.

Police in one region said they had killed five people / AFP via Getty Images

Ms Mirthan said: "They were selecting the girls with hijab and they were pulling their hijab."

Muslims, who make up 14 per cent of India's population, are especially worried as the law follows the revocation of the special status of the Muslim-majority Kashmir region, and a court decision to build a temple on the site of a mosque razed by Hindu zealots in northern India.

Both steps are seen advancing a Hindu-first agenda.

Mr Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party denies any religious bias and says the new law is meant to help minority groups facing persecution in the three nearby Muslim countries.

The most violent protests during the past few days occurred in the northeastern state of Assam, where mobs torched buildings and train stations, angry the law would help thousands of immigrants from Bangladesh become lawful citizens and at least two people were killed.

About 1,500 people have been arrested for violence including arson and vandalism, police spokesman GP Singh said, adding that authorities are reviewing surveillance videos and anticipated making more arrests.

Schools remain closed until December 22, the government has blocked internet service statewide and a curfew has been imposed from 9pm to 6am. Foreign journalists are not permitted to travel to India’s northeastern region, including Assam, without a permit.
