Citizenship Amendment Act: Student protests in campuses across India

NEW DELHI: Students across many college and university campuses from Kerala to West Bengal protested on Monday against the alleged police violence on students of Jamia Millia Islamia University on Sunday and the Citizenship Amendment Act. Students in all 40 central universities and a number of IITs, IIMs and state universities protested. Various student union representatives told ET that a ‘Bharat Bandh’ will be held on Thursday.Banaras Hindu University, the Tata Institute of Social Sciences, IIT Bombay, IIT Madras, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore and Jadavpur University, Lucknow’s Integral University and Nadwa College were among campuses where students staged protests on Monday. In an open letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, students and faculty of IIM Bangalore expressed solidarity with students around the country and defended their right to protest. Different students unions held protest marches in New Delhi while Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi sat on a dharna at India Gate after she was disallowed to visit Jamia.The HRD ministry is monitoring the situation across campuses. Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank in a tweet appealed to students to maintain calm on campuses. The ministry has sought a report from Jamia on the incident. Jamia VC Najma Akhtar told ET: “The executive council of the university has proposed that a FIR be lodged on the issue. If the police had taken us into confidence, we would have cooperated with them. My objection is to cops entering the campus without permission and inflicting such trauma on our students. This is what we will also say in our report to the ministry.”Major student unions such as the Student Federation of India, the National Student Union of India and the All India Student Association mobilised support to register their protest. AISA general secretary Sandeep Saurav told ET all 40 central universities will see protests this week on the issue and plans were afoot to take it to other institutes as well. “No campus can be turned into a war zone like it was done at Jamia Millia Islamia. We are demanding a roll back of Citizenship Amendment Act and action against Delhi Police for excesses on students. Protests have already erupted across several institutes,” Saurav told ET. RSS-affiliated ABVP demanded a high-level inquiry into the Jamia incidents.
