CAA protests continue; PM appeals for peace: Top developments and reactions

Modi calls violent protests 'unfortunate and deeply distressing'

I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. No… https://t.co/WOnVWWKitf — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1576485285000

Delhi witnesses fresh protests against police action in Jamia, CAA

Violent protests continue in Bengal; over 300 arrested

Mamata Banerjee leads a protest rally against

, and Citizenship Amendment Act, in Kolkata on Monday. (TOI photo | Subhrajit Chandra)

Priyanka Gandhi sits on 'symbolic' protest

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra holds a sit-in at the India Gate in a show of solidarity with the students from Jamia Millia Islamia and other universities protesting the amended citizenship law. (TOI photo | Rajesh Mehta)

More protests in UP

21 held after clashes between AMU students, police; hostels vacated

People at an Eidgah in Aligarh to protest against the alleged police action on AMU students who were protesting over Citizenship Amendment Act. (PTI photo)

SC takes serious note of violence, says it must stop immediately

Read Also SC to hear pleas alleging police atrocities on students protesting against CAA A bench headed by Chief Justice S A Bobde on Monday also took serious note of the rioting and destruction of public property during protests against the Act and said this must stop immediately.

Union home ministry asks states, UTs to check violence, circulation of fake news

Seven flights, many trains cancelled from northeast

Congress leader Jairam Ramesh challenges Citizenship Amendment Act in SC

Protests in south as students join forces against CAA

Students during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act, in front of Town Hall, Bengaluru on Monday. (TOI photo | K Sunil Prasad)

Students, locals stage protest in Bhopal against CAA, NRC

Opposition parties demand judicial probe into police action against Jamia students

Who said what:

Several protests - some peaceful, some violent - erupted across India on Monday against the police crackdown in Jamia Millia Islamia in Delhi and the amended citizenship law as students and political leaders took to the streets. Prime Minister Narendra Modi called these protests "deeply distressing" and appealed for peace. Here are the top developments and reactions:Prime Minister Narendra Modi termed the violent protests across the country against the Citizenship Amendment Act as "unfortunate and deeply distressing", and appealed to people to stay away from rumour-mongering and not let "vested interests" divide the society. In a series of tweets, Modi also assured that the amended citizenship law does not affect any Indian of any religion. Modi said he unequivocally assures people that tweaked law does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. "No Indian has anything to worry regarding this Act. This Act is only for those who have faced years of persecution outside and have no other place to go except India," PM tweeted.Asserting that the law was passed by both Houses of Parliament with overwhelming support, Modi said,"large number of political parties and MPs supported its passage. This Act illustrates India's centuries old culture of acceptance, harmony, compassion and brotherhood."The police crackdown on students of Jamia Millia Islamia and boiling anger against the amended Citizenship Act fuelled fresh protests in the national capital. Congress and several other opposition parties rallied behind the agitators. Thousands of students took to the streets against the alleged police excesses on Jamia students on Sunday evening and over the new legislation, claiming that it will weaken India's secular foundations and damage its social fabric. Though there was no report of violence, the magnitude of protest grew manifold with students holding separate demonstrations at multiple places including India Gate, Jantar Mantar, Delhi University and Jamia. Jamia campus had turned into a battlefield on Sunday as police entered the campus and used force, following a violent protest against the law. The police action triggered protests in several leading universities and institutions across India.Road and rail blockades continued in West Bengal as violent protests over the citizenship law refused to die down. Mamata Banerjee , who led a mega rally from Red Road to Jorasanko Thakur Bari, the ancestral house of Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore in north Kolkata, urged the agitators to not indulge in vandalism and arson, and said it will only undermine the very motive of the protest. She also blamed some powers from outside West Bengal "acting as friends" of the Muslim community for vandalism and arson, in an apparent reference to Asaduddin Owaisi's AIMIM. Notwithstanding the appeal, incidents of violence were reported from several districts across the state with sources saying over 300 people have been arrested so far.Congress leaders led by Priyanka Gandhi Vadra held a sit-in at the India Gate, in a show of solidarity with the students from Jamia Millia Islamia and several other universities who have been protesting the contentious law. After a two-hour silent protest from 4 pm, the Congress general secretary said the police crackdown on Jamia students was an attack on the soul of India. "This country is for everyone, it is for all those students who were beaten up yesterday. Attack on students is an attack on the soul of India," she said. She alleged that the citizenship amendment law was against India's Constitution and that it was brought to "destroy" the Constitution.Protests against the amended Citizenship Act hit new areas in Uttar Pradesh on Monday with a mob setting vehicles ablaze in Mau and students hurling stones at policemen outside an Islamic seminary in the state capital. Students at the Banaras Hindu University (BHU) again held a protest. In Lucknow, there was a demonstration at a private university as well.As many as 21 people have been arrested in connection with the clashes between AMU students and police over the amended Citizenship Act and orders issued to completely vacate all hostels of the university, officials said. Senior AMU official Rahat Abrar said about 50 per cent of the inmates have vacated their hostel rooms. AMU Proctor Afifullah Khan said no student will be allowed to remain in hostels as strict orders have been issued to vacate all hostels completely. Special arrangements have been made to evacuate the students from these hostels and about 40 buses arranged to ferry them to their home towns in the western districts, ADG (Agra) Ajay Anand said.The Supreme Court took serious note of rioting and destruction of public property during protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act across the country and said that "violence must stop immediately". The top court said it, prima facie, does not think court can do much in the matter as it is a law and order problem and police forces have to control it. The apex court, which agreed to hear on Tuesday pleas alleging police atrocities on students holding protests against the Act at Aligarh Muslim University and Jamia Millia Islamia here, said it will not hear this issue in such an atmosphere of violence. A bench headed by Chief Justice S A Bobde said, "We are not here to blame anybody. All we are saying is that this violence must stop." "If protests and violence and damage of public property will be there, we will not hear the matter," it added.Asking states and union territories to check violence and ensure safety of life and property, the Union home ministry said strict action should be taken against those spreading fake news on social media. In an advisory issued by the ministry, it said that it was "imperative" that all measures are taken by the state and Union territories to ensure the safety of citizens. The advisory comes in the backdrop of violence reported from different parts of the country, especially university campuses, during protests against the amended citizenship act which was passed by Parliament and given assent by the president last week. "It is imperative that all required measures be taken to contain violence, ensure protection of life and safety of citizens and prevent damage of property," the advisory said. The state governments and UT administrations have been requested to take precautionary measures to maintain law and order, peace and public tranquillity.A total of seven flights to and from Guwahati was cancelled on Monday, while no passenger train ran from the northeast towards the Eastern states following damage to railway properties in West Bengal during protests against the amended Citizenship Act, officials said.Senior Congress leader Jairam Ramesh has challenged the Citizenship Amendment Act in the Supreme Court and his plea will be heard on Wednesday. Ramesh has challenged the new law in his personal capacity. He had filed the petition on December 13. "Given the urgent situation that has developed around the rushed and insidious Citizenship Amendment Act, I approached the Hon'ble Supreme Court to hear my matter urgently. "The Hon'ble judges have agreed to list my challenge to the same on Wednesday i.e. day after tomorrow," Ramesh said on Twitter. In his petition, Ramesh has prayed that the court pass appropriate order declaring and quashing the Citizenship (Amendment) Act as "unconstitutional, null and void and ultra vires Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India and hence void ab initio".Protests by political parties and students against the CAA were held in various parts of southern states as the ruling CPM-led LDF and opposition Congress headed UDF in Kerala joined hands to oppose the law, setting aside differences. Various educational campuses, including the prestigious Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras, the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) in Bengaluru, saw protests by the students against the police crackdown in Jamia Millia Islamia in Delhi on Sunday night and the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA). Actor politician Kamal Haasan led Makkal Needhi Maiam said it has filed a public interest litigation in the Supreme Court on Monday seeking a stay on the new amendment which provides citizenship to the persecuted religious minorities from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. In a rare show of camaraderie, bitter political foes -- Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan and leader of opposition in the assembly Ramesh Chennithala -- came together at a joint protest in the state capital and condemned the act with the former saying it was an attempt to "curb" freedom.Students of different colleges in the Madhya Pradesh capital and groups of citizens staged a protest in Old City against the police crackdown on the students of Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) and Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) for opposing the proposed implementation of the new citizenship law. Meanwhile, the opposition BJP in the state also announced a protest on Tuesday at all the district headquarters in Madhya Pradesh for immediate implementation of the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).Congress and other opposition parties condemned the police "brutality" against students of Jamia Millia Islamia and demanded a probe by a Supreme Court judge into incidents of students being thrashed in the campus. Senior leaders of the Congress, Left parties, SP and RJD addressed a press conference, saying the police action on students inside the Jamia campus is not acceptable in a democracy. Congress leaders Ghulam Nabi Azad and Kapil Sibal, CPM leader Sitaram Yechury, CPI's D Raja, RJD's Manoj Jha, SP's Javed Ali Khan and Sharad Yadav condemned Sunday's police action against students and said they had sought time from President Ram Nath Kovind and would take up the issue with him.Union home minister Amit Shah on Monday alleged that the opposition parties are spreading "falsehood" about the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) among the students. The BJP president accused the Congress, Aam Admi Party and the Trinamool Congress of "misleading" students on CAA.Congress president Sonia Gandhi accused the Modi government of being the "creator of violence and divisiveness" which has declared a war against its own people and said the writers of this script of polarisation are Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah. In a statement, she alleged that the BJP government's intention was clear about wanting to spread instability and creating an atmosphere of religious tension for political interests.Union minister G Kishan Reddy said violence that erupted in the country against the newly enacted Citizenship Act was due to the "venomous" disinformation being spread by a "callous" and irresponsible opposition. He added that political parties which were allegedly instigating violence in the national capital over the amended Citizenship Act should refrain from doing so and asked people to maintain peace.Rajasthan chief minister Ashok Gehlot alleged that the BJP government at the Centre is trying to prepare the ground for making India a "Hindu rashtra" instead of focusing on the country's economy. Targeting Prime Minister Narendra Modi and home minister Amit Shah, the chief minister said they are trying to create a "division" in the name of religion and questioned whether the country would remain intact if they continue doing so.BJP spokesperson Sambit Patra accused the opposition parties of misleading people and trying to "bifurcate" the country in the name of Hindus and Muslims by firing from the shoulders of students. "Why is it that on Saturday Congress party tried to re-launch Rahul Gandhi and on Sunday onwards hatred and incidents violence started in the country," Patra asked adding that this would be too much of a coincidence. "This is all the conspiracy of opposition and certain other parties."
