Rajasthan: Rape accused barges into victim's home, stabs father to death; locals protest over police inaction

Dhannaram allegedly barged into the minor's house with a knife and attacked the family members. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused also injured minor's brother and mother The brutal murder has ignited protests overnight as the irate villagers demanded suspension of the Sadri police station in-charge Dhannaram- the accused allegedly barged into the minor's house with a knife and attacked the family members

Jaipur: Amid nation-wide stir over increasing crimes against women, a man accused of raping a minor girl allegedly barged into her house and stabbed her father to death. The accused also injured minor's brother and mother. The incident took place on Sunday night in Rajasthan's Pali district.

The brutal murder has ignited protests overnight as the irate villagers demanded suspension of the Sadri police station in-charge for his alleged negligence in acting on the repeated complaints of threats to the family by the accused. Meanwhile, the protestors denied conducting a post-mortem of the body on Monday.

Man accused of raping girl allegedly barges into her house in Rajasthan's Pali district, stabs her father to death and injures her brother and mother: Police — Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) December 16, 2019

Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) Brijesh Kumar Soni told the media outlets that the minor is a resident of a village in Sadri, 350 km southwest of Jaipur. She had reportedly eloped with Dhannaram (the accused), a resident of the same village on July 14. And on November 10 when she returned home, an abduction and rape complaint was registered against Dhannaram. The police then initiated an investigation in the matter.

Meanwhile, on Sunday night, Dhannaram allegedly barged into the minor's house with a knife and attacked the family members. The police officials added that minor's father has been killed while her mother and brother were injured. The accused also got badly injured after he was caught by the villagers while fleeing the spot and has been admitted to a local hospital. The police officials stated that the accused will be arrested once he was discharged from the hospital.

However, further probe in the matter is underway.
