Students across India rise in protest against Jamia crackdown, Mamata, Priyanka Gandhi join in: Highlights

A day after the brutal police crackdown in Jamia Millia Islamia University in Delhi, students and universities across the country broke into angry protests to slam the controversial citizenship law and the government's efforts to quell the agitation against it.

Even as Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah tried to reassure the protesting students across several states in India that the citizenship law is not against Indian Muslims, protests and outrage against it only grew louder.

On Sunday evening, a team of Delhi Police personnel dressed in riot gear barged into the Jamia Milia University and pulled out students from the hostels and library and allegedly abused and students, including some women.

Fifty detained Jamia students were released early Monday but tension continued in the campus even a day after.

The Supreme Court will be hearing a bunch of pleas on Tuesday against the police atrocities on students at Aligarh Muslim University and Jamia Millia Islamia. However, the court warned that it will not hear the issue in such an atmosphere of violence and asked students to refrain from indulging in violence.

"The only thing we want is that the violence must stop," said a bench headed by Chief Justice S A Bobde.

UNIVERSITIES RISE IN PROTEST

Several Delhi University students boycotted exams and held a protest outside the Arts Faculty in North Campus to express their solidarity with the movement and the crackdown on fellow students in Jamia.

In Lucknow's Nadwa College, students gathered in the hundreds shouting slogans like "Awaz do, hum ek hain" (call us we are all united) as police tried to control the situation. For a brief while, they hurled stones at the police who threw the missiles back over a campus steel gate.

Aligarh University campus remained sealed amid patrolling by the police, a day after students clashed with them.

Police outside Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama college in UP. (PTI)

In Hyderabad's Maulana Azad Urdu University, students held a protest march post midnight in solidarity with the Jamia students and demanded that their exams be postponed.

There were angry demonstrations at the Banaras Hindu University (BHU) in Varanasi and at the Jadavpur University in Kolkata with demands that the government take action against police "hooliganism".

Students from the Mumbai University and the Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) protested on the streets shouting slogans such as "Shame on Delhi Police".

Students at Central University of Kerala, Kasargod and Pondicherry University boycotted classes. Students from Patiala's Punjab University, Patna University and Chennai's Loyola College also joined in the protest that has created ripples in the country.

PROTEST CONTINUES IN JAMIA

At ground zero of the student movement, a group of Jamia students stood shirtless in the bone-chilling cold of a December Delhi morning to protest the action against their collegemates on Sunday. Hundreds more gathered on the streets in an orderly manner with some students forming a human chain to manage traffic.

Several students were seen leaving the Jamia University premises with packed bags in their hands and tears in their eyes. The university has reportedly advised students to leave the campus in view of the police action and tension surrounding it.

WHAT DELHI POLICE HAD TO SAY

Delhi Police addressed the media on Monday a day after the crackdown in Jamia and said an investigation will be conducted on the Jamia violence and people should not pay any heed to social media rumours. Delhi Police also insisted that there was no firing during the police action at the university on Sunday evening. According to Delhi Police's Public Relations Officer MS Randhawa, the force used "maximum restraint, minimum force" despite being "provoked" by protesters and did not carry any firearms.

"There was no firing, there have been no casualties in the Jamia violence. The crime branch will investigate the violence. Thorough investigation will be done and accountability will be fixed," he said at a press conference.

"Four DTC buses, 100 private vehicles and 10 police bikes were damaged during the violence. One policeman is in the ICU," the Delhi Police spokesperson added.

Mamata Banerjee leads a massive rally in Kolkata. (PTI)

2 'BULLET INJURY' CASES

Two men who were apparently part of a demonstration by Jamia Millia Islamia students on Sunday were admitted to the Safdarjung Hospital with "gunshot injury". Delhi Police has, however, denied firing on the protesters during the clash, saying the injuries could be due to the sharp end of tear gas shells.

The father of one of students, Sohaib Khan (23), said his son was not part of the protest but was passing by when he was hit by a "pellet" on toe.

MAMATA BANERJEE, PRIYANKA GANDHI PROTEST

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee took out a major rally in Kolkata on Monday to slam the crackdown on students and the amended citizenship law that has sparked outrage across the nation.

The anti-citizenship law protests snowballed into a major flashpoint in West Bengal on Monday with highways and railway lines being blocked and incidents of arson and loot being reported from many places in the state. Mamata Banerjee declared that if the Centre has to impose CAA and NRC in Bengal it will be over her "dead body".

In Delhi, Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra sat on a dharna at India Gate on Monday evening and slammed the Home Ministry's action against student protesters as "brutal".

Priyanka said, "An attack on students is an attack on the soul of India" and Sonia Gandhi issued a statement later accusing the BJP of creating instability in the country.

Priyanka Gandhi stages protest at India Gate. (India Today)

TRAINS SUSPENDED, FLIGHTS CANCEL

A total of seven flights to and from Guwahati were cancelled on Monday, while no passenger train ran from the Northeast towards the Eastern states following damage to railway properties in West Bengal during protests against the amended Citizenship Act.

At least three such trains including Agartala-Bangalore Humsafar Express scheduled to leave on Tuesday were also cancelled.

In Odisha, as many as 17 trains were cancelled on Monday due to stir in West Bengal over amended citizenship law.

PM MODI, AMIT SHAH'S ASSURANCE

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Monday said the Citizenship Amendment Act 2019 will give Indian nationality to refugees facing religious persecution in three neighbouring countries and not take away anyone's citizenship in India.

I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. No Indian has anything to worry regarding this Act. This Act is only for those who have faced years of persecution outside and have no other place to go except India. Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) December 16, 2019

Amit Shah also alleged that some political parties were spreading rumours and inciting violence to promote their political interests. "The CAA is to give citizenship to refugees facing religious persecution, it is not to take away citizenship of any Indian," Amit Shah said.

Amit Shah also urged students to go through the newly enacted law and to not fall in the trap of political parties.

On the other hand, Prime Minister Narendra Modi termed violent protests across the country against the Citizenship Amendment Act as "unfortunate and deeply distressing", and appealed to people to stay away from rumour-mongering and not let "vested interests" divide the society. In a series of tweets, Modi tried to assure protesters that the amended citizenship law does not affect any Indian of any religion.

ASSAM CURFEW

The Assam government on Monday announced that curfew in Guwahati, imposed on December 11 in the wake of violent protests against the citizenship law, will be lifted from 6 am on Tuesday. The broadband internet service which has been suspended at the same time will also resume across the state from Tuesday morning.

The decisions were taken at a law and order review meeting by Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal.

(With PTI inputs)
