Opposition parties slam ‘police brutality’, seek judicial probe into Jamia violence

NEW DELHI: Opposition parties on Monday made common cause with students protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act and condemned the “police brutality” on students of Jamia Millia Islamia on Sunday evening. They also demanded a judicial inquiry led by a Supreme Court judge into the violence in which Delhi Police entered the university campus and allegedly “assaulted” students.Congress MPs Ghulam Nabi Azad and Kapil Sibal, Left’s Sitaram Yechury and D Raja, Samajwadi Party MP Javed Ali, RJD MP Manoj Jha and Loktantrik Janata Dal’s Sharad Yadav addressed a press conference and said they had sought time from President Ram Nath Kovind and were likely to meet him on Tuesday to apprise him of the violence.Demanding a statement from home minister Amit Shah, they sought to know who directed the police to enter the university without the administration’s permission.Azad countered the government’s “propaganda” that the opposition was toeing Pakistan’s line. “Pakistan is like a dead, stuffed lion to scare people. Till when will this government deploy this dead lion — Pakistan — to scare the people of India? BJP and the government must stop this drama now. Citizenship amendment is a genuine issue that concerns people. But the government brings one controversial law after another to divert people’s attention from unemployment, falling GDP, the farm crisis and a deepening economic slowdown,” he said. He also urged people to not fall into the “communal trap” laid out by BJP.Congress rejected as “baseless” PM Narendra Modi’s charge that it was instrumental in fuelling violent protests across India. Kapil Sibal said the entire country was opposed to this “untenable and unconstitutional” law and there would have been no unrest if the Centre had not forced it through.Condemning all forms of violent protests but upholding the students’ rights to agitate, CPM general secretary Sitraram Yechury said, “They (BJP) claim that we (opposition) are anti-national. All of us sitting here are loyal to the Indian Constitution and have taken oath on it many times. Upholding the Indian Constitution is the highest form of patriotism. It is unlike those who uphold Hindutva nationalism. We are the true Indian patriots.” The Left also said it would challenge the CAA in the SC, and called for a protest on December 19.CPI general secretary D Raja said the growing student protests across India was a “civil war-like situation” and held Shah responsible for the police brutality. RJD’s Manoj Jha said the legislative majority tried to decimate constitutional morality and history would not forgive the BJP government for what it unleashed in Jamia. He also conveyed RJD’s Bihar bandh call on December 21.
