After CBI vs Kolkata police showdown, probe agency plans SC move, Mamata sits on all-night dharna - All you need to know

After CBI vs Kolkata police showdown, probe agency plans SC move, Mamata sits on all-night dharna - All you need to know

CBI officials, detained at the residence of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar, were released by police as Mamata Banerjee staged a 'dharna' against centre- the latest.

A spat between a team of the CBI officials and Kolkata police turned into an all-out war between the Centre and the Mamata Banerjee government on Sunday.

After Kolkata police foiled CBI's attempt to question the city police chief in connection with chit fund scams, the West Bengal CM began a sit-in protest at a city landmark insisting it the CBI action stifled the spirit of "constitution and federalism".

Meanwhile, CBI Interim Director M Nageshwar Rao said that the agency will approach the Supreme Court on the matter as the West Bengal Police are not cooperating.

In a dramatic showdown with the Modi government, a furious Banerjee, wrapped in a brown woollen shawl, began all-night 'dharna' right in front of the Metro Cinema to protest "insults" she faced at the hands of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP chief Amit Shah.

Banerjee asked all opposition parties to unite to bring down the Modi government and, in a rare exhortation by a political leader, called upon personnel of security forces of the Centre and states, besides the Army, to "condemn" the attitude of the Modi government.

Here's a summary of events so far:

- The fast-paced development started unfolding as soon as a team of 40-odd agency officers arrived at Kumar's residence at Loudon Street in central Kolkata this afternoon, but they were stopped by sentries and officials.

- CBI joint director Pankaj Srivastava said the agency's officials had gone to question Kumar in chit fund scam cases and "we would have rounded him up if he hadn't cooperated with us". A day earlier, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) claimed that Kumar had been "absconding" and "being looked for" in connection with Saradha and Rose Valley ponzi scam cases.

- As the CBI team landed at the city police chief's residence, a team of Kolkata Police officers rushed to the spot to speak to the CBI officials and tried to enquire if they had the documents required for questioning Kumar.

- A small team of CBI officials was taken to Shakespeare Sarani police station for further discussions. Thereafter, more men arrived at the spot and a commotion ensued. Some CBI officers were then forcibly bundled into police jeeps and taken to the police station.

- In a tit-for-tat move, a team of Kolkata Police officials also cordoned off the CGO Complex- the state headquarters of CBI. Later in the evening, central forces arrived at the CBI office in Kolkata. Subsequently, Kolkata Police personnel vacated the compound.

- Rajeev Kumar, the city police commissioner, who appeared briefly outside his residence after the chief minister's press conference, said he would talk to the media Monday. He was later seen at the dharna site of the chief minister.

- Speaking at the dharna site, Banerjee said leaders of several opposition parties have called her up to extend their support and solidarity towards her "fight to protect the Constitution". In Delhi, the Congress said the CBI action in Kolkata was clearly "mala fide" and an "assault" on the federal polity.

- Condemning the Mamata Banerjee-led TMC government BJP leader GVL Narasimha Rao said Banerjee wants to protect the corrupt in her state like a dictator and claimed that she is obstructing the investigation of CBI which was there as per Supreme Court order.

Here's how things unfolded in this whole drama:

Mamata Banerjee asked the huge crowd gathered at sit-in site to go home after midnight. However, many remained at the site as floodlights were put on and a shamiana raised.

Kolkata: Latest visuals from West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's 'Save the Constitution' dharna at Metro Channel, over the ongoing CBI issue. It has been over 4 hours since the dharna began pic.twitter.com/7dtOyz0HnX — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

West Midnapore: TMC workers stage 'rail roko protest' at Midnapore Railway Station over the ongoing CBI issue. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/8lIQVsWJT7 — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

According to reports, CBI might move the Supreme Court tonight for action against the Mamata Banerjee government after their officials were arrested and detained following the raids.

Several opposition leaders including Rahul Gandhi, Omar Abdullah, Akhilesh Yadav, Tejashwi Yadav, Chandrababu Naidu, Mayawati, Sharad Pawar and Arvind Kejriwal spoke to Mamata Banerjee over phone and expressed solidarity with her.

Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) seeks time from West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi to discuss the ongoing issue.

A delegation of senior BJP leaders to meet Chief Election Commissioner on Monday. BJP will complain about West Bengal govt blocking rallies of senior BJP leaders, reports ANI.

While interim CBI chief M Nageshwar Rao told ANI that there is evidence against Rajeev Kumar showing he has been instrumental in causing destruction of this evidence and obstructing justice.

On the other hand, Praveen Tripathi, Joint Commissioner Crime of Kolkata Police said that a team of CBI officers came without any papers for what they called a 'secret operation'. When asked what the operation was about, they could not give a satisfactory response.

All five CBI officers that were detained by police at Shakespeare Sarani police station in Kolkata have been released, according to ANI.

West Bengal: All five CBI officers that were detained by police at Shakespeare Sarani police station in Kolkata have been released. pic.twitter.com/FMS2MzrDAX — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee sitting on her 'Save the Constitution' dharna at Metro Channel, Kolkata. Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar is also present.

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee sitting on her 'Save the Constitution' dharna at Metro Channel, Kolkata. Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar is also present. pic.twitter.com/nB6ASQIYFp — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee said she will stage a dharna near the Metro Channel to save the federal structure. She said this dharna means satyagraha.

Interim CBI chief M Nageshwar Rao told ANI,"We are contacting our senior law officers about the Kolkata incident. Whatever they suggest will be followed."

West Bengal: Kolkata Mayor Firhad Hakim arrives at the residence of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar. Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee is also present there, a meeting is currently underway. pic.twitter.com/48JDc0TTS0 — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

5 CBI officers have been detained by the police. https://t.co/9M4tPdDPTE — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

Kolkata: West Bengal Director General of Police arrives at the residence of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar. Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee is also present there, a meeting is currently underway. pic.twitter.com/oLtLWf3ZnZ — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

West Bengal: Police force of Bidhannagar police is present outside the CBI regional office at CGO Complex, Kolkata. pic.twitter.com/qfm5VFgZSy — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

#Breaking: CBI vehicle’s driver pulled out of the car, Kolkata Police’s driver gets behind the wheel. Another officer sat forcibly next to CBI DSP Tathagata Vardhan and taken to Shakespeare Sarani. CBI officials manhandled & detained by Kolkata Police @dna @ZeeNews @WIONews — Pooja Mehta (@pooja_zeenews) February 3, 2019

CBI officials prevented from entering the residence of Kolkata Police commissioner Rajeev Kumar. Officials waiting outside his residence right now for further instructions @dna @ZeeNews @WIONews — Pooja Mehta (@pooja_zeenews) February 3, 2019

West Bengal: Police detains the CBI team which had reached the residence of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar. The team has now been taken to a police station. pic.twitter.com/YXJJ3d11LL — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

Chit fund case: Visuals from outside the residence of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar. A CBI team is present at the spot. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/2nvzbStFa0 — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

The IPS officer, who led a Special Investigation Team of West Bengal Police probing the scams, needs to be questioned regarding missing documents and files but he has not responded to notices to appear before the agency, CBI officials have said.

(If you can't view the full gallery click here)
