Protests spread to more campuses; PM warns against ‘vested interests’

The Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 was passed by both Houses of Parliament with overwhelming support. Large number… https://t.co/jfyedIoJRx — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1576485254000

I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. No… https://t.co/WOnVWWKitf — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1576485285000

The need of the hour is for all of us to work together for the development of India and the empowerment of every In… https://t.co/iGTquKHPLm — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1576485316000

This is the time to maintain peace, unity and brotherhood. It is my appeal to everyone to stay away from any sort o… https://t.co/ymDocJEWoD — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1576485743000

Protests against the Citizenship Act 'unfortunate and deeply distressing': PM Modi

NEW DELHI: Protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) at the Jamia Millia Islamia in Delhi and Aligarh Muslim University – and the violent clashes with the police on Sunday – resonated in campuses across the country on Monday as demonstrations, big and small, were held in 36 other educational institutions Protests were reported not just from premier institutions such as IIT-Bombay, IIT-Madras, Jadavpur University and Banaras Hindu University , but also from far-flung areas like Siliguri in north Bengal and Kochi in the south.With anti-CAA protests spreading to more areas, Prime Minister Narendra Modi termed the agitation against the controversial Act “unfortunate and deeply distressing”. In a series of tweets, he said: “This is the time to maintain peace, unity and brotherhood. It is my appeal to everyone to stay away from any sort of rumour-mongering and falsehoods. We cannot allow vested interest groups to divide us and create disturbance.”Home minister Amit Shah attempted to reach out to the student community while addressing an election rally in Jharkhand’s Pakur. “I appeal to students to study the Act. There is no provision of stripping anybody’s citizenship. This Act is only meant to accord citizenship to religious minorities facing persecution in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh,” he said.Much of social media was agog with photos and videos of injured Jamia students and the police action against them. As the situation in Jamia remained tense, more institutions in Delhi, including Delhi University, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Maulana Azad Medical College and Ambedkar University, joined the agitation.In campuses across the country, students expressed solidarity with members of their fraternity in Jamia and AMU by carrying placards against CAA and the proposed nationwide National Register of Citizens and by burning effigies of BJP leaders. Placards and slogans decried the pitched battle between security forces and students at AMU.From boycotting exams and classes to writing open letters and conducting midnight marches, many young voices united in speaking against what they termed “an attack on the Constitution and the right to protest in a democracy”.Video clips of the affected students went viral and this only helped in the anti-CAA protests covering new ground. “Do we get an education only to operate machines? We are also taught to stand alongside those facing injustice,” said a student of law at Jamia Millia in between sobs in a video clip.An open letter against CAA initiated by IIM-A faculty was signed by 1,053 teachers till Monday evening, including those from all major IIMs and IITs of the country. “The Act is discriminatory and violative of the basic structure of the Indian Constitution. It is inconsistent with the cherished values of equality under law and secularism,” the letter said.In Kolkata, the students’ union at Presidency University burnt effigies of the government and hundreds from Jadavpur University raised slogans against alleged police brutality. “If authorities are questioning our citizenship, we also want to question the validity of the last two general elections,” said Debraj Debnath, general secretary of the Faculty of Arts Students (FAS).A protesting student from Assam at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bengaluru, which had organised a day-long sit-in, told TOI, “How can the government discriminate against people based on their religion? Also, the basic idea of a democracy is that it is open to criticism, the government cannot take away our right to protest.”Throughout the day, faculty members, scientists and even families of students dropped by at IISc to offer support. Manmohan, a retired scientist who came to the campus, said he did so because “if students are attacked there will nobody left to question them (the government) tomorrow.”Suvrat Raju, associate professor, International Centre for Theoretical Sciences, Bengaluru, said the scientific community was of the view that use of religion as a criterion for citizenship is absurd. “Moreover, the manner in which the government has sought to repress criticism of its policies, through police action, is shocking.”In Ahmedabad, an IIM-A professor was among 53 persons — academicians, students and civil rights activists — detained by police for the protests. Prof Navdeep Mathur and four students of the institute and Prof Raghav Rangarajan of Ahmedabad University (AU) had gathered to express solidarity with students when cops swooped down on them. Prof Reetika Khera, a faculty member at IIM-A, said, “Peaceful non-violent dissent is our right. We are a democracy. We wanted to say that we condemn the brutal police violence across campuses of the country."At the Indian Institute of Management-Bangalore (IIM-B), meanwhile, 170 students and faculty wrote an open letter to Modi and urged him not to “trample the democratic rights of citizens to peacefully protest an unjust law”.
