Tourism in Odisha suffers blow as CAA protests rage on railway tracks

BHUBANESWAR/KENDRAPADA: Tourism in Odisha has been caught in the cross hairs as numerous trains have been cancelled owing to protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in the neighbouring West Bengal and other states.The period between November and January is the peak time for tourism in Odisha and people from Bengal form a lion’s share of domestic tourists visiting Puri and other parts of the state. Some tourists have called off their trips owing to the cancellation of several trains.Train services have been affected since December 13, the day President Ram Nath Kovind gave his assent to the Citizenship Amendment Bill 2019, turning it into an Act. With widespread protests breaking out against the passage of the Bill, about 31 trains passing through Odisha were cancelled on the very next day. More than 13 trains were affected on Sunday. Though the agitation and Rail Roko were stopped in West Bengal and the northeast, Railways cancelled 21 trains on Monday owing to the delay in arrival of connecting trains and cancellation of link trains.East Coast Railway (ECoR) sources said trains are being cancelled owing to the cascading effect of disruption in operations following the Rail Roko in West Bengal. “The agitation against CAA on December 13 and 14 will affect the train operations on Tuesday and Wednesday too,” a senior railway official said.“We had plans of visiting Puri, Konark and Chilika and its nearby tourist spots between December 15 and 22. But our train Howrah-Puri Shri Jagannath Express was cancelled on December 14. We could not get confirmed tickets for our five-member group. So we finally changed our mind,” Aniruddho Basu of Santragachhi in West Bengal said.Alok Kumar Maharana, managing director of Sand Pebbles Tours and Travels, said the industry is under pressure owing to the cancellation of trips by tourists in the wake of protests over CAA in Bengal and the northeast. “We get a large number of domestic tourists from West Bengal. But some of them have changed their minds after the cancellation of trains. Puri and Bhubaneswar tourism circuit will be affected,” he added.A senior official of the tourism department said the train cancellations will affect the tourism sector. “Though the statistics of tourist footfall is expected to come at the end of the month, we feel the recent incidents in West Bengal and the northeast will have an impact on the tourism sector,” he added.“The train cancellations have hit the tourism sector in Bhitarkanika National Park, other tourist places in Kendrapada district and its nearby areas,” said Sanghamitra Jena, a tour operator of Eastern Treasure India Tour.Recently, the United States and Canada had asked their citizens to avoid non-essential travel to the northeast in view of the ongoing protests against the CAA. “Many overseas tourists visit Odisha and northeastern states in winter, but this time they may not come to India owing to the unrest over CAA,” Jena, who recently returned from Nagaland with a group of overseas tourists, said.Tour operators said violence in West Bengal will hit tourism in the famous Buddhist sites of Lalitagiri, Ratnagiri, Langudi, Udaygiri and Kaima in Jajpur district and the Bhitarkanika National Park in Kendrapada district as a large number of tourists prefer to visit these places from October to February.
