Detainee on hunger strike details force-feeding

The man, who AP is identifying only by his last name Singh out of family concerns for his safety, stopped eating more than a month ago. In mid-January, ICE obtained court orders to begin non-consensual hydration and feeding, and so for weeks they’ve had nasal tubes inserted in their noses and IVs in their arms.

One of the hunger strikers, a 22-year-old man from India who called the Associated Press on Friday, described being dragged from his cell three times a day and strapped down on a bed. He said a group of people force-feed him by pouring liquid into tubes pushed through his nose.

US Immigration and Customs Enforcement has confirmed there are now nine men — up from six earlier — being force-fed under court order in a detention center in El Paso.

Advertisement

The AP first reported on the force-feeding Wednesday.

‘‘They tie us on the force-feeding bed, and then they put a lot of liquid into the tubes, and the pressure is immense so we end up vomiting it out,’’ said Singh. ‘‘We can’t talk properly, and we can’t breathe properly. The pipe is not an easy process, but they try to push it down our noses and throats.’’

Speaking through an interpreter, Singh said he has lost 50 pounds since he began his hunger strike. He said he is refusing food to protest guards’ unfair treatment of him and other detainees from Punjab. He said they are being denied bond while detainees from other countries were allowed out.

In a statement, ICE said it fully respects the rights of all people to voice their opinion without interference.

‘‘ICE does not retaliate in any way against hunger strikers. ICE explains the negative health effects of not eating to our detainees. For their health and safety, ICE closely monitors the food and water intake of those detainees identified as being on a hunger strike,’’ the agency said.

Advertisement

The AP’s reports on the force-feeding have garnered angry responses from policymakers and human rights advocates. US Representative Veronica Escobar, an El Paso Democrat, visited some of the men, tweeting after that their situation is ‘‘unacceptable.’’

‘‘El Paso and our country are better than this,’’ she said.

Human Rights Watch published a dispatch Friday describing force-feeding as ‘‘cruel, inhuman and degrading.’’

Hunger strikes among immigrant detainees are uncommon, and court orders authorizing force-feeding are rare, said an ICE official, noting that once force-feeding is approved, detainees have in the past given up their hunger strikes.

Detainees, their attorneys, and advocates have said that up to 30 men have been on hunger strikes over the last month. According to ICE, 10 detainees from India and Nicaragua who are being held at the El Paso detention site have refused nine consecutive meals — the immigration agency’s benchmark for when to start calling refusal to eat a hunger strike.

Singh said he came to the United States in August with his cousin, seeking to escape violence in his home state of Punjab in India. Court records show he was arrested for illegally entering the country near El Paso and pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor. His uncle, Amrit Singh, said that his asylum claim had been denied.
