Speaker suspends 21 more MPs

editorial@tribune.com

Aditi Tandon

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, January 3

The Lok Sabha continued to witness suspension of members for grave disruption of proceedings with Speaker Sumitra Mahajan naming 21 more MPs for unruly behaviour today. Among those suspended for the remaining four sittings of the House are 13 MPs of the Telegu Desam Party, seven of the AIADMK and one member of the YSR Congress, who was seen protesting in the well along with the TDP.

Former Aviation Minister Ashok Gajapati Raju was among the suspended TDP members. Kurnool MP Renuka Butta was the lone YSRCP member to be named. She had joined the TDP in the well with placards saying: “We want special status for Andhra Pradesh.”

These MPs sloganeered, shouted and flung papers across the House, attracting action under rule 374-A of the procedures of Lok Sabha.

With this, the total number of MPs suspended has gone up to 45. The Speaker had yesterday suspended 24 members of the AIADMK, which has the strength of 39 in the House. As of now, 31 AIADMK MPs stand suspended. They have been protesting Karnataka Government’s move to build a dam on the Cauvery and want the Centre to intervene.

The House had to be adjourned thrice today due to protests of AIADMK and TDP members. The first adjournment happened until 12.30 pm, the second until 2 pm and the final one for the day.

When the House assembled at 2 pm to take up the pending debate on Rafale jet purchase, the Speaker found 11 suspended TDP members squatting on the floor of the well.

They had not left the House despite being named and wanted to be marshalled out. LS sources said TDP members had even been taking pictures from inside the well while the House was adjourned during the day. Two more TDP MPs were suspended late tonight, taking their number to 13.

At 2 pm, the Speaker called off the proceedings by adjourning the House for the day. Under the rules, suspended MPs are barred from the House, its galleries, inner lobbies and committee meetings.

The Tribune has further learnt that the rules committee of Lok Sabha has empowered the Speaker to decide a route to address rampant disruptions. The committee is considering a provision of Chhattisgarh Assembly whereby a lawmaker who enters the well stands automatically suspended.

“This is one of the proposals under the consideration of the committee. Automatic suspension of unruly MLAs is practised by the Chhattisgarh Assembly and the period of suspension is determined by the Speaker,” an LS source said.

“TDP members not just sat in dharna in the Speaker’s room but even made videos of the protest to circulate the clips in their constituencies,” a source privy to developments in the LS rules committee said.
