Does Dissent Have a Dress Code?

Jamia Millia Islamia

Aligarh Muslim University

Prime Minister Narendra Modi

Abraham Lincoln

JNU protests

Kanhaiya Kumar

UN Climate Summit

It has been said that perhaps the greatest paradox of life is when getting an education often means you begin to question the very society that has educated you. This seems to be the reason why governments are forever at loggerheads with students.In India, massive protests and boycotts are taking place across the nation against the controversial Citizenship Law. The last few days have seen violence, arson and even death of civilian protesters. After Sunday evening’s police brutality at New Delhi’sand at, students in multiple cities have come out in support of each other.Almost concurrently,was speaking at an election rally in Jharkhand, where he said, “… people who are setting fire (to property) can be seen on TV… They can be identified by the clothes they are wearing”. There remains little doubt what the country’s leader was referring to.Clothes have historically been indicators of identity. It would be simple to call them mere cultural or geographical reference points. It was the remarkable Virginia Woolf who had said, “Vain trifles as they seem, clothes have, they say, more important offices than to merely keep us warm. They change our view of the world and the world’s view of us… There is much to support the view that it is clothes that wear us and not we them; we make them take the mould of arm or breast, but they mould hearts, brains, our tongues to their liking.” It can safely be said then, governments also have a problem with some type of clothes.Students and their clothing choices have long been discussed and debated by those in positions of authority, who have long grappled with what the young wear. The clothes of some students are a disciplinary issue. If some sort of clothes are too distracting to those of the opposite sex, others are just too plain casual to wear to an institution. Of course, there are also those that allow for chits of paper to be hidden in their folds and safety pins during exams. So, students are problematic if they are underdressed, and they are certainly damned if they are overdressed.That said, dissent, especially by students, has often shaped history.had famously said: “The philosophy of the school room in one generation will be the philosophy of the government in the next”. One of the most significant student strikes was at the University of Paris in 1229; it went on for two years. Thousands of students participated in the Free Speech Movement in the University of California, Berkeley, in 1964-65, making it the first act of civil disobedience in a US college campus. They were protesting against the ban on on-campus political activities, bringing in the mass disobedience tactics pioneered in the civil rights movement. The largest student protest happened in 1970 when four million students across 450 universities protested the invasion of Cambodia and the killing of student protesters in Ohio.In India, especially over the last few years, student protests in universities have made it to national news. In 2014, students of Jadavpur University protested against the handling of an oncampus molestation case. Theof 2016 are still being discussed almost four years later, where the president of students’ union (now a politician)was arrested on charges of sedition. His arrest drew much criticism from scholars and made a strong case for rescinding the sedition law.Greta Thunberg is a Swedish student who bunked school for what she thought was a far more interesting cause: she protested outside the Swedish parliament calling for stronger action to address the climate crisis. She would hold up a sign saying, “School strike for the climate”. She made an angry impassioned plea at thein September, urging world leaders to take notice of global warming. This year she was awarded the ‘Person of the Year’ by Time magazine.This year, my son’s school started allowing personal clothes on Fridays. Their reason was children shouldn’t be stifled by the idea of school, and be allowed their own expression and identity. This is a marked change from school days when children would graffiti on each other’s uniforms on the last day – less as a memento of their friendship, more as a rebellion against authority that demanded uniformity and discipline.Ideas encouraging freedom of expression or dress are often not encouraged by those in authority, especially when the emperor himself wears no clothes.Tweets:
