BAE Systems Tapped For Howitzer Support | AM General To Support Jordan’s M998 HMMWV Fleet | Denmark Ordered Leguan AVLBs

Americas

BAE Systems won a $249.2 million modification for the Self-Propelled Howitzer and carrier, ammunition, tracked vehicles and their associated support under the production contract to build and deliver M109A7s and M992A3s. The M109A7 is the latest howitzer in the BAE Systems M109 family of vehicles, the primary indirect fire support system for the ABCTs. It uses the existing main armament and cab structure of a Paladin M109A6, and replaces the vehicle’s chassis components with modem components common to the Bradley vehicle. The state-of-the-art digital-backbone and power generation capability provides significant growth potential for future payloads, and will accommodate existing battlefield network requirements. Also known as the CAT (Carrier Ammunition Tracked) this vehicle serves as a heavily armored munitions carrier. More specifically, munitions designed fore the M109A7 tracked self-propelled howitzer. Work will take place in York, Pennsylvania and estimated completion will be on January 31, 2023.

Ultrax Aerospace won a $13 million deal for spares/repairs in support of the UH-60 Black Hawk Helicopter Automated Flight Control line replaceable units. The UH-60 Black Hawk is a twin-engined medium lift utility helicopter. It is equipped with a single 4-bladed rotor and a single 4-bladed tail rotor. The basic crew compliment for the UH-60A is three; pilot, co-pilot, and crewchief. Ultrax will perform wrk in Montana with a December 12, 2024 completion date. This is a five-year base contract with no option periods.

Middle East & Africa

The US Army awarded AM General a $15.1 million Foreign Military Sales to Jordan for hardware support to reset and upgrade a fleet of 200 M998 High Mobility Multi-Wheeled Vehicles. One bid was solicited via the internet with one bid received. The High Mobility Multi-purpose Wheeled Vehicle, HMMWV is a lightweight, highly mobile, diesel-powered, four-wheel-drive tactical vehicle that uses a common chassis to carry a wide variety of military hardware ranging from machine guns to tube-launched, optically tracked, wire command-guided (TOW) anti-tank missile launchers. work will take place in Amman, Jordan. Estimated completion date is December 13, 2020.

Europe

The US Secretary of Defense, Mark Esper, and Czech Republic Minister of Defense, Lubomir Metnar, signed a Letter of Offer and Acceptance finalizing the Foreign Military Sale of four AH-1Z and eight UH-1Y military helicopters on December 12. Bell expects delivery of the first H-1 aircraft to the Czech Republic will begin in 2023 and complete delivery by 2024. The sale totals about $650 million and is the Czech Republic’s largest military purchase from the US. The defense secretary said it is a step forward in the Czech Republic’s replacement of Russian helicopters with NATO interoperable equipment. This procurement supports the National Defense Strategy objectives of strengthening alliances as well as countering Russian influence, highlights consolidated gains made over the past 30 years as the Czech Republic modernizes its armed forces and demonstrates the strength of the US-Czech Republic defense relationship.

Denmark ordered Leguan armored vehicle launched bridges (AVLBs) from Krauss-Maffei Wegmann (KMW), the company announced in a press release on 12 December, two days after it reported that the Netherlands received its first two of the systems. The Danish Defence Acquisition and Logistics Organisation on December 12 ordered six Leguan AVLBs, one carrier vehicle, plus equipment and simulators, with deliveries scheduled to begin at the end of 2022.

Asia-Pacific

India’s Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) settled a long-standing wage dispute with employees in a bid to avert future additional work strikes. HAL said on December 11 that the company’s management has signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with trade unions representing its workers to settle the wage revision. In mid-October more than one-third of HAL’s approximate 28,000 employees downed tools in protest over low wages. The strike was later ruled unlawful by the high court in the state of Karnataka, where HAL’s head office is located.

Today’s Video

Watch: Indian Defence Updates : India Cancels FICV Project,Su-35 To Pakistan,30 Predator Deal,6 More Apache
