CAA protests: Former Congress MLA Asif Khan, six others booked for Jamia Nagar violence

Ex Congress MLA has been booked for Jamia violence | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, which seeks to grant Indian citizenship to non-Muslim refugees from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh, has triggered a massive outrage across the country, with violent protests being witnessed in several states. The amended law, which came into force after President Ram Nath Kovind’s assent on the night of December 12, has been facing sharp criticism with some calling it a “religion-biased” Act.

CAA protests updates: As-it-happened

12.49 am: Former Congress MLA, Asif Khan questions his detention, says, "Violence took place 2 days ago & the viral video was made by me yesterday in reaction to an inciting video by Jamia Nagar's SHO. I've been protesting peacefully in Shaheen Bagh. Why cases are being registered in New Friends Colony & Jamia Nagar?"

12.30 am: Congress hits out at MoS Railways Suresh Angadi over his shoot at sight remarks. "If people in power talk in such language to curb the protest then its fascism," Congress said. Congress spokesperson Rajiv Tyagi told IANS, "In any civilised society, there is no place for violence. When people in power speak about violence to curb protests and agitations then its fascism."

12.15 am: The entry and exit gates of two metro stations - Jafrabad and Maujpur - remained closed for over seven hours on Tuesday, the DMRC said. Besides the two stations, "all entry and exit gates of Welcome, Gokulpuri, Johri Enclave and Shiv Vihar were opened," the DMRC said in a tweet.

11.56 pm: RP Meena Additional DCP North East Delhi said that around 300-400 people were holding a peaceful protest at Brijpuri area when they suddenly they started pelting stones. "We held talks with them after which they've dispersed.The situation is under control now.Few people were injured," he said.

11.28 pm: Delhi: A peace committee meeting was held in Shaheen Bagh and Jamia Nagar police station, earlier today. "We held a meeting with locals and listened to their perspective as a confidence-building measure. We appealed to them to maintain law & order, and not pay heed to rumours," said Chinmoy Biswal, DCP South East Delhi.

11.20 pm: A plea has been filed in Delhi High Court seeking the release of Jamia Milia university students, who were detained during the protests against Citizenship Amendment Act 2019. "A committee should conduct a judicial inquiry into the acts of violence and arbitrary detentions by the Delhi Police and Paramilitary Forces in a time-bound manner," the plea said.

10.56 pm: Ministry of Human Resource Development Sources have clarified that the Vice Chancellors of Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University did not meet HRD officials at Ministry and no formal report has been sought.

10.29 pm: Fresh protests have broken out against amended citizenship law in Seelampur's Brijpuri area, news agency PTI reports citing official sources.

10.20 pm: Noida Traffic Police: On directions of Delhi Police, closure of Kalindi Kunj road connecting Noida and Delhi after Jamia Nagar incident has been extended till tomorrow. Please use an alternative route to travel to Delhi/Faridabad.

9.50 pm: Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta, Director General of Police, Assam: 4 people have been killed in police action, unfortunately. The situation had become such that the police had to fire in order to save more people & property. The situation is pretty much under control now.

9.30 pm: "Pakistani agents (Congress) are misleading the people, Rahul Gandhi is basically from Pakistan and he is a Pakistani agent. Atrocities are taking place against Hindu girls in Pakistan, Afghanistan," says Karnataka BJP MLA Basangouda Patil Yatnal, attacking the Congress party over CAA protests.

9.15 pm: West Bengal: Deputy Commissioner of Police (HQ), Howrah Ajeet Singh Yadav was injured, after a bomb was hurled at police while they were trying to disperse the protesters in Sankrail Manikpur area, today. He has been admitted to a hospital.

8.46 am: Delhi Police: Former Congress MLA Asif Khan has been named as an accused in the FIR, for involvement in Jamia Millia Islamia incident that took place on 15 December.

8.30 am: West Bengal: The restriction on internet service has been extended for the next 48 hours across the North Dinajpur district.

8.07 pm: Union Minister of State of Railways, Suresh Angadi says anyone who damages public property be shot at sight. Says "...I strictly warn concerned dist admn&railway authorities, if anybody destroys public property, including railway, I direct as a Minister, shoot them at sight..."

7.36 pm: Alok Kumar, Joint Commissioner of Delhi Police on Seelampur incident: Total 21 people injured, of which 12 are Delhi police personnel & 3 are from Rapid Action Force. 5 persons have been detained. 2 police booths have been damaged. No lathicharge was done by the police.

7.13 pm: BJP leader Manoj Tiwari alleges that Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) and Congress are inciting violence in Delhi. Says we want a Delhi that is about 'Sabka Saath Sabka Vikaas'.

7.00 pm: CAA will not be rolled back at any cost, says Home Minister Amit Shah in an exclusive interview with Times Now.

6.00 pm: Delhi Lieutenant Governor, Anil Baijal appeals for peace. "I appeal to all to maintain peace. Don't get involved in any kind of violence & immediately inform Delhi Police about violent elements. Violence is not only illegal but also inhuman. Express your concerns through peaceful democratic means," says Baijal.

5.35 pm: "We have an example in Delhi where Police entered the Jamia women hostel & dragged them out, it mercilessly beat students. I think you all have seen that Modi govt seems to have no compassion when it comes to shutting down people's voices and implement legislation," Gandhi said.

5.32 pm: Sonia Gandhi: The situation in the Northeast which is now spreading throughout the country including the capital because of the act, is a very serious situation, we fear that it may spread even further. We're anguished at the manner in which police dealt with a peaceful demonstration.

5.22 pm: President should take not and intervene. We respect the Constitution and morality. Whether the government of the day respects the Constitution and democracy is a different issue

5.20 pm: This is the repetition of Jammu and Kashmir. Police have become the government and we condemn this and have appraised the President of India on this, says Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad.

5.12 pm: "We met the President today and urged him to retrieve this divisive act. We hear that the situation may spread even further. We are anguished with the way police have handled the situation," said Sonia Gandhi. Members of 12 opposition parties met the President today.

5.10 pm: Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal appeals to citizens to maintain peace. "No form of violence is acceptable in a civilised society. Nothing can be gained by violence. We should put forth our opinion peacefully," says Kejriwal.

4.53 pm: Alok Kumar, Joint Commissioner of Delhi Police, on Tuesday said that no bullet has been fired in the Seelampur incident. "Only tear gas shells used. The situation is under control now. Some police personnel are injured. 2 public transport buses, 1 Rapid Action Force bus&some bikes damaged during the protest," he said.

Alok Kumar, Joint Commissioner of Delhi Police on Seelampur incident: No bullet has been fired. Only tear gas shells used. Situation is under control now. Some police personnel are injured. 2 public transport buses, 1 Rapid Action Force bus&some bikes damaged during the protest. pic.twitter.com/5lelcu6tj4 — ANI (@ANI) December 17, 2019

4.40 pm: AMU Registrar in a letter to Aligarh Dist Magistrate: Admin got info through sources that anti-social elements in the garb of protest may enter Admin block of AMU & cause damage. So, you are requested to deploy security forces outside the Admin block to prevent an untoward incident.

4.31 pm: Union Home Minister Amit Shah: I want to say to Congress party that this was part of Nehru-Liaquat pact but was not implemented for 70 years because you wanted to make vote bank. Our government has implemented the pact and given citizenship to lakhs and crores of people.

4:16 pm: Union Home Minister Amit Shah hit out at the Opposition for the CAA protests and said it is misleading the people of country. "I reiterate that there is no question of taking away citizenship of any person from any minority community. There is no such provision in the bill," said Shah.

4:05 pm: MHRD received a report on Monday night from Jamia Millia Islamia on Dec 15 incident, which mentioned that a resolution has been passed by Executive Committee of university seeking a high-level or judicial inquiry into the violence, but we've not received any formal request for an inquiry, said sources within the ministry, ANI reported.

4:00: pm: Delhi Police sources, on Tuesday, said that a protest in Jaffrabad, North East Delhi was initially peaceful but suddenly turned violence. "A protest was scheduled in Jaffrabad,North East Delhi at 2 pm today. People gathered around 1:15 pm&marched towards Seelampur. Initially, protest was peaceful but suddenly violence emerged while they were dispersing. More details awaited," the said, ANI reported.

3:50 pm: Commenting on whether action will be taken against AAP MLA and others for their alleged involvement in Jamia Millia Islamia incident on 15 December, Delhi Police sources said: "Matter is under investigation. Whosoever is involved, action will be taken against them."

3:45 pm: In connection with law and order problem in the jurisdiction of Northeast Frontier Railway and in New Farakka–Azimganj and Krishnanagar–Lalgola Sections of Eastern Railway, 19 trains have been cancelled for today, said PRO, Eastern Railway.

3:40 pm: Sources with Delhi Police said that two persons were admitted to Safdarjung Hospital after Jamia violence. "The type of injury to these people have suffered is yet to be known. We have not fired anything, but we have recovered empty shell at a residential area," said the sources.

3:33 pm: Police used a drone to monitor the situation in Jafrabad area where a clash broke out between police and protesters, during a protest against CAA today.

Delhi: Police use a drone to monitor the situation in Jafrabad area where a clash broke out between police and protesters, during protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct today. https://t.co/8wVpBiCMVa pic.twitter.com/brkTJdDZIz — ANI (@ANI) December 17, 2019

3:30: Ministry of Human Resource Development sources: Situation in all universities is peaceful. Earlier there were some incidents that raised from protest to candle march. Out of 42 central universities, all academic sessions were normal except two universities (AMU and Jamia). "In AMU (Aligarh Muslim University) and Jamia Millia Islamia, exams have been rescheduled," the sources added.

3:25 pm: Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) sources: CAA has nothing to do with the deputation of any foreigner. The usual deputation procedure of any foreigner will apply as per already existing acts. The Act doesn't apply for any Indian.

3:15 pm: Entry and exit at Seelampur and Gokulpuri metro stations are closed: DMRC

3:10 pm: Citizenship Amendment Act not anti-Muslim, 'our culture does not teach us to hate': Defence Minister Rajnath Singh in the US.

3:05 pm: Clashes broke out between police and protesters in Jafrabad area on Tuesday, during a protest against CAA. Owing to protests, traffic movement has been closed on 66 feet road from Seelampur to Jafrabad (both carriageways). Entry and exit have been closed at Welcome, Jaffrabad, Maujpur-Babarpur metro stations in view of protest against citizenship law in Seelampur.

#WATCH Delhi: Police take away protesters from the spot where a clash broke out between police and protesters, during protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct today. Police has also used tear gas shells to disperse the protesters. pic.twitter.com/DkPGAEQ1tM — ANI (@ANI) December 17, 2019

3:03 pm: PM Modi, in Berhait: "Stop this guerilla politics. Indian Constitution is our only holy book. I appeal to youth in colleges to debate our policies, protest democratically. We will listen to you. But some parties, urban naxals, are firing off your shoulders." "I request the students in colleges and universities of this country to understand their own importance, understand this important time of their lives, understand the importance of their educational institutions," he added.

3:00 pm: West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee claimed that 30 people have committed suicide in the state due to the fear of NRC, asking as to who will take the responsibility for it. Speaking at a rally in Kolkata, she said, "In West Bengal, 30 people have committed suicide due to the fear of NRC (National Register of Citizens). Who will take the responsibility for it?"

2:58 pm: Locals in northeast Delhi's Seelampur pelted stones at police during protests against CAA.

#Breaking: Protest against #CAA2019 turns violent at Seelampur in East #Delhi. Stone pelting and police lathicharge reported, many injured. pic.twitter.com/P3hmqKcFj2 — NBT Dilli (@NBTDilli) December 17, 2019

2:50 pm: "I dare Congress, its friends to publicly declare they are prepared to accord Indian citizenship to all Pakistanis," said PM Modi at Jharkhand rally. He further asserted that Citizenship (Amendment) Act neither takes away the rights of an Indian nor harms him in any manner. "The law we have made is for people fleeing three nations due to religious persecution; It's for those who are miserable and can't go back. I want to know how the new citizenship law encroaches upon rights of Muslims or any Indian citizen," he added.

2:30 pm: Prime Minister Narendra Modi has once again accused the Congress and its allies of trying to flame tensions over the citizenship law. Speaking at a rally in Jharkhand, PM Modi said: "Citizenship Amendment Act doesn’t snatch away any right of an Indian citizen or causes any harm. Congress and its allies are instigating Muslims for political purpose."

2:15 pm: Jamia Millia Islamia's Chief Proctor WA Khan has rejected the Central government's claim that he gave the Delhi Police permission to enter the university campus on the night of December 15. "These are baseless allegations. I was the first to condemn police's barbaric behaviour after entering the campus without permission," Khan said, in response to Solicitor General Tushar Mehta's claim in the Supreme Court that the police entered campus with the Proctor's permission.

2:00 pm: Delhi Police DCP (South-East Delhi) Chinmoy Biswal has said that a total of 10 people have been arrested so far in the Jamia violence case. "Three of them have criminal background. No student has been arrested by the Delhi Police," Biswal said.

1:56 pm: Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray on Tuesday likened Jamia violence to Jallianwala Bagh incident. "What happened at Jamia Millia Islamia, is like Jallianwala Bagh. Students are like a 'Yuva bomb'. So we request the central government to not do, what they are doing, with students," he said.

1:30 pm: West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee lead a protest march from Jadavpur to Jadu Babu's Bazar, against CAA. Trinamool Congress (TMC) MPs Mimi Chakraborty and Nusrat Jahan also participated in the protest march.

Kolkata: West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee leads a protest march from Jadavpur to Jadu Babu's Bazar, against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. Trinamool Congress (TMC) MPs Mimi Chakraborty & Nusrat Jahan also present in the protest march. pic.twitter.com/JQiWinGI3L — ANI (@ANI) December 17, 2019

1:20 pm: "We find it appropriate to direct petitioners to approach HCs with their grievances. HCs would be at liberty to pass orders on arrests and medical assistance and order inquiries," said apex court. It added, "incidents have taken place at various places, one inquiry cannot be ordered in these cases".

1:17 pm: "We condemn torture meted out to Jamia Millia University students, it was unprecedented," said Mamata Banerjee at a protest rally in Kolkata over citizenship law.

1:16 pm: No student is in jail, police took injured students to hospitals: Centre told SC as the top court hears pleas related to CAA protests.

1:15 pm: SC asked the Centre to give details as to why notices were not given to protesters before the arrest and whether medical assistance was given. "If anybody commits offence then police is free to arrest, says SC, adding injured students should get medical attention," said SC.

1:08 pm: The Supreme Court took strong note of lawyers arguing at a high pitch and said there should not be a shouting match just because there is a large crowd and media.

1:07 pm: BJP did not give opposition parties time to think and discuss Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, sought its passage in a hurry: Mamata Banerjee at protest rally in Kolkata. "Centre stopped railway services in Bengal over a few minor incidents in the state," she added.

1:06 pm: Senior advocate Colin Gonsalves, appearing for protesters, urged the top court to send a former judge to AMU for fact-finding.

1:05 pm: The SC refused to consider statements of Jamia varsity VC to press and said, "we are not going to rely on newspapers to arrive at judicial decisions.

1:00 pm: Responding to Jaising's argument, the SC observed, "The Telangana encounter case could be looked into by appointing a commission but in this case there is no committee that can look into it all over the country."

12:58 pm: As the Supreme Court suggested that high courts should be approached for fact-finding exercise, Jaisingh said, "how can the court wash its hands of the issue. "It is a cross-state issue and needs a fact-finding SIT. How can the court wash its hands of the issue? Court heard the Telangana encounter case. We are asking for a similar order," said the advocate.

12:55 pm: Senior advocate, Indira Jaising appearing for students, said, "It's an established law that universities are not a place where police can enter without permission of VC. One person lost eyesight. Legs of some students were broken., to which, Solicitor General, T Mehta replied, "not a single student lost eyesight".

12:50 pm: While hearing pleas on Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University incidents, the SC said FIRs should be filed under law for offences such as destruction of properties. "We do not have to intervene. It is a law and order problem, how did the buses burn? Why don’t you approach jurisdictional High Court?" asked the apex court. "We have disclosed our minds, HCs be approached for fact-finding exercise," said the SC.

12:48 pm: FIRs have been filed one after another against students at AMU, Jamia, said senior advocate Indira Jaising for protesters.

12:41 pm: We don't want to spend time knowing facts, you should go to courts below first, said CJI SA Bobde hearing pleas on CAA protests. The apex court asked as to how buses were burnt during protests in Delhi.

12:37 pm: Right to peaceful protests has to be protected by SC, said lawyer for Alumni Association of Jamia University as apex court hears pleas on CAA protests.

12:35 pm: The SC bench comprising CJI SA Bobde and Justices BR Gavai and Suryakant began hearing pleas on police action during protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

12:26 pm: Kamal Haasan on being asked about police action at Jamia Millia Islamia and AMU, said, "The young will have to be politically aware. They must ask questions. If their questions are stifled, then democracy is in danger. I am a student (in my field) I will continue to voice for them."

"We will take our fight in the right direction towards a legal solution to it," he added when asked as to how he would take his fight against CAA.

12: 20 pm: DMK chief MK Stalin said that the Citizenship Amendment Act is 'hasty and autocratic', and 'tramples' rights of Muslims.

Tamil Nadu: DMK President MK Stalin holds protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct in Kanchipuram pic.twitter.com/f9vUsxQRTn — ANI (@ANI) December 17, 2019

12:15 pm: Additional DCP (South East) Kumar Gyanesh, said that some protesters were carrying wet blankets and putting them on tear gas shells during protests against CAA on Sunday. "I saw it myself, some protesters were carrying wet blankets and putting them on tear gas shells to minimize their impact. It did not seem to be spontaneous but well planned. An investigation is underway," he said. "Petrol bombs were also hurled at us by the protesters. These things do not happen on the spot, it shows that it was a conspiracy," he added.

11: 50 am: In a video, Delhi Police Joint CP can be seen appealing to students of Jamia Millia Islamia to stay calm and stop stone pelting, on December 15.

#WATCH Delhi Police Joint CP appeals to students of Jamia Millia Islamia to stay calm and stop stone pelting, on 15th December. (Source: Delhi Police) pic.twitter.com/vfYtzYVUYT — ANI (@ANI) December 17, 2019

11:36 am: Internet services have been suspended in Sambhal district till today midnight in wake of CAA protests.

11:25 am: Writ petitions have been filed in Calcutta High Court over Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's statement saying CAA will not be implemented in the state, and advertisements over the same by the state government in media, using public funds.

11:15 am: The Supreme Court on Tuesday said that the religion must be considered pan-India for declaring group as a minority. A bench headed by Chief Justice SA Bobde dismissed a plea challenging Centre's 26-year-old notification granting minority status to Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Parsis. It refused to entertain the PIL filed by BJP leader and lawyer Ashwini Kumar Upadhyay seeking laying of guidelines to accord minority status based on state-wise population of a community.

11:06 am: SC agreed to consider plea seeking CBI or court-monitored SIT probe into violence against Citizenship Amendment Act.

10:50 am: Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) files a petition in Supreme Court against the amended Citizenship Act.

10:40 am: DMK president MK Stalin held a protest against CAA in Kanchipuram. DMK leaders Kanimozhi and Dayanidhi Maran along with party leaders also held a protest against CAA in Chennai Collectorate and Chepauk, respectively.

Tamil Nadu: DMK President MK Stalin holds protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct in Kanchipuram pic.twitter.com/f9vUsxQRTn — ANI (@ANI) December 17, 2019

10:35 am: The Ministry of Home Affairs, on Tuesday, said that no bullet was fired by Delhi Police during Jamia protests on Sunday night.

10:33 am: Students and residents protested peacefully outside Jamia Millia Islamia University against the Citizenship Amended Act and National Register of Citizens.

10:30 am: Asked if Citizenship Act will be implemented in Maharashtra, Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut said, "Our Chief Minister (Uddhav Thackeray) will decide on that in Cabinet meeting."

10:25 am: Protests continue against Citizenship Amendment Act in some parts of West Bengal.

10:20 am: Curfew relaxed in Shillong from 6 am to 7 pm. Ban on mobile internet services remain in force.

10:15 am: Kerala state-run private buses were stoned and roads were also blocked during a protest against Citizenship Amendment Act, said officials, PTI reported. The dawn to dusk statewide shutdown called by around 33 organisations in Kerala to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, began with the police taking around 100 people into preventive custody, from various parts of the state.

9:45 am: The Delhi Police on Tuesday said that they have arrested 10 people with criminal backgrounds in connection with December 15 Jamia Millia Islamia violence, adding none of them are students.

9:43 am: Condemning the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) chief Mayawati, on Tuesday, asked the Central government to take back the "unconstitutional law". "I demand Central government to take back this unconstitutional law, otherwise it may lead to negative consequences in the future. They should not create emergency like circumstances like Congress did earlier," she said. "BSP's parliamentary party has also sought time to meet President Ram Nath Kovind. Our party will also raise our voices in the UP assembly, against the Citizenship Amendment Act and crimes against women," she added.

9:40 am: The Supreme Court bench headed by CJI SA Bobde will be hearing a plea on students-police clash in Jamia Millia Islamia today.

9:30 am: Assam Director General of Police Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta said that four people were killed in police action during protests against CAA in the state.

“Four people have been killed in police action, unfortunately. The situation had become such that the police had to fire in order to save more people and property,” the senior police official said, adding situation is under control now.

He further said that 136 cases have been registered so far and 190 protesters have been arrested in connection with the protetsts.

“These were not normal democratic protesters but people who indulged in violence, some conspirators have also been arrested, including some major leaders from various organisations,” he added.
