Ayushmann Khurrana, Ajay Devgn and others react to growing unrest over CAA protests

Follow us on Image Source : TWITTER Ayushmann Khurrana, Ajay Devgn, Huma Qureshi and others react to CAA protests

Several actors on Monday tweeted to show dissent at the treatment meted out to the students protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in New Delhi. Similar protests were staged in different parts of the country as well, and Bollywood took no exception to express disappointment at the tension gripping the nation.

At the trailer launch of 'Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior' in Delhi, Ajay Devgn, when asked about his opinion on the CAA and the protests, said, “This is a democracy. The establishment has an opinion, and there are those who do not agree with that opinion. Everyone should have the right to express their opinion. Violence is not the answer. Instead of fighting, things should be settled amicably, so that the aam janta doesn’t suffer.”

Ayushmann Khurrana tweeted to show support for the students: “Deeply disturbed about what the students went through and I strongly condemn this.”

Filmmaker Anurag Kashyap tweeted: "This has gone too far.. can't stay silent any longer . This government is clearly fascist .. and it makes me angry to see voices that can actually make a difference stay quiet .." Reacting to his tweet, filmmaker Anubhav Sinha tweeted: "Welcome back Kashyap. Was missing you here."

Anubhav Sinha posted: "F*** you everyone who does not have an opinion!!! F*** you!!! F*** you again!!! you are no icons!!! You are businessmen!!!"

"When no one has the answers, students do. Look at history worldwide."

Taapsee Pannu, reacting to a video of police crackdown at Jamia, tweeted: "Wonder if this is a start or the end. Whatever it is, this is surely writing new rules of the land and those who don't fit in can very well see the consequences. This video breaks heart n hopes all together. Irreversible damage,and I'm not talking about just the life n property."

Kubbra Sait tweeted: "If this voice and plea doesn't shatter your inner demons. I don't know what will. Is the end here? Or can we still save ourselves. Where is the Prime Minister? The silence is deafening."

Dia Mirza tweeted: "What is happening in our country should make us all hang our heads in shame. Shame. Now is the time to come together and act as one nation, one people, one country."

Pooja Bhatt tweeted: "To speak with silence when we should protest is what makes cowards out of men. India is burning. One can't be mute anymore."

Swara Bhasker tweeted: "Shocking messages of violence, tear gassing from #Jamia in #Delhi ! Why are students being treated like criminals? Why are hostels being tear gassed.. ??? What is going on #DelhiPolice ???? Shocking and shameful! #CABProtests"

Lisa Ray tweeted: "For all those who feel the violent response of the Delhi police to students is justified as they were ‘destroying public property' I say, we must immediately arrest all men urinating against public walls in India who cause far more destruction on a daily basis. Shall we begin?"

Rajkummar Rao was among the first ones to express his disappointment. He posted: "I strongly condemn the violence that the police have shown in dealing with the students. In a democracy the citizens have the right to peacefully protest.I also condemn any kind of act of destruction of the public properties. Violence is not the solution for anything!"

Alankrita Shrivastava tweeted: "Sarfaroshi ki tamanaa ab hamaare dil mein hai, Dekhna hai zor kitna baazu-e-qaatil mein hai...Hats off to the brave young students of India. You who can speak squarely in the face of such oppression are true citizens."

The Supreme Court has said it will hear, on Wednesday, the clutch of pleas challenging the constitutional validity of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

Over a dozen pleas have been filed in the apex court which include pleas by Congress leader Jairam Ramesh, Tripura's erstwhile ruling family scion Pradyot Kishore Deb Barman, Trinamool Congress MP Mahua Moitra, All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) leader Asaduddin Owaisi and others.

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
