Anti-CAA protests: Posters hunt for missing Nitish Kumar in Patna

Amid violent protests against the amended Citizenship Act across the country, posters describing Bihar CM Nitish Kumar as "missing" have come up in Patna.

The posters, which have photos of Nitish Kumar with "silent on NRC and CAB" written on them, say the Bihar CM has been missing since few days. "Look carefully at this face which hasn't been seen or heard from last few days...Bihar will be grateful to those who find him," says one of the posters that have come up in Patna.

Another poster looking for Nitish Kumar calls the CM dumb, deaf and blind.

Bihar: 'Missing' posters of Chief Minister Nitish Kumar put up across the city in Patna. pic.twitter.com/IZcMu230Km ANI (@ANI) December 17, 2019

Bihar CM Nitish Kumar has been criticised for his silence over the amended Citizenship Act. While JD(U), which supported the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in both the Houses of Parliament, has clarified its stand on NRC in the wake of protests, CM Nitish Kumar is silent.

Party vice-president Prashant Kishor, however, has slammed the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

Prashant Kishor, whose offer to resign was turned down by Kumar, continues to speak out against the contentious act, which triggered country-wide protests.

Prashant Kishor has also expressed displeasure over his party supporting the contentious bill, saying the legislation discriminates against people "on the basis of religion". Kishor, however, is not the only JD(U) member who has been vocal against CAA and NRC. Party spokesperson Pavan Verma and MLC Gulam Rasool Balyawi have also voiced dissatisfaction over the party's stance on CAA.

The JD(U) had voted in favour of the Bill in the Lok Sabha as well in the Rajya Sabha. The Legislation seeks to grant citizenship to non-Muslims fleeing adjacent Islamic republics because of "persecution".

Also read | Jamia protest: Prashant Kishor supports students as JDU chief Nitish Kumar maintains silence

Also watch | Nationwide stir over Jamia row
