22 students from IIT Gandhinagar, Caltech embark on 'India ki Khoj'

The eighth edition of the Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar (IITGN)'s week-long India immersion program, India ki Khoj 2019 kick-started at the institute campus. India ki Khoj 2019 is scheduled from December 16 to 22, 2019. This time, a total of 22 students, 10 from California Institute of Technology (Caltech) and 12 from IIT Gandhinagar, have come together to participate in this unique cultural immersion program. Interestingly, it is an all-women team participating from Caltech this time.

During the welcome session in the morning, Mona Mehta and Jaison Manjaly, faculty members in the Humanities and Social Sciences discipline at IITGN and coordinators for the program introduced participants with India ki Khoj 2019.

In his welcome address to the participants, Sudhir Jain, Director, IITGN said, "This is a very high-quality program we have tried developing over the years, thinking that it will be a very good opportunity for students from Caltech to come to India and understand this country a little bit. We also hope that this will be a beginning of some sorts where you will get to know a different culture, food, a different type of educational institution here and retain some sort of interest in India."

"It is designed in such a way that it turns into a kind of cultural exchange between our students and students from Caltech. You will not only learn from the distinguished speakers but also from each other," he added.

Rajmohan Gandhi, author, and historian talked about an instance when someone asked him why there was so much violence in India despite Gandhi's teachings of non-violence. To this Gandhi responded that Mahatma Gandhi tried to teach Indians two things: 'Fear Not and Hate Not'.

However, he had succeeded only in making them understand the importance of 'Fear Not' but failed in convincing them about 'Hate Not'. The current argument by some that India should be a country for Hindus first, because they are in a majority, is part of a global surge in the idea of ethnonationalism, which is the argument that national identity should be based on a particular religion or ethnicity. As early as 1906, Gandhiji had rejected this idea in his book, Hind Swaraj. If at all Indian democracy has survived for this long, it is because it accepted cultural diversity.

About India ki Khoj 2019:

Participants during an introductory session.

India ki Khoj 2019 will go on till December 22, 2019, during which students will attend lectures like 'Architectural Landscapes of India' by Jigna Desai, CEPT University; 'Imagining India: Many Voices, Many Narratives' by Madhumita Sengupta, IIT Gandhinagar; 'Lecture-Demonstration on Indian Classical Music Traditions' by Srinivas Reddy, IIT Gandhinagar and Brown University; 'Re-imagining A Queer Future: Creating movements in a hesitant Gujarat' by Anahita Sarabhai, Founder, Queerabad; and 'Science in Ancient India: Is it a Myth, Oxymoron or a Reality?' by Krishnamurthy Ramsubramanian, IIT Bombay; among others.

The participants will also attend a Stand-Up Comedy Show, 'Second Sex and More' by Mahila Manch (Women's Forum), Ahmedabad; and 'Odissi Classical and Folk Dance Performances' by P Sudha and her Troupe. They are also going to visit Gandhi Ashram, Old City of Ahmedabad, Lothal, Local Village Communities near IITGN, Kasturbhai Lalbhai Museum of Modern Art, and Sarkhej Roja.

Started in 2011, India ki Khoj is an intensive and immersive module that focuses on the understanding and appreciation of India through diverse lectures, activities and field visits. The program is designed and led by members of the Humanities and Social Sciences Program at IITGN to help foreign as well as our own students relate with and comprehend the many layers that form India.

Read: IIT Gandhinagar rated among India's cleanest campuses

Also read: IIT Gandhinagar inaugurates Winter Institute in Digital Humanities
