Students take charge as CAA protests spread across Punjab

People protest against the Citizen (Amendment) Act and National Register of Citizens at Amritsar and Ludhiana

BATHINDA: Students in Punjab led protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) on Monday staging demonstrations at Punjabi University in Patiala, Panjab University (PU) in Chandigarh, and a regional centre of PU in Machiwara, Ludhiana.

Though a protest was planned at Central University of Punjab (CUP) in Bathinda, it had to be cancelled as the students’ parents asked them not to in view of the police action at Jamia Millia Islamia in Delhi on Sunday. Anger against the new legislation was felt in other parts of the state too as protests were also organised in Malerkotla, Amritsar and Bathinda.

A massive protest was organised by the only Muslim MLA and minister in the Punjab cabinet, Razia Sultana, in Malerkotla, a town with a sizeable population of the minority community. Several members of Muslim organisations and Bhim Army took to the streets in Ludhiana. Members of the Muslim community protested in Amritsar.

CAA has invited sharp criticism over the exclusion of the Muslim commuity among people from neighbouring countries seeking asylum in India. The Earlier, on December 13 night, CUP students took out a candle march against the law on the varsity campus.

The Association for Democratic Rights (ADR) slammed the act in its present form and held a convention at Teachers’ Home in Bathinda against the bill on Sunday, where a score of activists accused the NDA government of pushing the country towards fascism through the law. The activists also took out a protest march to demand that it be withdrawn. ADR termed the Centre’s proposal to go nationwide with the National Register of Citizens (NRC) as unwanted.

In Ludhiana, members of the Muslim community protested at the Shahi Mosque in Field Ganj. In nearby Machiwara town, members of All-India Student Federation protested at PU regional centre. At PU’s Chandigarh campus, student bodies AISA, SFS, SATH SFI, ASA, LSA and PSU (Lalkar) protested at the varsity’s Student Centre in the evening.

In Bathinda, rights activist Prof Parminder Singh said the NDA government was working to divide people on religious lines by getting the bill passed from both houses of Parliament. “The act, in its present, form after getting the assent of President is not acceptable as it is discriminatory and will divide the country on religious lines. This could lead to an anarchy type of a situation, which needs to be avoided at all costs,” he said.

CUP students said the act was discriminatory against Muslims. A group of students who had protested against CAA said the Constitution was secular in nature and giving the legislation a religious colour was unacceptable. “Apart from it, the way police is beating up students for opposing the law is a more dangerous trend,” said one of them. The students did not wish to be named as their parents had refused to allow them to protest.

CPI (ML-Liberation), Punjab Lok Sabhyachark Manch (Pulse) and Inquilabi Kendra Punjab also held protests against CAA.


