Few Bollywood celebrities speak out on the controversial CAA bill

The reactions from several Bollywood celebrities were triggered off by after Sunday’s protests at Delhi’s Jamia Millia Islamia University. Bollywood has finally broken its silence on the violence at the Jamia Millia Islamia University. The students of the university were beaten up by Delhi police on Monday after they protested against the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act passed by the Narendra Modi government. Anurag Kashyap who often gets targetted for his frank opinions cameback to social media with a tweet attacking the government. He tweeted, “This has gone too far.. can’t stay silent any longer . This government is clearly fascist .. and it makes me angry to see voices that can actually make a difference stay quiet ..”

Reacting to his tweet, filmmaker Anubhav Sinha tweeted: “Welcome back Kashyap. Was missing you here.”

Sinha was visibly upset as most celebrities did not react to what had happened in Delhi. He tweeted, “F*** you everyone who does not have an opinion!!! F*** you!!! F*** you again!!! you are no icons!!! You are businessmen!!!”

He added, “When no one has the answers, students do. Look at history worldwide.”

Taapsee Pannu, who has been known to be vocal also tweeted, “Wonder if this is a start or the end. Whatever it is, this is surely writing new rules of the land and those who don’t fit in can very well see the consequences.

This video breaks heart n hopes all together. Irreversible damage, and I’m not talking about just the life n property.”

Actress Kubbra Sait tweeted: “If this voice and plea doesn’t shatter your inner demons, I don’t know what will. Is the end here? Or can we still save ourselves. Where is the Prime Minister? The silence is deafening.”

Dia Mirza tweeted: “What is happening in our country should make us all hang our heads in shame. Shame. Now is the time to come together and act as one nation, one people, one country.”

Pooja Bhatt tweeted, “To speak with silence when we should protest is what makes cowards out of men. India is burning. One can’t be mute anymore.”

Swara Bhasker tweeted on Sunday night, “Shocking messages of violence, tear gassing from #Jamia in #Delhi ! Why are students being treated like criminals? Why are hostels being tear gassed.. ??? What is going on #DelhiPolice ???? Shocking and shameful! #CABProtests”Filmmaker Onir tweeted: “Students showing the path to true secularism and democracy. #CABAgainstConstitution”

Ayushmann Khurrana in a statement wrote, “Deeply disturbed about what the students went through and I strongly condemn this. All of us have the right to protest and exercise our fundamental freedom of expression. However, protests also cannot turn violent and lead to destruction of public property. That simply is counterproductive. Dear countrymen, this is the land of Gandhi. Ahimsa is and should be the tool to express. Have faith in democracy.”

Rajkummar Rao tweeted, “I strongly condemn the violence that the police have shown in dealing with the students. In a democracy the citizens have the right to peacefully protest. I also condemn any kind of act of destruction of the public properties. Violence is not the solution for anything!”

Alankrita Shrivastava had tweeted: “Sarfaroshi ki tamanaa ab hamaare dil mein hai, Dekhna hai zor kitna baazu-e-qaatil mein hai… Hats off to the brave young students of India. You who can speak squarely in the face of such oppression are true citizens.”

Manoj Bajpayee tweeted, “There may be times when we are powerless to prevent injustice, but there must never be a time when we fail to protest.

With the students and their democratic rights to protest ! I condemn violence against protesting students!!!!!”

Rakul Preet Singh: “Freedom of speech, freedom of expression, freedom of choice . Really makes me wonder if these are just for textbooks or do we really respect the rights of citizens in a democracy like ours My heart goes out to the students in Delhi.Violence isn’t the solution.Where are we headed?”

Siddharth Malhotra: “My heart goes out to all the students back home in Delhi. In a democracy like ours, its sad to see violence against citizens for voicing their opinion through peaceful protests. There should be no place for violence of any form & intent in our country. I strongly condemn this act.”
