World #3 – India: bill granting citizenship to non-Muslim immigrants

(by Agence France-Presse) — Fresh protests rocked India Monday as anger grew over new citizenship legislation slammed as anti-Muslim, with six people dead in the northeast and up to 100 reported injured in New Delhi. The law fast-tracks citizenship for non-Muslim migrants from three neighbouring Muslim majority countries (Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan), but critics allege it is part of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Hindu nationalist agenda to marginalize the 200 million Indians who follow Islam. [India’s Muslim population is about the world’s second-largest and the world’s largest Muslim-minority population. India is home to 11% of the world’s Muslim population.]

In the country’s northeast, however, even allowing non-Muslims citizenship is opposed by many locals who fear their culture is threatened by Bengali-speaking Hindus.

Modi, who insists he is not anti-Muslim, said…that Muslims from the three Muslim-majority countries are not covered because they have no need of India’s protection. …

On Sunday night in Delhi, police with batons fired tear gas and charged protesting students before storming a Muslim university [where students had been protesting the law].

On Monday fresh protests took place in Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore and Lucknow, where hundreds of students — most of them Muslims, television pictures indicated — tried to storm a police station, hurling volleys of stones at officers cowering behind a wall.

In the east in Kolkata, capital of West Bengal, thousands gathered for a major demonstration called by state premier Mamata Banerjee, a firebrand opponent of Modi (who is also a Hindu). In recent days empty trains were torched there and on Monday internet access remained suspended [by the government].

In Kerala in the south, another state whose government refuses to implement the citizenship law, several hundred people also protested. Kerala’s finance minister Thomas Isaac tweeted: “United action of all secular force is the need of the hour.”

Protests were reported in Mumbai, West Bengal, Aligarh, Hyderabad, Patna and Raipur over the weekend.

Authorities in northern Uttar Pradesh, meanwhile, have cut internet access in western parts of the state following demonstrations in Aligarh, home to a large university and a sizeable Muslim population.

The main epicentre of the protests has been in India’s far-flung northeastern states, long a seething and violent melting pot of ethnic tensions. Protesters there are mostly Hindu [who are opposed to illegal immigrants being given citizenship, threatening their livelihood and culture].

On Sunday night in Assam state — following days of rioting and clashes with police — around 6,000 people protested on Sunday evening, with no major incidents reported.

Modi blamed the main opposition Congress party and its allies of “stoking fire,” saying those creating violence “can be identified by their clothes” — a comment interpreted by some as referring to Muslims.

…The new law is being challenged in the Supreme Court by rights groups and a Muslim political party, arguing that it is against the constitution and India’s cherished secular traditions.

Ashok Swain, a professor at Sweden’s Uppsala University said that the scale of the protests had caught Modi’s government, which is presiding over a serious slowdown in economic growth, off guard.

“The protest is getting international attention and also spreading to different parts of the country. This certainly will add pressure on the regime when the economy has failed,” Swain told AFP.

Published by afp .com on December 16, 2019. Reprinted here for educational purposes only. May not be reproduced on other websites without permission from Agence France-Presse.
