Delhi Police arrest 10 outsiders who joined Jamia students in rioting

Delhi Police arrest 10 outsiders who joined Jamia students in rioting

Delhi Police have arrested 10 people for rioting and arson during the protest outside the Jamia Millia Islamia University on Sunday. None of them are connected with the university and all of them have criminal background, police said.

All the men were caught from the Jamia Nagar and Shaheen Bagh areas after a night-long raid on Monday, police sources said, adding these men were arrested on the basis of videos circulated during the anti-CAA protests.

These men have used the university campus to target policy from within the campus and the university administration should be questioned as to how they were inside the campus, and now they should be brought to book for inciting violence with the help of the university authorities and students, sources said.

Students from within the campus were also throwing stones. All of them later came out and were swearing and breaking the glasses of the government buses.

Police are on the lookout for members of some of the WhatsApp groups who had organised rioting and arson during the protests.

Meanwhile, police arrested 21 people after they clashed with police at the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) during a protest against the amended citizenship law and the violence against Jamia Milia Islamia students in Delhi, police said on Monday.

"We have arrested 21 persons in the matter. Named FIR has been lodged against 56 persons and others unidentified. The process of hostel vacation is on and 25-30 per cent of them have been vacated, rest expected to be vacated by evening," PTI.quoted SSP (Aligarh) Akash Kulhary as saying.

The students clashed with police after they were refused permission to hold a solidarity march for their counterparts in Delhi’s Jamia Milia Islamia. They broke the police cordon and cops alleged that stones were pelted on them.

Tension prevailed as police entered the campus and used batons and tear gas to control the situation. Officials said over a hundred students were injured in the police action, of which 60 had injuries from tear gas.

Aligarh Muslim University Registrar Abdul Hamid said the police entered the campus late Sunday night and clashes were reported from inside. Police also sealed all gates to the campus and the administration has closed the university till 5 January.

Internet services in Aligarh, Saharanpur and Meerut stand suspended, DGP O P Singh said.
