No action against students at Jamia, but those engaged in vandalism: Amit Shah

“Come what may, the Modi government will ensure that these refugees get Indian citizenship and live as Indians with honour,” he said at an event in New Delhi.

Amid row over police action at Jamia Milia Islamia, Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Tuesday said that no action is being taken against the students but only those who engaged in vandalism and arson. Shah, while speaking at an event in Mumbai said there is no action against students opposing the CAA. He also directed Delhi Police to ensure peace in the national capital.

According to police, at least 29 persons have been arrested for violent clashes over the last couple of days in Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) and in parts of UP, reported news agency PTI. Apart from that, two FIRs were registered in connection with Tuesday’s violence during a protest in the national capital’s Seelampur and Jafrabad areas that left 21 people, including 12 policemen, injured.

Angry protesters torched motorbikes, pelted stones at police personnel and damaged buses and a police booth, while police resorted to baton charge and fired tear gas shells to disperse the protesters. The situation was brought under control after a stand-off that continued for about one-and-a-half-hour, police officials were quoted as saying by PTI.

Earlier today, defending the government’s decision to bring in the new Citizenship law, Home Minister Amit Shah said it will ensure that non-Muslim refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan get Indian nationality and live in the country with honour.

Shah also challenged the people, who are against the new law, to oppose the legislation as much as they can. “Come what may, the Modi government will ensure that these refugees get Indian citizenship and live as Indians with honour,” he said at an event in New Delhi.

ALSO READ | Citizenship law India’s internal matter, Pak PM habitually abusing global fora: MEA

The Union Minister’s remarks came after PM Modi hit out at Congress for spreading hatred in the name of CAA. Speaking a rally in Jharkhand on Tuesday, the PM challenged the opposition to declare if they are ready to give Indian citizenship to all people from Pakistan. “Citizenship (Amendment) Act neither takes away the rights of an Indian nor harms him in any manner. I dare Congress, its friends to publicly declare they are prepared to accord Indian citizenship to all Pakistanis,” said Modi.

Speaking at India Economic Conclave in Mumbai today, Shah said there was nothing against minorities in the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA), which was passed by Parliament last week and has received Presidential assent. He said the opposition is engaged in a false campaign on the Act.

The Home Minister added that there is nothing anti-minority in the amended Citizenship Act.

He further said that there is no going back on the Citizenship Act and the government is firm like a rock on its implementation. Later, while responding to a question at the ‘Agenda Aaj Tak’ programme, Shah said, “Whoever is not eligible to be included in NRC, will be sent out of the country.” He said the National Register of Citizens (NRC), carried out in Assam, was not a religion-based exercise.

He also said he has directed the Delhi Police to maintain law and order and to ensure peace in the national capital.

Shah, along with Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman and HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank has also echoed PM Modi’s tweets in which he called for peace and said that “no Indian has anything to worry” over the amended citizenship law, which has triggered a nationwide agitation.

Posting a series of tweets the morning after at least 100 protesters were injured when police stormed the Jamia campus in Delhi, Modi said the “violent protests” were “unfortunate and deeply distressing” and pointed to “vested interests” who “divide us and create disturbance”.

Following the passing of Citizenship Amendment Bill in the Rajya Sabha on December 11, there were violent protests in Assam. On Sunday, the police barged into the premised of Delhi-based Jamia university and lathi-charged students protesting against the contentious Citizenship Act.

According to the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014, and facing religious persecution there will not be treated as illegal immigrants but given Indian citizenship.
