Sursa (Mamata) can’t stop Ram (Modi) and Hanuman (Yogi) from establishing Ram Rajya in Bengal: BJP MLA Surendra Singh

Sursa (Mamata) can’t stop Ram (Modi) and Hanuman (Yogi) from establishing Ram Rajya in Bengal: BJP MLA Surendra Singh

BJP MLA Surendra Singh from Balia, who’s known for controversial comments and drawing Ramayana analogies, slammed Mamata Banerjee for refusing to allow Yogi Adityanath to land in Bengal for his Jan Sabhana session.

He called Mamata Banerjee a ‘terrorist and a tyrant’.

He claimed that Mamata was behaving like Sursa – asura and mother of Nagas – who tried to prevent Hanuman from entering Lanka.

He went on to say that that no matter how much one emulated Sursa or Ravana, they couldn’t stop Hanuman from entering Lanka. He said: “No matter how much one tries to emulate Sursa and Ram, one wouldn’t emerge victorious because in this battle PM Modi was Ram and Yogi Adityanath was Hanuman.”

He went on to call the West Bengal CM a 'demon, terrorist and tyrant' saying that her rule will end in Bengal and 'Modi and Yogi’s Ram Rajya would be established' in Bengal.

This isn’t Surendra Singh’s Ramayana analogy. He is wont to label opponents of BJP as Ravan and his ilk.

Earlier, he labelled Congress President Rahul Gandhi as 'Raavan' and his sister and Congress' General Secretary for Uttar Pradesh (UP) East Priyanka Gandhi 'Surpanakha.'The BJP MLA from Ballia also said that the Congress is a sinking ship and it managed to defeat the BJP in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh in the recently concluded Assembly polls because of SC/ST Act. Singh stressed that the Congress has no political standing anymore and the party would not win anywhere else in the country.

Talking to reporters, Singh said that when Lord Ram was set to start his war against Raavan, then the demon king had first sent his sister – Surpanakha - to counter Lord Ram. He added that in this war - referring to the upcoming Lok Sabha election - Rahul is the Ravana and Prime Minister Narendra Modi is in the role of Lord Ram and Rahul has fielded his sister Surpanakha to defeat PM.
