Fact Check: RPF constable’s death in accident linked to anti-CAA violence

Amid violent protests across the country against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, especially in West Bengal, a picture of an unconscious man in khaki uniform is going viral on social media. It is being claimed that a CRPF jawan was killed by anti-CAA protesters.

The picture was posted by Facebook user Ashish Raj in a group called WE SUPPORT NARENDRA MODI. The Hindi claim along with the picture translates to, There’s very sad news. CRPF jawan Dharmendra bhai became a victim of anti-CAA protesters. OP Meena is seriously injured. Heartfelt tributes.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the claim to be misleading. Railway Protection Force constable Dharmendra Meena died in a road accident while on way from Kolkata to Beldanga in Bengal's Murshidabad district with his team. The RPF team was deployed in view of violent anti-CAA protests in the area, targeting railway properties.

Till the time of filing this story, the post was liked by more than 1,400 users. Facebook group WE SUPPORT NARENDRA MODI has almost 30 lakh members.

During investigation, we found a post by Facebook user M.L. Meena, who said his friend, RPF constable Dharmendra Meena, died in a road accident in West Bengal. The post was later deleted.

In the post, M.L. Meena said they took training together and were posted in the same division. He also tagged Dharmendra Meena’s Facebook profile with the post. Upon checking the profile, we found that it is the same person who is seen in the viral image.

With the help of this clue, we found a news report in Bengali by IE Bangla about the road accident in which RPF constable Dharmendra Meena died.

According to the report, the accident took place on the morning of December 14 in Nakashipara of Nadia district in West Bengal. It said that the vehicle was hit by a lorry and five RPF personnel were injured.

We also spoke to Amaresh Kumar, senior divisional security commissioner, posted in Sealdah divison of Eastern Railway, who confirmed the same and denied any role of protesters in death of the constable.

We were also able to contact Facebook user M.L. Meena over phone. He too confirmed that Dharmendra Meena died in a road accident.

Also read: Fact Check: Video of little girl crying goes viral with misleading claim

Also read: Fact Check: Eight-year-old photo passed off as police atrocities on Jamia students

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim CRPF jawan Dharmendra killed by anti-CAA protesters Conclusion RPF constable Dharmendra Meena was killed in a road accident JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
