Protest in only 22 of 300 plus universities, wrong to say it's widespread: Amit Shah

Union Home minister Amit Shah has said it is wrong to say that protests are being held in a majority of universities across the country. Speaking at Day 2 of Agenda Aaj Tak on Tuesday, Amit Shah said the protests are being held only in a few universities in the country.

"There are 224 universities in the country. If you private universities, the numbers reaches around 300. Of these, protests were held in only 22 universities. Of these 22 universities, in four universities (including Jamia Millia Islamia University and the Aligarh Muslim University) the protests were more serious. In the remaining universities, the protests were normal and attended by students with strength varying from 10, 20, 30 to 10, 200 and 300," Home minister Amit Shah said.

The home minister said these students protests are being held at present because the Citizenship Amendment Act has just been passed and the students have not studied them in detail.

"I want to appeal to the students that they should study this Act in details and then if they feel there is something wrong, they can come forward and hold discussions with the government. We are ready to explain our position," he said.

Asked about the violence and police action in Jamia Millia Islamia University on Sunday where many people, including students and cops, were injured, Amit Shah said the question of going after students does not arise.

"But if there is stonepelting from inside the university and there are instances of arson, and even then the police do not act, then I think the police are not doing their duty. When protest becomes violent, it is important to control it," Amit Shah said.

He said the only instruction he has given to the Delhi Police at the moment is to ensure peace in Delhi. "All other questions can be asked later on," he said.

ALSO FROM AGENDA AAJ TAK

Ayushmann Khurrana on relationships: Mere liye pyaar matlab shaadi hota tha

Gautam Gambhir, VVS Laxman left on a bitter note: Harbhajan Singh

Yuvraj Singh slams India's World Cup 2019 planning: It was completely wrong

WATCH | Amit Shah says wrong to say students' protests widespread, appeals to students to read Citizenship Act
