Jharkhand assembly elections: Hemant Soren promises ‘Abua Sarkar’ in Santhal Pargana

RANCHI: A day before Prime Minister Narendra Modi ’s scheduled rally in Barhait, JMM working president Hemant Soren on Monday urged the electorate of Santhal Pargana to not get carried away by poll promises being made by “politicians from Gujarat, New Delhi and Maharashtra”.Shuttling between Dumka and Barhait, the assembly constituencies from where he is seeking another term in Jharkhand Assembly, Hemant on Monday held rallies in Borio, Godda, Sarath, Littipara and Barhait. There, he imvoled tribal sentiments of ‘jal, jangal and jameen’ against BJP by recounting Raghubar Das government’s efforts to amend the state’s pro-tribal tenancy laws.Addressing a large gathering in native Santhali, Hemant said: “BJP is bringing its functionaries from Delhi, UP, Gujarat and Maharashtra. A lot of heroes and heroines are also coming to the state. Once the election is over, none of them will come and alleviate your problems. They will leave behind a lathait (strongman) in Raghubar Das. All of you know how he tried to snatch your land by changing the SPT Act,” Hemant said to a high-pitched response from the audience in Littipara.Asserting that this election is important for adivasis and moolvasis of Jharkhand, Hemant urged the electorate to give him at least 50 seats so that ‘abua sarkar’ comes to power. Referring to Shiv Sena, he added: “In Maharashtra, Chatrapati Shivaji’s teer-dhanush (bow-arrow) drove out BJP. In Jharkhand, our bow and arrow will do the same to BJP.”Modi is scheduled to address an election rally in tribal revolutionary duo Sidho-Kanho's native village Bhognadih village on Tuesday afternoon. Bhognadih comes under Barhait assembly constituency. Notably, Modi held a rally in Dumka on Sunday. Modi’s programme are carefully slotted in two constituencies to attack Hemant, who is the chief ministerial face of the opposition alliance.Attempting to strike a chord with the audience, Hemant recalled how onion prices have touched Rs 150 per kg. “Immediately after the election, don’t be surprised if the prices go as high as Rs 500. These people also closed the dhoti, saree, lungi scheme we launched. Now, prices of seeds and fertilizers will go up manifold,” he said in Maslia block under Littipara assembly constituency.Hemant, who is operating from his residence in Khijuria in Dumka from December 12, camped in Barhait’s Patna. He also held closed door meetings with JMM functionaries of the district and chalked out a campaign strategy, party officials in Dumka said.
