NRC not religion-based exercise, all intruders will be thrown out: Amit Shah

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Tuesday said that the National Register of Citizens (NRC) is not a religion-based exercise and "whoever is not eligible to be included in it will be sent out of the country ".

Delinking the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) from NRC, the home minister said that the CAA only seeks to provide citizenship to those minorities who were persecuted in neighbouring nations and is not linked with the NRC.

Speaking at Agenda AajTak, Amit Shah said that NRC is crucial as no nation in the world allows intruders to take their citizenship without proper channels.

"Is there any country in the world where there is no register of its citizens, can anyone go to the US and just be their citizen?" Amit Shah asked.

Home Minister Amit Shah said that neither the NRC exercise nor the CAA will hurt Indian Muslims.

"No Indian citizen needs to worry at all, no one will be thrown out. We will make special provisions to ensure that no Indian citizen from minority communities is victimised in the NRC process. But we can't leave the borders open as well. Countries are not run like that," Amit Shah said.

"It is important for everyone to understand that intruders or illegal migrants do not only eat away resources and opportunities meant for Hindus but also Muslims," Amit Shah said. " Not even a single person of a minority who is an Indian citizen will be harmed in the NRC, but not even one intruder will be spared," he said.

Home Minister Amit Shah claimed that the opposition parties had united to spread rumours and create fear among minorities over the Citizenship Amendment Act.

"Indian Muslim brothers and sisters, I want to assure you that the Act will not affect you. The Act does not take away anyone's citizenship, it only gives citizenship," Amit Shah said.

On being asked about how the government will identify who is a Muslim and a Hindu migrant, as several Bangladeshi migrants usually lie about their identity, Amit Shah said, "Let us worry about that."

"Let us worry about how we will find out who is lying and not lying about being Hindu and being persecuted among the migrants," Amit Shah told.

On students protests and Jamia police action:

Home Minister Amit Shah said it is wrong to say that protests are being held in a majority of universities across the country. "There are 224 universities in the country. If you factor in private universities, the numbers reaches around 300. Of these, protests were held in only 22 universities. Of these 22 universities, in four universities (including Jamia Millia Islamia University and the Aligarh Muslim University) the protests were more serious. In the remaining universities, the protests were normal and attended by students with strength varying from 10, 20, 30 to 10, 200 and 300," Amit Shah said.

The home minister said these students protests are being held at present because the Citizenship Amendment Act has just been passed and the students have not studied it in detail.

Asked about the violence and police action in Jamia Millia Islamia University on Sunday where many people, including students and cops, were injured, Amit Shah said the question of going after students does not arise.

"But if there is stone pelting from inside the university and there are instances of arson, and even then the police do not act, then I think the police are not doing their duty. When protest becomes violent, it is important to control it," Amit Shah said.

He said the only instruction he has given to the Delhi Police at the moment is to ensure peace in Delhi. "All other questions can be asked later on," he said.

Also read | Congress accepted demand to divide country on religious lines: Amit Shah

On allegations of vote bank politics:

Home Minister Amit Shah, who is also BJP's president, said that the Modi government did not take the decision to amend the Citizenship Act and provide citizenship to refugees to boost its vote bank.

"We aren’t doing this for any election. No elections around the corner. Congress didn’t deal with the country’s problems. This is Modi’s government- not here to run the government, but to resolve the country’s problems. We aren’t here to do politics. We could’ve relaxed for five years. If I was doing politics, I’d have done this [CAA] in 2023," he said.

Also read | BJP had guts to do what Congress did not, says Amit Shah

Is government ignoring economy?

On being asked if the government's focus on contentious laws such as CAA was misplaced at the time the country is facing an economic crisis, Amit Shah said that the two departments were independent of each other. "Government doesn’t work like that. If there’s a security problem, should Nirmala Sitharaman stop work in finance ministry?" he said.

Also read | Economy to recover soon from effects of global slowdown, says Amit Shah

When Amit Shah was asked about the Bharatiya Janata Party's (BJP) promise to deliver a gross domestic product (GDP) at 10 per cent, which is presently at 4.5 per cent, Amit Shah said that the government touched 7.8 per cent "which people often forget".

Amit Shah said, "This [GDP at 4.5 per cent] is a temporary issue and a result of a global slowdown."

Amit Shah said that global factors are to be blamed for the slowdown in India.

Amit Shah said that under the leadership of Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, the Modi government has taken many steps to overcome these challenges concerning the Indian economy.

ALSO FROM AGENDA AAJ TAK

Ayushmann Khurrana on relationships: Mere liye pyaar matlab shaadi hota tha

Gautam Gambhir, VVS Laxman left on a bitter note: Harbhajan Singh

Yuvraj Singh slams India's World Cup 2019 planning: It was completely wrong

Watch | Hindu rashtra is not our aim, says Amit Shah
