Violence bedevils Delhi

Violent protest against citizenship law in Delhi, 21 injured; students, Opposition leaders step up protests across country; SC rejects inquiry panel plea

New Delhi: Angry protesters demanding scrapping of the amended Citizenship Act pelted stones at police personnel, torched several motor bikes and vandalised two police booths as well as three buses in northeast Delhi’s Seelampur on Tuesday, leaving 21 people injured in fresh violence in the city.

The national capital continued to reel under swirling agitation against the alleged “divisive” law with thousands of students hitting streets near the Jamia Millia Islamia, where a violent protest had occurred on Sunday, and elsewhere for what they called “protecting the soul of India”.

Twenty-one people, including 12 policemen and six civilians, were injured in the clashes in Seelampur which continued for one-and-half hours, while five persons have been detained, according to police.

Police said they used tear gas shells to disperse the mob but denied that there was any baton charge on protesters.

As fresh clashes erupted in Delhi and elsewhere, leaders of Opposition parties knocked on the doors of President Ram Nath Kovind urging him to advise the Centre to withdraw the “unconstitutional and divisive” citizenship amendment law.

Congress president Sonia Gandhi, who led the Opposition delegation, alleged the Modi government was “shutting down” people’s voices and bringing legislations which are not acceptable to them.

In the backdrop of the violence, Union Home Minister Amit Shah said that he has directed the Delhi police to maintain law and order and to ensure peace in the national capital.

Delhi police commissioner Amulya Patnaik briefed Union home secretary Ajay Kumar Bhalla and other senior officials of the ministry on the violence at Jamia Milia University and Seelampur during anti-CAA protests and the prevailing situation in the national capital, officials said.

The home ministry officials are said to have expressed their unhappiness over the two incidents happening within just three days, an official said, adding they asked the Delhi police brass to strengthen intelligence gathering mechanism so that such incidents do not occur in future.

Braving freezing cold, thousands of people poured onto streets near JMI as well for a peaceful protest. Holding tricolour and placards, they raised slogans like “azaadi (freedom) from atrocities” and formed human chains, while some women-led groups took out marches in the narrow lanes of nearby residential areas.

Schoolchildren held out placards reading “we want justice” as their buses drove through the area.

The Seelampur protest turned violent when police stopped them from moving ahead. The agitated crowd clashed with police, pelted stones at police personnel and damaged vehicles, including a school bus which had a driver and student.

The situation was brought under control, police officials said, while blaming the clashes to a “hidden mob” that swelled to 4,000 to 5,000 people.

Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, BJP’s East Delhi MP Gautam Gambhir and Seelampur’s AAP MLA Haji Ishraq appealed to people to maintain peace and distance themselves from violence.

A group of injured Jamia students also held a press conference along with some activists and alleged “barbaric” beatings, abuse and humiliation by the police during their crackdown on those protesting against the new law on Sunday.

Ten people with criminal background have been arrested for their alleged involvement in the violence near Jamia Millia Islamia University on Sunday, police said, adding none of them were students.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi accused the “Congress and its friends” of spreading lies over the new law and asked students to try and see whether they were not being made accomplices in a “conspiracy” where “urban naxals” and others were using their “shoulders to fire” to serve their own interests.

According to police, at least 29 persons have been arrested for violent clashes over the last couple of days in Jamia Millia Islamia and in parts of Uttar Pradesh.

The Supreme Court, however, declined to set up a committee of a retired apex court judge to inquire into incidents of violence in different parts of the country since Sunday and asked the petitioners to approach high courts.

A senior home ministry official said the police did not fire any bullet on protesters near Jamia on Sunday, but an empty cartridge was found from the area.

Under the new law, all but Muslims who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014 and are facing religious persecution can be given Indian citizenship.

Protests are being held across the country ever since a bill was introduced in Parliament earlier this month for this law.

Fresh protests took place on Tuesday in Kerala, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Assam, Maharashtra, West Bengal and several other parts of the country as well.

In Gujarat, protesters gathered outside the Sabarmati Ashram with anti-CAA placards.

In Kerala, stones were hurled at state transport buses, shops were forcibly closed and protest marches were held in support of a dawn-to-dusk hartal, while over 200 people were taken into preventive custody.

In Tamil Nadu, DMK president M K Stalin called the new law “hasty and autocratic” and alleged the BJP-led Centre’s objective was not India’s progress but trampling the rights of Muslims.

In West Bengal, protesters blocked roads and railway tracks, though curfew was lifted in Guwahati of neighbouring Assam following improvement in the law and order situation. Curfew was relaxed in Shillong too.

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said the BJP cannot bully the states into enforcing the law.

In Uttar Pradesh, 19 people were arrested in Mau area of the state for violence on Monday night, that had followed police action in Jamia.

Separately addressing a meet of vice-chancellors and directors of central universities, Kovind asked them to ensure that higher educational institutes emerge as spaces that nurture free expression and ideas.

The government officials maintained that the situation in 42 central universities, except the two, was peaceful.
