SC/ST Confederation holds protest against Modi

SC/ST Confederation holds protest against Modi

JAMMU, Feb 3: All India Confederation of SC/ST/OBC Organizations, led by its State President RK Kalsotra, organized a massive protest against the Prime Minister Narendra Modi for his government’s “discriminatory policies”.

The protestors, led by the State President, demanded restoration in promotion which was taken away by the judgment passed by the High Court of J&K. Kalsotra said that the BJP-PDP led government, popularly known as Modi Government in the State, had in fact done no justice to the downtrodden sections that constitute majority populace in the state living in abject social and educational deprivation. He further roared that with childish excuses and deliberate misinterpretation of the order passed by the Supreme Court, the BJP-PDP coalition ensured that the High Court's judgment operated notwithstanding the stay of said judgment by the Supreme Court which goes on to prove the agenda pushed by the Modi Government. Even with seven months of Governor/President's rule in the state, things have continued to haunt these downtrodden sections. Kalsotra further said that during his election rally in Hiranagar, it was Modi only who promised 27 percent reservation to the OBC's of the state as per the Mandal report but he seems to have forgotten this promise too and it has proved to be another Jhumla.

Another demand related to clearance of backlog of vacancies by special recruitment drive which has been deliberately overlooked for oblique reasons. The State President was also critical of the rise in caste based atrocities against the SC/ST/OBC/Minorities during Modi led government and demanded immediate stoppage of the same without fail. In the same breath, the Confederation demanded withdrawal of new 13 roster point system in the Universities and restoration of the old 200 roster point system. Concluding his address, the President said that umpteen attempts are being made to dilute the Constitution which guarantees rights to the ostracized, the deprived and reeling lot of the nation. He said that the rights of these communities are being swindled away by introduction of cleverly drafted unconstitutional schemes and steps to benefit already privileged communities which, if not stemmed, will sound death knell to the constitutionalism for this Nation and there is an urgent need to stop all this with utmost alacrity. The height of the non seriousness of the government can be gauged from the fact that inspite of a number of memoranda, representation and requests, the Governor has till date evaded granting time to the Confederation.

Confederation lamented the deplorable condition of SC/ST/OBC's/minorities in the state and apprehended further snatching away of their constitutional rights by those enjoying power since centuries. It was strongly demanded that unless the demands are met right before model code of conduct is imposed, the plans of the incumbent central government to return to power in the state as well as centre will be effectively defeated as electoral turnaround can be ensured only by SC/ST/OBC's/minorities which constitute more than 80 percent of the population in the state as well as at the central level.


