Wild boar attacks: Farmers stage protest in Udumalpet

Tirupur: Farmers who were facing menace of wild boars staged a protest demanding to allow culling of the boars in Udumalpet in the district on Tuesday.

After collector K Vijayakarthikeyan assured to take their demand to the state government during talks with representatives of the protesters at the collectorate in the city, the farmers withdrew their stir in the evening temporarily.

More than 4,000 farmers from around 40 villages in Udumalpet and Madathukulam taluks staged sit-in in Kuttai Thidal ground opposite to Udumalpet forest ranger office in Udumalpet. For the last two weeks, the farmers associations held meetings in various villages continuously to mobilize the protest.

“The wild boars have moved more than 15km from Anamalai tiger reserve (ATR) forests, and they were staying in non-forest areas for the last two years. This season, wild boars were often destroying many crops including maize and vegetables in Udumalpet and Madathukulam areas. But forest department was acting against the farmers if they attack the boars, and so, they must face criminal charges and fines besides losing their livelihoods,” said S R Madhusudhanan, state vice-president, Tamil Nadu Vivasaigal Sangam affiliated to AIKS.

“In the last two months, around 30-40 such cases were slapped against the farmers in both the taluks,” he added.

P Shanmugam, state president of the association, who also took part in the stir, said, “It is important that the state government understand that there should be balance in food chain. Since there is no balance, the boars’ population thrived without presence of their natural predators. The boar should be moved to vermin list from the protected wild animals’ list.”

“Like in few other states, the farmers should be allowed to shoot them if they or their fields were affected, besides taking steps to cull them. More importantly, the affected farmers should be compensated in a short span of time, and crop insurance should be covering the fields if they were damaged by the wild animals,” he added.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
