FTII suppressing our voice, say agitating students

Institute using WhatsApp and notices, they allege



Continuing their hunger strike against a fee hike for the second consecutive day on Tuesday, students at the Film and Television Institute of India (FTII) alleged that their voice being suppressed by the administration. They also said that the institute is slowly becoming unaffordable for all, and only a certain class of people could now get in.



According to them, the institution is putting pressure on them by using social media outlets like WhatsApp.



FTII formed a WhatsApp group for parents of the 2019 batch without taking their consent, which was wrong as they are adults now, they said.



A cinematography student from 2019 batch said, on condition of anonymity, “We are postgraduate students and making a parents group on WhatsApp without our permission is wrong. Further, the administration is putting false information on the group, misleading them. Yesterday, our parents got a message that seniors are forcing junior students to participate in the protest which is not true. We are participating in the protest with our own accord and no one is forcing us. Those who don’t want to participate in the protest are not taking part at all.”



Further, they alleged, the institute was threatened students with disciplinary notices sent to the students if they raise their voice on any issue.



Aadhith V Sathvin, student association president, said, “While we were also planning to express our solidarity with students from Jamia Millia Islamia but we fear these notices. Once we get any such notice, we don’t get any scholarships, or bona fide certificate that we are students of FTII, required to participate in film festivals.”



Students started their hunger strike from Monday, demanding that 10 per cent fee hike every year should be stopped. They have further asked that the fees, which have reached Rs 1,18,000 should be reduced. Apart from this, they demanded that the Joint Entrance Test (JET) 2020 should be cancelled immediately and the entrance fees of Rs 10, 000 should be revised.



Bhupendra Kainthola, director, FTII, said, “The decision to increase fees by 10 per cent per annum was taken by the FTII governing council in 2008 and has been in force since. Any decision to review or roll back can therefore be taken only by the governing council. The representation by the students’ association can be placed before the next meeting of the governing council with the permission of its chairman. The request to stop the JET 2020 admission process and review the entrance exam fee was discussed in the governing council meeting on December 10. While not accepting the request to halt the process, the council recommended to JET committee that the exam fee may be reviewed for 2021. The hunger strike is totally unjustified as there is no immediate reason to protest against a decision taken over 11years ago. I appeal to the agitating students to call off the protest and resume their studies.”


