Five MSU fine arts students arrested for graffiti on CAA

Police teams at Fine Arts faculty for investigation on Tuesday

Vadodara: Five students of MS University’s Faculty of Fine Arts were arrested on Tuesday for making graffitis on the wall of Police Bhavan to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Two other students involved in the act are yet to be arrested.

“We got CCTV footages of the incident from a camera installed outside the Police Bhavan. Later, we checked footages of CCTVs installed nearby and got license plate number of the motorbike that they had used, following which we tracked them down,” said Sandip Chaudhary, DCP, zone II.

“They were against the Citizenship Amendment Act and had been planning to do some kind of protest. They later decided to do graffiti. When questioned, they said that the city hadn’t witnessed any protest against CAA and hence they wanted to provoke people to protest,” Chaudhary said.

The seven students had divided themselves in different groups to do graffiti on the walls of Police Bhavan, MSU’s union pavilion ground and walls near Rosary School. The police have seized three two-wheelers and five mobile phones from the accused. The students had made Nazi symbol along with lotus that is poll symbol of the BJP and also written abusive words as a mark of protest against the bill.

An FIR was registered against the accused for “using provocative and humiliating words” to hurt sentiments of people from one community and cause violence, and also damaging public property, he said.

They were booked under IPC Sections 295 (defiling place of worship), 298 (uttering words with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings), 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace), 505 (1)(b)(c) (intent to incite any class or community to commit any offence against any other class or community), and 505 (2) (statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill will). The accused were also charged under sections of the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, the police added.

Police are now investigating any more persons were involved in the offence. Several teams of policemen were seen patrolling the sprawling MSU campus on Tuesday.

The graffiti came as an embarrassment for the cops as Police Bhavan is one of the well-guarded buildings in the city. All the graffiti was removed from the Police Bhavan walls on Tuesday.


