Osmania stands with Jamia: Osmania University protest against CAA

Help India!

Hyderabad

Nikhat Fatima, TwoCircles.net

Support TwoCircles



More than 2000 protestors including students of Osmania University, scholars, teachers, activists and other professionals came together at the University campus to protest against the CAA and also to express their solidarity to the students of Jamia Milia Islamia(JMI) and Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) who were brutally attacked by the police.

Holding placards that read ” Osmania stands with Jamia”; ” We reject CAA and NRC” the protestors shouted slogans demanding justice; condemning the police brutality on the students of AMU and JMI and also demanding the roll back of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

The protest started in the evening and as it began to grow dark the students lit up torches for the ‘Mashal Juloos’ and took the procession rallying around the campus shouting slogans against the government; rejecting NRC and calling for its boycott.

They were joined by students from other universities and institutions and many civil rights groups.

Sajaya Karkla, a social activist who was at the protest said, ” It seems we are going to face harder times. We must oppose NRC, it is going to devastate all the vulnerable communities not only muslims. CAA will be a sharp sword on the neck of the minorities”.

Farhan Mubeen, a student of B. E Architecture, said, ” The discriminatory nature of the Act is for everyone to see. We are protesting against it. And we want it to be rolled back. But first we demand that the police involved in the brutal attacks on the students should be punished as per law and sacked.”

He also said that there are always protests over different matters but it is only when Muslims protest the police resort to violence.

Another student Ateeq Rahman, said, ” We had students from not just our university but also from many other colleges. I hope the Government will take notice of our protests and do the needful.”

The students of Osmania Univesity have protested earlier too after the Bill was passed in Lok Sabha and they say there will be many more protests as they are not ready to cave in.
