Police in Rajasthan's Churu detain government school teacher for molesting girl students

The accused will likely be charged under relevant sections of the POCSO Act (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused is a teacher at the government middle school in Churu district Police are yet to charge the accused under relevant sections of the POCSO Act He was detained on the basis of a complaint by the parents of one of the girls

Jaipur: Police in Churu district of Rajasthan detained a teacher on Tuesday after the parents of a student accused him of molestation. Identified as Kuntak Sakholia, the man teaches at a government middle school. He is currently being questioned in connection with the allegations levelled against him.

The teacher has been accused of molesting three-four girls who are all students, said Churu Superintendent of Police Tejaswini Gautam. An FIR was lodged in this regard on Tuesday on the basis of a complaint registered by the parents of one of the girls. The matter has been handed over to the Mahila police station for further inquiry.

According to the most recent inputs, Sakholia is yet to be charged. If the allegations turn out to be true, he will be charged with relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. However, more details are awaited as this is a developing story.

Earlier this month, a 56-year-old teacher was arrested in Chhattisgarh's Janjgir-Champa district for molesting multiple students of Class 8. At least 15 girls who study at the state-run school in Podibhata village accused the man of touching them inappropriately. Prior to his arrest, students of the school staged a massive protest demanding police action against the accused.

In November of this year, seven government school teachers in Chhattisgarh's Balodabazar district were arrested for allegedly molesting two Class 9 students. All of the accused taught at the Government Higher Secondary School in Marda village and were arrested by Kasdol police on the basis of a complaint by the parents of both the minor girls. In their statements, the complainants had also claimed that the accused tried to threaten the girls by warning them of dire consequences were they to approach the police or narrate their ordeal in front of their parents.
