Citizenship Bill Protest: United Nations Says It Is 'Closely Monitoring' India's Moves On CAB

Haq was responding to a question on whether the Secretary-General has a comment on the Citizenship Amendment Bill. Haq added that he would also like to draw attention to the fact that some of the UN human rights mechanisms, including rapporteurs, have already been expressing their concerns about the nature of this law, and you can see those from the Human Rights Office. ALSO READ | As Northeast Boils Over Citizenship Bill, Japan PM Shinzo Abe Cancels India Visit On whether there will be any statement after the UN completes its analysis of the possible consequences of the law, Haq said we'll have to see what the nature of our reaction needs to be. Right now, we are in the process of analysing the features of this. "And as I mentioned a few days earlier, of course, we have our basic principles, including those enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and expect those to be upheld, he said. Earlier, even the United States has urged India to protect the rights of its religious minorities in keeping with its Constitution and democratic values as it continues to monitor the developments in various Indian states related to the contentious Citizenship Bill. The Northeastern states of India have witnessed high-end protests and clashes after the controversial Bill was passed in the Rajya Sabha. Several columns of paramilitary troops have been deployed in the states in order to control the situation. Thousands of people, including students, social activists, political parties and common citizens, have come on road to protest against the contentious Bill passed by the Central government. ALSO READ | On His Barb Over Citizenship Law, India Gives Pakistan PM Imran Khan A Befitting Reply Curfew was imposed in Guwahati and mobile internet were suspended in several districts of Assam fearing any untoward. However, the protests and clashes with security forces resulted in death of several people. Protests were reported in several other parts of the country including West Bengal, Telangana and even the national capital. In order to ease down the situation, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday asked the Eastern and Northeastern states to shun apprehensions regarding the Bill and extended assurance that the traditions, culture, language etc. of Assam and other states will not be affected at all. "Central government will work with state government for your development," he had said.

As the Northeaster states of India continue protesting against the recently passed Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) causing a worldwide attention, the United Nation on Friday said that it is closely analysing the possible consequences of Bill. "We're aware that the lower and upper houses of the Indian Parliament have passed the Citizenship Amendment Bill, and we're also aware of the concerns that have been publicly expressed. The United Nations is closely analysing the possible consequences of the law," news agency PTI quoted Deputy Spokesman for the Secretary-General Farhan Haq said on Thursday during the daily press briefing. As per the new legislation recently passed by the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday and now approved by the President of India, members of Hindu, Sikh, Jain, Buddhist, Parsi and Christian communities who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014 and facing religious persecution there will not be treated as illegal immigrants but given Indian citizenship. The Act says the refugees of the six communities will be given Indian citizenship after residing in India for five years, instead of earlier requirement of 11 years.
