AP Capital News: Andhra Pradesh may have three capitals, says Jaganmohan Reddy; panel report soon

AMARAVATI: Andhra Pradesh chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy on Tuesday floated the idea of three capital cities, citing a “strong need to decentralise development” in all the three regions of the state.Assuring the continuance of Amaravati as the state’s ‘legislative capital city’, the CM hinted at making Kurnool in Rayalaseema the ‘judicial capital city’ with the high court and Visakhapatnam in north coastal region the ‘executive capital city’.Speaking on the issue in the assembly, Jagan said the priorities of the government should be in tune with the aspirations of the people of all parts of the state. “We can consider multiple capital cities model on the lines of South Africa for development of all parts of the state. We will take final call on the issue after the receipt of the experts’ committee,” he said.Jagan’s statement, particularly on making Kurnool the judicial capital, is significant in the wake of the ongoing protests of advocates from Rayalaseema, demanding shifting of the high court from Amaravati to the city.Jagan said the government is expecting the expert committee’s report on this in a week.“We can think in terms of having three capitals — one being the legislative capital (Amaravati) and the other two being executive capital (Visakhapatnam) and judicial capital (Kurnool). A reputed consultancy firm will also give its report and a decision will be taken after discussing the details and logistics,” he said.He stressed that Visakhapatnam, which has a good infrastructure, can be readily considered for ‘executive capital’ without much investment.Jagan said that previous government had readied grand designs for development of a capital city spread over 53,000 acres at a cost of Rs 1.09 lakh crore. “I too wanted to develop the capital city with Rs 1 lakh crore provided we had sufficient surplus funds. Is it proper to splurge monies on the development of just around 20 sq km area of the state by ignoring the people’s immediate needs of drinking water, health and education?” he asked.He said that north-coastal irrigation projects require nearly Rs16,000 crore and another Rs 60,000 crore for taking Godavari water to Rayalaseema region. Drinking water schemes in all the districts would cost around Rs 40000 crore, the AP CM said. Nearly Rs14,000 crore was also needed for improvement of schools and Rs.30,000 crore for improving hospital infrastructure, the CM said, adding that they needed to spend money judiciously particularly when the coffers were empty.He said that TDP had planned a capital in Amaravati for Rs 1.09 lakh crore and called tenders for Rs 43,000 crore, but spent just Rs 5000 crore. Jagan said that the government was still paying Rs 700 crore as interests on loans secured for construction of projects in Amaravati.
