Mamata vs Centre: CBI took action as Kolkata Police chief was not cooperating in probe, says Rajnath

Singh added that the Police Commissioner was summoned many times but he did not appear. Union Minister rounded off his statement by saying that West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi has summoned Chief Secretary and Director General of Police and has asked them to take immediate action to resolve the situation. #CBIvsMamata - #SaradhaChitFund scam under the regime of #Mamata Banerjee led TMC govt robbed millions of poor and marginal investors in West Bengal of their earnings - #rajnathsingh in Lok Sabha - Watch updates on https://t.co/DklVA2kRqn pic.twitter.com/aFmkLasWDu February 4, 2019 Earlier in the day, BJP's Union minister Prakash Javedkar, while addressing the Lok Sabha questioned the West Bengal CM on what was the need for staging such a protest, what was she hiding and whom was she shielding in connection with the multi-crore Saradha Chit Fund scam which duped millions of investors of their hard earned savings. Javedkar took a dig at the opposition Mahagathbandhan by saying that corrupt leaders who are out on bail have united together as part of the Grand Alliance. He added that the Mamata Banerjee govt was facing an emergency situation in Bengal, rather than the BJP. LIVE: "Mahagathbandhan is divided by regions and united by corruption" says union minister @PrakashJavdekar https://t.co/DklVA2kRqn pic.twitter.com/IfwHkxSYQZ — ABP News (@abpnewstv) February 4, 2019 Javedkar condemned the act by the TMC govt by saying that whatever is happening in Kolkata and West Bengal is one of a kind. Never before was an investigating team taken into custody by police. It's murder of democracy. We want to ask Mamata Banerjee why is she staging dharna, who does she want to shield? Police Commissioner or herself?

The Lok Sabha proceedings in the parliament on Monday got off to a stormy start after the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) parliamentarians lashed out at West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and her govt for staging the 'Save the Constitution' protest against the Narendra Modi govt in Kolkata since Sunday evening. Addressing the parliament on the dramatic turnaround of events in Kolkata on Sunday evening, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh defended CBI's action of probing Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar by stating that the action was taken after the Supreme Court had ordered an investigation into Saradha chit fund case. He further said that the Supreme Court had told CBI to investigate the chit fund matter "fairly" so there is "nothing unconstitutional" in what happened on Sunday. The Supreme Court in its earlier order on the CBI investigation of Saradha chit fund case had said that CBI in its investigation till now had found involvement of many political & influential persons.
