Authorities impose prohibitory orders in part of Delhi after protests over citizenship law - Xinhua

Source: Xinhua| 2019-12-18 14:59:56|Editor: ZX

Video Player Close

NEW DELHI, Dec. 18 (Xinhua) -- Authorities in Indian capital - Delhi Wednesday imposed prohibitory orders in a part of the city and intensified patrolling for surveillance following protests over the controversial new citizenship law, officials said.

The prohibitory orders under a government order (section 144) have been imposed in entire northeast of Delhi.

According to officials, police contingents have been deployed on roads and lanes of Jaffrabad, Seelampur and adjacent areas in the northeastern part of the capital city.

On Tuesday afternoon violent protests broke out in Seelampur area. The protesters clashed with police and threw stones towards them, and police responded by firing tear smoke shells and resorting to baton charging.

"We have intensified surveillance in the area for we don't want yesterday's incident should get repeated," a police official said. "We are also working closely with peacekeeping committees of the areas to ensure normalcy prevails."

Policemen on motorbikes and vehicles were patrolling in the areas, said locals.

Police have arrested six people from the area who were in connection with Tuesday violence, wherein nearly 20 vehicles included those of the police were torched or vandalized.

"We are verifying their credentials and investigating their role in the yesterday's violence," the police official said. "We are also checking CCTV footages to identify more people involved in this violence."

Massive protests are going on across several India states and inside universities against the new citizenship law.

Last week Indian parliament passed the controversial new citizenship law. The law aims at granting citizenship to illegal immigrants belonging to six religions -- Hinduism, Sikhism, Buddhism, Jainism, Parsi and Christianity -- from Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Pakistan. However, it has kept out Muslim immigrants from applying for citizenship.
