CAA protests: Delhi Traffic Police issues advisory, asks people to avoid Okhla underpass; heavy traffic on DND

Heavy traffic hits DND | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Amid CAA protests, the Delhi Police has issued advisory closing Road number 13 A between Mathura road-Kalindi Kunj and Okhla underpass going towards Kalindi Kunj as a precautionary measure The DND flyway is witnessing heavy traffic due to diversion of vehicles from the aforementioned routes Meanwhile, DMRC announced that all metro stations have been opened for commuters

New Delhi: As a result of nefarious elements hijacking protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act 2019 (CAA) in the national capital, there has been some violence such as stone-pelting and incidents of arson such as setting cars and buses on fire. That has caused some serious safety concerns and traffic congestions in several places in Delhi. The civic authorities have curbed vehicular mobility on two stretches in the capital - namely Road number 13 A between Mathura road-Kalindi Kunj and Okhla underpass going towards Kalindi Kunj.

Traffic police issued an advisory to the commuters and asked people coming from Noida to take DND or Akshardham route to reach Delhi. The DND flyway is witnessing high congestion and slow mobility of vehicles owing to diversion of traffic from other routes.

Delhi: Heavy traffic on DND Flyway. Road No. 13A between Mathura Road-Kalindi Kunj & Okhla underpass going towards Kalindi Kunj have been closed for vehicular movement. Traffic Police have advised commuters coming from Noida to take DND or Akshardham route to reach Delhi. #CAA pic.twitter.com/5o8nOl4yYy — ANI (@ANI) December 18, 2019

Sources revealed that the traffic movement on the aforementioned routes was curbed as a precautionary measure owing to planned protests by Jamia students, news agency PTI reported.

The Delhi traffic police took to Twitter to inform people about the closed routes.The official handle of the Delhi traffic police tweeted,” Traffic Alert Road No. 13A between Mathura Road and Kalindi Kunj is closed for traffic movement. People coming from Noida are advised to take DND or Akshardham to reach Delhi.”

Traffic Alert



Road No. 13A between Mathura Road and Kalindi Kunj is closed for traffic movement. People coming from Noida are advised to take DND or Akshardham to reach Delhi. — Delhi Traffic Police (@dtptraffic) December 18, 2019

In another tweet on the micro-blogging site, the traffic police stated,” Similarly people going to Noida from Mathura road are advised to take ashram chowk, DND or Noida link road. Okhla underpass going towards Kalindi Kunj is also closed for traffic movement.”

Similarly people going to Noida from Mathura road are advised to take ashram chowk ,DND or Noida link road. Okhla underpass going towards Kalindi Kunj is also closed for traffic movement. — Delhi Traffic Police (@dtptraffic) December 18, 2019

Meanwhile, all metro stations have been opened by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation.

The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, on Tuesday, closed seven metro stations owing to violence in Seelampur during the protests against the amended Citizenship Law in the capital. Later, five metro stations were opened.

On Wednesday, the DMRC tweeted that entry and exit gates of Jaffrabad and Maujpur - Babarpur stations have been closed but subsequently, within an hour DMRC informed that all metro stations have been opened.

Security Update



Entry & exit gates of Jaffrabad and Maujpur - Babarpur stations are closed. However, interchange facility to continue towards Shiv Vihar is available at Maujpur.



Normal service on all other stations and lines. — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 18, 2019

Security Update



Entry & exit gates at all stations have been opened.



Normal services have resumed in all stations. — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 18, 2019

CAA has triggered public outrage at several places across the country. Protests have hit the national capital, Assam, West Bengal, Meghalaya and other places in the country. Many universities like Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University, among others have flared up in protests against CAA. The government on its part has been trying to reach across to the youth to explain that CAB or CAA is not meant for the Indian Muslims at all and is only a compassionate support to the harassed minorities of Islamic regimes in the neighbouring countries.



Home MInister Amit Shah told Times Now in an exclusive interview that the earlier Congress governments have been promising to help the Indians stranded on the other side of the border due to Partition and not helped by Nehru-Liaqat pact. The Prime Minister, in order to calm the people, has assured the people that CAA doesn’t affect any citizen of India and appealed to the people to air dissent, which is necessary for a vibrant democracy, by using peaceful means.
