Modi wished Hazare luck for his fast unto death, says Shiv Sena

The Shiv Sena on Monday appealed to the BJP-led government to save the life of social activist Anna Hazare, whose hunger strike entered its sixth day. The party, which is the oldest ally of the BJP, also criticised Prime Minister Narendra Modi for sending an 'insensitive' letter to Hazare.

The 81-year-old anti-graft crusader has been on hunger strike in his native Ralegan Siddhi village in Ahmednagar, over 240km from Mumbai, since January 30.

Hazare, the face of the Lokpal movement, has been demanding the appointment of anti-corruption watchdogs at the Centre and in Maharashtra and resolution of farmers' issues.

Taking a swipe at Modi on the issue, the Sena said, "Anna faces criticism for being adamant and stubborn. It is said to be the trait of selfless people. Similar characteristics are found in Prime Minister Narendra Modi as well, but it is portrayed as his greatness."

In its editorial in party mouthpiece Saamana on Monday, the Shiv Sena said, "First, you should save Anna's life and then we can see what is to be done later. If the government is wishful of Anna losing his life in this battle, then it is a sign of the state's culture getting morbid," the Sena editorial alleged.

It also hit out at the Modi government for the PMO's letter to Hazare, which his supporters claimed was "terse" and amounted to giving him the cold shoulder.

"Your letter was received, thank you and best wishes," read the letter, purportedly sent by the PMO, which was shown to some reporters by an aide of Hazare on February 2.

"His fast is for the Lokpal, appointment of Lokayukta and farmers' issues and the prime minister has sent a letter, wishing him luck for his fast unto death," the Sena editorial claimed.

The BJP's ally in the Maharashtra and Union governments also alleged that the ruling dispensation had "managed" the media at the national level to ensure coverage of Hazare's stir was kept at a "low level".

"If Anna's agitation spreads across the country like last time, then there will be chaos in the country. The government is trying to keeping the coverage at a low level," the Sena alleged.

On Sunday, Hazare told reporters he would return his Padma Bhushan award “in the next few days” if the Modi government did not act on his demands. Hazare said, “If this government does not fulfil its promises made to the country in the next few days, I will return my Padma Bhushan. (The) Modi government has breached the faith of people.” Hazare had received the Padma Bhushan, the third-highest civilian honour of the country, in 1992.

Hazare also told news agency ANI that Modi would be responsible if anything happened to him during his hunger strike. “People will remember me as a person who tackled situations and not as somebody who added fuel to the fire. If something happens to me, people will hold prime minister responsible,” Hazare declared.
