Citizenship Amendment Act: the women in Jamia Millia video say India will not be divided

TOPSHOT - Yemen's Shiite Huthi rebels shout slogans during a gathering to mobilise more fighters to battlefronts to fight pro-government forces, on June 18, 2017, in the Yemeni capital Sanaa. / AFP PHOTO / MOHAMMED HUWAIS (Photo credit should read MOHAMMED HUWAIS/AFP via Getty Images)

Still unvaccinated? You could be fined $4,000 in this EU country

A medic prepares a dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine against the coronavirus at a private nursing home in the Israeli central coastal city of Netanya on January 5, 2022. - Israel began on January 3 administering fourth Covid vaccine shots to people over 60 and health workers amid a surge driven by the Omicron variant. (Photo by JACK GUEZ / AFP) (Photo by JACK GUEZ/AFP via Getty Images)

Russia expert: Putin wants a 'replay of the end of the Cold War'

Britain's Prime Minister Boris Johnson leaves from 10 Downing Street in London on January 25, 2022. - London's police chief on Tuesday said her officers are investigating several parties that took place at Prime Minister Boris Johnson's office and government departments during Covid lockdowns. "The Met is now investigating a number of events that took place at Downing Street and Whitehall in the last two years in relation to potential breaches of Covid-19 regulations," Metropolitan Police Commissioner Cressida Dick told the London Assembly local authority. (Photo by Daniel LEAL / AFP) (Photo by DANIEL LEAL/AFP via Getty Images)

Explained: How Italy will elect a new head of state

Opposition leader speaks out as Putin's ally allows Russian military to enter the nation

EU Chief: 'Nothing off table' in response to Russia

North Korean leader Kim Jong Un observes the firing of suspected missiles in this image released by North Korea's Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) on March 22, 2020. KCNA/via REUTERS ATTENTION EDITORS - THIS IMAGE WAS PROVIDED BY A THIRD PARTY. REUTERS IS UNABLE TO INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY THIS IMAGE. NO THIRD PARTY SALES. SOUTH KOREA OUT.

Opinion: These maps show why Putin might want to invade Ukraine

Here's why the US doesn't want its F-35 wreckage to fall into China's hands

220119-N-EE352-1075 PHILIPPINE SEA (Jan. 19, 2022) A Sailor fuels an F-35C Lightning II, assigned to the "Argonauts" of Strike Fighter Squadron (VFA) 147, on the flight deck aboard Nimitz-class aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson (CVN 70), Jan. 19, 2022. Operating as part of U.S. Pacific Fleet, USS Carl Vinson is conducting training to preserve and protect a free and open Indo-Pacific region. (U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist Seaman Leon Vonguyen)

Lithuania warns that Ukraine invasion will lead to 'war of Europe'

A view shows Russian BMP-3 infantry fighting vehicles during drills held by the armed forces of the Southern Military District at the Kadamovsky range in the Rostov region, Russia January 27, 2022. REUTERS/Sergey Pivovarov

New Delhi CNN —

Aysha Renna didn’t think she would ever find herself confronting baton-wielding police officers to protect a fellow Muslim student from a beating.

But the 22-year-old, along with several other women, is now being praised for her bravery after a video showing them stopping Indian police from attacking her friend went viral on social media.

“At that moment, I wanted to save my brother, so in order to do that I wanted to make these people (go) away,” she told CNN on Tuesday.

Renna was among 2,000 people demonstrating at the prestigious Jamia Millia Islamia university in New Delhi on Sunday against a controversial law that offers a path to citizenship for non-Muslim religious minorities from select countries.

Images of the protest shared widely online show Renna and fellow student protester Ladeeda Farsana standing above protesters with their hands raised, leading many to embrace the pair as figureheads of the movement.

Hundreds of people were injured in the protests, with students telling CNN they were beaten by police with sticks and batons. Dozens have been arrested. Delhi Police said they were unarmed and used minimum force to bring the crowds under control.

Since the Citizen Amendment Act (CAA) was passed into law by Hindu nationalist Prime Minister Narendra Modi last week, protests have broken out across nine states, including in major cities such as Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and the capital New Delhi, mostly around university campuses. Meanwhile, ongoing protests in Assam, in India’s northeast, turned violent, with at least five people killed, police said.

Renna has been in hiding since the incident on Sunday, when the demonstrations were broken up by police who forced their way into her university library, firing tear gas.

Aysha Renna's stand against authority reflects widespread anger in India over the controversial citizenship law. CNN

In the viral video, police can be heard telling the young women – who had taken shelter in a nearby house – to come outside. The women tell the police to leave before the officers grab their friend and drag him onto the sidewalk, where they beat him with batons.

The women then put themselves in front of the police batons to shield their friend from the blows, shouting at the officers to leave.

“We didn’t think about it, we just wanted to save our brother,” said Farsana, a 22-year-old Arabic student at Jamia university and one of the women who intervened.

The man targeted by police, Shaheen Abdullah, 24, said the group was running to get away from a stampede of people who fled the university once police moved in, but the group of officers had chased them.

“These brave girls, they came out and were trying to shield me,” Abdullah said. “I was like no, no! It should be the other way!”

Renna said that she doesn’t fear police violence, “because the most fearful thing is the government’s action against the minorities.”

Anger has been growing nationally over the CAA, which promises to fast-track citizenship for religious minorities, including Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians, from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan, who arrived in India before 2015.

Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Rafiq Maqbool/AP An Indian Muslim participates in a protest against a new citizenship law that opponents say threatens India's secular identity, in Mumbai, India, on Friday, January 24. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Majunath Kiran/AFP/Getty A Muslim youth waves the Indian flag during a protest held by the Muslim community in Bangalore on January 24. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Harish Tyagi/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock A heart made of paper boats with slogans on them rests near a protest in the Shaheen Bagh neighborhood in New Delhi on Wednesday, January 16. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Sanjay Kanojia/AFP/Getty Images Protesters light candles near posters of Mahatma Gandhi and politician and social reformer Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar during a demonstration against India's new citizenship law at Mansoor Ali Park in Allahabad on Tuesday, January 14. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Manjunath Kiran/AFP/Getty Images Police personnel try to protect a man attending a protest against graffiti on the shutters and walls of Church Street condemning Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and India's new citizenship law in Bangalore on Tuesday, January 14. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Anupam Nath/AP Activists of All Assam Students' Union and other indigenous organizations participate in a torch procession against the Citizenship Amendment Act in Guwahati, India, on Saturday, January 11. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill STR/AFP via Getty Images Protestors shout slogans outside the Delhi Police Headquarters following clashes between student groups at Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi on Sunday, January 5. The violence injured around 34 people, according to police. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Mahesh Kumar A/AP Placards lie next to Indian Muslims offering prayers during a protest on Saturday, January 4. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Manish Swarup/AP Policewomen detain a student protesting outside Uttar Pradesh Bhawan in New Delhi on Friday, December 27. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Manjunath Kiran/AFP/Getty Images Demonstrators gather at the Quddus Saheb Eidgah grounds to take part in a rally against India's new citizenship law in Bangalore on Monday, December 23. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Danish Siddiqui/Reuters Demonstrators sit next to bonfires during dusk as they block a road during a protest in New Delhi on Sunday, December 22. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Money Sharma/AFP via Getty Images Protesters gather by the Jama Masjid mosque in New Delhi to demonstrate against India's new citizenship law on Friday, December 20. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Ajit Solanki/AP Policemen with batons charge a protester in Ahmedabad on Thursday, December 19. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Rajanish Kakade/AP Indians gather during a protest rally in Mumbai on December 19. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Stringer/AFP via Getty Images An officer flees a police station damaged by protesters during a demonstration in Lucknow on December 19. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Dibyangshu Sarkar/AFP via Getty Images Chief minister of West Bengal state and leader of the Trinamool Congress Mamata Banerjee, along with party supporters, walks in a mass rally across Howrah bridge in Kolkata on December 18. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Altaf Qadri/AP Students from Jamia Millia Islamia, a university in New Delhi, shout slogans during a protest on Tuesday, December 17. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Money Sharma/AFP/Getty Images People standing on roofs in New Delhi watch police gathered next to a demonstration on December 17. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Sanjay Kanojia/AFP via Getty Images Students and activists protest outside the Allahabad University campus in Allahabad, India, on Monday, December 16. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Dibyangshu Sarkar/AFP via Getty Images People participate in a mass rally in Kolkata, India, on December 16. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Punit Paranjpe/AFP via Getty Images Demonstrators hold signs at the University of Mumbai. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Stringer/AFP/Getty Images A bus is seen on fire following a demonstration in New Delhi on Sunday, December 15. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Anupam Nath/AP A child prays during a condolence event in Guwahati, India, for demonstrators killed in anti-CAB protests. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Sajjad Hussain/AFP/Getty Images Demonstrators shout slogans during a protest in Guwahati on Friday, December 13. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Biju Boro/AFP via Getty Images Relatives of Sam Stafford, 18, who was killed during clashes with police the previous day, react in Guwahati on December 13. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Manish Swarup/AP Indian Muslims demonstrate against the bill in New Delhi on December 13. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Biju Boro/AFP via Getty Images Police fire tear gas during a protest in Guwahati on Thursday, December 12. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Biju Boro/AFP via Getty Images Indian soldiers patrol near a burnt vehicle during a curfew in Guwahati on December 12. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Anupam Nath/AP An Indian police officer aims his gun before firing toward protesters who threw stones in Guwahati on December 12. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Sajjad Hussain/AFP/Getty Images Indian youth congress members hold torches as they demonstrate in New Delhi on Wednesday, December 11. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Biju Boro/AFP/Getty Images Security personnel use batons to disperse students protesting against CAB in Guwahati on December 11. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill Anupam Nath/AP Protesters on motorbikes hold placards during a protest against the bill in Guwahati on Tuesday, December 10. Photos: Protesters rally against India's citizenship bill STR/AFP/Getty Images Demonstrators shout slogans during a shutdown called by the North East Students' Organization in Agartala, India, on December 10. It was hours after lawmakers approved the government's new citizenship bill. Prev Next

But the exclusion of Muslims – which Modi said is because they are not minorities in India’s neighboring countries – has raised concerns about the bill’s constitutionality and the growing anti-Muslim rhetoric in India.

“This act is clearly against Indian Muslims, it’s against the constitution. So we want to save our constitution,” Farsana told CNN. “We want to fight for our right.”

The passing of the new law has also raised fears among many of India’s 200 million Muslims that their own citizenship could be called into question in the not too distant future.

Many have linked the new law to Indian Home Minister Amit Shah’s repeated promise to implement a nationwide register of citizens, a process by which residents will need to provide the government with evidence that they are living in India legally. The government has insisted that the policy is intended only to root out illegal immigrants.

So far the registry has only been implemented in Assam, where earlier this year, an estimated 1.9 million people were excluded from the list – the majority of whom were Muslim, and therefore not protected under the new law.

“We will be physically turned out,” said Abdullah. “There is no other country we can go. This is our land and we have to stay here and we have to fight for that.”

Modi has sought to reassure Indian citizens that the new citizenship law will “not affect any citizen of India of any religion,” he said in a statement on Monday.

“This act is only for those who have faced years of persecution outside and have no other place to go except India,” Modi said.

But critics say the citizenship legislation is part of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party’s (BJP) agenda to push Hindu nationalism onto secular India. The BJP has its roots in India’s right-wing nationalist Hindu movement that promotes a vision of a Hindu nation.

Protesters have continued to stage rallies across the country.

A partial curfew was imposed in the district of North East Delhi on Wednesday after protests against the citizenship law turned violent. Delhi police spokesperson Arun Mittal, told CNN that a ban on large public gatherings has been put in place.

Indian police and protesters clashed in the district on Tuesday, with protesters pelting stones and police firing tear gas in the area of Seelampur, Mittal said. Six people were arrested.

Meanwhile, India’s Supreme Court has been asked to rule on whether the law is unconstitutional.

Abdullah said they will not stop protesting.

“We will regroup and we will protest again. We are not planning a riot but we need to show them that we are not going to step back,” he said. “We can’t just step back and wait for something to happen.”

Renna said that the government will not succeed in dividing the country.

“India will be united always,” she said. “India will be one.”
