Curfew lifted in Guwahati, mobile Net ban for 24 hours more

Rapid Action Force personnel keep vigil in Guwahati (ANI Photo)

GUWAHATI/DIBRUGARH: After six days, curfew was lifted in Kamrup (Metro) and Jorhat districts on Tuesday, while restrictions were relaxed in Dibrugarh and Tinsukia districts. The ban on mobile internet, however, will continue for at least another 24 hours.

“Gauhati High Court made an observation that if security agencies are satisfied the suspension of mobile internet may be lifted. With all due respect to the HC and going by the deep-rooted conspiracy in the violence, security agencies believe that the mobile internet services remain suspended is not lifted today. Day after tomorrow, we will review the security situation and take a call.”

Broadband internet services were resumed from Tuesday. In Dibrugarh, the curfew was temporarily relaxed from 6 am to 8 pm, while in Tinsukia, it was lifted from 6 am to 4 pm. “It is disappointing that the curfew is still in force in Dibrugarh and Tinsukia districts. The situation in Dibrugarh (the home district of chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal) is normal. There has been no incidents of violence in the last 96 hours. In Tinsukia too, the situation has become almost normal. Businesses are suffering because of the curfew. There is unnecessary panic panic among the public because of the curfew,” Dibrugarh Bar Association general secretary Satyabrata Sharma said.

On Wednesday, the nearly four lakh state government employees will stage a noncooperation protest in protest against the Citizenship (amendment) Act (CAA). Sarma said the government has allowed the employees to support the ongoing statewide protest against the act. “The employees can join the protest tomorrow and there will be no pay cut for the day. But, our only condition is that they should not join protests organized by any political party, be it Congress, BJP, AIUDF or AGP. We have no problem if they stage protests under their own banners or with other non-political groups like Aasu or AJYCP,” Sarma said. Meanwhile, Aasu’s threeday gana satyagraha across Assam entered the second day, while AJYCP members sat on a hunger strike at several places.

In Guwahati, Aasu leaders Samujjal Kumar Bhattacharya and Lurinjyoti Gogoi, actor Barsha Rani Bishaya and hundreds of protesters courted arrest for the second consecutive day on Tuesday while staging the satyagraha. They were released after some time. 4 PILs in HC over Net ban Four PILs have been filed in Gauhati high court against the ban on mobile internet services in Assam in the past six days. The PILs have been filed by Luit Kumar Barman, a businessman based in Guwahati; Ajit Kumar Bhuyan, senior journalist; Banashree Gogoi and Randip Sharma, advocates at the HC.

The HC in its order to the government said, “Having considered all aspects of the case and in particular the dependence of the citizens on internet services, we saw that the suspension has virtually resulted in some serious disruption on the lives of the residents. We deem it just and proper to observe that respondents on considering inputs of various sources may take a considered decision for restoration of mobile data and internet services during the afternoon hours of the day beyond 3 O clock. In case there is no disruption or untoward incident, the respondents may consider longer period of continuance of internet and mobile data services.” The court asked the government to give a reply to the court on Wednesday. The next hearing for the PILs is fixed on Thursday.


