Amit Shah on Jamia Violence: “Police Did Not Go After Students”. Really?

> Culture

Jamia violence on December 15, shook the nation after news of Delhi Police brutality over an Anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protest got around. Soon some the biggest Indian universities (with the addition of Yale and Oxford) joined in as the country erupted in protests against the Act and the attack on unarmed students. Amit Shah, in his response on December 17 says that he only directed Delhi Police to maintain law and order (read: they didn’t follow the law, acting on misinformation and impulse) and make sure that peace prevails in India’s capital.

Home Minister Amit Shah addressed the Jamia Millia Islamia University and talked about the NRC and CAA and its effects on the citizens of India. Recently, 10 arrests were made in the JMI case, none were students. The attacks on students were incited by people who are currently under investigation and the students caught in limbo continue to suffer. Amit Shah, however, in his interview with AajTak took no shots at the cops or expressed grief over the violence that clearly wasn’t incited in a campus library.

SEE ALSO: Citizenship Amendment Act Protests: Police Violence At Delhi's Jamia Millia Sparks Outrage Across India

Amit Shah covered topics ranging from the students’ Anti-CAA sentiments, NRC implementation in Assam, the potential of CAA and of course, Congress’ fault. Here are a few takeaways from his interview and what they sound like to someone looking for answers:

“Police Did Not Go After Students”

Amit Shah cleared the air on the orders given to Delhi Police saying that, "I have directed the Delhi Police to maintain law and order and ensure peace in Delhi,". He went on to ask whether or not the authorities should have acted the way they did.

“Don’t you think that the police should take action? Police have to take action because that is their duty and the right thing for them to do.” - Amit Shah

The Home Minister did not admit that JMI witnessed police brutality. His statements makes no mention of the use of teargas and lathis to storm a college over an alleged protest. He also didn’t mention any remorse for the injuries caused to innocent students or acknowledge that the government allowed a crackdown that’s practically illegal (they didn’t have permission to enter the campus from the Vice-Chancellor).

SEE ALSO: Jamia protests: 10 Arrested In Jamia Police Violence Case. None Of Them Are Students

“Students haven’t read the CAA properly”

About the students protesting the Citizenship Amendment Act, Amit Shah maintained that the root cause of the outrage is ignorance of what the Act is about. While mentioning that only 22 out of 224 universities in India protesting, he said that he’s all ears for CAA issues once the students understand them fully.

“Students haven’t read the CAA properly. I appeal to them to do so. If they have issues, they can bring them forth to the government. As people understand the Act better, the protests will gradually die down,” - Amit Shah

This is probably the most dismissive statement he’s made on the subject. The students’ protests that were turned into violence by the police is somehow based on a massive misunderstanding according to the Home Minister. JMI is a centre of education and the protests ensued after the earlier CAB and NRC implementation in Assam became public knowledge. To casually negate the understanding of a minority over a bill that raises concerns is rather shocking.

“Bonafide Indian citizens should have no fear”

Amit Shah has used words like “infiltrators” to describe Muslims before as he says that minorities shouldn’t have fear under the BJP-led government. The CAA by itself makes no difference to current citizens of the country but the Act that clearly makes provisions according to religion is a tricky thing for minorities when paired with the NRC.

First we will pass the Citizenship Amendment bill and ensure that all the refugees from the neighbouring nations get the Indian citizenship. After that NRC will be made and we will detect and deport every infiltrator from our motherland. pic.twitter.com/oB2SlBaQ0j — Amit Shah (@AmitShah) May 1, 2019

"No Indian will be sent out of the country. I want to tell the minorities that special facility will be made for them and also other people (for the NRC). But I also want to ask should we keep our borders open for illegal immigrants?" - Amit Shah

Like most of his adresses, Amit Shah delved into the Congress’ incompetence to pass pending laws and regulations. He even went on to question if the Congress or any of the opposition is willing to take in all the illegal immigrants from Pakistan.

Citizens have been seeking answers and demanding clarity on CAA and NRC. All eyes are on the Home Minister and the Prime Minister to offer statements that explain the recent developments in the country. Just yesterday, Narendra Modi took to social media to address the subject. Check out a breakdown of what he said here:

PM Narendra Modi Calls Violent Protests Against CAA 'Deeply Distressing', Appeals For Peace And Unity

Cover artwork: Dhawal Bhanushali/Mashable India
