Fact Check: Girl in viral pic with Rahul Gandhi is not the face of Jamia protests

A picture of a girl talking to Rahul Gandhi is being widely shared on social media with the claim that she is the one seen at the Jamia protests.

Did the girl who has become the face of Jamia Millia Islamia protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act share stage with Rahul Gandhi?

Ayesha Renna, a history student at Jamia, has been a talking point on social media after a video emerged of her arguing with Delhi Police along with two other girls during a lathicharge on Sunday at the university.

And now, a picture of a girl talking to Rahul Gandhi is being widely shared on social media with the claim that she is the one seen at the Jamia protests. Many Facebook users have shared Ayesha's photos at the protests along with the viral image.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the viral claim to be false. Both the girls are different.

The Claim

Facebook user "Manish Soni" uploaded a collage of two photos - one of a girl wearing glasses and hijab and holding a microphone, and the other of her talking to Rahul Gandhi. The caption in Hindi translates to, "This is the girl who was found at all the places where riots occurred." He also posted the link to Ayesha's profile.

The archived version of the post can be seen here.

Many Facebook users have shared the viral image along with pictures of protests where Ayesha can be seen. The caption in Hindi can be translated to, "Look carefully at the girl with spectacles who is present in every protest. Also see who is with her."

The archived version of the post can be seen here.

AFWA probe

AFWA reverse-searched the viral photo of the girl with Rahul Gandhi and found that she is Safa Sebin, a Class 12 student from Malappuram district in Kerala.

The Congress leader was at his Lok Sabha constituency of Wayanad in Kerala earlier this month. Just before his speech at a public meeting on December 5, Rahul had said he would speak in English and wanted someone to translate for him. Safa volunteered and won accolades for the same.

News about this can be read in Kerala Kaumudi and the video can be seen at Asianet News ().

AFWA then reverse-searched the other protest images shared along with the viral photo and found that Ayesha did indeed take a part in them.

Hailing from Kerala, the Jamia student's interviews have appeared in the media. Her Facebook account too has many posts about the protests.

AFWA also reached out to Safa who said she is a student of Government Higher Secondary School at Karuvarakundu in Kerala's Malappuram district. "I am in school and have nothing to do with the protests in Delhi," she said, laughing at being compared to Ayesha because of the hijab and spectacles. "I do know Ayesha Renna; she is from my district. But I have never met her though."

Conclusion

Therefore, it is clear that the girl with Rahul Gandhi in the viral image has nothing to do with the protests by Jamia students. She is a school student in Kerala's Malappuram, while the girl taking part in the protests against CAA is a Jamia student.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Young girl seen with Rahul Gandhi is a protester at Jamia Millia Islamia Conclusion The girl is a Class 12 student in Kerala's Malappuram district and has nothing to do with the protests in Delhi JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
