CBI vs Kolkata Police: Mamata Bannerjee on dharna; WATCH ground report

In 2006 too, Mamata Bannerjee had chosen the same spot to observe an indefinite fast in support of farmers (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Kolkata: Vendetta politics is in full swing as Mamata Bannerjee has decided to sit on a dharna in Kolkata. The Chief Minister has decided to sit on a dharna after a showdown between the CBI and the Kolkata police. Taking a stand to allegedly save her officers, Banerjee has called this a constitutional breakdown.

Slamming the central government and its methods, Banerjee acccused Prime Minister Narendra Modi of bringing tears to the eyes of the farmers of the country. Stating that the Trinamool Congress (TMC) has always been a pro-farmers government, the CM also said that the central government has done nothing apart from giving the farmers sleepless nights.

CBI vs Kolkata Police | Massive showdown in #Kolkata. #WestBengal CM Mamata Banerjee on a dharna in Kolkata.



MIRROR NOW's @Ranadeepc02 gets the latest on ground report. #CBIvsMamata pic.twitter.com/dbbQfKQzU5 — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) February 4, 2019

As per Mirror Now ground report, the dharna that is being held currently is very symbolic to the dharna that Mamata had done in the year 2006 when she observed an indefinite fast following a controversy relating to the Singur land issue. In 2006 too, Bannerjee had chosen the same spot to protest as this year.

In the Singur land issue, the CM had decided to protest against TATA's decision of acquiring land from farmers and building industries on the land. This year too, Bannerjee has taken a stand in the support of the farmers.

CBI vs Kolkata Police | 26 leaders of the opposition to meet the ECI later today.@Iam_Ayushmann gets the latest pic.twitter.com/zIc2eKWpSS — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) February 4, 2019

Terming her government pro-farmers, Bannerjee laid emphasis on the fact that her government is the number one government in skill-development and infrastructure in rural areas of West Bengal. Steering clear of all the charges of contempt of court and allegations in the Sharda scam, Bannerjee laid emphasis on farmers as she sat on a dharna.
