Violent protests over Citizenship Act: How Indian police control riots?

Students of Ferguson College of Pune are holding placards supporting Jamia students. Students in various universities have expressed solidarity with the Jamia protesters and criticised the Delhi Police for action inside Jamia Milia Islamia University campus on Sunday over violent protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act in Delhi. (Photo: PTI)

Protests over Citizenship Amendment Act, passed last week by Parliament, continue in parts of the country. At many places, the protests turned violent and led to police action drawing severe flak from various quarters particularly in the cases of Jamia Milia Islamia University campus.

The Delhi Police entered the Jamia campus on Sunday evening following stone-pelting and arson by a mob, which, police say, had joined the protest march taken out by Jamia students demanding roll back of the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Both sides reported injuries but the visuals of police entering the campus caused a rage among civil right activists and student groups in nearly two dozen universities across the country. Police have taken action in many states to control rioting by protesters to express their anguish against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Around 200 people were arrested and nearly 1,500 detained in Assam, where the protests over the Citizenship Amendment Act began first. In Delhi, which has now become the centre of anti-CAA protests, police are still making arrests by identifying the rioters.

Delhi police personnel were at the receiving end from the violent protesters in Seelampur area of the city on Tuesday. (Photo: PTI)

Even in states like Bengal and Kerala - ruled by parties that oppose the Citizenship Amendment Act and have declared that they would not implement the law passed by Parliament - police action has been severe going by the number of arrests made in connection with protests and clashes with police.

In Bengal, more than 350 people were arrested till Tuesday for their alleged participation for causing unrest over the Citizenship Amendment Act. In Kerala, more than 200 protesters were arrested.

However, most of criticism has come the Delhi Police's way despite many senior police professionals defending police action in Jamia campus and later in Seelampur where police personnel were largely at receiving end.

Delhi Police was criticised for handling protests over the Citizenship Amendment Act by Jamia students in Delhi. This photograph has been doing rounds over social media since police action in Jamia campus. (Photo: Twitter)

A 2016 report on crowd control by the Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPRD) - under the Union home ministry - deals in detail how to deal with rioting in a public protest.

The BPRD report underscores the fundamental right of protest by referring to lawful assembly under Article 19 of the Constitution but emphasizes that "threat to public peace and order arises from the congregation of a large number of persons for a specific purpose."

In the present case, the specific purpose is protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act which the protesters - except those in Assam - allege targets Muslims to further the Hinduva agenda of the BJP, the party ruling at the Centre.

The BPRD report has defined a riot based on "the use of force or violence by any one, or more than one member, of" an assembly of protesters distinguishing it from non-aggressive crowd. According to section 146 IPC, it is force or violence that turns an unlawful assembly into a riot. The degree of force or violence is not important.

Crowd control or police action against rioting is a duty of police personnel under Section 23 of the Police Act of 1861, the BPRD says. The law reads, "It shall be the duty of every police officer to prevent the commission of offences and public nuisances; and to apprehend all persons whom he is legally authorised to apprehend and for whose apprehension sufficient grounds exist."

This law empowers police to use force to control crowd or check rioting by a group of protesters. But the laws are silent on how much force should be used. It has been left to the assessment of the police officer in-charge of the ground situation.

Bengaluru youths protesting police action inside Jamia campus in Delhi. (Photo: PTI)

This is where the complaints of excessive use of force by police emerge. In Jamia campus, the students complained of police hauling and beating them up in an action that the Delhi Police says was taken in pursuit of the rioters who had taken refuge in the Jamia campus.

The BPRD has given a three-pointer rule to control a riot situation. This can be used to judge if any police action was excessive or brutal in controlling riot. The riot control principles are:

No more force should be used than is necessary; [necessary is the keyword that makes the intent of officer in-charge vital] It should not be used as a punitive measure; It must cease immediately the objective is gained

Against these three principles, the use of tear smoke, cane or firearms is permitted for the police to control rioters. Tear smoke and cane were used by the police in Jamia campus where the protesters pelted police with stones and allegedly used petrol bombs on the force.

A study project, Managing Peaceful Mass Agitations by Police, sponsored by the National Police Academy, called for developing new SOPs (Standard Operating Procedures) so that use of force in police action in controlling violent protests could be contained to the minimum required.

Instituted in the backdrop of police handling of the Anna Hazare and Ramdev's protests in 2011-12, the study concluded, "Use of traditional methods of dealing with the agitators is mostly ill-suited for the public protests today. Police mishandling of these events gets captured by media and is relayed repeatedly on the channels, creating antipathy for police, eroding faith and credibility of the government, jeopardizing the possibility of reconciliation between the agitators and the authorities."

Analysing the 2016 violent protests in the Kashmir Valley following terrorist Burhan Wani's killing and Haryana over Jat reservation demand, an Observer Research Foundation (ORF) too, found that the traditional method of riot control in India is inadequate and tends to use of excessive force by the police and security personnel.

The ongoing protests over the Citizenship Amendment Bill and the use of force by police in Delhi and elsewhere underscore the need for more specific SOPs for the security forces to employ in controlling riots.

The Citizenship Amendment Bill, for record, seeks to offer a window of acquiring Indian citizenship to the illegal immigrants belonging to six communities -- Hindu, Sikh, Jain, Buddhist, Parsi and Christian -- whom the government considers entered India to escape religious persecution in their parent countries, namely, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan.
