Day after protests, Delhi Police conduct flag march in Seelampur, Jaffrabad; Sec 144 imposed

People protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) 2019 in North East Delhi's Seelampur area | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The Delhi Police also held a flag march in Mustafabad and Ghonda areas People have been urged not to pay heed to rumours Section 144 prohibits the gathering of four or more people at a spot

New Delhi: A day after Seelampur and Jafrabad witnessed violence over the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, police and paramilitary personnel on Wednesday carried out a flag march in the northeast Delhi areas.

As uneasy calm prevailed, schools and shops in the area opened this morning. In order to maintain law and order in the area, police maintained a tight vigil.

The Delhi Police also held a flag march in Mustafabad and Ghonda areas.

As per police, prohibitory orders have been clamped in northeast Delhi except areas that fall under two police stations - Harsh Vihar and Sonia Vihar. Section 144 prohibits the gathering of four or more people at a spot.

Patrolling is being done by the Delhi Police and paramilitary personnel in groups to ensure that the situation continues to be peaceful.

People have been urged not to pay heed to rumours. Meanwhile, sources suggest that the Delhi Police are raising the matter of the accounts spreading false and fake information with Facebook and Twitter. “We are also in process of taking action on such accounts,” said sources.

"Section 144 has been invoked in the North East district. The police undertook flag march. People are appealed to maintain peace and harmony and not to lend credence to rumours," tweeted the DCP office (northeast).

Six people (five from Seelampur and Jafarabad, and one from Brijpuri) were arrested and three cases were filed late last night for arson and violence during the protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019.

Joint Commissioner of Alok Kumar said: "We have registered three cases of arson and violence. The first case was filed for Seelampur violence, second for Jafarabad and third for Brijpuri."

Police filed cases of rioting, arson, unlawful assembly, damage to public property, and causing grievous hurt.

The officer added that over two dozen miscreants have been identified for indulging in violence and setting public properties on fire.

A total of 34 people, including a few children and 12 policemen, received injuries in violence during a protest in Seelampur.

Police, however, reiterated that no bullet was fired. Only tear gas shells were used. One Rapid Action Force bus, two public transport buses, and some motorbikes were damaged during the protest.

The demonstrators had also targeted a school bus carrying some children. However, they were escorted to safety by police.

Yesterday's was the second violent protest in the national capital within the span of 72 hours against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, commonly known by its abbreviation CAA.
