CAA protests: Students detained in Coimbatore while trying to block TN governor’s convoy

Protesters at PSG College

COIMBATORE: A total of 17 students of the Bharathiar University were detained by police when they tried to block the path on which governor Banwarilal Purohit's convoy was to reach the venue of the university’s convocation on Wednesday. The students were protesting the Citizenship Amendment Act and police attack on students in Delhi who had protested the Act.Of the 17 students, 11 were girls. They were taken to the Thondamuthur police station. R Selvam, one of the protesters who was detained, told TOI that they had tried to block the road on the campus which led to the convention centre where the convocation was to be held. “Our plan was to block the governor’s vehicle, but police removed us before the convoy came into the campus,” he said.Selvam said right from the morning police had not been allowing students and parents who came to attend the convocation near the university’s administrative block in anticipation.Students from other colleges in the city too staged protests on the campuses. At PSG College of Arts and Science in the city, around 300 students from all years staged a sit-in protest on the campus. Protesters said police asked them to disperse as the governor had passed the college en route Bharathiar University and had seen them protesting.“We held the demonstration to create awareness on the Citizenship Amendment Act. We began it as a solidarity protest for the students of Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University who were attacked by police for protesting against the Act. We concluded by speaking about the Act and asked our students to read more and know about the Act,” said a protester who studies in the second year.Protesters at the Government Arts College said they had asked students to leave the premises and stay away from classes. They also staged a sit-in protest.Dhinesh Raja, a student and representative of Students Federation of India, said the Citizenship Amendment Act would divide the nation on religious lines. “Also, it would deny citizenship to hundreds of thousands of Sri Lankan Tamil refugees staying in this country,” he said.“We condemn the police violence on students in Delhi who protested against the Act. We seek that the Act is repealed,” he said.Lawyers, students organisations and political outfits too staged protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act in the city on Wednesday.
