Supreme Court To Examine Constitutional Validity Of CAA, Issues Notice To Centre

> Culture

As protests against the Citizenship Amendment Bill, coupled with the NRC) continue to be rampant across the country, there have been several pleas for the Supreme Court to intercede on the citizen's behalf. As is usually in the case of laws that violate the Constitution of India, it has been alleged that the CAA with the NRC are in violation of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution. However, on Wednesday, the apex court refused to order a stay on the CAA.

Dhawal Bhanushali / Mashable India

On Wednesday morning, a three-judge bench of the SC, headed by Chief Justice of India SA Bobde along with Justices Surya Kant and BR Gavai declared that they would not implement a stay on the CAA and will have to look into it. Since the Act has not yet been implemented, it cannot be stayed.

However, in light of the nationwide protests and the Supreme Court receiving some 59 petitions, the SC will be examining the constitutional validity of the CAA. To that effect, it has issued notices to the Centre for all the 59 petitions. Amongst the parties and organisations that have moved the SC against the new law is the Indian Union Muslim League and the Asom Gana Parishad (AGP).

SEE ALSO: Amit Shah on Jamia Violence: “Police Did Not Go After Students”. Really?

The amended citizenship law which eases the process to obtain Indian citizenship for non-Muslim refugees from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh, if they have arrived in India before December 31, 2014. As for the Muslim refugees, they would have to apply for citizenship via the usual 11 years naturalisation rule.

The petitions filed claim that the CAA violates the spirit of the Constitution, which implies that religion should not become the basis for determining citizenship. The government should be treating people of all faiths and religions equally.

Artwork: Dhawal Bhanushali / Mashable India

SEE ALSO: Delhi Jama Masjid's Shahi Imam Says CAA Isn't For Indian Muslims, Calls For Calm Protests
