Anti-CAA protest: Kamal Haasan visits Madras University; denied entry in campus

Kamal Haasan | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Kamal Haasan said that as a political leader, it is his duty to support them in their agitation against the CAA The police, however, denied its involvement in stopping Kamal Haasan from entering the campus

Chennai: Makkal Needi Maiam (MNM) founder and chief Kamal Haasan on Wednesday expressed solidarity with Madras University students who have been carrying out demonstrations against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in Chennai, Tamil Nadu. The actor-turned-politician said that it was his "duty" to support the students' agitation and that he will call himself a student till he dies.

When Kamal Haasan reached Madras University to meet the students, he was denied permission to enter the campus. He spoke to the students from behind the main gate of the university, which is on the opposite side of the Marina Beach. When the police officials present at the spot were asked whether they have denied permission to Kamal Haasan, the officials said they had no role to play in allowing or disallowing anyone.

While speaking to media, Kamal Haasan said, "I am not allowed to go inside. Till I die, I will call myself a student, I have come here in that capacity to be their defender. I will keep voicing whether or not I have started a party and now that I have started a party it becomes my duty to be here."

Meanwhile, Manithaneya Makkal Katchi (MMK) supporters are holding anti-CAA protests outside the residence of Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami.

Earlier in the day, a meeting of DMK and its allies, including Left parties, demanded the Centre to immediately revoke the amendment to the Citizenship Act and slammed the proposed NRC exercise across the country. A resolution adopted at the meeting stressed that the amendment had a "dimension of religion and race" and "ignored Eelam Tamils", and called the pan-India NRC as "antithetical".
