Amit Shah is like General Dyer who is firing at unarmed citizens: NCP leader Nawab Malik

Nawab Malik, senior leader NCP | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights NCP leader Nawab Malik drew a parallel between Home Minister Amit Shah and hated British-Raj-era General Dyer over the incident of alleged crackdown by police on protesting students of Jamia Millia Islamia Malik backed Uddhav Thackeray’s similar remarks calling the incident a modern era Jallianwalla Bagh incident, over the handling by police of the Jamia University protest and asserted that he is correct On Sunday, students of Jamia Millia Islamia claimed that the police entered the campus and thrashed them while they were holding a peaceful protest against CAA

Nagpur: As the country boils over the amended Citizenship Act, the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leader Nawab Malik launched a sharp attack at Union Home Minister Amit Shah by comparing him to notorious Raj-era British General Dyer who gave orders to open fire in Jallianwala Bagh where unarmed crowds had assembled.

Nawab said,” Amit Shah is firing on citizens of the country in the same way. Amit Shah is no less than Dyer.”

Further, he justified Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray’s recent comments over the alleged crackdown by the police in Jamia Millia Islamia. He said,” What Uddhav Ji said ("What happened at Jamia Millia Islamia, is like Jallianwala Bagh") is correct.”

While talking to the reporters, Uddhav claimed that an “atmosphere of fear” was being created by such actions of the Central government.

Jamia Millia Islamia, the Delhi based university, witnessed protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 (CAA). On Sunday, the university virtually turned into a battlefield after the police entered the campus to grab protesters who ran towards the university after allegedly committing acts of violence, arson and vandalising vehicle. The Jamia students alleged that that police thrashed them while they were holding a separate peaceful protest in the campus. The police detained some of the students and released them on early Monday morning.

Reacting to the incident, and coming down harshly upon the police administration, Thackeray said, "There is a deliberate attempt to create an atmosphere of unrest in society. The way police opened fire on students by forcefully entering the compound, it appeared like the Jalianwala Bagh massacre."

“He said fear was being created in the minds of the youth of the country, he added.

Thackeray also appealed to the Centre to not destabilise the youth of the country and said that no country can remain stable if its youth is disturbed.

"The youth are like a bomb which should not be triggered. It is my humble request to the prime minister," the chief minister said.

Violent protests have erupted at several places across the country including the national capital Delhi, West Bengal, Assam and Meghalaya against CAA that has led to the loss of life and property.

The CAA seeks to grant citizenship to non-Muslim refugees from three neighbouring Islamic countries namely Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan. Many oppositions parties have denounced the legislation terming it to be unconstitutional and against the principles of equality and secularism enshrined in the Indian constitution. They regard it to be discriminatory and say that it is targeted against one community.

While the people of some northeastern states feel that the Act threatens their cultural and linguistic identity as it will grant citizenship to illegal Bengali-speaking Hindu settlers from Bangladesh. This will alter the demography of the region and therefore will threaten their identity.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has reassured the agitating people that CAA does not harm any citizen of India and people should resort to non-violent means to air dissent. He also gave a reassuring message for the people of Northeast that centre is committed to preserving their identity and they should calm down.

Aligarh Muslim University, among others, has also seen protests against the legislation.

In 1919, then Brigadier-General Reginald Dyer had ordered the troops to fire indiscriminately at unarmed civilians who gathered at Jallianwala Bagh in Amritsar, Punjab to protest against the arrest of two national leaders- Satya Pal and Saifuddin Kitchlew. The firing resulted in the death of hundreds and left more than a thousand people injured.



Delhi Police and Home Ministry have reiterated that in the anti-CAA protests case, there was no firing on the students or any protesters. Only tear gas shells and baton-charge was used.
