MANPAC to boycott Hindi language to protest against CAB

Guwahati: Manipur People Against Citizenship Amendment Bill (MANPAC) on Sunday announced boycott of Hindi language, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh and all symbols of the Indian Union with immediate effect in protest against the Centre's effort to pass the contentious bill.

MANPAC alleged that the bill openly embraces foreign immigrants and tends to treat the indigenous people as second class citizens. The conglomerate of 72 civil society organizations alleged that despite the unabated protest across the northeastern region, the Centre is working to pass the citizenship bill as supplementary bill either on February 6 or February 7.

Vinay Biswam, CPI national secretary and Rajya Sabha MP alleged that the Bill was anti-national, anti-people and unconstitutional and said that the bill should be thrown in the dustbin. he also said that the CPI was well aware of the pulse of the people of Manipur and the Northeastern states and stated that it would take an active role in blocking the bill from being passed in the Rajya Sabha.

Moreover, the protest against the said bill continued in various parts of the state of Manipur.

On the move to call the boycott of the Hindi language, eminent Filmmaker of Manipur Aribam Syam Sharma has also joined the protest and said that he would return the Padma Shri award which has been conferred to him in 2006 by the Government of India in the field of cinema if the citizenship bill will be passed in the Rajya Sabha.

MANPAC also said that the patriotic songs would also be boycotted in all the educational institutions. It would also approach the United Nations and other international bodies to intervene and do justice to the Mongol-Asian people of the Northeast.

MANPAC Convener appealed to the people to support the protests that are being taken in various parts of the state until the bill is withdrawn. "A mega convention will be held soon and if the past experiences are any indication, the Union Home Ministers repeated assurance to protect the interest of the indigenous people of the northeastern region is highly doubtful," said Yumnamcha Dilipkumar, Convener of MANPAC.

Dilipkumar further informed that different modes of agitation would be staged in different parts of the state of Manipur and also appealed to the local clubs, organizations and Meira Paibis to collect signatures of the local MLAs on the day of agitation at their localities to declare that they oppose the Citizenship bill without any ambiguity.

Also Read: AISF And SFI Take Out Procession Against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill
