Islamia College erupts over police action on AMU, JMIU students

Islamia College erupts over police action on AMU, JMIU students

Police thrash media persons covering protest

SRINAGAR, Dec 17: Police on Tuesday used force to quell Islamia College students protest against alleged barbarism meted out to the students of Jamia Milia Islamia University (JMIU) and smashing up of varsity property by Delhi Police.

Expressing sympathies with the students of Jamia Milia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University, students of Islamia College of Science and Commerce Hawal staged solidarity protest at College premises to condemn Delhi Police action.

The slogan shouting students alleged that Delhi Police, without seeking permission from JMIU authorities, barged inside the varsity and injured scores of innocent students by firing bullets and tear smoke shells on them.

They also alleged that torching of vehicles on roads and maltreating passengers by political goons who pretended to be students was a politically goaded move to target JMIU students.

Students demanded that the higher-ups of Delhi Police should be brought to book for issuing orders to their juniors to inflict injuries to students and damage property.

Meanwhile, police fired several tear smoke shells to disperse off the students who pelted stones on them. Clashes, witnesses said, continued for one hour however no one was reportedly injured.

Police also thrashed some media persons who were covering students protest at Islamia College against Delhi police’s unwarranted action against JMIU students recently.

Witnesses said that cops repeatedly slapped on the face of a reporter besides blurting choicest abuses against him for capturing video of students protest.

“We demand that the Citizens Amendment Bill which was recently passed in the Parliament should be repealed so as to make Muslims feel safe in India. There should be no discrimination with any particular community and attempts of isolation should be stopped,” students said.

The protesting students also expressed solidarity with JMIU and AMU students saying those involved in targeting students must be brought to book.
