10 detained for violence Police fired no bullet during Jamia protests: MHA

10 detained for violence Police fired no bullet during Jamia protests: MHA

‘Students not involved in arson, violence’

NEW DELHI, Dec 17 (Agencies): No bullet was fired by police during violent protests against the amended Citizenship Act at Jamia Milia Islamia University on Sunday, Home Ministry officials said. There have been allegations that police fired bullets on protesters during the agitation at Jamia.

The officials also said that 10 persons with criminal background have been detained in connection with the protests and more anti-social elements are being tracked. "No bullet was fired by the Delhi Police during protests at Jamia. All 10 persons detained have criminal background. More anti-social elements are being tracked," the officials said, citing a Delhi Police report.

Several vehicles, including buses, were burnt down and public properties destroyed during the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act, which was passed by Parliament last week. According to the Act, members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014 and facing religious persecution there will not be treated as illegal immigrants but given Indian citizenship. The Act says refugees of six communities will be given Indian citizenship after residing in India for five years, instead of 11 years earlier

Criminal elements, and not students, were involved in arson and vandalism that followed the protest against the citizenship law on Sunday near Jamia Millia Islamia university in south Delhi, according to an initial probe into the violence, two MHA officials familiar with the development said.

The probe has also established that the police did not open fire at the protesters. But there is a view that one or more firearm may have been used by the criminal elements who joined the protests to incite violence. This suspicion has been confirmed after an empty cartridge was found in the area that bore the brunt of the violence on Sunday.

The damage to public property during the protest had provoked sharp comments from Chief Justice of India SA Bobde when he was hearing a request for a court-mandated probe into the police response to the protest at Jamia and other universities that followed. Chief Justice Bobde directed on Tuesday that the petitions be filed in the high courts which would take steps to inquire into the allegations.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi had also responded to reports of violence during protests against the citizenship law in a string of tweets on Monday, underlining that debate, discussion and dissent - and not violence - are essential parts of democracy.

A total of 67 people and 31 police personnel were injured on Sunday.

A total of three persons had to be admitted to Safdarjung and Holy Family hospitals. A detailed examination by doctors and the police to confirm a gunshot wound in one case is still on.

“We want to make it clear that the Delhi Police did not fire on protesters at Jamia. However, investigation is on about an empty cartridge that was found from the spot,” a senior home ministry official said.

The probe ruling out the involvement of students in incidents of arson comes a day after Jamia vice chancellor university vice-chancellor Najma Akhtar backed her students all the way and sought action against the police for entering the university campus with the administration’s permission.

“How can police enter a central university campus without permission and break things?” Akhtar said at a press conference on Monday after the university’s Executive Council meeting.
