Karnataka crisis: Case of the four missing MLAs

Athani

Gokak (Belagavi)

Ballari (Rural)

Chincholi (Kalaburagi)

BENGALURU: For over a month now, the four assembly constituencies of Athani, Gokak, Chincholi and Bellari (Rural) have been in a “vacuum”, what with their public representatives “missing in action” while pursuing political and personal gain. Development work has come to a standstill and there is no redressal system in these segments.A cross-section of voters in these constituencies told TOI they felt betrayed by the actions of their representatives, who were voted on Congress tickets. Reports suggest the four plan to quit and join the BJP and the moot question is whether the quartet will show up for the legislature session commencing on February 6.After a gap of 20 days, legislator Mahesh Kumathalli was last spotted in Athani, his constituency, on the evening of January 25. However, the dissident MLA again disappeared barely 12 hours later, soon after attending the flag hoisting ceremony in Athani town on Republic Day. The MLA is again incommunicado, and his cellphone is switched off.On that day, Kumathalli told people and reporters he had been to Mumbai to get treatment for his weak back. However, contradicting his statement, Dr Prakash, the MLA’s brother, told reporters Mahesh was in Bengaluru to bring development funds for the constituency.A ‘nondescript’ personality, Kumathalli surprised everyone by defeating BJP heavyweight Laxman Savadi in the 2018 election. His victory was put down to the efforts and influence of his “godfather”, Gokak strongman Ramesh Jarkiholi. When Ramesh got entangled in a political row and subsequently decided to distance himself from the Congress, Kumthalli showed his loyalty.With Kumthalli missing, Congress workers have announced a “reward scheme” for information on the MLA’s whereabouts. According to one social media post, a cash prize was announced for any person who manages to “bring back the MLA by either air, rail or road”.The first-time MLA has become a target of voters’ ire, while local BJP leaders are also piling pressure on him to return. Namdev Patil, a BJP worker, said: “If he had worked efficiently, Athani town would have got a veterinary college which was announced by Siddaramaiah during his last budget. Siddaramaiah had also announced filling of 11 lakes, but this is yet to be realised due to the negligence of local MLA.”Having been dropped from the cabinet in December last year, the disgruntled Gokak MLA Ramesh Jarkiholi said he would resign from his legislature post. Now, the “Trojan horse” of the BJP, has been ridiculed by voters and party workers alike — but all in private. Sightings of the five-time MLA have been rare over the last two months.Ramesh’s personal mobile phone has been switched off and his disappearance has upset voters as well leaders in the party. But he stands so tall, none are ready to come out in the open against him.A close aide insisted Ramesh’s disappearance has made no major difference on day-to-day activity in the constituency. “There is a well-established set-up to hear grievances of people and to provide relief,” the aide said.However, the aide admitted “some” road works in Gokak town were being held up due to the MLA’s absence. Ramesh didn’t turn up to hoist the flag on Republic Day either, a fact which the BJP gleefully took advantage of.Last seen as part of a public “thanks giving” event in Ballari district, legislator B Nagendra has become a “liability” for voters of his constituency. The MLA switched to the Congress after being in the BJP till 2017 and won on a Congress ticket by a small margin from the scheduled reserved constituency.While Nagendra nurtured ambitions of becoming the district in-charge minister, it was thwarted by the party when it inducted E Tukaram and PT Parameshwara Naik from the same district into the cabinet. In another blow, the candidature his brother B Venkatesh Prasad for the Ballari Lok Sabha bypoll was shot down by the Congress. Now, having identified himself with Ramesh Jarkiholi, Nagendra is facing a serious backlash from voters.“If he had such high ambitions then Nagendra should have stayed in the BJP and not joined the Congress,” said Jeelan Basha, 48, from Chaganur village. “How can the party give him a ministerial berth soon after joining the Congress? Perhaps we voted for the wrong person. Henceforth, no matter which party he contests from we will never vote for him.”Echoing the sentiment, another voter from the constituency said the bureaucracy has saved work in the segment coming to a standstill.“After the ‘Abhinandan’ programme, our MLA has not been seen at all,” said Prasad Rao, 53. “But thankfully, with the state and central government machinery working efficiently, development work has not completely stopped.”Of the four constituencies, the least worried are voters from Chincholi. Their faith in MLA Umesh Jadhav has remained steadfast although Congress workers have held protests in front of the MLA’s home.Locals in Chincholi are more worried Jadhav would join the BJP and contest against Kalaburagi incumbent and Congress Lok Sabha opposition leader Mallikarjun Kharge.Jadhav made a name for himself by ringing in development work — good roads and proper drinking water facilities. KM Baari, a local, said people in Chincholi are praying in mosques and temple that Umesh does not leave the Congress as the constituency will lose its development-oriented leader.(Inputs from Ravindra Uppar in Belagavi, K Mahendra Kumar in Ballari and Mouneshwar Sonnad in Kalaburagi)
