Citizenship Act Protest: Section 144 To Be Imposed In Bengaluru For Next Three Days

New Delhi:

Prohibitory orders have been clamped in Bengaluru, Mangaluru and other parts of Karnataka in the backdrop of the protests against the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act. The orders in Bengaluru would be in force for three days starting from 6 am on Thursday morning to December 21 midnight.

In the last few days, many protest were held across the Karnataka capital against the CAA. The move comes after the Mangaluru Police imposed Section 144 in the city till December 20.

Bengaluru police Commissioner Bhaskar Rao told reporters that none should organise protests in the city from 6 am on Thursday to midnight of December 21. Anyone violating the orders will be dealt with an iron hand, he said.

"There will however be no restrictions on schools, colleges, malls, markets, bus services, metro rail, autorickshaws and cab aggregators. Rao said the orders were imposed as many violent incidents had taken place during protests asgainst the Citizenship Amendment Act in various parts of the country, where public property was damaged.

Warning against holding protests over the CAA without permission, Mangaluru Police Commissioner PS Harsha on Wednesday urged people and organisations to express their opinions on the issue within the boundaries of law and order.

Several messages were being circulated on the social media asking people to gather in large numbers for a protest on December 20 and 23 but the police have not received any application seeking permission to organise the protests, he said without elaborating on who had given the call.

"We have approached the concerned persons such as the Khazi... He has clarified that no such programmes are planned as of now," Harsha told reporters.

The Commissioner said so far the police have received six to seven applications for which law and order assessment was done and permission given to hold protest.

"Two days ago, we have detained 38 activists for protesting and violating Karnataka Police Act as no permission was sought for the protest," he said.

Those who want to express their opinions in the form of protests or rallies, can apply for permission at the local police station, he added.

With regard to protests on December 20 and 23, he said if someone "spreads such rumours and provokes people to join the protest, stringent action will be taken against such individuals or groups.

(With PTI inputs)
