Students clash over Citizenship Act

Campuses across State turn restive as pro- and anti-Act groups lock horns

The State police have flagged increasing restiveness on college campuses across Kerala.

Officials said the student community appeared divided over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

The controversial law, which allegedly discriminated against Muslims and scraped away at the secular tenet of the Constitution, has met with opposition and support in almost equal measure on fiercely politicised college campuses in the State.

The issue was likely to roil the student community if the developments on several campuses on Wednesday were any indication.

Thrissur incident

At Sree Kerala Varma College in Thrissur, Students Federation of India (SFI) allegedly prevented Akhil Bharatiya Vidhyarthi Parishad activists from organising a seminar to “justify” the law, resulting in violence. The ABVP later alleged that Campus Front activists had joined hands with the SFI to attack them.

The outbreak of fisticuffs, caught on a mobile camera, was soon aired on television channels and amplified on social media. College teachers broke up the fight. But police said the peace was tenuous. The violence had its reverberations across Kerala. In Thiruvananthapuram, a group of youths waving saffron flags and wearing Sangh Parivar headbands charged a police barricade in front of the Secretariat. The police dispersed the mob by firing water jets. They have registered a case of unlawful assembly and rioting against 30 people.

Students’ clash was reported from Indira Gandhi College, Mambaram, in Kannur also.

In Kochi, students from various colleges marched bearing Indian flags to protest the “biased” law. A police officer said Campus Front activists formed the bulk of the protesters. In Kozhikode, a section of the students of the Indian Institute of Management organised a protest against the CAA outside the campus. The SFI took out a protest on the Mahatma Gandhi University campus in Kottayam. Siad Kandala, an office-bearer of the Social Democratic Party of India, told The Hindu that the Campus Front was on the frontline of the student protests.

The SFI and ABVP workers battled each other in NSS College, Pandalam, and St. Thomas College, Kozhencherry, but ground reports said the clashes were on other issues. The police fear that the strife was likely to spread to other colleges as the protests against the Central Act gained political momentum on campuses across the country.
