Large Gatherings Banned In Karnataka Amid Citizenship Act Protests

Large scale protests were planned in Karnataka against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Highlights Protests were planned in Bengaluru against new citizenship law

Police says demonstrations banned to prevent damage to property, life

Schools, colleges and offices to be open, says police

Thursday was meant to be a day of big protests in Bengaluru but restrictions imposed for the next three days could dampen efforts of those opposing the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in Karnataka. Section 144, that bans the gatherings of four or more persons, has been imposed in parts of the state including the capital city, police officials said on Wednesday.

"Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act were happening without permission... There has been stone-throwing during processions that has injured people and damaged property. So we have taken a decision to not allow this. From 6 am today to midnight December 21, there will be prohibitory orders in Bengaluru. No procession or rally will be allowed," Bengaluru Police Commissioner Bhaskar Rao said at a news briefing.

"This is to protect the people. Schools, colleges, bank, offices, commercial establishment, cinemas malls will function normally. Normal life will go on. No need to be afraid, just go about your business. Young people can go to school and college but cannot take part in these protests," he added.

A demonstration was planned at the Town Hall in Bengaluru today at 11 am. Left parties had also planned a protest at the Mysore Bank Circle - another popular protest venue - also at 11 am.

Massive protests have erupted across India against the new Citizenship (Amendment) Act that was cleared last week, often turning into violent clashes between protesters and policemen. The contentious law promises citizenship to immigrants from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh but not if they Muslims.

Critics have said the law challenges the foundations of India's secular constitution by making religion a criteria for citizenship for the first time. The ruling BJP, which also governs Karnataka, says that the law will help minorities who have faced persecution in the neighbouring countries for decades.

Earlier this week, protesters had been stopped from occupying the steps of the Town Hall in Bengaluru where demonstrations are usually permitted. A water cannon and barricades were in place to deter demonstrators. Students were taken away from the location on Tuesday.

"Yes, people do have a right to protest but safety is important," Bengaluru police chief Bhaskar Rao said.

It is not clear if protestors will still attempt to converge at the planned protest venues. The police commissioner said action will be taken against those who violate prohibitory orders.

Earlier on Wednesday, prohibitory orders had been imposed in Mangaluru, the coastal town in Dakshina Kannada district which has a history of communal tension.
