Madras University protest enters 3rd day, Kamal Haasan reaches campus to support students

Students of Madras University continued their protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) for the third day today. As police personnel guarded the gates of the campus and cordoned off the entrance for outsiders entering the premises, defiant students staged their protest with slogans against the Citizenship Act.

On Tuesday, the situation at the university campus turned dramatic after two student protesters were taken into custody for enquiry. The students chanted slogans against the Centre, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and its student body, the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP).

They also demanded the release of the two students who were detained by the police. The students who were taken in at around 1:30 pm were later released late in the night.

Meanwhile, the university administration announced a holiday from December 18 to December 23 in an attempt to stop the protest inside the campus. The varsity was also supposed to remain closed till January 1.

While the students continued their protests in solidarity with the protesters at Jamia Millia Islamia, Aligarh Muslim University and other colleges across the country, the political class in Tamil Nadu was also having an active day.

Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM) chief Kamal Haasan reached the university and met the protesting students outside the gates of the campus.

"I have asked them to continue. There is no bill that is so big that it cannot be retracted," Kamal Haasan said.

Kamal Haasan: I am not allowed to go inside. Till I die, I will call myself a student, I have come here in that capacity to be their defender. I will keep voicing whether or not I have started a party and now that I have started a party it becomes my duty to be here. https://t.co/pkdsv1MFxP pic.twitter.com/56Kpn9AFHu ANI (@ANI) December 18, 2019





Post a meeting with the students, Kamal Haasan announced that his party Makkal Needhi Mayiam will be participating in the anti-CAA rally by DMK and its allies on December 23 in Chennai. As protests continued in the state, Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami justified AIADMK's stand to support the CAA.

"CAA has been clarified by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the ministers. As far as CAA is concerned, all Indians residing in the country will not be affected," Edappadi K Palaniswami said.

The ruling government in Tamil Nadu voting in favour of the CAA has stirred up the controversy with political leaders attacking the AIADMK. DMK president MK Stalin has appealed the general public, students and others to widely participate in the rally against the Act.

"EPS said no Indian will be harmed? EPS obeys whatever PM Modi and Amit Shah say. So it's nothing surprising on his statement," he said.

Kamal Haasan said, "The AIADMK did not just support the bill they were just answering to their masters."

DMK's Kanimozhi said, "The AIADMK government is a shame on this nation. It is a shame for Tamil Nadu, we are embarrassed to say that AIADMK is ruling this state. They have let minorities of this country and people of the country down."
