Jamia violence: Three students, former Congress MLA among seven named in FIR

Three Jamia Millia Islamia University students were among seven people booked by the Delhi Police in connection with Sunday’s violence in Jamia Nagar area during protests against the amended Citizenship Act, PTI reported on Tuesday. The students have been charged with culpable homicide, rioting and assault on public servants, reported The Telegraph. None of these seven people have been arrested yet.

The three Jamia students were identified as Kasim Usmani, a member of Aam Aadmi Party’s student wing CYSS, Chandan Kumar, a member of All India Students’ Association, and Asif Tanha, a member of the Students Islamic Organisation of India.

Apart from the three students, former Okhla Congress MLA Asif Khan and three local politicians have also been named. Bharatiya Janata Party leaders, including Prime Minister Narendra Modi, have time and again claimed that the protests against the amended Citizenship Act have been orchestrated the Congress and other opposition parties.

So far, 10 people have been arrested. All of them have been sent to judicial custody till December 31. No Jamia student is among those taken into custody.

The Left-backed All India Students’ Association condemned the Delhi Police’s action. “Rather than taking action against officials who unleashed violence on the students, the Delhi Police has filed FIR against student activists of Jamia,” the AISA said in a statement, according to The Quint.

Former Congress MLA Khan said he was silently protesting in Shaheen Bagh. “Why cases are being registered in New Friends Colony and Jamia Nagar?” he asked, according to ANI.

On Sunday, buses were set on fire after protestors engaged in a pitched battle with the police. Several students and policemen were injured. After the violent clashes, the police allegedly entered the campus and launched a crackdown. Later in the evening, the police detained around 100 students. They were released around 3.30 am on Monday. Protests swept campuses across the country on Monday against the brutal police crackdown at the Jamia campus.
