India’s top court declines urgent hearing of CBI plea against Kolkata Police chief

New Delhi: Update:The Rajya Sabha was on Monday adjourned for the day without transacting any business due to ruckus in the House over alleged "misuse" of the CBI by the Central government.

Earlier, the Upper House was adjourned till 2 p.m., soon after it met for the day.

Chairman M. Venkaiah Naidu announced that he has rejected notices given by some opposition members under Rule 267 (suspension of business) on various issues.

This drew vociferous protests from the Opposition and some members even trooped to the Chair's podium.

Trinamool Congress leader Derek O'Brien gave notice on the alleged "excesses of CBI against federal governments" while Samajwadi Party's Ram Gopal Yadav and Rashtriya Janata Dal's Manoj Jha submitted notices on other issues.

When the House met again at 2 p.m., Naidu told the opposition members: "You do not want the House to run... President's address is an opportunity for everybody to speak about their state, issues."

However, raising of the slogans continued near the Chair's podium leading to the adjournment for the day.

This drew vociferous protests from the Opposition and some members even trooped to the Chair's podium.

The Lok Sabha on Monday witnessed uproar as opposition parties led by the Trinamool Congress (TMC) protested against the CBI raid in Kolkata, calling it a misuse of the agency against political opponents.

This forced Speaker Sumitra Mahajan to adjourn the House for a second time in the pre-lunch session till 2 p.m.

Soon after the House re-assembled at noon, TMC leader Saugata Roy raised the issue and dubbed the situation in West Bengal as a "constitutional crisis".

"Around 42 CBI officials went to arrest the Kolkata Police Commissioner (Rajeev Kumar) without previous permission and court notice. The Central government is misusing the CBI against political opponents. They are trying to throttle the opposition's voice," he said.

The Supreme Court on Monday postponed to Tuesday the hearing of a CBI plea against Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar who is accused of destroying evidence related to the Saradha chit fund scam.

A bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi declined a plea by Solicitor General Tushar Mehta seeking an urgent hearing on Monday.

Describing the situation as "extraordinary", Mehta said: "We fear evidence will be destroyed."

In response, the Chief Justice said: "We were late in reaching the court by a few minutes because we were reading your application... There's no evidence of what you're saying right now.

"If you show one proof they are tampering or even remotely thinking of it, we'll come down so heavily that they will regret it."

Leader responses

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee continued her sit-in protest in Kolkata on Monday over the Central Bureau of Investigation's attempt to question Kumar in connection with a ponzi scheme.

The Trinamool Congress supremo has accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Bharatiya Janata Party chief Amit Shah of attempting to destabilise her government.

Meanwhile, newly-appointed CBI chief Rishi Kumar Shukla, 59, took charge of the probe agency on Monday.

Who is the new head of CBI?

New CBI chief Rishi Kumar Shukla took charge on Monday, a day after the agency's officials clashed with Kolkata Police over the questioning of Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar that has led to a face-off between the West Bengal and central governments.

Shukla, 59, took charge from interim chief M. Nageswara Rao, who was appointed to the post after the unceremonial ouster of CBI Director Alok Verma.

A 1983 batch IPS officer of the Madhya Pradesh cadre, Shukla took charge on a day the CBI approached the Supreme Court over the Kolkata face-off, alleging its probe into a ponzi scheme scam was being hindered and its officers were being harassed.

Politicans' respond

Meanwhile, Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav has alleged that the BJP wants to stay in power "by hook or by crook" and was using the CBI as an "election agent".

"The BJP wants to stay in power by hook or by crook. They are so scared of losing (general elections) and the CBI is being used as election agents," Yadav tweeted Sunday night.

The Biju Janata Dal (BJD) on Monday said the conduct of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) smacks of unprofessionalism.

The comment comes a day after the CBI's attempt to question Kolkata Police chief Rajeev Kumar in connection with a ponzi scheme scam was thwarted by the Kolkata Police.

The BJD said institutional integrity has to be restored after the row between the CBI and the Kolkata Police.

"We are a matured democracy and professionalism should be maintained in these issues," said a BJD statement.

"Even in Odisha, sudden action of the CBI just before the Panchayat elections in the past and now before the general elections smacks of unprofessional conduct and coloured with political motives," said the statement.

BJD MP Bhartruhari Mahtab also opposed the action of the CBI in West Bengal.

"It is something which demonstrates and questions the institutional integrity of CBI. The manner in which CBI has been functioning over the last two-three months does not show professionalism. This is the reason as to why the CBI is facing such criticism today. We are not a banana republic," Mahtab said.

He added that there were instances, especially during the last few years, when the situation got aggravated to such an extent that institutions were derided because of certain motivated actions.
