MSU officials told to stay on alert

Students from ABVP held demonstration in support of CAA at MSU

Vadodara: Protests in support and against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) is keeping M S University on the edge.

Even as seven students of MSU’s Faculty of Fine Arts have been arrested for making graffiti to protest against CAA, the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) on Wednesday held a demonstration at MSU head office in support of the amended Act.

The right-wing student outfits reaction came a day after the cops arrested five students for making graffiti at Police Bhavan and compound wall of MSU Students Union.

On Wednesday, a poster calling for ‘Vadodara bandh’ on Thursday against CAA and National Register of Citizens (NRC) was also in circulation in some social media groups.

But sources said that the poster was tweaked from the original one which was seeking support for a march from ‘Lal Quila to Shaheed Park’ at Delhi.

Meanwhile, cops also held a meeting with MSU’s top brass on Tuesday night during which the university officials were asked to remain alert.

The university officials have been asked to install CCTV cameras and ensure that those which have been installed remain functional.

Also, the cops have asked the officials to ensure that identity cards of all those entering the campus are properly checked, especially at near otherwise trouble spots like the Halls of Residence.

The university’s vigilance staff has been asked to keep an eye over suspicious activities while instructions have been issued to keep a strict watch on movement of outsiders inside the hostel campus.

“We have instructed the wardens that they will be held responsible if any unauthorised persons are found inside the hostel premises,” said an official.

There were reports that a group of students of fine arts faculty were planning to stage protests against CAA on a much larger scale.

The group had circulated messages on social media platforms appealing youngsters to join protest in front of Faculty of Fine Arts on Sunday evening - the same day when the protest had started at Jamia Millia Islamia University. But later had circulated other messages that the protest programme had been postponed.


