Telecom industry needs some sanity and orderliness: Sunil Mittal

New Delhi: Bhartiwill be fine if the regulator were to fix a floor for voice tariffs as well as for data, said chairman Sunil Mittal , who added that he had “legal hope” of getting relief on the telco ’s over Rs 35,500 crore adjusted gross revenue (AGR) dues, which need to be paid in just over a month.“Trai finally floated a consultation paper on tariffs, that was our request and we are glad that they have heeded to the request of the industry,” Mittal said, after emerging from a two-hour meeting with commerce and industry minister Piyush Goyal. His comments come a day after the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India ( Trai ) floated a consultation paper on whether to set a floor and a ceiling for voice and data services.On being asked his views on Trai’s point that it may be difficult to regulate only data rates, and not voice, and bring in a tariff ceiling to protect consumers, Mittal said, “They need to bring some sanity and orderliness in the telecom industry, so we are happy with whatever they decide”. India’s three private telcos — Airtel,and Reliance Jio — have sought a floor for data tariffs, but don't want voice to be regulated.But Trai questioned the telcos’ demand. “Regulating the data tariff in turn regulates the voice tariff, at least on a 4G network. As such, it does not seem logical, on the part of COAI, to request the authority (Trai) to regulate data tariffs by prescribing floor price while keeping voice services under forbearance… This would create a disparity between the service providers providing the same service,” Trai said.Jio is the only operator running a pure 4G network while the other two offer both 2G and 3G services.On the issue of the AGR dues, Mittal said, “We have legal hope”. The company is awaiting a decision on its plea for a partial review of the over ?35,000 crore statutory dues that it faces after a Supreme Court ruling in October widened the definition of AGR to include non-core items.Airtel, in the meantime, is also in the process of raising $3 billion via equity and debt to pay off its dues. The company has said it has doubts on it continuing as a going concern if it doesn’t manage to raise funds on its terms.Analysts say Trai’s paper on floor pricing and its move to allow telcos to continue charging interconnect usage charge (IUC) at 6 paise a minute till end December 2020 will improve investor appetite for the sector.Citing the weak health of the sector, Mittal also ruled out the possibility of auctions in the current fiscal. A day earlier, telecom minister Ravi Shankar Prasad had said the auctions may be held in March-April.Mittal said he also discussed with Goyal the issue of the ?36,000 crore input tax credit for telcos that has not yet been released by the government. “Generally, there are issues around income tax and all which we brought up when amalgamation happens,” he said, while elaborating on other issues discussed at the meeting.“We have also asked for giving the infrastructure status to tower companies as they are really part of infrastructure,” he said. Describing the meeting with Goyal as fruitful, Mittal said, “It is so refreshing to see a minister on top of everything, he had representations from all the ministries with him”.
