CAA: City police keeps a close watch on social media

Mangaluru: With protests across the country over the Citizenship Amendment Act CAA ), the Mangaluru city police is keeping a close watch on fake messages being circulated on social media . In the city, several organisations have expressed opposition to the act and are organising peaceful protests within the constitutional framework.City police commissioner Dr P S Harsha told reporters on Wednesday, that a few organisations through social media had called for a major protest on Friday and December 23 to oppose the CAA. “Religious heads mentioned in the message were called for a discussion. None of the religious leaders said they had called for a protest or extended support for the same. They even assured support to maintain peace in the city,” he said. Meanwhile, notices will be issued against those sharing fake messages.“We have also noticed that some people sitting aboard are sharing their opinion against the act through social media, thus inciting hatred. Such acts are unconstitutional and against the law. Legal action must be initiated against inflammatory messages,” the commissioner said.He said there is no blanket ban on protests. People are free to express their opinion as per their constitutional rights, however, he added that those interested must submit a request letter to the deputy commissioner of police, law and order, who is the nodal officer. The request letters will be examined and permission will be granted in case there are no law and order issues. Permission will be granted after finalising the date and time, he said.The city police have received about six applications to hold protests. Out of the applications received, it is learnt that permission to hold a protest was denied to representatives of a different state. Without naming the state, the commissioner said that they were requested to protest in their state.On Monday, 38 people from an organisation were arrested and a case filed in the Mangaluru East police station, for violating several laws, including the Karnataka Police Act. They were protesting without obtaining the necessary permission.The city is peaceful, and no untoward incident has been reported so far on the issue of CAA.
