CAA Protest: Hundreds of Mumbai college students promise to join anti-CAA protest at August Kranti today

MUMBAI: Hundreds of students from city colleges— other than Tata Institute of Social Sciences ( TISS ) and IIT-Bombay—have promised to participate in the protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act at August Kranti Maidan on Thursday. On Wednesday, too, the city witnessed protests, with thousands hitting the streets in Mumbra and hundreds holding a candlelight march on Bandra’s Carter Road.Around 300 students from St Xavier’s College will join Thursday’s protest. A group of senior students from the campus released a statement saying, “We, the students at St Xavier’s College, wanted to resonate the calling of real issues and the idea of India we love, call our home and swear allegiance to. This is our moment of reckoning and our call to action. We cannot sit idly while the fundamental rights of our fellow citizens are being jeopardized—therefore we have taken to the streets today.”With growing support for the call, organisers are worried about miscreants who may wish to disrupt a peaceful gathering. Fahad Ahmad of TISS, a lead organiser, issued an advisory for all protestors, requesting them to keep a watch for miscreants in the crowd and report them to the organisers. Not resorting to violence is another important advice given to all students. If anyone resorts to violence, report them to police personnel around you, said Fahad in his message being circulated on several groups.A sit-in protest at IIT-B— to prepare for the main protest on Thursday— was called off as institute authorities refused last-minute permission. “We have allowed several protests in the past, but we always asked students to seek permission beforehand, which they did not in this case,” said an institute official.“The citizenship law attacks the value of what our flag stands for, and I, being a Jamia student, am indebted to the university which imbibed the passion of art and architecture in me,” said Ayan Khan (25) who graduated last year. Khan was among the hundreds who came together at Carter Road. “We do not support the autocratic rule of the government and specifically the essence of the bill which is discriminatory. It should be withdrawn,” said Mallika Jhaveri (21). Protestors plan to continue their movement after Thursday. Youth leader Jignesh Mevani will address a gathering on Friday.
