CAA protests UPDATES: Three dead; internet services suspended in Ghaziabad, Bareilly, Mangaluru and Prayagraj

Massive protests have rocked the country over the implementation of CAA | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Protest against Citizenship Amendment Bill across India has intensified. Two protesters died during violent protests in Karnataka's Mangaluru, even as protesters in Lucknow set vehicles ablaze in Hasanganj during a protest against Citizenship Act. Eight Air India flights were delayed and metro services were disrupted at various stations. Later in the evening, internet services were suspended in Ghaziabad, Bareilly, Mangaluru and Prayagraj.

Meanwhile, Section 144, which prohibits an assembly of more than four people in an area, has been imposed in multiple states.

Citizenship Amendment Act UPDATES:

11.47 pm: UP government orders suspension of mobile internet, SMS services till Saturday noon following violent protests: Official sources told news agency PTI.

11.38 pm: Protest should not be violent, appeals Sukhbir Badal amid anti-CAA stir. Earlier today, he said, "Our stand on the Citizenship Bill has always been based on the Sikh ideal of Sarbat Da Bhala. We want all persecuted minorities seeking sanctuary in India to be given citizenship & equal rights. Unity in diversity is our greatest strength & I reiterated this in Parliament also."

11.26 pm: Union minister Prakash Javadekar accused Congress and AAP of supporting foreign infiltrators. "No country in the world gives protection to foreign infiltrators, today we are against the foreign infiltrators. The AAP and Congress party are in support of them. Rumours are being spread regarding the Citizenship Amendment Act and people are being manipulated," he said in a tweet.

11.24 pm: Bhaskar Rao, Commissioner of Police, Bengaluru City: Section-144 to remain imposed in the city till tomorrow. 24 people have been booked & 8 cases have been registered. Cases also registered against MLA Rizwan Arshad & Ramachandra Guha.

11.20 pm: Tejashwi Yadav called BJP Bharat Jalao Party. "Every person has a right to protest in our country. It is the duty of the administration to maintain law and order but the whole country is burning as Bharat Jalao Party wants to break this country," Yadav told media persons on Thursday.

10.59 pm: Civil society leaders, Bollywood celebrities, political activists and student leaders gathered at the historic August Kranti Maidan in Mumbai to register a silent protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) 2019.

10.53 pm: Two individuals were held for distributing pamphlets with inciting content about the National Register of Citizens (NRC), Delhi Police told news agencies on Thursday.

10.51 pm: Internet services suspended in Prayagraj till 10 am tomorrow, reports news agency ANI citing district administration, following protests over Citizenship Amendment Act.

10.43 pm: Karnataka Government: Mobile internet services suspended for 48 hours in Mangaluru city & Dakshina Kannada District.

10.34 pm: Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa appeals to masses to 'not pay heed to politically motivated' statements on CAA. "I request all citizens of the state to remain calm and maintain peace. False propaganda is being spread about the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. Do not pay heed to politically motivated, provocative statements from anyone," tweeted Yediyurappa.

10.26 pm: Ashish Bhatia, Police Commissioner, Ahmedabad on violence in Shah Alam area of the city: We have detained around 32 people, we are registering FIR. We are identifying others based on CCTV footage. 19 police personnel were injured in the incident.

10.24 pm: Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav, on Thursday, appealed to people to register their protest against CAA by means of Satyagraha. "I appeal to the people of Lucknow to not take the law and order in their hands and take Mahatma Gandhi's path of satyagraha that's how people will win. People should protest peacefully," said Akhilesh.

10.13 pm: Internet services suspended in Bareilly for 2 days.

10.00 pm: Ghaziabad District Administration: Internet services to be suspended in the district from 10 pm today till 20 December, 10 pm.

9.45 pm: Karnataka: DCP of Bengaluru(Central), Chetan Singh Rathore sings national anthem along with protesters present at the Town Hall in Bengaluru, when they were refusing to vacate the place. Protesters left peacefully after the national anthem was sung. Watch:

#WATCH Karnataka: DCP of Bengaluru(Central),Chetan Singh Rathore sings national anthem along with protesters present at the Town Hall in Bengaluru, when they were refusing to vacate the place. Protesters left peacefully after the national anthem was sung. #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/DLYsOw3UTP — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

9.29 pm: Delhi BJP chief Manoj Tiwari invites CM Arvind Kejriwal and Delhi Congress president Subhash Chopra for debate on new citizenship law

9.21 pm: Madhya Pradesh: Section-144 of the CrPC (prohibits the assembly of more than 4 people in an area) imposed in 44 districts of the state.

9.13 pm: 50 people arrested in Gujarat Gujarat MoS for Home, Pradeepsinh Jadeja to ANI: There were 2 incidents of violence in Ahmedabad today. Other than that there is peace in the whole state. Around 50 people arrested, we are checking video footage to identify those who were involved, strict action will be taken.

9.04 pm: 1,200 protesters demanding to scrap of amended citizenship act detained when they defied prohibitory orders imposed by Delhi Police in Red Fort area: Official quoted as saying by news agency PTI.

9.01 pm: Deshpremi Nagrik Manch, a Goa-based NGO, came in support of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and said that misconceptions regarding the act are the reason behind nationwide protests. "Misconceptions are being created about the new law across the country to fuel violence. It is also not against the Muslim community. There should be an awareness about the CAA," said one of the members of the organisation.

8.54 pm: Gujarat: Protesters pelt policemen with stones during a demonstration against Citizenship Amendment Act 2019 (CAA), Watch-

8.43 pm: Jamia Millia Islamia VC Najma Akhtar interacts with students injured during police crackdown at the campus on Sunday, assures university will bear medical expenses

8.40 pm: Uttar Pradesh DGP, OP Singh on reports of a protester dying in Lucknow during protests against Citizenship Amendment Act: Firing was not done from our side. I do not know how that death occurred, I do not think it has anything to do with this agitation & police action.

8.35 pm: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi says the government has no right to shut down colleges, telephones & the Internet, to halt metro trains and to impose Section144 to suppress India's voice and prevent peaceful protests. "To do so is an insult to India’s soul," says Gandhi in a tweet.

8.26 pm: Delhi Police has taken two people into custody for distributing pamphlets with inciting content on them regarding National Register of Citizens (NRC) and the Citizenship Amendment Act. The two people are being questioned.

8.23 pm: After anti-citizenship law protests, one person dies of firearm injury in KGMU Trauma Centre in Lucknow: Official

8.12 pm: Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police (DGP), OP Singh in Lucknow: 55 people have been arrested in the city, we are scrutinizing CCTV footage. SSP Lucknow will take appropriate action, we will not spare anyone.

8.07 pm: Uttar Pradesh DGP, OP Singh in Lucknow: Situation is normal in the city, some incidents occurred at places where protesters had declared they will gather. They pelted stones at us & set ablaze OB vans of media. We chased them & fired tear gas, situation has been controlled.

7.54 pm: Mangaluru city police Commissioner PS Harsha: 20 police personnel are injured, two civilians are in ICU. Protest against Citizenship Amendment Act had taken place in Karnataka's Mangaluru today.

7.46 pm: Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal requests Centre to rollback the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

7.43 pm: Tamil Nadu CM and AIADMK joint coordinator E Palaniswami says there is no pressure on the party to support the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA).

7.35 pm: JUST IN: Two dead in Mangaluru after violent protests over citizenship law - hospital staff, reports news agency Reuters.

7.30 pm: Gujarat: Protesters dispersed by police using tear gas after some police vehicles were vandalized in Shah Alam area of Ahmedabad, today.

7.29 pm: Defence Minister Rajnath Singh had a telephonic conversation with UP CM Yogi Adityanath today. The CM apprised him of the situation in Lucknow & the entire state of Uttar Pradesh. Defence Minister Rajnath Singh is in the US for 2+2 Ministerial meeting

7.13 pm: Those involved in violence identified through video footage, will take revenge by making them pay for damage to property: CM Adityanath.

7.12 pm: Karnataka: Curfew announced in 5 police station limits of Mangaluru Commissionerate limits (central subdivision of Mangaluru) till tomorrow midnight.

7.08 pm: Dakshina Kannada (Karnataka) district Deputy Commissioner, Sindhu B Rupesh: All schools and colleges under Mangaluru city corporation will remain closed tomorrow.

6.52 pm: Actor Farhan Akhtar reaches August Kranti Maidan, Mumbai where a protest against Citizenship Act is on. "To raise your voice against something is democratic right, people are raising their voices & I'm of the view that there seems to be a certain amount of discrimination in what is happening," Akhtar said.

6.43 pm: Government Sources have released a fact sheet on frequently asked questions on the Citizenship Amendment Act.

6.29 pm: Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath: I have called a meeting over this. You cant indulge in violence in name of protest. We will take strict action against such elements. Will seize property of those found guilty and compensate damage to public property.

6.19 pm: Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan seeks Home Minister Amit Shah's intervention to prevent attacks by certain groups of students from the state during anti-CAA protests in Delhi

6.14 pm: All Delhi Metro stations, barring Jamia Millia Islamia and Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh, reopened: DMRC

6.13 pm: Bihar CM Nitish Kumar in Gaya: We don't think about who instigates whom for what reason, we are committed to work for every section of society. I appeal you to maintain harmony, fraternity & respect for one another. I guarantee that no wrong will be done to the minorities.

6.09 pm: Tamil Nadu Police on high alert following reports of infiltration of four extremists from Kerala, allegedly targeting some Hindu outfit leaders

6.04 pm: BJP social media in-charge Amit Malviya hits back at Mamata Banerjee over her 'don't stop protest' remark. "She is the most irresponsible Chief Minister who doesn't deserve to hold a public office. This is the kind of language Pakistan would speak! Just shows how she is aware of the slipping public support in Bengal," Malviya tweets.

6.00 pm: Pakistan terms Indian Army chief General Bipin Rawat's remarks on the situation along the LoC as an effort to "divert attention" from the simmering domestic tension due to the amended Citizenship Act

5.57 pm: Delhi Police PRO, MS Randhawa: Police are closely monitoring social media, please share with us if you receive any rumours. We are identifying those who are trying to spread rumours and will take legal action against them.

5.52 pm: Delhi Police PRO, MS Randhawa: Section-144 is imposed in North-East district, Red Fort, and some parts of New Delhi. There are rumours that it is imposed throughout Delhi, it is false. Section-144 is imposed in only some small parts of the city.

5.35 pm: Union Ministry of Home Affairs to hold a review meeting later today over the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act in different parts of the country.

5.33 pm: Amit Shah no less than General Dyer, says NCP leader Nawab Malik, amid protests over Citizenship Amendment Bill in the country.

5.31 pm: MoS Home G Kishan Reddy: Instigating people in the name of religion is not what political parties should do. Political efforts should be made to maintain peace. If you want to protest, please don't create violence and rumours.

5.26 pm: India shares its perspective on the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) with the US. "I'm not aware of the specifics of what was discussed in EAM's meeting with the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. But our perspective on the Act (Citizenship Amendment Act) has been shared with the US interlocutors, including the US Congress," says MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar.

5.25 pm: Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC): All entry and exit gates of Chandni Chowk, Barakhamba, Mandi House, Pragati Maidan, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Delhi Gate, ITO, Janpath, Khan Market, Vasant Vihar and Munirka are open.

5.23 pm: If BJP has guts, it should go for a UN-monitored referendum on amended Citizenship Act and NRC: Mamata Banerjee at Kolkata rally. "BJP is buying skull caps for its cadres who are wearing them while vandalising properties to malign a particular community," Mamata Banerjee at Kolkata rally.

5.09 pm: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee in Kolkata: Suddenly after 73 years of independence we have to prove that we are Indian citizens. Where was BJP's head and tail at that time, BJP is dividing the country. Don't stop your protest because we have to get #CAA revoked.

5.05 pm: Several teachers of the Aligarh Muslim University held a silent march opposing the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, days after the institute witnessed police crackdown against its students who were agitating against the new legislation

4.49 pm: Opposition parties fuelling protests against Citizenship Amendment Act, alleges Minister of State for Home Affairs, GK Reddy. "Violent protests only in few places in Delhi, Lucknow; no need to worry... Some political parties trying to incite students, women in the name of religion," says Reddy.

4.56 pm: We are not living in this country at mercy of others, says West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee at a protest rally against CAA in Kolkata.

4.55 pm: Ahmed Patel, Jyotiraditya Scindia, RPN Singh, & Deepender Singh Hooda arrive at the residence of Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi for party's core group meeting over 'unrest across the country over Citizenship Amendment Act'.

4.47 pm: Air India update: 8 flights are delayed by 20-100 minutes at Delhi airport. Earlier today, Air India said that in view of the current heavy traffic congestion along the Gurugram-Delhi highway, resulting in inconvenience to passengers, reissue/no-show/cancellation and refund charges for all domestic & international tickets for travel from Delhi on 19th Dec 2019 shall be waived.

4.42 pm: BJP posts video clip of Congress leader and former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's 2003 speech in which he advocates a "most liberal" approach to grant citizenship to minorities from neighbouring countries like Bangladesh

4.38 pm: Lucknow: Uttar Pradesh DGP, OP Singh at the spot in Hazratganj where violence broke out during a protest against CAA. "The situation is under control now. Mob had turned violent but the force didn't lose their patience. The mob has been dispersed forcefully so that there is no loss of life or property. The force is now being moved to another location. 40-50 arrested across the district," SSP Lucknow told ANI in Hussainabad.

4.36 pm: Entry and exit gates of Rajiv Chowk Metro station open: DMRC. The gates were closed at 2.25 pm. "Entry & exit gates of Rajiv Chowk are closed. Interchange facility is available at this station," DMRC had earlier said.

4.35 pm: Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) has warned its students boycotting exams that they will not be eligible to register in the next semester if they fall short of the academic requirements of the institution

4.33 pm: Gauhati High Court has directed the Assam government to restore mobile internet services at 5 pm, reports news agency PTI. The services were suspended in light of the unrest in the state.

4.25 pm: Mobile internet services will remain suspended in Assam, till 9 am on Friday. Meanwhile, the situation continues to be delicate in New Delhi, where the DMRC has announced that entry and exit gates of Delhi Gate are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station.

4:10 pm: Air India: In view of the current heavy traffic congestion along the Gurugram-Delhi highway, resulting in inconvenience to passengers, reissue/no-show/cancellation and refund charges for all domestic & international tickets for travel from Delhi on 19th Dec 2019 shall be waived.

4:00 pm: Police resort to lathi-charge to disperse the protesters demonstrating against CAA in Lucknow.

3:55 pm: Lucknow: Protest against Citizenship Act turns violent in Hazratganj. Protesters pelted stones, Police resorted to lathi-charge. A media OB van has also been set ablaze.

3:52 pm: “You can see the situation at Parivartan Chowk, it is absolutely normal here. 300-400 people are standing here. They are being sent back after we took their memorandum. It is absolutely peaceful at Parivartan Chowk,” said IG, Lucknow Range, SK Bhagat. He further said that he had no information about Khadra but said he had received inputs that incidents of stone-pelting took place there.

3:45 pm: All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) administration has issued a memorandum to its staff, faculty, resident doctors, nurses and students to refrain from holding any dharna/ protest/ strike at, in or around AIIMS.

3:37 pm: Student leader and activist Umar Khalid detained by Delhi Police among other protesters for protesting against Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 at Red Fort here on Thursday.

3:25 pm: 16 flights have been delayed due to traffic jam at NH-8. IndiGo has cancelled 19 flights, after its crew members got stuck in a traffic jam in the city and, also due to other issues.

3:22 pm: Clash between Dalit Aghadi Organisation and ABVP workers erupts at Aurangabad University, Maharashtra.

3:20 pm: Delhi High Court issues notice to Centre and Delhi Police, asks them to file a response on a plea over Jamia Milia University incident. The court posts the matter for further hearing on February 4. After the Court set February 4 as next date of hearing, the petitioner's counsel requested for an earlier date. After the court denied, the lawyers raised 'shame shame' slogans in court. High Court also denied interim protection from arrest to students.

3:15 pm: Delhi: Congress core group meeting to be held at Sonia Gandhi's residence later today over 'unrest across the country after CAA protests.

3:09: pm: Vehicles set ablaze in Hasanganj during a protest against Citizenship Act. Protesters clashed with Uttar Pradesh Police in Daliganj. Police had to fire tear gas shells to disperse protesters.

2:52 pm: Students and other people of Muslim community offered Namaz outside the gates of Jamia Millia Islamia university. Members of other faiths formed a human chain around them.

2:48 pm: A group of BJP MLAs met Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal on Thursday and urged him to intervene immediately to allay fear and doubts among people regarding the amended Citizenship Act.

Around 14 BJP MLAs told Sonowal that they are facing the ire of the people due to the citizenship law.

2:46 pm: Violence erupted during protests across UP against the Citizenship Amendment Act on Thursday afternoon in various cities. People came out on large numbers in old city areas like Khadra and pelted stones at the police.

2:40 pm: A bandh called by a minority rights group against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and National Register of Citizens evoked lukewarm response here on Thursday as routine life remained unaffected, police said. At least 12 members of the National Students' Union of India (NSUI) were detained from outside a college for protests against the new citizenship law, Deputy Commissioner of Police Vijay Patel said.

2:30 pm: Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa has directed the Police to not lathi-charge protesters.

2:23 pm: The Congress has accused the government of muzzling the voice of the people through "draconian measures" such as shutting of internet services and imposing prohibitory orders.

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra warned that "the more the government tries to suppress the voice of people, the louder it will become".

2:10 pm: Gujarat: Police resort to lathi-charge during a protest called by different Left parties, over Citizenship Amendment Act, in Ahmedabad. The protesters were allegedly blocking police vehicle when police resorted to lathi-charge to disperse them.

2:00 pm: A State Transport bus set ablaze, allegedly during a protest against Citizenship Amendment Act in Sambhal. Internet services have been suspended till further orders, following violence during a protest.

1:41 pm: BJP working president JP Nadda has called a meeting of the party's general secretaries on December 20 where he will speak to the general secretaries about the programs being organised by the party to educate the people on the issue of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

1:38 pm: Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray has slammed the Centre over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, and asked how and where the government intended to settle Hindu immigrants in the country.

1:30 pm: Historian Rama Chandra Guha has condemned the Bengaluru police for its action against the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protesters in the city. "We are protesting in a non-violent manner totally. This is a discriminatory act. See how the police are behaving against the citizens. What is this action of the police," said Guha.

1:25 pm: Film-maker Aparna Sen takes part in a protest against Citizenship Act and National Register of Citizens (NRC). "Ours is a sub-continent that has many languages, cultures, ethnicities, it is held together by a strenuous thread that is secularism. If that thread breaks, then, the country breaks up," said the filmmaker.

1:22 pm: Hyderabad Police has detained around 50 people protesting against CAA and NRC outside the Charminar.

"In the entire south zone, rallies and procession in favour of or in opposition won't be allowed. No organization has been given any permission to organize a protest," said Avinash Mohanty, DCP South.

1:21 pm: “I applaud with glee at the stupidity of the government for stoking the fire of Satyagraha by arresting the thinking and questioning minds of India like Ramachandra Chandra and Yogendra Yadav. Yet I am concerned about their safety. India stands with you,” said Kamal Haasan.

1:16 pm: Delhi Police Special Cell had directed on 18 December that voice, SMS, internet services be halted from 9 am to 1 pm today, in walled city areas of north and central districts, Mandi House, Seelampur, Jafrabad, Mustafabad, Jamia Nagar, Shaheen Bagh and Bawana, in view of prevailing law and order situation.

1:14 pm: “This government is scared of students. This government is scared of one of India’s most accomplished historians for speaking to the media on CAB NRC and holding a poster of Gandhiji. I condemn the detention of Ram Guha. We extend our full solidarity to all those detained,” said West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee.

1:07 pm: “Today, law and order situation in the country is deteriorating. There is a fear among all citizens today. I appeal to the central government to not bring this law but give employment to the youth,” said Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal on being asked about protests over Citizenship Act.

1:03 pm: Guwahati, Assam: Congress leaders Harish Rawat and Ripun Bora take part in a protest against.

12:45 pm: Entry and exit gates of Barakhamba are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station.

12:44 pm: Samajwadi Party leaders protest against CAA outside Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Sabha. The call for protest was given by SP chief and former chief minister Akhilesh Yadav.

12:40 pm: Delhi: Congress leader Sandeep Dikshit detained by police at Mandi House. He says, "I was not allowed to go to Red Fort (for protest), so, I came to Mandi House".

12:35 pm: CPI(M) leaders Sitaram Yechury and D Raja have been detained by Delhi Police for protesting against CAA.

12:30 pm: Bharti Airtel: We're complying with instructions received from govt. authorities on suspending Voice, SMS and data in certain areas in Delhi. Once the suspension orders are lifted, our services will be fully up and running.

12:25 pm: BJP Delhi unit chief Manoj Tiwari has invited Delhi Congress head Subhash Chopra and CM Arvind Kejriwal to read CAA with him at 3 pm at Central Park tomorrow.

12:20 pm: Protesters detained in Bengaluru's Townhall.

12:15 pm: "My request is, to the Indian who is sitting on the Commissioner of Police Chennai's chair. Please do not stifle Democratic voices to be raised at Valluvar Kottam today," Kamal Haasan tweets.

12:12 pm: Residents of Goa should not worry about the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) being passed by the Parliament, that has triggered widespread protests across the country, Chief Minister Pramod Sawant said adding that all precautions need to be taken have been taken.

12:10 pm: Yogendra Yadav detained in Delhi.

12:07 pm: There are inputs of mobilising people from neighbouring states of Delhi. A message has been given to all concerned districts to keep a check on all Delhi borders. According to sources, there were few protests in Delhi in the past 24 hours which were organised by mobilising people through WhatsApp groups but no organization has come up to take responsibility for protest. Few locations have been identified where officers have asked to provide local intelligence frequently.

12:05 pm: A petition has been filed before Karnataka High Court challenging imposition of Section 144 in the state in wake of protests over Citizenship Act. The Court posts the matter for hearing on December 21.

12:00 pm: The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation today shut down gates of a total of 14 Metro stations due to protests against the CAA. Metro stations whose entry and exit gates are closed include ITO, Pragati Maidan, Vasant Vihar, Jamia Millia Islamia, Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh, Munirka, Patel Chowk, Lok Kalyan Marg, Udyog Bhawan, Khan Market, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Chandni Chowk and Vishwavidyalaya. Trains are not halting at these stations. Gates of Central Secretariat and Mandi House stations are also closed but trains are halting at these stations and interchange facility is also available there.

11:57 am: "We request protest organizers to hold protests at designated places only. I appeal to all to cooperate with the police," said Delhi Police PRO MS Randhawa.

11:55 am: Major political parties, social groups, NGOs will organise a protest at the historic August Kranti Maidan in south Mumbai in the evening. A large number of students and youth are expected to join. Similar processions and gatherings have been planned in Thane, Palghar, Pune, Nashik, Ahmednagar, Aurangabad, Beed, Latur and other parts of the state to oppose the CAA.

11:40 am: Some pockets in Maharashtra observed a complete shutdown today as part of the 'Bharat bandh' to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

11:37 am: Dear Mumbaikars, Please be advised about the alternate routes and diversions around August Kranti Maidan due to agitation against the Citizenship Amendment Act, on Dt 19th December 2019. Following will be reflected from 1200 hrs to 2200 hrs on Dt.19/12/2019.

11:35 am: BSP supremo and former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Mayawati urged the Narendra Modi-led NDA government to take back the Citizenship Amendment Act keeping wider public interest in mind and focus on national problems like economy, rising inflation and unemployment.

11:31 am: Karnataka: Left parties hold protest in Bengaluru against the amended Citizenship Act and NRC.

11:30 am: Reportedly, 14 metro stations including Pragati Maidan and ITO have been shut in Delhi following the anti-CAA protests. There is no halt at Khan Market metro station.

11:27 am: Delhi Police: Permission has not been granted for the protest march to be held by the Communist party from Mandi House to Jantar Mantar over Citizenship Amendment Act and NRC at 12 pm today. Gates of Central Secretariat and Mandi House stations are also closed but trains are halting at these stations and interchange facility is also available there.

11:23 am: A large number of protesters in Delhi's Red Fort area where Section 144 has been imposed. Cops have detained protesters near Red Fort. Section-144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (prohibits assembly of more than 4 people in an area) has been imposed near Red Fort.

11:15 am: Historian and biographer Ramachandra Guha has been detained in Bengaluru while holding protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

11:10 am: The Delhi Police has not granted permission to the Communist Party and Swaraj Abhiyan, which under the banner of 'Hum Bharat Ke Log', was planning to carry out a march against the Act today.

In a letter written to the police department on December 17, Yogendra Yadav-led Swaraj Abhiyan had requested permission for a peaceful march from the Red Fort.

11:02 am: Entry and exit gates of 14 Delhi Metro stations are closed for commuters. Earlier in the morning, the DMRC had closed gates of seven metro stations, including Jamia Millia, Jama Masjid and Munirka.

This time, entry and exit gates of Patel Chowk, Lok Kalyan Marg, Udyog Bhawan, ITO, Pragati Maidan and Khan Market have been closed.

11:00 am: A 25-year-old set himself on fire yesterday evening during a protest against the CAA. He was admitted to Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, where his condition is said to be critical. Police has said he was not part of the protest.

10:50 am: The Ferozabad district has booked an All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) leader Ehtsaham Ali Babar for allegedly posting an inflammatory video on Facebook to incite local residents against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC).

10:40 am: Muslim organisations in Chandigarh hold protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act and National Register of Citizens.

10:31 am: Delhi: Section-144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (prohibits an assembly of more than 4 people in an area) has been imposed near Red Fort. Heavy police deployment in the area.

10:30 am: Huge jam at Delhi-Gurgaon border as Delhi police barricade roads amid planned protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act

10:20 am: Samajwadi Party leaders have been detained in Lucknow for violating Section 144.

10:10 am: The Lucknow Traffic Police, from its social media handle, has issued an advisory, asking people not to allow unknown persons in their vehicles. A senior police official said that internet shutdown would be an option if anyone tried to foment trouble through social media.

10:00 am: Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) has also closed the entry and exit gates of Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Chandni Chowk and Vishwavidyalaya.

9:57 am: Delhi: Section-144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (prohibits an assembly of more than 4 people in an area) has been imposed near Red Fort.

9:52 am: Permission has not been granted for the protest march to be held by Communist party from Mandi House to Jantar Mantar over Citizenship Amendment Act and NRC at 12 pm today.

Permission has also been denied for the march to be held under the banner of 'Hum Bharat Ke Log' against Citizenship Amendment Act from Lal Quila to Shaheed Bhagat Singh Park (ITO) at 11:30 am today.

9:50 am: Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC): Entry & exit gates of Jamia Millia Islamia, Jasola Vihar, Shaheen Bagh and Munirka are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations.

9:35 am: Chennai city police denied permission to civil society groups and political outfits planning to hold a protest against the CAA on Thursday. Citing threat to law and order, police also rejected grounds to protest citing "false propaganda", according to several reports.

9:30 am: Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa has held a meeting with senior police officers including Bangalore City Police Commissioner Bhaskar Rao today and instructed them to take all measures to avoid any untoward incident, in the view of protests against Citizenship Act and NRC

9:20 am: Bengaluru: Police deployed in Town Hall area as a 'bandh' has been called by a consortium of Left-wing and Muslim organisations in Karnataka today in protest against Citizenship Act and NRC; Sec 144 has been imposed throughout Bengaluru including Rural Dist. from 6 am today for the next 3 days.

9:15 am: Karnataka: Section 144 imposed in Dakshina Kannada district due to protests over Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

9:10 am: The Road No. 13A between Mathura Road and Kalindi Kunj would be closed for traffic movement due to public agitation over Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA), said the Delhi Traffic Police on Thursday.

People coming from Noida, Uttar Pradesh have been advised to take the Delhi Noida Direct (DND) Flyway or Akshardham road to reach Delhi.

9:05 am: Amid raging protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) across the country, Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray spoke to representatives of the Muslim community via video conferencing and requested them to maintain law and order during protests against CAA and NRC.

9:00 am: Several other demonstrations were also planned in Uttar Pradesh today against the citizenship law. The protests are being led by some Muslim groups, who see the CAA as a ploy to rid them of their citizenship.

8:57 am: The Samajwadi Party has announced statewide protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) today with Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav saying that his party would go ahead with the protests. He further asked the party workers to participate in it in large numbers.

8:51 am: All India Students Federation (AISF) members stop the train at Rajendra Nagar railway station, Patna in protest against and National Register of Citizens.

Patna: All India Students Federation (AISF) members stop train at Rajendra Nagar railway station in protest against against #CitizenshipAct and National Register of Citizens. #Bihar pic.twitter.com/fF5Hcp1luY — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

8:45 am: Prohibitory orders under Section 144 of CrPc have been imposed in the whole of Uttar Pradesh and no permission for an assembly or gathering in the state has been given for Thursday.



"Section 144 is in force and no permission for any gathering has been given for December 19. Please do not participate. Parents are also requested to counsel their children," said Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police (DGP) O. P. Singh in a tweet posted around midnight on Wednesday.

8:41 am: BJP General Secretary in-charge of West Bengal Kailash Vijayvargiya was shown black flags and was at the receiving end of go-back slogans as he was forced to cancel his visit to Murshidabad district's Jangipur due to roadblocks.
