Ban on mobile net to continue for sometime: Assam Minister

Guwahati: Thousands took part in the final day of the satyagraha organised by the All Assam Students’ Union (AASU) and other organisations against the Citizenship Amendment Act CAA ) on Wednesday even as several state government employees observed a ‘ceasework’ protest.Meanwhile, state industry minister Chandra Mohan Patwary said Popular Front of India’s state unit chief Aminul Haque has been arrested in connection with involvement in the attack on the Dispur secretariat (Janata Bhawan) on December 11. The minister also said curb on mobile internet will continue for some time as the situation is not yet congenial for restoration of the services.A team of state BJP MLAs led by Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal will visit New Delhi to meet Prime Minister Narendra Modi once the situation improves. While Assam Secretariat Services Association (ASSA) extended its support to the ‘ceasework’ protest called by Sadou Asam Karmachari Parishad (SAKP- the Federal Employee Association of Assam), employees in Barak Valley did not participate. Employees in several places staged a sitin dharna and declared that they will participate in the protests even if government deducts their salaries.To keep up the tempo of protests, Aasu has announced that it will take out padayatras and organise village meetings to oppose CAA. On December 21, women-led protests will be organised throughout the state while on December 23, a citizens’ convention will observed.Chief adviser of Aasu, Samujjal Bhattacharya, said, “People from different communities of Assam, including Marwari, Bojpuri, Hindispeaking and Sikh communities are spontaneously joining the movement against CAA.” Protests took place in Golaghat, Nagaon and Jorhat. People in several places were prevented from marching to the Deputy Commissioner’s office. Student organisations from Nagaland also joined the protests declaring that it is Northeast India’s movement against CAA.People from Hailakandi, Nalbari, Barpeta, Kokrajhar, Mangaldoi, Morigaon, Digboi, Naharkatia, Amguri, Dhubri, Doom Doom Dooma, Demow and Jonai participated in the satyagraha. There were protest meetings in Duliajan, Jagiroad and Sadiya.In Bongaigaon, several locals of the area participated in the satyagraha. Members of the literary body, Asam Sahitya Sabha, took out a protest march and warned the government of attack on the Assamese language, which will not be tolerated. In Upper Assam’s Tinsukia, Naamghar members staged a protest against CAA in traditional “Sattriya” attire. They took out a long procession shouting slogans “Revoke CAA.”Several artists in Assam has termed the state government’s announcement of artists pension of Rs 50,000 each as a one-time grant to 2000 artistes and technicians of the state as nothing but an attempt to derail the CAA movement.
