CAA protests: Protesters detained, Delhi action moves to Jantar Mantar

Mumbai: A large number of protesters gathered at Jantar Mantar in Delhi on Thursday to protest the amended citizenship law after they were not allowed to demonstrate near the Red Fort and Mandi House where prohibitory orders have been imposed.

Left leaders including D Raja, Sitaram Yechury, Nilotpal Basu, Brinda Karat, Congress' Ajay Maken and Sandeep Dikshit, and activists Yogendra Yadav and Umar Khalid were among those detained near the Red Fort and Mandi House where the two demonstrations were planned to be held.

Read | Nationwide protests planned in 10 cities against Citizenship law

Here are LIVE updates:

06:55 pm: Curfew announced in 5 police station limits of Karnataka's Mangaluru Commissionerate limits (central sub division of Mangaluru) till tomorrow midnight. Section 144 is already in place in city.

06:30 pm: Government Sources have released a fact sheet on frequently asked questions on the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Government Sources have released a fact sheet on frequently asked questions on the #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/GcElRZJlZS — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

06:20 pm: Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath said he has called a meeting over the violence. “You can’t indulge in violence in name of protest. We will take strict action against such elements. Will seize property of those found guilty and compensate damage to public property,” he added.

05:40 pm: Delhi Police PRO, MS Randhawa said police is closely monitoring social media, please share with us if you receive any rumours. We are identifying those who are trying to spread rumours and will take legal action against them.

05:20 pm: MoS Home G Kishan Reddy said, “Instigating people in the name of religion is not what political parties should do. Political efforts should be made to maintain peace. If you want to protest, please don't create violence and rumours. There aren't violent protests anywhere except Lucknow where violence broke out today. Otherwise situation is peaceful everywhere.”

05:00 pm: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said, “Suddenly after 73 years of independence we have to prove that we are Indian citizens. Where was the BJP's head and tail at that time? BJP is dividing the country. Don't stop your protest because we have to get CAA revoked. Let there be an impartial organisation like United Nations or National Human Rights Commission hold a referendum to see how many people are in favour or against.”

(Photo: ANI | Twitter)

04:35 pm: SSP Lucknow, in Husainabad said, “Situation is under control now. Mob had turned violent but force didn't lose their patience. Mob has been dispersed forcefully so that there is no loss of life or property. The force is now being moved to other location. 40-50 arrested across the district.”

04:30 pm: Maharashtra: People gather in protest against Citizenship Amendment Act, at August Kranti Maidan, Mumbai.

Maharashtra: People gather in protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct, at August Kranti Maidan, Mumbai. pic.twitter.com/BAOtYLBAHa — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

04:20 pm: Mobile internet services to remain suspended in Assam, till 9 am tomorrow.

04:05 pm: Lucknow: Protest against Citizenship Act turns violent in Hazratganj. Protesters pelted stones, Police resorted to lathi charge. A media OB van has also been set ablaze.

Lucknow: Protest against #CitizenshipAct turns violent in Hazratganj. Protesters pelted stones, Police resorted to lathi charge. A media OB van has also been set ablaze. pic.twitter.com/1W8LVdwvov — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 19, 2019

04:02 pm: Lucknow: Police resort to lathi charge to disperse the protesters demonstrating against Citizenship Amendment Act, in Hazratganj area.

#WATCH Lucknow: Police resort to lathi charge to disperse the protesters demonstrating against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct, in Hazratganj area. pic.twitter.com/8HyWjA4taq — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 19, 2019

04:00 pm: Maharashtra: Protesters hold march against Citizenship Act in Nagpur.

03:30 pm: 19 IndiGo flights were cancelled and 16 others were delayed as crew members were stuck in traffic jam at NH-8 due to anti-CAA protests on Thursday, a Delhi airport official said. Three airlines -- Vistara, Air India and IndiGo -- announced that their passengers, who are stuck in traffic due to anti-CAA protests at various parts of Delhi, will be adjusted in subsequent flights.

03:10 pm: Delhi: Congress core group meeting to be held at Sonia Gandhi's residence later today over 'unrest across the country after Citizenship Amendment Act.

03:05 pm: Lucknow: Vehicles set ablaze in Hasanganj during protest against Citizenship Amendment Act.

Lucknow: Vehicles set ablaze in Hasanganj during protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. pic.twitter.com/x2rhSsNnQx — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 19, 2019

02:50 pm: Delhi: Students and other people of Muslim community offered Namaz outside the gates of Jamia Millia Islamia University. Members of other faiths formed a human chain around them.

#WATCH Delhi: Students and other people of Muslim community offered Namaz outside the gates of Jamia Millia Islamia university. Members of other faiths formed a human chain around them. pic.twitter.com/FEPZOqI1MX — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

02:15 pm: Gujarat: Police resort to lathi-charge during protest called by different Left parties, over Citizenship Amendment Act, in Ahmedabad. The protesters were allegedly blocking police vehicle when the police resorted to lathi charge to disperse them.

#WATCH Gujarat: Police resort to lathi-charge during protest called by different Left parties, over #CitizenshipAmendmentAct, in Ahmedabad. The protesters were allegedly blocking police vehicle when the the police resorted to lathi charge to disperse them. pic.twitter.com/tTIWJXsf8T — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

02:02 pm: Karnataka: Protests continue at Town Hall in Bengaluru against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Karnataka: Protests continue at Town Hall in Bengaluru against the #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. pic.twitter.com/V6LqbqJSNA — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

01:57 pm: Sambhal: A State Transport bus set ablaze, allegedly during protest against Citizenship Amendment Act.

Sambhal: A State Transport bus set ablaze, allegedly during protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. More details awaited. pic.twitter.com/rtjO2rEF1A — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 19, 2019

01:36 pm: Sukhbir Singh Badal, Shiromani Akali Dal President said, “Appeal that protests should not be violent. As for the act, I had said in Parliament also that no religion should be excluded from this act.”

(Photo: ANI | Twitter)

01:30 pm: Film-maker Aparna Sen in Kolkata said, “Ours is a sub-continent that has many languages, cultures, ethnicities, it is held together by a strenuous thread that is secularism. If that thread breaks, then, the country breaks up.”

01:20 pm: Kolkata: Film-maker Aparna Sen takes part in a protest against Citizenship Act and National Register of Citizens (NRC).

(Photo: ANI | Twitter)

01:15 pm: Delhi Police Special Cell had directed on December 18 that voice, SMS, internet services be halted from 9 am to 1pm today, in walled city areas of north and central districts, Mandi House, Seelampur, Jafrabad, Mustafabad, Jamia Nagar, Shaeen Bagh and Bawana, in view of prevailing law and order situation.

(Photo: ANI | Twitter)

01:00 pm: Guwahati, Assam: Congress leaders Harish Rawat and Ripun Bora take part in protest against Citizenship Act.

(Photo: ANI | Twitter)

12:55 pm: Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal said, “Today, law and order situation in the country is deteriorating. There is a fear among all citizens today. I appeal to the central government to not bring this law but give employment to the youth.”

12:42 pm: Delhi: Congress leader Sandeep Dikshit detained by police at Mandi House. He said, "I was not allowed to go to Red Fort (for protest), so, I came to Mandi House".

12:30 pm: Internet has been suspended in parts of Delhi amid protests against the citizenship law, Airtel confirmed to customers who complained. The operator's customer care department confirmed that there was a government directive to suspend internet, voice and SMS services in "many parts" of Delhi.

12:27 pm: Delhi: Former JNU student and activist Umar Khalid amongst protesters detained by police for protesting against Citizenship Act, near Red Fort.

(Photo: ANI | Twitter)

12:20 pm: Bengaluru: Police detains protesters at Town Hall Citizenship Act.

11:56 am: Hyderabad: Police detain protestors who were holding demonstration against Citizenship Amendment Act near Charminar.

Hyderabad: Police detain protestors who were holding demonstration against Citizenship Amendment Act near Charminar. #Telangana pic.twitter.com/5nPiqPr3Kk — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

11:55 am: Delhi Police PRO MS Randhawa, at Red Fort said, “We request protest organizers to hold protests at designated places only. I appeal to all to cooperate with the police.”

(Photo: ANI | Twitter)

11:45 am: Left leaders D Raja, Sitaram Yechury, Nilotpal Basu, Brinda Karat and others were detained at Mandi House here during an anti-Citizenship Act protest for defying prohibitory orders imposed by the Delhi Police in the area.

11:35 am: Condemning police action against the protestors across the country, Congress party tweeted, "It is the democratic right of every citizen to protest peacefully against the govt. Imposing #Section144 & internet shutdowns are draconian measures to muzzle citizens by a govt that is terrified of hearing what Indians have to say. BJP should be ashamed."

It is the democratic right of every citizen to protest peacefully against the govt. Imposing #Section144 & internet shutdowns are draconian measures to muzzle citizens by a govt that is terrified of hearing what Indians have to say. BJP should be ashamed.https://t.co/hxlxOdzTzR — Congress (@INCIndia) December 19, 2019

11:30 am: Karnataka: Left parties hold protest in Bengaluru against the amended Citizenship Act and NRC.

Karnataka: Left parties hold protest in Bengaluru against the amended #CitizenshipAct & #NRC. Visuals from Mysore Bank Circle area. Section 144 is imposed in the city. pic.twitter.com/f3LIjzqOHu — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

11:25 am: Yogendra Yadav and historian Ramachandra Guha are among the protestors who have been detained as a part of police crackdown on anti-CAA protests.

11:15 am: Delhi: Large number of protesters in Red Fort area where Section 144 has been imposed.

#WATCH Large number of protesters in Delhi's Red Fort area where Section 144 has been imposed. #CitizenshipAct pic.twitter.com/tH5j4dJjTZ — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

(Photo: ANI | Twitter)

11:05 am: Delhi: Police detain protesters near Red Fort. Section-144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (prohibits assembly of more than 4 people in an area) has been imposed near Red Fort.

11:00 am: Karnataka: Consortium of Left wing and Muslim organisation hold protest in Kalaburagi. Police have detained more than 20 protesters.

10:35 am: Several routes across the national capital witnessed massive jams, including the busy Delhi-Gurgaon border as the Delhi police barricaded roads and imposed transport restrictions ahead of protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

(Photo: ANI | Twitter)

10:30 am: Entry and exit gates of Patel Chowk, Lok Kalyan Marg, Udyog Bhawan, ITO, Pragati Maidan and Khan Market are closed.

10:25 am: Ahmedabad Police: No permission has been given for rally or protest for today. They request citizens to adhere to law.

10:20 am: Police imposes prohibitory orders under CrPC Section 144 near Red Fort amid protest against amended Citizenship Act: Officials.

10:10 am: DMRC: Entry and exit gates of Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Chandni Chowk and Vishwavidyalaya are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations.

"Entry and exit gates of Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Chandni Chowk and Vishwavidyalaya are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations," the DMRC tweeted. Gates of Jamia Millia Islamia, Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh and Munirka were also closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations, it said.

10:00 am: Retired IPS officer SR Darapuri placed under house arrest for approaching Supreme Court against CAA, reported The Hindu.

09:45 am: Delhi Police said permission has not been granted for the march to be held under the banner of 'Hum Bharat Ke Log' against Citizenship Amendment Act from Lal Quila to Shaheed Bhagat Singh Park (ITO) at 11:30 am today.

09:30 am: Bengaluru: Police deployed in Town Hall area as a 'bandh' has been called by consortium of Left wing and Muslim organisations in Karnataka on Thursday in protest against Citizenship Act and NRC. Section 144 has been imposed throughout Bengaluru including Rural District from 6 am today for the next 3 days.

Catch the latest news, live coverage and in-depth analyses from India and World. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
