CAA Protests: Two Killed In Police Firing In Mangaluru, One Dies In Lucknow

New Delhi:

A Lucknow man was killed as violence erupted in Lucknow while two persons were killed in police firing in Mangaluru on Thursday as protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act, turned violent in various parts of the country.

Violence erupted in the state capital and some other parts of Uttar Pradesh with protesters, angry over the new citizenship law, pelting stones at police and torching vehicles. Mohammad Wakeel (25) suffered a firearm injury when he was passing through an old city area where the clashes took place, his family members said. The police, however, denied that the firearm injury had anything to do with the protests or the police action.

Internet services remained suspended for at least part of the day at various places, including Aligarh, Sambhal, Mau and Azamgarh districts. Scattered incidents of violence were reported from Lucknow's old city and parts of Sambhal and Mau districts. Two buses were torched and police posts targeted in Lucknow and Sambhal. Police said 18 of their own personnel (16 in Lucknow and two in Sambhal) were injured. Altogether, 112 protesters detained. Section 144 of the CrPc, which bans the assembly of people, had already been in force in the entire state for several days now.

In Mangaluru, two persons were killed as protesters attempted to lay siege to the Mangalore North police station and tried to attack police personnel, following which force was used to disperse them, police sources said.

Over 1200 people were detained across several parts of Delhi throughout the day while protests continued till late evening at Jantar Mantar. Police detained several protesters in Bengaluru's Town Hall including Historian Ramchandra Guha. A number of protesters were detained near Red Fort in Delhi, including Swaraj India's Yogendra Yadav. Around 18 Delhi Metro stations were shut in Delhi across routes, many of which were reopened later. Mamata Banerjee took out a separate protest rally in Kolkata once again and slammed the BJP saying they are buying skull caps for violent protesters to spread hatred against one particular community

Check Updates Here:

22:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In One person has died in Lucknow after suffering a bullet injury while two others in Mangaluru have died due to police firing.

22:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Mobile internet services have been suspended in Ghaziabad for 24 hours from 10 pm on Thursday in view of violent protests against the new citizenship law in parts of Uttar Pradesh, an official said. The action has been taken to avoid spreading of hate messages on social media with an aim to disturb the communal peace and harmony, the official said. District Magistrate Ajay Shankar Pande has instructed mobile phone service providers to suspend internet services till 10 pm on Friday, the official said. The district magistrate has taken this action to thwart any possibility of violence and arson in the district, he added.

18:10 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath on Lucknow violence: "I have called a meeting over this. You cant indulge in violence in name of protest. We will take strict action against such elements. Will seize property of those found guilty and compensate damage to public property."

18:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Protesters clash with police in Ahmedabad's Shah Alam area after incidents of stone-pelting.

18:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In News Nation also learnt that curfew has been imposed in three police station areas in Mangaluru.

17:50 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi Police PRO, MS Randhawa: Section-144 is imposed in North East district, Red Fort, and some parts of New Delhi. There are rumours that it is imposed throughout Delhi, it is false. Section-144 is imposed in only some small parts of the city.

17:49 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Lucknow: 20 motorcycles, 10 cars, 3 buses and 4 media OB vans have been set ablaze in the area around Parivartan Chowk during protests against Citizenship Act today.

17:49 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee in Kolkata: "Let there be an impartial organisation like United Nations or National Human Rights Commission hold a referendum to see how many people are in favour or against Citizenship Act."

17:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In

BJP is buying skull caps for its cadres who are wearing them while vandalising properties to malign a particular community: Mamata Banerjee at Kolkata rally



Follow LIVE updates here: https://t.co/md01ujTfpd pic.twitter.com/n4fkyl06tA

— News Nation (@NewsNationTV) December 19, 2019



17:13 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In According to reports, over 200 people have been kept detained at Surajmal Stadium in Nangloi while over 50 are at the Rajiv Gandhi stadium in Bawana. The numbers are expected to increase as more protestors are being brought there from different places.

17:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The government, meanwhile, has asked people not to worry saying the violent protests against the Citizenship Act was only in few places in Delhi and Lucknow. Union Minister of State (Home) GK Reddy said, " Some political parties trying to incite students, women in the name of religion."

16:30 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Entry and exit at Delhi Gate station closed, all gates of Rajiv Chowk open

16:14 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In In Lucknow, protest against Citizenship Act turns violent in Hazratganj. Protesters pelted stones, Police resorted to lathi charge and water cannons. According to ANI, a media OB van has also been set ablaze.

15:26 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress core group meeting to be held at Sonia Gandhi's residence later today over 'unrest across the country after Citizenship Amendment Act.

14:42 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Internet services suspended in Uttar Pradesh's Sambhal after protesters set two state transport buses on fire.



#BREAKING | Internet services suspended in Uttar Pradesh's Sambhal after protesters set two state transport buses on fire



Follow LIVE updates here: https://t.co/md01ujTfpd pic.twitter.com/Ar41ZBfrpp

— News Nation (@NewsNationTV) December 19, 2019



14:27 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Rajiv Chowk Metro Station Closed As Protests Intensify In Delhi

14:06 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Can't Silence People's Voice By Force: Priyanka Gandhi The voice of a people cannot be silenced by force. Every time force is applied to dominate and rule, every time you beat and suppress, every time you push people to the wall, they will rise up stronger, their resolve will strengthen and their voice will grow louder. Our freedom movement was proof of this, our constitution is the guarantor of it and our people are the soul of it. The voice of a people cannot be silenced by force. Every time force is applied to dominate and rule, every time you beat and suppress, every time you push people to the wall, they will rise up stronger, their resolve will strengthen and their voice will grow louder. Our freedom movement was proof of this, our constitution is the guarantor of it and our people are the soul of it.

13:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Stir turn violent, agitators set bus on fire in UP's Sambhal

13:19 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi Police Special Cell had directed on 18 Dec that voice, SMS, internet services be halted from 9am to 1pm today, in walled city areas of north and central districts, Mandi House, Seelampur, Jafrabad, Mustafabad, Jamia Nagar, Shaeen Bagh and Bawana, in view of prevailing law and order situation.



Delhi Police Special Cell had directed on 18Dec that voice, SMS,internet services be halted from 9am to 1pm today,in walled city areas of north¢ral districts,Mandi House,Seelampur,Jafrabad,Mustafabad, Jamia Nagar, Shaeen Bagh&Bawana, in view of prevailing law&order situation pic.twitter.com/Qk2sk0TKI1

— ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019



13:00 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal on being asked about protests over Citizenship Act: Today, law and order situation in the country is deteriorating. There is a fear among all citizens today. I appeal to the central government to not bring this law but give employment to the youth.

12:52 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Entry and exit gates of Barakhamba station are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station.

12:45 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In People are being detained from the Mandi House which includes the senior leaders of Communist Parties.



People are being detained from the Mandi House which includes the senior leaders of Communist Parties. We condemn this attitude of the Govt which can not tolerate democracy. Shame. #NOtoCAA pic.twitter.com/KSOGNFKfLq

— CPI (M) (@cpimspeak) December 19, 2019



12:43 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress leader Sandeep Dikshit detained by police at Mandi House. He says, "I was not allowed to go to Red Fort (for protest), so, I came to Mandi House".



Delhi: Congress leader Sandeep Dikshit detained by police at Mandi House. He says, "I was not allowed to go to Red Fort (for protest), so, I came to Mandi House". #CitizenshipAct pic.twitter.com/QIiiMRXfNg

— ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019



12:37 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We're complying with instructions received from govt. authorities on suspending Voice, SMS and data in certain areas in Delhi. Once the suspension orders are lifted, our services will be fully up and running: Bharti Airtel

12:36 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In It is an honour to be detained on 19th of December, a small tribute to Ashfakulla Khan and Ramprasad Bismil, tweets Yogendra Yadav.



It is an honour to be detained on 19th of December, a small tribute to Ashfakulla Khan and Ramprasad Bismil.

Happy to be in the company of Dr Dharamvir Gandhi, ex-MP, Patiala pic.twitter.com/odFCzMJQNf

— Yogendra Yadav (@_YogendraYadav) December 19, 2019



12:29 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Former JNU student and activist Umar Khalid amongst protesters detained by police for protesting against Citizenship Act, near Red Fort.



Delhi: Former JNU student and activist Umar Khalid amongst protesters detained by police for protesting against #CitizenshipAct, near Red Fort. pic.twitter.com/EqH8w2QSgH

— ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019



12:12 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In There were few protests in Delhi in past 24 hrs which were organised by mobilising people through WhatsApp groups but no organization has come up to take responsibility of protest. Few locations identified where officers have asked to provide local intelligence frequently: Sources

12:11 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In There are inputs of mobilising people from neighbouring states of Delhi. A message has been given to all concerned districts to keep a check on all Delhi borders: Sources

12:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Petition filed before Karnataka High Court challenging imposition of Section 144 in the state ( in wake of protests over Citizenship Act): Court posts the matter for hearing on December 21.

12:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In There are inputs of mobilising people from neighbouring states of Delhi. A message has been given to all concerned districts to keep a check on all Delhi borders: MHA

12:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi Police PRO MS Randhawa, at Red Fort where Section 144 is imposed: We request protest organizers to hold protests at designated places only. I appeal to all to cooperate with the police.

11:59 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Entry & exit gates of Vasant Vihar and Mandi House are closed. Interchange facility is available at Mandi House.



Security Update



Entry & exit gates of Vasant Vihar and Mandi House are closed. Interchange facility is available at Mandi House.

— Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 19, 2019



12:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi Police detains Yogendra Yadav.



It is an honour to be detained on 19th of December, a small tribute to Ashfakulla Khan and Ramprasad Bismil.

Happy to be in the company of Dr Dharamvir Gandhi, ex-MP, Patiala pic.twitter.com/odFCzMJQNf

— Yogendra Yadav (@_YogendraYadav) December 19, 2019



11:43 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Bengaluru City Police: Some people are spreading rumors. We request citizens not to give attention to them.

11:40 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Police has detained historian Ramachandra Guha during protest at Town Hall in Bengaluru.

11:40 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Permission has not been granted for the protest march to be held by the communist party from Mandi House to Jantar Mantar over Citizenship Ammendment Act and NRC at 12 pm today; Visuals from Mandi House.



Delhi Police: Permission has not been granted for the protest march to be held by the communist party from Mandi House to Jantar Mantar over #CitizenshipAmmendmentAct and NRC at 12 pm today; Visuals from Mandi House pic.twitter.com/7ypA9bb6fH

— ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019



11:39 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Karnataka: Left parties hold protest in Bengaluru against the amended Citizenship Act and NRC. Visuals from Mysore Bank Circle area. Section 144 is imposed in the city.



Karnataka: Left parties hold protest in Bengaluru against the amended #CitizenshipAct & #NRC. Visuals from Mysore Bank Circle area. Section 144 is imposed in the city. pic.twitter.com/f3LIjzqOHu

— ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019



11:28 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Some protesters gathered at Mandi House, Police got them removed from there.

11:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Consortium of Left wing & Muslim organisation hold protest in Kalaburagi against Citizenship Amendment Act.



Karnataka: Consortium of Left wing & Muslim organisation hold protest in Kalaburagi against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. Police have detained more than 20 protesters. pic.twitter.com/DzDZXcknYo

— ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019



11:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress is behind protests against CAA, &because of people like UT Khader situation is becoming like this. Taking care of Muslims is our responsibility. Request all to maintain peace. If Congress leaders continue to support protests then they'll face consequences: Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa

11:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Chennai Police have revoked permission for today’s rally to be held against Citizenship Act in Valluvar Kottam.

10:52 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prohibitory orders under Section 144 of CrPc have been imposed in the whole of Uttar Pradesh.

10:45 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Entry and exit gates of Central Secretariat metro station are closed. However, interchange facility is available at this station.

10:31 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In "Permission has not been granted for the march to be held under the banner of 'Hum Bharat Ke Log' against Citizenship Ammendment Act from Lal Quila to Shaheed Bhagat Singh Park (ITO)," Delhi Police said.

10:22 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Entry and exit gates of Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Chandni Chowk and Vishwavidyalaya are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations.

10:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Low Visibility Procedures are implemented at Delhi Airport. There might be some flight disruptions. Passengers are requested to contact the airline concerned for updated flight information. Any inconvenience caused is regretted.

10:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Section-144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (prohibits assembly of more than 4 people in an area) has been imposed near Red Fort.

09:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Police detained over 50 people and questioned them about arson in Seelampur and Jafrabad area. Cops may question more people.

09:18 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Road No. 13A between Mathura Road and Kalindi Kunj is closed for traffic movement. People coming from Noida are advised to take DND or Akshardham to reach Delhi: Traffic Police

09:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Now that Supreme Court is seized of challenge to validity of Citizenship (Amenendment) Act 2019 and has granted no stay, I appeal all to give up agitational path in interest of peace so that normalcy returns and suffering of people is contained: West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar.

09:15 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In All India Students Federation (AISF) members stop train at Rajendra Nagar railway station, Bihar in protest against against Citizenship Act and National Register of Citizens.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
