Anti-Citizenship Act protests on Dec. 19 | One dies of alleged firearm injury in Lucknow; two die in police firing in Mangaluru

Several protesters hit the roads in many parts of the country — defying prohibitory orders in some States — against the proposed nationwide NRC and the recently passed amended citizenship law.

Historian Ramchandra Guha, activists Yogendra Yadav and Harsh mander, were among the several people detained on December 19.

On the eve of protests planned by various organisations against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) on December 19, Section 144 of the Cr. PC has been imposed across Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh.

Here are the live updates:

Two die in police firing in Mangaluru

Two persons were killed in police firing in Mangaluru on Thursday as protesters across the country took to the streets against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) and the proposed National Register of Citizens (NRC), which in combination could potentially introduce a religious test for citizenship in India.

Read more

Ghaziabad | 10.20 p.m.

Internet services suspended in UP's Ghaziabad

Mobile internet services have been suspended in Ghaziabad for 24 hours from 10 p.m. on Thursday in view of violent protests against the new citizenship law in parts of Uttar Pradesh, an official said.

The action has been taken to avoid spreading of hate messages on social media with an aim to disturb the communal peace and harmony, the official said.

Uttar Pradesh| 9.50 p.m.

Protest against CAA held at 102 places across U.P.: police

Around 3,305 persons were detained by the Uttar Pradesh police as protests continued at more than hundred places over citizenship law across the state.

112 persons were detained in Lucknow on charges of arson and vandalism. One dozen vehicles were damaged in the state capital, where 16 policemen got injured. Another two were injured in the Sambhal district, which also witnessed violent protests.

Delhi | 9.30 p.m.

1,200 protesters detained in Delhi, released later

Around 1,200 protesters, who staged a protest for scrapping of the amended Citizenship Act, were detained on Thursday for defying prohibitory orders imposed by the Delhi Police in Red Fort area and were released later in the day.

According to an official, protesters were detained at Surajmal Stadium in Nangloi and Rajiv Gandhi Stadium in Bawana.

Lucknow | 8.15 p.m.

One dies of alleged firearm injury in Lucknow

An 24-year-old man, identified as Mohammad Waqeel of Thakurganj died of alleged firearm injury, two others received firearm injury, while a fourth person was injured due to other causes in Lucknow today, a spokesperson for the King George Medical University said. However, DGP O.P Singh says he feels the death does not have any connection to the police action against the CAA agitation.

Though Taufeeq, brother of Mohammad Waqeel, claimed he was shot by the police.

"It was an inspector who fired the shot near the Hussainabad police outpost. There was firing from the police outpost. My friend, who was accompanying [my brother], saw it himself," said Taufeeq, adding that his brother was not a part of the protests." — Omar Rashid

Lucknow| 7.50 p.m.

U.P. CM warns of strong action against vandals, says will ‘auction’ their property

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said on Thursday his government will take “revenge” on those involved in the violence over the amended Citizenship Act by auctioning their property to compensate for the losses.

“There was violence in Lucknow and Sambhal and we will deal with it strictly. All properties of those involved in damaging public assets will be seized and auctioned to compensate for the losses,” he said.

Delhi| 7.40 p.m.

No untoward incident reported during anti-CAA protests in Delhi: Police

No untoward incident was reported during the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests in the national capital on Thursday, the Delhi Police said.

Besides police personnel, 52 companies of other forces, including the Rapid Action Force (RAF), were deployed to maintain law and order, Delhi Police Public Relation Officer (PRO) Mandeep Singh Randhawa said.

He said social media and whatsApp groups are being closely monitored to check rumour mongering.

Mangaluru| 7.10 p.m.

Two deaths feared, curfew in some areas of Mangaluru

Two persons reportedly died of bullet injuries in hospitals on Thursday evening following protests over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and ensuing police action in Mangaluru. Earlier in the day, some youths were injured when police opened fire against miscreants who were attempting to set Mangaluru North (Bunder) Police Station.

Violence broke out after police caned a group of youths who had gathered near the office of Deputy Commissioner, defying the prohibitory orders. Curfew was announced in Central Sub-Division of Mangaluru, in five police station limits, till midnight of December 20. They include North, South, East, Barke and Urwa.

Delhi | 7. 00 p.m.

Two people have been arrested from North East Delhi for distributing inflammatory pamphlets regarding CAA and NRC.

Mumbai | 6. 45 p.m.

Thousands of protesters took to the streets at Mumbai against the Citizenship Act on Thursday, converging at the August Kranti Maidan, where Mahatma Gandhi in 1942 told the British to quit India.

The gathering included workers of political parties, students and a smattering of Bollywood personalities, who made out a strong case against the Act and the National Register of Citizens (NRC).

Gujarat | 6.15 p.m.

Independent MLA Jignesh Mevani has been detained by police during CAA protests in Gujarat. — Mahesh Langa

Gujarat | 6 p.m.

Police injured in stone-pelting in Ahmedabad

Around 10 policemen were injured in stone pelting on police vehicles during protests against CAA in Ahmedabad’s Shah Alam area.

"Two policemen received injuries when the crowd pelted stone on police vehicles. Now the situation under control," says Ahmedabad Police Commissioner Ashish Bhatia.

West Bengal | 5.55 p.m.

Left Front takes out rally to protest against CAA and NRC

Joining the countrywide protests by opposition parties against the amended Citizenship Act and the contentious NRC, the West Bengal unit of Left Front took out a rally in the city on Thursday.

Senior state CPI(M) leaders Surjyakanta Mishra, Left Front chairman Biman Bose, CPI leader Swapan Bandyopadhyay, RSP leader Manoj Chakraborty were among those who were at the forefront of the rally which covered a distance of over two km from Ramlila Maidan to Park Circus.

“Down down with NRC, CAA,” “No discrimination to any community”, “India will remain secular”, “Defeat the ploy to break India’s federal structure’ - were some of the slogans on banners seen at the rally in which thousands of Left Front supporters and members of different left organisations took part.

Mr. Mishra told reporters at the start of the rally, “This is the time to foil BJP’s dangerous game plan to divide the country. The Left will do everything to protect the country’s integrity and secularism.”

Karnataka | 5.50 p.m.

Curfew in Mangaluru till December 20

Curfew announced in Central Sub Division of Mangaluru, in five Police Station limits till midnight on December 20, 2019.

There was traffic jam in several parts of the central business district area in the city after police diverted city buses and other traffic from approaching the State Bank of India bus terminus near the office of the Deputy Commissioner where protesters opposing the CAA took to pelting stones at police.

Police diverted traffic from Kasaragod, Bengaluru and Dharmasthala on the National Highway 66 at Pumpwell Circle which is the main entry point to the city.

Hence many city buses cut short their trip midway without reaching the starting and end point of the travel that is State Bank of India bus terminus.

Caught unaware of the stone pelting incidents and other developments in Bunder area behind the office of Deputy Commissioner, several people including the school children and college students were seen waiting at many bus stops near the Bunts Hostel Circle, Kankanady, Valencia, Mallikatta, Ambedkar Circle in large numbers.

The ongoing road development works in some places added chaos to the traffic.

Delhi | 5.40 p.m.

The Union Home Ministry will review the security situation in the evening, and the CAA protests will be discussed.

Meanwhile, Yogendra Yadav has been released from detention. He is on his way to Jantar Mantar, says Swaraj India.

Maharashtra | 5.30 p.m.

Celebrities make an appearance at Mumbai protest

“I put before you a simple choice. Gandhi or Godse? Bhagat Singh or Savarkar?” asked screenwriter Saeed Mirza.

“I thank students of the country for letting us know that India's blood hasn't cooled yet,” said actor Sushant Singh Rajput.

West Bengal | 5.30 p.m.

Mamata dares Centre to bring referendum on CAA

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee at a rally against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in Kolkata on December 19, 2019. | Photo Credit: Shiv Sahay Singh

Mamata Banerjee condemned the heckling of historian Ramachandra Guha.

She dared the Centre to bring a referendum on Citizenship (Amendment) Act. “Let an impartial organisation hold this referendum.”

“BJP is buying skull caps for its cadres who are wearing them while vandalising properties to malign a particular community,” she said. “BJP was founded in 1980 and is asking for our citizenship documents of 1970. We are not living in this country at mercy of others.”

Kerala | 5.25 p.m.

Kerala will fight for protecting the constitution, says Pinarayi Vijayan

Kerala will fight for protecting the Constitution, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan asserted on Thursday as he condemned the police action in detaining left leaders in Delhi and historian Ramachandra Guha in Bengaluru during anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protests.

Vijayan also alleged that the NDA government was displaying an authoritarian tendency that was not witnessed even during the Emergency period (1975-77).

“We strongly condemn the act of detaining CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury, politburo members Prakash Karat, Brinda Karat, CPI general secretary D. Raja in Delhi and historian Ramachandra Guha in Bengaluru,” Vijayan said. - PTI

Delhi | 5.15 p.m.

Anti-CAA protesters offer roses to security personnel at Delhi’s Jantar Mantar

Anti-CAA protesters, including students and activists, gathered near Delhi’s Jantar Mantar offer roses to security personnel. | Photo Credit: Saurabh Trivedi

Anti-citizenship law protesters offered roses to security personnel at the Jantar Mantar on Thursday, saying police can baton charge them as much as they want but their message is “love in return for hatred”.

Some lawyers participating in the demonstration also offered legal assistance to protesters in case they are detained by the Delhi Police.

A large number of protesters, including students and activists, gathered at the Jantar Mantar here on Thursday against the new legislation after they were not allowed to hold demonstration near the Red Fort and Mandi House where prohibitory orders have been imposed.

Several posters have been put up at Jantar Mantar against the new citizenship law, with one reading – “Digital India with no Internet, ‘Janta mange rozi roti, milti hamko lathi gali’ [people demand employment but get batons and abuses]; save constitution save country.”

Delhi | 5 p.m.

Five Delhi metro stations, including Vishwavidyalaya, Patel Chowk open for public

The entry and exit of five metro stations were opened by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) .

“All entry & exit gates of Vishwavidyalaya, Patel Chowk, Central Secretariat, Udyog Bhawan and Lok Kalyan Marg are open,” the DMRC tweeted.

The busy Rajiv Chowk metro station is also now opened for public after being closed for almost two hours. - PTI

West Bengal | 4.45 p.m.

Multiple rallies in Kolkata against CAA

While Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee is holding a rally in Kolkata, the Left is holding another in Park Circus. This is apart from a Congress march and a civil society protest.

On the road from Ram Lila Maidan to Park Circus, a few thousand people are walking in protest against CAA and NRC. Slogans like ‘Inqilab zindabad’ and ‘BJP Hatao aur Desh bachao’ are heard.

Maharashtra | 4.30 pm

Crowds are swelling at August Kranti maidan in Mumbai.

The August Kranti Maidan, which once witnessed cries of "Bharat Chhodo (Quit India)" now echoes with slogans of "Bharat Jodo" (Put India Together).

“This is a spontaneous protest by a lot of citizens who feel deeply hurt with the passing of the CAA and NRC. I am here with my daughter to support the youth and my party position is clear on what is happening in the country,” says Suresh Shetty, former Maharashtra Cabinet Minister and Congress leader.

Live | Protesters trickling into Mumbai's August Kranti Maidan for a planned agitation against the #CAA_NRC https://t.co/6rejNB2wns #CitizenshipAmmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/PriB8mfrb9 — The Hindu (@the_hindu) December 19, 2019

Assam | 4.15 pm

Gauhati HC has directed Assam government to restore the mobile internet services by 5 p.m. on Thursday.

After hearing four public interest litigations and considering the difficulties faced by people, a division bench of the high court comprising Chief Justice Ajay Lamba and Justice Achintya Malla Bujor Barua passed the order on Tuesday directing the state government to consider restoration of Internet services.

However, internet services remainded suspended in the region.

Kerala | 4.00 pm

Anti-CAA stir continues in Kerala

Hundreds of activists of Democratic Youth Federation of India took out a protest march to Raj Bhavan, the official residence of the Governor on Thursday, after senior Left leaders were detained during an anti-Citizenship Act protest in Delhi.

Police had to use water canon many times to disperse them but the activists squatted on the road and continued the protest.

Governor Arif Muhammed Khan was away for a function when the protest was held, police said.

Uttar Pradesh | 3.50 pm

Police crackdown spreads to other parts of Lucknow

Satkhanda police outpost, near the famous Roomi Gate in Lucknow. | Photo Credit: Omar Rashid

Tear gas was fired at protesters near Parivartan Chowk, the heart of the protest. Several persons have been detained.

Abhishek Prakash, DM Lucknow told The Hindu: "Section 144 was violated by the violent crowd. There was stone-pelting at some places. Mild force was used to being crowd under control. We are arresting those who pelted stones and violated the law. Things will be soon brought under normalcy."

Brickbating also took place outside the Chota Imambada. Several vehicles were torched outside Satkhanda police outpost.

Tamil Nadu | 3.40 p.m.

Protest begins in Chennai

Activists of political parties, members of students' and youth organizations, social organizations, artists and advocates conducted demonstration against the Citizenship Amendment Act at Valluvarkottam on Thursday. | Photo Credit: M. Vedhan

Despite police permission being denied for a demonstration against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in Chennai, students and residents of the city gathered at Valluvar Kottam on Thursday afternoon to register their protest. Protests and demonstrations also continued in other parts of the State on Thursday, the fourth consecutive day of agitations against CAA.

In Tiruchi, 36 members of the Students Federation of India (SFI) were detained outside the Tiruchi Railway Junction during a protest march.

Uttar Pradesh | 3.30 pm

Internet services suspended in UP’s Sambhal

Internet services were suspended in Uttar Pradesh’s Sambhal after a public bus was set ablaze and another damaged.

Some of the protesters also pelted stones at a police station, District Magistrate Avinash K Singh said.

“The internet services have been suspended as a precautionary measure to prevent rumour-mongering,” the DM added.

One state roadways bus was set on fire in Chaudhary Sarai area of the district on Thursday afternoon while another was damaged, Superintendent of Police Yamuna Prasad said. Fire tenders were rushed to the spot.

3.15 pm

UNICEF asks govts to respect children’s right to speak up and be heard

In a statement released on December 19, UNICEF stated that “waves of protests around the world are reminder that voices of children and adolescents must be heard and their rights protected”.

In a statement by Executive Director Henrietta Fore, she says, “My plea is to please protect children from violence and respect their right to speak up and be heard.”

Ms. Fore added, “Children’s rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression, including in peaceful protest, are enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the most widely ratified human rights treaty in the world. It is incumbent on Member States to ensure that children can exercise this right in a safe and peaceful manner.”

Rajasthan | 3.00 pm

Muslims of India need not fear, CAA doesn’t threaten their citizenship: Ajmer Dargah spiritual head

The Citizenship (Amendment) Act is not against Muslims of the country and they need not fear as it does not pose any danger to their citizenship, the spiritual head of Ajmer Dargah Zainul Abedin Ali Khan has said.

“The Citizenship (Amendment) Act is not against Muslims living in the country. Any muslim living in the country need not fear as there is no danger to their citizenship. But, there is a need to clarify the fear and myth spread among Muslims in the country,” the Dargah Deewan said.

Referring to the Delhi police crackdown on students of Jamia Millia Islamia, Abedin appealed to the Centre to issue a guideline to police to not use force on students and not act in a way as if the pupils of the university are criminals.

Uttar Pradesh | 2.50 pm

Old City tense

A view of old city area of Lucknow after police dispered the crowd by lobbing tear gas. | Photo Credit: Omar Rashid

Tense atmosphere prevails in old city area of Lucknow as RAF and police clashed with protestors.

Police fired tear gas to disperse protesters. They also baton-charged the protesters, who had confronted the police.

Bricks and stones were allegedly thrown at the police, when the entered the locality to disperse the crowd.

A car set was set on fire in Madheyganj and the police outpost in the area was vandalised.

Gujarat | 2.40 pm

Over 40 protesters detained in Ahmedabad

Police baton-charged some people who gathered in Sardar Baug area of Ahmedabad.

More than 40 persons have been detained. and are being taken to Police Commissioner Office.

The protest was organised by Left parties, including the CPI and CPI(M), and organisations associated with them.

Delhi | 2.40 pm

Protesters now throng Jantar Mantar

Protesters at Jantar Mantar. | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

A large number of protesters gathered at the Jantar Mantar after the Police refused permission to conduct protests at Red Fort and Mandi House.

Sansad Marg and Jai Singh Marg have been closed.

Delhi | 2.30 pm

Four more Metro stations shut

The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation closed gates of more metro stations in view of protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

The entry and exit gates of Janpath metro station, Vasant Vihar, Rajiv Chowk and Mandi House Metro have been closed.

Delhi | 2.00 pm

Left leaders detained from Mandi House, released in different parts of Delhi

A number of Left leaders including D Raja, Sitaram Yechury and Prakash Karat were detained at Mandi House for defying prohibitory orders.

Nilotpal Basu, Brinda Karat and Annie Raja were also among those detained.

“We were detained and then taken in buses and dropped at different areas. I was dropped off near Karol Bagh while some others have been taken to Bawana,” CPI General Secretary D Raja told PTI just after he was let off.

Karnataka | 1.30 pm

Yediyurappa calls for peace, allays fears of Muslims

Chief Minister B.S. Yediyurappa on Thursday called for peace and tried to allay fears among the Muslim community regarding the law.

The Chief Minister on Wednesday had declared that his government will “hundred per cent” implement the Citizenship Amendment Act in Karnataka.

“I appeal to the minority Muslim brothers, this law will in no way affect you, protecting your interest is our responsibility. Kindly cooperate, maintain peace and order,” Mr. Yediyurappa said.

Speaking to reporters here, he said “we have not given permission for any agitation in favour or against the law, and section 144 (prohibitory orders) were in place.

“Things are normal for now, there is no problem, no one should organise any programmes in this regard and every one should maintain peace...police are monitoring things,” he added.

Delhi | 1.30 pm

Social activist Harsh Mander being detained in New Delhi on December 19, 2019. | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

Social activist Harsh Mander has been detained by ITO police in New Delhi.

Kolkata | 1.15 p.m.

Thousands gather in Kolkata for civil society rally

People protesting the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in Kolkata on Thursday, December 19, 2019. | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

Thousands of people gathered at Moulali in central Kolkata to protests against the CAA and NRC. People have assembled with placards, posters demanding the scrapping of CAA and NRC.

The rally witnessed a massive gathering from districts and villages largely driven by mainly various leftist groups without any political party flags.

Delhi | 12.50 pm

Mobile internet services appear to snapped in several areas across Delhi. Several Delhiites took to Twitter to reach out to telecom service providers.

Airtel and Vodafone confirmed that they have received instructions from government to suspend voice, internet and data in certain parts of Delhi.

Bihar | 12.35 pm

Movement of trains, vehicles disrupted during bandh in Bihar

Movement of trains and vehicles have been disrupted at several places in Bihar during bandh call given by Left parties on Thursday in protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the National Register for Citizens (NRC).

The bandh call also received support from the ‘mahagathbandhan’ (grand alliance) parties and the Jan Adhikar Party (JAP) led by former MP Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav.

Left party workers and supporters of the Vikashil Insaan Party, the Hindustani Awam Morcha (Secular), the Congress, the Rashtriya Lok Samata Party (RLSP) and the JAP disrupted the movement of trains and vehicles in places such as Buxar, Katihar, Lakhisarai, Sitamarhi, Bhabhua, Darbhanga, Biharsharief, Vaishali and Madhepura. At several places, the National Highways have been blocked by the supporters.

In Patna, train movement was disrupted at Rajendra Nagar station for some time, but later police officials dispersed the protesters.

Uttar Pradesh | 12.30 pm

As many as 62 persons arrested or detained in Uttar Pradesh overnight ahead of the protests today, said DGP O. P Singh.

Three among these were arrested for distributing "objectionable pamphlets" in Meerut, said Mr. Singh.

More than 3,000 persons have been served notices under CrPC 149 in the state.

Uttar Pradesh | 12.20 pm

SP leaders defy prohibitory orders, hold protest against CAA

Protesters at Parvartan Chowk in Lucknow.

Defying prohibitory orders, opposition Samajwadi Party legislators and leaders held a protest outside the Vidhan Bhawan in Lucknow.

They gathered outside the Assembly building in the morning ahead of the sitting of the state legislature, despite tight security arrangements and shouted slogans against the contentious legislation.

The SP leaders assembled under the statue of Chaudhary Charan Singh before staging the protest.

Later, when the Assembly met for the day, the SP lawmakers raised the issue inside the House creating uproar.

Prohibitory orders banning large gatherings have been imposed across Uttar Pradesh.

Delhi | 12.10 pm

CPI(M) says it strongly condemns the imposition of curfew like situation in Delhi.

"This is an attack on democratic rights of the people," the party's official handle tweeted.

"We urge all to join the March against CAA and NRC at Mandi house at 12 pm," the party said.

Section 144 has been imposed at Mandi House. Police were seen asking people to vacate the area.

Delhi | 11.55 am

Gurugram Police advise people to avoid traveling to Delhi."Due to sealing of Delhi borders at NH48, MG road and Old Delhi-Gurugram road by Delhi Police, citizens are advised to avoid non-essential travel to Delhi," a Gurugram Police tweet said.

Delhi | 11.50 am

Yogendra Yadav detained

Police barricades placed at 1 km before the Red Fort | Photo Credit: Hemani Bhandari

Swaraj India founder Yogendra Yadav and former MP Dharamvir Gandhi have been detained from Red Fort.

“I was standing alone in a corner, giving a byte to Swaraj Express. That was nowhere a violation of Sec 144. Why did Delhi Police detain me?" asked Yogendra Yadav.

Delhi police official were seen constantly asking people to leave the area surrounding Red Fort. They are giving way only to those who say they are not in the area for any protests.

Telangana | 11.40 am

50 UoH students detained

Detained students of University of Hyderabad holding protest at Moinabad police station on the outskirts of Hyderabad. | Photo Credit: Abhinay Deshpande

Around 50 students of University of Hyderabad were detained by Cyberabad police while on their way to Nampally Public Gardens to hold a protest rally with Left parties against CAA and NRC.

They were shifted to Moinabad police station.

The students continued their protest at the police station.

Around 40 people who had gathered at Charminar for a protest against CAA, NRC were also picked up.

Karnataka | 11 30 am

Ramachandra Guha detained in Bengaluru

Police have surrounded hundreds of protesters who had gathered near the Townhall in Bengaluru, against the CAA and proposed country-wide NRC.

Historian Ramachandra Guha, who was taking part in the protest, has been detained.

The police also rounded up protesters from surrounding streets and roads as they were making their way to the spot. A similar scene played out at Mysore Circle when people started gathering there.

As a pre-emptive action, Kannada Chaluvali Vatal Paksha (KCVP) leader Vatal Nagaraj was detained at his residence in Dollars Colony minutes before he planned to take out a protest.

Prohibitory orders are in force in entire Karnataka.

Karnataka | 11 am

Demonstrations planned across Karnataka

Police officer requesting protesters to disperse from the front of townhall in Bengaluru | Photo Credit: Sampath Kumar G P

As many as 40 platoons of Reserve Police force have been deployed along with the city police at sensitive points to maintain law and order. Prohibitory orders came into place on Wednesday evening and organisations have been banned from staging protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA).

Police personnel have been deployed at Mysore Bank Circle and Town Hall, where protests had been planned on Thursday. Some organisations, which did not want to be named, said they would go ahead with the protests. WhatsApp messages have also been doing the rounds, urging citizens to lend their support and gather at Town Hall.. “We will be peaceful… Please turn up,” read one such message.

Also Read CAA protests: Demonstrations planned across Karnataka despite imposition of Section 144

Delhi | 11 am

Gates of 14 Delhi metro stations closed

The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation on Thursday closed gates of 14 metro stations in view of protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Now, the entry and exit gates of 14 Delhi Metro stations are closed for commuters. Earlier in the morning, the DMRC had closed gates of seven metro stations, including Jamia Millia, Jama Masjid and Munirka

“Entry & exit gates of Patel Chowk, Lok Kalyan Marg, Udyog Bhawan, ITO, Pragati Maidan and Khan Market are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations,” the DMRC tweeted.

The gates of Central Secretariat were also closed but interchange facility was available for passengers.

(PTI)

West Bengal | 10 am

West Bengal peaceful as no fresh violence

West Bengal was peaceful with no fresh incident of violence over the new citizenship law reported so far on Thursday, police said. However, stray incidents of clashes between groups supporting the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 and those opposing it were reported on Wednesday.

Mumbai | 9:50 am

Congress, allies set up front to protest CAA, NRC

The Congress, Nationalist Congress Party and various other parties have formed a front and are organising a protest here on Thursday against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and the National Register of Citizens (NRC) on Thursday.

These parties have come together under a front, called Hum Bharat Ke Log, which will hold a protest at the August Kranti Maidan here, a release issued by the front said.

Karnataka

Prohibitory orders imposed across Karnataka till December 21

On the eve of protests planned by various groups across Karnataka against the Citizenship Act on December 19, Section 144 of the Cr. PC has been imposed across the State. It will be in force for the next three days (till December 21) and permission to hold protests and rallies have been denied, according to senior police officials.

Amar Kumar Pandey, Additional Director-General of Police (Law and Order), said ban orders had been imposed as the police were anticipating a law and order problem. “Hence, it was decided not to grant permission to hold any protest or allow people to congregate. Police officers have been asked to ensure that prohibitory orders are in place for the next three days depending upon the situation,” said Mr. Pandey.

Uttar Pradesh

Section 144 enforced in all of U.P.

Section 144 was enforced in all of Uttar Pradesh on Wednesday night ahead of the scheduled protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) on Thursday. DGP O.P. Singh appealed to the parents not to allow their children to participate in any demonstration or march or else they will face action.

Internet services were also suspended in Azamgarh district on Wednesday for 48 hours after protests on two consecutive days against the CAA.
