Historian Ramachandra Guha detained at anti-CAA protest in Bengaluru, says feel sorry for cops

Historian Ramachandra Guha was detained near Town Hall in Bengaluru on Thursday morning amid nationwide protests against an amended citizenship law that critics believe is anti-Muslim.

He and others were detained for protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act as well as the NRC, a controversial citizenship verification drive, in defiance of prohibitory orders.

Guha, 61, said in response to his detention that it was "absolutely undemocratic" that the police weren't allowing even a peaceful protest, a democratic right of citizens.

A video shows Ramachandra Guha holding a poster that reads, "CAA [Citizenship Amendment Act] against Constitution", and arguing with city police as they take him away.

In another clip, he can be seen telling a reporter for a news website: "I feel sorry for the police. The police are acting at the behest of their colonial masters. I feel sorry for them that they have to do this."

"Our paranoid rulers in Delhi are scared. Our home minister would not dare allow a peaceful protest," he said.

Section 144, which prohibits the assembly of more than four people, has been imposed across Bengaluru and Mangaluru; prohibitory orders will remain in place in the state capital till late at night on Saturday, December 21.

The Bengaluru city police has issued an advisory asking the public not to pay heed to rumours.

'CONGRESS BEHIND PROTESTS'

Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa, a senior BJP leader, claimed the Congress was behind the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

The law offers citizenship to Pakistani, Afghan and Bangladeshi illegal immigrants who fled their home countries to escape religious persecution.

It covers six minority religious groups, but not Islamic ones.

Yediyurappa said it was the government's responsibility to take care of Muslims, and appealed for peace.

He warned Congress leaders of consequences if they continued to support the protests.

Congress leader Siddaramiah, a former chief minister, asked the police to "act sensibly and act responsibly" despite "acting [at] the behest of ruling dispensation".

Inputs from ANI
