Priyanka Chopra Jonas on anti-CAA protests: To raise one's voice peacefully and be met with violence is wrong

Priyanka Chopra

CAA

Jamia Millia Islamia

Shah Rukh Khan

On December 19, the brand ambassador of Assam and celebrityJonas joined the list of celebrities who have voiced their opinion regarding the anti-CAA protests across the country. After days of protest, the actor took to Twitter and wrote, "Education for every child is our dream. Education is what empowered them to think independently.""We have raised them to have a voice. In a thriving democracy, to raise one's voice peacefully and be met with violence is wrong. Every voice counts. And each voice will work towards changing India. #HaveVoiceWillRaise #HaveVoiceMustRaise," she further wrote.The statement comes days after ongoing protests against the implementation of the Citizenship Amendment Act () were marred with violence when the Delhi police attacked students protesting at theUniversity. While 10 people, none of them students of the university, with criminal background have been arrested, universities across the country have staged protests to express solidarity.In the past couple of days, netizens have called out multiple Bollywood celebrities such as Amitabh Bachchan, Akshay Kumar and, who also happens to be alumnus of Jamia Millia Islamia University, for their silence. The CAA looks to grant Indian citizenship to refugees who come from Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Parsi and Christian, Jain communities who hail from three neighbouring countries- Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.There are a number of protests planned across multiple cities today. But in Bengaluru, police imposed section 144 for three days and have detained many protesters since this morning, including Ramchandra Guha. In Delhi, 12 metro stations have been shut. Police have picked up protesters from Lal Killa. Permission for protest has been denied in Ahmedabad as is the case in Uttar Pradesh. Mumbai will see protesters congregate at August Kranti Maidan this afternoon to protest against the controversial law.
