CAA protests spread to Bihar; railway track blocked, train stopped as protestors call for bandh in state

AISF stopped a train at Rajendra Nagar railway station in Patna | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights All India Students Federation (AISF) stopped a train at Rajendra Nagar railway station in Patna to register their protest against CAA and NRC In another incident, CPI-M workers blocked the railway tracks at Laheriasarai railway station during their demonstration against CAA Today, the Left has called for a bandh in the state while the RJD has announced to observe Bihar bandh on December 21

Patna: Amid the ongoing unrest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 (CAA) across the nation, the members of All India Students Federation (AISF) stopped a train at Rajendra Nagar railway station in Patna to mark their protest against the CAA and National Register of Citizens (NRC).

Patna: All India Students Federation (AISF) members stop train at Rajendra Nagar railway station in protest against against #CitizenshipAct and National Register of Citizens. #Bihar pic.twitter.com/fF5Hcp1luY — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

In another incident, in Darbhanga, CPI-M workers blocked the railway tracks at Laheriasarai railway station during their demonstration against the CAA and NRC.

Darbhanga: CPI-M workers block railway track at Laheriasarai railway station protesting against #CitizenshipAct and National Register of Citizens. #Bihar pic.twitter.com/Gf8h9WKwrx — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

Left parties have called for a bandh in Bihar today, i.e. December 19 to register their protest against CAA and NRC. The Bihar Pradesh Congress Committee (BPCC) has announced to extend its full support to the ‘Bihar band’ observed by the Left front.

While, the key opposition party in Bihar, Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) has announced to observe bandh in the state on December 21 against the CAA. The announcement was made by Lalu Prasad’s younger son- Tejashwi Yadav.

Violent protests have erupted at several places across the country against the contentious Citizenship Act. CAA seeks to grant citizenship to non-Muslim immigrants from three neighbouring nations - Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh. The beneficiaries of the Act include members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities who are religious minorities in the aforementioned countries.

The opposition parties have denounced it citing that the Act is discriminatory and specifically targeted against one community. They regard it to be against the principles of secularism and equality enshrined in the Indian constitution.

The people of some northeastern states like Assam and Meghalaya, among others have been raged by the Act because they feel that the Act threatens their cultural and linguistic identity. They fear that the Act will grant citizenship to the illegal Bengali-speaking Hindu settlers from Bangladesh and therefore it will change the demography of the region and will threaten their cultural and linguistic identity.

Many universities like Jamia Millia Islamia, Aligarh Muslim University, the Benaras Hindu University, among others have also raised their voices against the amended Citizenship Act.
