Meet The Three Students From Jamia Millia Who've Become The Face Of The CAA Protests

It's natural to resist any form of subjugation and what India is going through currently, is a lateral form of that and people are resisting it. Students from across the country are standing against the CAA (Citizenship Amendment Act) and protests are the only way the students can best express their strongly opinionated views.

While the history of student protests is what unifies the youth of the nation, we will always remember the faces of the people who spoke out boldly and loudly, as they stood in a crowd, unifying people who had the same beliefs as them.

© Twitter/Hindustan Times

This time. three female students from Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia University made their voices heard loud and clear, while opposing the government instilled CAA.

Ayesha Renna, Ladeeda Farzana and Chanda Yadav have come to be the face of the Jamia Milia student protest, as they stood up to the police who were seen chasing the protestors in the Jamia campus a few days ago. A picture of the three women standing tall and protesting amidst the crowd went viral and we all want to know who these women are and what their story really is.

© Instagram/Jamia Milia

Ladeeda Sakhaloon is an FYBA Arabic student, hailing from Kannur, Kerala. Chanda Yadav is from Chandauli in UP, pursuing her BA in Hindi, and Aysha Renna, a second-year MA History student, is from Malappuram, Kerala.

“We started the protest from our hostel at around 7. For half-an-hour, there were just four of us,” Sakhaloon told a popular publication in an interview.

She also added that while the protest ensued, there were already a large number of people who were a part of it. Looking at the crowd, the three of them started spreading the word about what was happening around them. They started addressing the crowd in numbers. The three climbed a wall to talk to the rest of the students at large and they realised the number of students gathered at that point in time had crossed over a thousand.

© Twitter/India Today

“If we don't protest, who will? My parents have always said that you must fight injustice. When my father saw that photograph, all he said was, 'You are on the right path,'” Sakhaloon added to her interview.

Chanda Yadav, on the other hand, struggled with her family to come to the University in the first place. She is the first girl child from her family to step out of her village for education.

“They said you are going to a Muslim university. You'll become like them, you'll start eating what they eat. The hatred for Muslims and JMI made me all the more curious about the university. And after spending over two years here, I know how wrong they were.” Chanda told a popular publication in an interview.

Her mother did ask her to stay away from the protests and Chanda wouldn't know how she would react if she ever saw her photograph that has gone viral. Even so, Chanda believes she is doing her part diligently, just like how other students are.

“But I'm happy. We see photos of students protesting from across the world. We are doing our bit" - she added.

During the ongoing protests, the students have been shouting various slogans that imply what they truly feel about the new Act that has been passed. Students are seen holding placards with significant messages, and singing songs and reciting poetry with the same fervour and sentiment. In fact, Renna, one of the three girls, now has a hoarse voice from protesting slogans.

“I wanted my voice to reach miles and miles. I knew I was representing each one of the students standing in front of me,” she told a popular publication in an interview.

© Twitter/NDTV

While the students have been brave in protesting for their rights, it's been rather tough on them. But even so, they haven't given up and the country is unifying through different mediums and on-ground protests everywhere, as we speak.

Let's wait and watch what shapes out of this crisis the country is currently facing.
