Telecom carriers limit operations partly in Delhi on government orders amid CAA protests

Telecom operators limit operations partly in Delhi on government orders amid CAA protests | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: After metro stations and roads, the Internet became the latest casualty of government measures in New Delhi to avoid dissent against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA).

Telecom carrier Bharti Airtel suspended voice, SMS and data operations in certain areas of Delhi following a government directive. Vodafone and Reliance Jio also restricted operations in some areas, said reports.

Delhi Police Special Cell had directed on 18 December that voice, SMS, Internet services be halted from 9 am to 1 pm today, in walled city areas of north and central districts, Mandi House, Seelampur, Jafrabad, Mustafabad, Jamia Nagar, Shaheen Bagh and Bawana, in view of prevailing law and order situation.

“We're complying with instructions received from govt. authorities on suspending Voice, SMS and data in certain areas in Delhi. Once the suspension orders are lifted, our services will be fully up and running,” Airtel said in a statement.

This is the latest development after some metro stations and roads were temporarily shut down in the national capital.

As many as 17 metro stations including Barakhamba road, Jamia Millia Islamia, Jasola Vihar, Shaheen Bagh and Munirka, Central Secretariat, Mandi House, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Chandni Chowk and Vishwavidyalaya, Patel Chowk, Lok Kalyan Marg, Udyog Bhawan, ITO, Pragati Maidan and Khan Market were been temporarily shut. The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) in a statement said ongoing trains won't stop at these stations.

Office goers particularly faced a hard time after road number 13 A between Mathura Road and Kalindi Kunj remained blocked since Monday night.

Section-144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which prohibits the assembly of more than 4 people in an area, has been imposed near Red Fort in view of the impending protests. A large number of protesters had gathered in the Red Fort area where Section 144 has been imposed. Some of the protesters were detained as well.

The developments occurred after violent protests broke out in Delhi in Jamia Millia Islamia and Seelampur.

Delhi police on Thursday made 12 fresh arrests in connection with the violence during protests in Seelampur against the amended Citizenship law today. The police arrested nine people on Tuesday and Wednesday.
