What is Section 144 of the CrPC?

Section 144 has been imposed in Uttar Pradesh, several parts of Karnataka and Delhi over anti-CAA protests.

With protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act intensifying at several places across many states, the governments have imposed Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) restricting the protesters from gathering against or in favour of the controversial law passed by Parliament last week.

Section 144 empowers the administration - technically a district magistrate or any other executive magistrate -- to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger.

Follow live updates on anti-CAA protests here

Put simply, the administration is empowered under Section 144 to impose restrictions on the personal liberties of individuals. This means the fundamental right of peaceful assembly provided under Article 19 of the Constitution is curtailed by the administration if the executive magistrate finds the situation at any specified place presenting a potential to disturbance in law and order.

The restriction could be imposed in a specific locality or in the entire town. The defining aspect of imposing such a restriction is assessment of the situation by the district administration that it has the potential to cause unrest or danger to peace and tranquility in such an area due to certain disputes.

Prevention of a crime or riot is the duty of the administration. Power conferred under Section 144 is absolute in terms of maintaining law and order.

Once Section 144 of the CrPC is imposed in any area, all civilians are barred from carrying of weapons of any kind including lathis, sharp-edged metallic objects or firearms in public places. Police or other security personnel are the only ones allowed to carry weapons in areas placed under Section 144.

Violation of Section 144 is liable for punishment upto three years in jail. However, in most cases involving public protests, as is the case with protests over the Citizenship Amendment Bill, the protesters are taken into custody by police and released after few hours. They are taken away from the site of protests in most cases.

Restriction under Section 144 is different from curfew. In the areas where curfew is imposed, all public activity is barred. Civilian traffic is also stopped. Curfew warrants much graver situation posing bigger danger of rioting and violence.

As a matter of rule, Section 144 is imposed for two months but it can be withdrawn any moment the administration finds the situation has attained normalcy. The government may extend the duration of restriction imposed under Section 144 beyond two months but not exceeding six months in one stretch.

However, there are certain places which are highly sensitive have Section 144 imposed in the surrounding areas all the time. Parliament Building Complex and the Supreme Court are among such areas where Section 144 is always in force.

ALSO READ | Mobile calls, SMS, internet suspended in parts of Delhi as CAA protests sweep country

ALSO READ | Historian Ramachandra Guha detained in Bengaluru at anti-CAA protest

FROM THE MAGAZINE | Citizenship Amendment Act: The anatomy of a protest

OVERSEAS IMPACT | Cancelled visits, call for sanctions: International fallout of Citizenship Act

INTERVIEW | We don't see India as a Hindu Rashtra, says Amit Shah
