Priyanka Chopra on CAA protests: Each voice will work towards changing India

Priyanka Chopra took to Twitter to condemn use of violence on students protesting against CAA.

Priyanka Chopra is the latest entrant to the list of Bollywood actors who have condemned the use of violence against students peacefully protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. Taking to social media, the actress supported the students in their fight and said that their voice count in a thriving democracy.

Priyanka Chopra took to Twitter to issue a note showing her support to the students. In her note she wrote, "Education for every child is our dream. Education is what empowered them to think independently. We have raised them to have a voice. In a thriving democracy, to raise one's voice peacefully and be met with violence is wrong. Every voice counts. And each voice will work towards changing India. #HaveVoiceWillRaise #HaveVoiceMustRaise (sic)."

The Sky Is Pink actress is not the first Bollywood star condemning the violence used against students of Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University who were protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act on Sunday.

From Hrithik Roshan to Vicky Kaushal, celebrities took to social media to register their opinion on the issue. While most of them condemned the violence, not many spoke about their opinion on CAA.

As a parent and a citizen of india , I am deeply saddened by the unrest across various educational institutions of our country. I hope and pray for peace to return as soon as possible. Great teachers learn from their students. I salute the worlds youngest democracy. Hrithik Roshan (@iHrithik) December 18, 2019

What is happening is not okay. The way it’s happening is not okay. People have every right to peacefully voice their opinion. This violence and disruption is both saddening and concerning as a fellow citizen. In no circumstance, must our faith in democracy be shaken. Vicky Kaushal (@vickykaushal09) December 16, 2019

I strongly condemn the violence that the police have shown in dealing with the students. In a democracy the citizens have the right to peacefully protest.I also condemn any kind of act of destruction of the public properties. Violence is not the solution for anything! Rajkummar Rao (@RajkummarRao) December 16, 2019

Celebrities like Farhan Akhtar and Anurag Kashyap, however, are openly opposing the new act. The Manmarziyaan maker has been tweeting against the act ever since it was passed by the both houses of the parliament.

Farhan Akhtar took to social media on Wednesday to urge people to join him in a protest against CAA on Thursday. He wrote, "Here’s what you need to know about why these protests are important. See you on the 19th at August Kranti Maidan, Mumbai. The time to protest on social media alone is over."

Here’s what you need to know about why these protests are important. See you on the 19th at August Kranti Maidan, Mumbai. The time to protest on social media alone is over. pic.twitter.com/lwkyMCHk2v Farhan Akhtar (@FarOutAkhtar) December 18, 2019

Along with his tweet the actor-filmmaker shared a graphic describing why are they protesting against CAA + NRC. The graphic also has an inaccurate map of India. Realising his mistake later, Farhan tweeted, "I recently posted a message about a protest meeting on December 19th with a repost of a graphic about the meeting. While I stand by the text, I have only just noticed that the map of India on the graphic is inaccurate. Every inch and part of Kashmir is a part of India and I reject the inaccurate map. I regret not noticing this earlier. My sincerest apologies for the oversight (sic)."

Students in different parts of the country are protesting against CAA. The Delhi High Court is going to hear different pleas related to the Jamia University incident today.

ALSO READ | Hrithik Roshan reacts to CAA: Great teachers learn from their students

ALSO READ | Beaten, mocked, belongings destroyed: Emotional Jamia students recall police action in library
