Rajiv Chowk, Central Secretariat, Lok Kalyan Marg and other metro stations reopen. Check details

Follow us on Image Source : PTI PHOTO Several metro stations shut in Delhi amid CAA protests

Delhi Traffic Latest News following Citizenship Act protests

5:10 pm: All entry & exit gates of Chandni Chowk, Barakhamba, Mandi House, Pragati Maidan, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Delhi Gate, ITO, Janpath, Khan Market, Vasant Vihar and Munirka are open.

5:00 pm: All entry & exit gates of Vishwavidyalaya, Patel Chowk, Central Secretariat, Udyog Bhawan and Lok Kalyan Marg are open.

4.45 pm: The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation has said the Rajiv Chowk Metro station is now open for commuters.

2.28 pm: IndiaTvNews.com has just learned that Delhi Metro has shut entry and exit gates at Rajiv Chowk Metro station (Connaught Place) in wake of protests against new Citizenship Act. This means no trains will now be stopping at Rajiv Chowk Metro for time being. Indiatvnews.com will keep bringing you all the latest news of Delhi Metro and road traffic.

"Security Update

Entry & exit gates of Rajiv Chowk are closed. Interchange facility is available at this station," DMRC tweeted.

1.48 pm: Delhi Metro has just confirmed that trains will not stop at Janpath Metro Station. Gates of the station have been closed as Citizenship protest intensified in many protests.

Delhi is sight to massive protests in the wake of the amended Citizenship Act. Section 144 has been imposed near Red Fort, while authorities have also snapped internet services in some areas of the national capital. As many as 19 metro stations have been shut as protesters took to the streets as demonstrations against Citizenship Act took a violent face on Thursday. The Delhi traffic police also issued an advisory over the closure of several roads.

Despite prohibitory orders issued by the Delhi Police, protestors have gathered at Red Fort and Mandhi House. Police have already detained scores of protesters at the Red Fort and taken away in buses. None of these protesters have gained permission from the Delhi Police to hold marches, police said.

Metro stations shut in Delhi on December 19 (till 5 pm)

1. Jamia Millia Islamia

2. Jasola Vihar

3. Shaheen Bagh

4. Munirka

5. Lal Quila

6. Jama Masjid

7. Chandni Chowk

8. Vishwavidyalaya

9. Patel Chowk

10. Lok Kalyan Marg

11. Udyog Bhawan

12. ITO

13. Pragati Maidan

14. Khan Market

15. Central Secretariat

16. Vasant Vihar

17. Mandi House

18. Barakhamba

19. Janpath

20. Rajiv Chowk

Delhi Traffic Alert: Avoid these routes in Delhi-NCR today

1. Road No. 13A between Mathura Road and Kalindi Kunj is closed for traffic movement. People travelling from Noida are advised to take DND or Akshardham to reach Delhi

2. People coming from Gurugram to Delhi will have to halt for checking as various barricades have been put up by the traffic police. A 10 km-long traffic jam was reported on the route in the morning

3. Traffic is heavy in the carriageway from Aya Nagar Border to Delhi

4. Demonstrations are underway at the road connecting Kapashera Border to Delhi

5. Traffic is heavy in the carriageway from Delhi Gate to GPO due to Swabhiman Rally

6. Traffic is affected on Subhash Marg, Peeli Kothi, Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Marg, Red Fort, Old Delhi railway station

7. Checkpoints have been set up at Delhi Chilla border due to which traffic is moving at a slow speed

8. Due to the sealing of Delhi borders at NH48, MG road and Old Delhi-Gurugram road by Delhi Police, citizens are advised to avoid non-essential travel to Delhi.

Image Source : INDIA TV Delhi traffic alert - Red line on map shows traffic on route

Image Source : INDIA TV Delhi traffic alert - Red line on map shows traffic on route

Image Source : INDIA TV Delhi traffic alert - Red line on map shows traffic on route

Also Read | Internet, SMS, Mobile services shut in many parts of Delhi

Also Read | Anti-CAA stir: Protesters detained near Red Fort

Latest India News
