CAA Protests: Delhi HC Refuses To Grant Interim Protection From Arrest To Jamia Students

New Delhi:

The Delhi High Court on Thursday issued notices to the Narendra Modi government at the Centre and Delhi police over alleged atrocities against Jamia Millia Islamia University students during their protest against the "divisive" Citizenship Amendment Act. The High Court, however, refused to grant interim protection to the students from arrest or any police action. The court was hearing two PILs seeking to set up a judicial commission to look into violence at Jamia University.

Both the petitions were mentioned before a bench of Chief Justice D N Patel and Justice Rekha Palli which allowed them to be listed for hearing on Thursday. The first petition was moved in the morning by advocate Rizwan seeking setting up of a fact-finding committee to look into the violence at the university.

The second petition was moved around 1.30pm jointly on behalf of the Imam of the Jama Masjid mosque opposite the Parliament House and two residents of Okhla seeking investigation by an independent agency like the CBI or the SIT into the violence at JMI.

The petition, on behalf of the Imam and two others, was filed through advocate Mehmood Prachha and also seeks "registration of FIR against the erring officials, including police personnel who orchestrated the incidents of violence to create unrest and have, thereafter, resorted to brutalities against the students".

It said that immediate action was required to be taken against the erring police officials so that they "do not get any time to fabricate and manufacture facts and evidence against the protestors". It also said that every citizen has the right to peacefully hold protests and police assault on such protesters was a violation of their fundamental right.

The police had stormed Jamia University and allegedly dragged students out of library and mosque and beat them black and blue. Several students were injured in the alleged police attrocities. According to some reports, at least two persons also sustained bullet injuries but the police denied opening fire.
