Historian Ramachandra Guha Detained During CAA Protests, Mamata Banerjee Says 'This Govt Is Scared'

New Delhi:

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee came out in support of noted historian Ramachandra Guha, who was detained during the anti-Citizenship Act protests in Karnataka’s capital city Bengaluru on Thursday. The West Bengal Chief Minister took to Twitter to voice her opinion against the detention. “This government is scared of students. This government is scared of one of India’s most accomplished historians for speaking to the media on #CAB #NRC and holding a poster of GandhiJi. I condemn the detention of Ram Guha. We extend our full solidarity to all those detained,” Banerjee said on micro-blogging site.

This government is scared of students. This government is scared of one of India’s most accomplished historians for speaking to the media on #CAB #NRC and holding a poster of GandhiJi. I condemn the detention of Ram Guha. We extend our full solidarity to all those detained — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) December 19, 2019

The nation is witnessing protests across states over the contentious law. In Karnataka, agitations were held at several places including Hubballi, Kalaburagi, Hassan, Mysuru and Ballary where police detained demonstrators who violated prohibitory orders.

Ramchandra Guha was detained near the Town Hall while he was talking to a news channel. He said it was "absolutely undemocratic" that police were not allowing even a peaceful protest, which is the democratic right of the citizens. He was taken away by police personnel and led to a vehicle parked nearby.

Chairperson and Managing Director of biopharmaceuticals enterprise Biocon, Kiran Mazumdar-Shaw expressed shock over the police action. "This is shocking n reflects the total lack of understanding of fundamental freedom to express dissent – a peaceful protest shd not be mishandled in this manner", she said on Twitter.

Meanwhile, Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa issued an appeal. "I appeal to the minority Muslim brothers, this law will in no way affect you, protecting your interest is our responsibility. Kindly cooperate, maintain peace and order," he said.

Prohibitory orders have been clamped in Bengaluru, Mangaluru and other parts of Karnataka in the backdrop of the protests against the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act. The orders in Bengaluru would be in force for three days starting from 6 am on Thursday morning to December 21 midnight.

In the last few days, many protest were held across the Karnataka capital against the CAA. The move comes after the Mangaluru Police imposed Section 144 in the city till December 20.

Bengaluru police Commissioner Bhaskar Rao told reporters that none should organise protests in the city from 6 am on Thursday to midnight of December 21. Anyone violating the orders will be dealt with an iron hand, he said.

"There will however be no restrictions on schools, colleges, malls, markets, bus services, metro rail, autorickshaws and cab aggregators. Rao said the orders were imposed as many violent incidents had taken place during protests asgainst the Citizenship Amendment Act in various parts of the country, where public property was damaged.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
