CAA protest in Mumbai: Farhan Akhtar to join protesters at August Kranti Maidan; Shiv Sena won’t participate

Mumbai CAA protest: Students raise slogans during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act and NRC at Bandra, Mumbai | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights A large number of students and youth are likely to join the protest Other celebrities like Sushant Singh and Mahesh Bhatt have also joined the protests against the passage of the CAA Shiv Sena, which is an ally of the NCP and Congress in the Maharashtra government, will not participate in the protests

Mumbai: Actor-filmmaker Farhan Akhtar will on Thursday join demonstrators at August Kranti Maidan in central Mumbai to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, and National Register of Citizens (NRC). The protest march will take place under the banner of 'Hum Bharat Ke Log' and has been organised by major political parties, NGOs, and social groups.

A large number of students and youth are likely to join the protest.

Taking to Twitter, Akhtar announced: "See you on the 19th at August Kranti Maidan, Mumbai. The time to protest on social media alone is over.”

Other celebrities like Sushant Singh and Mahesh Bhatt have also joined the protests against the CAA.

Similar gatherings are also expected to be carries out in Maharashtra’s Thane, Nashik, Palghar, Pune, Aurangabad, Ahmednagar, Beed, Latur and other parts as part of the anti-CAA protests.

In the meantime, the Shiv Sena, which is an ally of the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) and Congress in the Maharashtra government, will not participate in the protests.

While responding to this, Mumbai Congress president Eknath Gaikwad said the protest was organised by NGOs and not his party.

"The Congress, NCP and other parties were invited by citizens' groups for the protest. If the Congress had organised it, we would have invited all partners of the Maharashtra Vikas Aghadi (comprising the Sena, Congress and NCP)," said Gaikwad.

Notably, the Shiv Sena had backed the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the Lok Sabha, however, staged a walkout during voting on it in the Rajya Sabha.

Firoze Mitiborwala, one of the members of the 'Hum Bharat Ke Log' front, had earlier said that the group was in touch with the Shiv Sena to join the forum. “(Sena president and chief minister) Uddhavji has helped us with the logistics of today's protest at the August Kranti Maidan," he had said.

In the wake of the protests, the Mumbai Police have beefed up the security.

"Thousands of people belonging to different communities, NGOs and political parties are expected to take part in the protest. Mumbai police will maintain a strict vigil to prevent any untoward incident during the protest," said an official.

Besides the Mumbai Police, Riots Control Police (RCP), Quick Response Teams (QRT), and State Reserve Police Force will also be deployed. Policemen in plainclothes will also keep guard.

Drones and CCTV will be employed to monitor the crowd. Traffic regulations are also in place.

Meanwhile, Delhi too has witnessed huge traffic jams and massive support for the anti-CAA rallies called by various opposition leaders. However, the Centre has been reiterating that CAA will not affect the fate of Indian Muslims in any way and is only meant to benefit those rendered stateless due to the atrocities and religious persecution by proclaimed Islamic nations like Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh, post-1947 Partition.
