Citizenship Act Protesters In Lucknow Torch Police Post; Tear Gas Used

Lucknow Citizenship Amendment Act: A police post and vehciles were set on fire.

The police in Lucknow cracked down protesters using tear gas and batons after vehicles parked outside a police post were set on fire and stones thrown during a demonstration in the Uttar Pradesh capital against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

State police chief OP Singh told news agency PTI that cops had to fire tear-gas shells to control the situation in Madeyganj area. About 20 people have been taken into custody, he added.

"People are being led astray. It's all politics by the Samajwadi Party, Congress and other parties. We will strictly deal with elements instigating violence. We will seize their property, they will foot for damage to public property, all have been captured on video," Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said.

There was tension in some other areas, especially the Old City areas, and police officials were having a tough time maintaining law and order. Senior officers camped in the areas disturbed by protests.

A huge turnout of protesters at Koneshwar crossing and Hussainganj led to a clash with the cops, news agency IANS reported. Clashes with the police were also reported from Hussainabad, Daliganj and Teele Wali Masjid and the Chhota Imambara, IANS said.

Meanwhile, Congress sources told news agency PTI that state party president Ajay Kumar Lallu was detained when he was leading a protest against the law his party says is discriminatory in the busy Parivartan Chowk, near the District Magistrate's office.

Police lathi-charged protesters in the area and a large number of Congress workers were taken into custody, IANS reported. Samajwadi Party workers also clashed with cops.

With mobs collecting in different parts of the state capital, traffic management was thrown out of gear, leading to severe jams in almost all parts of the city.

Elsewhere in Uttar Pradesh, state-run buses were set on fire by protesters in Sambhal district and some private vehicles were also set ablaze. Internet services have been suspended in the western UP district.

In Kushinagar, protesters threw stones at the cops who then resorted to baton-charge to disperse them.

(With inputs from agencies)
