Mangalore news: Police resort to lathicharge as protesters hurl stones in Mangaluru, IIM-B students defer stir

A screengrab of a video shows protesters running after police resorted to lathi-charge in Mangaluru

MANGALURU: Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and the National Register of Citizens turned violent in Mangaluru on Thursday with demonstrators hurling stones at police personnel leading to lathicharge, police said.

Protesters hit the streets, defying prohibitory orders under section 144 of the CrPC that bans assembly of more than four people.

Some of the protesters were holding placards which read 'withdraw CAA and NRC' and 'CAA is against constitution'.

With stones being hurled, police resorted to lathicharge to disperse the protesters, police said.

Protesters donning helmets were seen hurling stones at policemen.

Shops in the area were shut. There was no traffic movement.

Security has been beefed up at the deputy commissioner's office and other areas of Mangaluru city to avoid untoward incidents.

Section 144, which was imposed from Thursday morning, will be in force till December 21 midnight.

Quick reaction team has also been deployed in the city, sources said.

Police officials are also monitoring the social media over spreading of rumours and demanding people and students to gather in large numbers to stage protests.

Strict action will be taken by holding groups admins responsible in case such messages are continued to be spread, police said.

IIM-Bangalore students defer protest

Meanwhile, students of the Indian Institute of Management-Bangalore (IIM-B) deferred a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), in view of the ban order by the city police commissioner, a faculty member said on Thursday.

"In view of the police order, the IIM-B students have postponed the protests. They will hold the protest only after Section 144 is lifted by the police," said associate professor Deepak Malghan in an email to the institute's fraternity.

Called by the post graduate program students, the protest in IIM-B scheduled at 6pm on Thursday was also supposed to be in support of the students of Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University.

The protest was planned at the main gate of the institute, within the campus boundary at Bannerghatta.

Starting Thursday, a three-day ban on assembly of more than 5 persons was imposed in the city in the wake of all-India shutdown call against the CAA.

Bengaluru police commissioner Bhaskar Rao imposed Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) from 6am on Thursday to Saturday midnight in view of the shutdown call by social and student organisations.


