Yogi’s stern message to CAA protesters: ‘Properties of arsonists will be seized and auctioned’

UP CM Yogi Adityanath warns CAA protesters | Photo Credit: IANS

Lucknow: As violence rocked several areas of capital Lucknow on Thursday, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath talked tough and said violence in the name of democracy is not acceptable.

Sending out a stern message to arsonists and unsocial elements, Yogi read the riot act and said properties of those involved in damaging public assets will be seized by the authorities and auctioned to compensate for the losses.

The CM made the remarks as protesters resorted to stone-pelting and arson in the state capital and some other parts of the state. Vehicles and a police chowki were torched, forcing police to use tear-gas shells and baton-charge protesters.

Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath: I have called a meeting over this. You cant indulge in violence in name of protest. We will take strict action against such elements. Will seize property of those found guilty and compensate damage to public property. #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/6jxuXDLWDt — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 19, 2019

Apart from Lucknow, incidents of violence were reported from parts of Sambhal and Mau districts.

The authorities kept Internet services snapped at various places, including Aligarh, Sambhal, Mau and Azamgarh districts, at least part of the day. Section 144 continues to remain in force across Uttar Pradesh.

Today, Samajwadi Party and Congress MLAs held a demonstration in the Legislative Assembly complex over the citizenship law. SP workers also took to the streets to protests against the CAA, in defiance of the police orders.

In Aligarh, teachers from the Aligarh Muslim University held a protest march. Shops remained briefly shut in some areas of the city.

"We want to convey to the people of India that our struggle against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act will continue peacefully within the democratic framework of the system," AMU Teachers Association secretary Najmul Islam told PTI.

"We feel that we are fighting for the idea of India as envisaged by the founding fathers of the nation. This is not a struggle for the rights of any particular community," he said.

In Sambhal district's Chaudhary Rai area, protesters set a public bus on fire and damaged another. District Magistrate Avinash K Singh said protesters also targeted a police station. "The Internet services have been suspended as a precautionary measure to prevent rumour-mongering," he said.

The Citizenship Amendment Act provides for the grant of Indian citizenship to persecuted minorities including Hindus, Christians, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists and Parsis from Muslim-majority Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, who have sought refuge in Indian on or before December 31, 2014.
