NDA government "weakening" constitutional institutions: Baghel

Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel Monday accused the BJP-led government at the Centre of "weakening" and "misusing" constitutional institutions of the country.

The Congress CM's remarks came in the backdrop of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's sit-in against the CBI's attempt to question the Kolkata police commissioner in connection with chit fund scam cases.

Baghel said the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has lost its credibility under the BJP-led government.

"The BJP has been constantly trying to weaken constitutional institutions. The party has destroyed the CBI as much as it could have done. Its (CBI) credibility has come to an end.

"How the agency was being misused was evident in West Bengal (Bharatiya Janata Party lagatar sanvaidhanik sansthao ko kamjor karne me lagi hai aur CBI ko wo jitna niche gira sakte the wo gira chuke hai. Uski vishwasniyata ab samapt ho chuki hai. Uska durupyog kis prakar se kar rahe hai wo kal West Bengal me dikhai diya hai)," Baghel told reporters.

He was responding to a query on the face-off between the West Bengal government and the premier central agency.

"The entire county has been witnessing how all the institutions - be it CBI or ED - are being misused. The Centre is taking action with an intention to extract revenge," he alleged.

The chief minister also condemned the alleged attack on a journalist by BJP functionaries at their party office in Raipur Saturday.

"The incident is condemnable. Police have taken action in the incident, but BJP should also take action against those who had thrashed the journalist.

"Don't they (BJP) have faith in democracy. The way BJP is trying to weaken constitutional institutions, it is also trying to weaken the fourth pillar of democracy," Baghel said.

The incident was a result of frustration of the BJP over its loss in the recent assembly election, he claimed.

"We have already taken an initiative to enact a journalist protection law. But in view of the incident at the BJP office, it seems the law has to be enacted soon," he added.

The journalist, Suman Pandey, who works with a Raipur- based website, was allegedly thrashed by BJP office- bearers during the partys district-level meeting in Raipur.

According to Pandey, he was beaten up for covering a scuffle among BJP leaders during the meeting called to review the saffron outfit's defeat in the November assembly polls.

Four BJP men, including Raipur district president Rajeev Agrawal, were arrested following the incident. However, all were released on bail bond from the police station.

Journalists are sitting on an indefinite protest in front of the Raipur Press Club demanding their expulsion from the BJP.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
