KPME: State government finally sets up expert committee for price fixation

It will suggest standard rates for procedures in hospitals empanelled under Arogya Karnataka

Almost a year after notifying rules of the controversial Karnataka Private Medical Establishments (Amendment) Act, the State government has finally set up an expert committee for recommending uniform package rates, classification and standards of infrastructure in hospitals, and standard protocols for treatment.

While this means reasonable and uniform package rates for various procedures in hospitals empanelled under Arogya Karnataka will be fixed soon, there is no clue as to when the rate fixation would be done as the terms of reference for the committees have not been stipulated by the government.

The uniform package rate committee is headed by the Principal Secretary, Department of Medical Education, the classification and standards of infrastructure committee is under the Health and Family Welfare Commissioner. The committee to fix standard protocols for treatment is headed by director of Bangalore Medical College and Research Institute (BMCRI).

Despite widespread protests by doctors in November 2017 against amending the original KPME Act, the government passed the KPME (Amendment) Act, 2017, during the Belagavi session then. However, the rules framed under the Act were highly watered down. Health activists alleged that the rules facilitated the State government to be a collaborator with the private medical establishments rather than being a regulator.

Meanwhile, hospitals that got empanelled for Arogya Karnataka were forced to follow the old package rates for various procedures that existed under various government health insurance schemes before they were merged to form Arogya Karnataka.

Complaining that the rates are low and unreasonable, doctors’ associations and several hospitals submitted representations to the government to expedite the process of new rate fixation.

Mallesh Hulumani, president of KPME Association, who has been nominated as a member of the rate fixation committee, told The Hindu that the KPME Association and the Indian Medical Association (IMA) have done cost accounting studies of various procedures and have come out with standard rates.

“We will place these studies before the committee during discussions. We hope the process will begin soon as the existing rates are low. With the terms of reference yet to be put in place, we are not sure when the committees will start functioning,” he said.
