ANTI-CAA PROTESTS RAGE ACROSS INDIA

New Delhi: Simultaneous protests raged in multiple cities on Thursday with thousands-strong crowds of students, activists and others defying prohibitory orders to voice their dissent against the new citizenship law, resulting in violence in Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka, where two people were killed in police firing.

Besides, the two deaths in Mangaluru, a 25-year-old man died of firearm injury which he suffered while passing by a violent protest in Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh, but police claimed that the death was not linked to the agitation or any police action.

Curfew was imposed in Mangaluru where thousands of protesters ran amok.

Authorities resorted to barricading and clampdown on mobile services, including an unprecedented one in the national capital, while protesters also faced tear gas shelling and police batons at some places including in Uttar Pradesh where incidents of arson and stone pelting gave the protests a violent colour.

Opposition parties also joined forces to attack the Modi government on the new law which they said goes against the “idea of India”, even as the ruling BJP asserted there would be no rethink on implementation of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and that the National Register of Citizens would also be brought in.

Protests remained largely peaceful at most places with the agitators depending on slogans and placards to express their opposition to the new law and what they called ‘barbaric police action’ against students of Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University.

There were incidents of stone pelting and arson in Bihar as well, while rail and road traffic was hit in several states.

The law has been amended to enable grant of speedier citizenship to non-Muslim refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan if they had to leave their respective countries due to religious persecution.

In Bihar, members of Left-wing student organisations squatted on railway tracks at Rajendra Nagar Terminus early in the morning, while hundreds of activists of Jan Adhikar Party, floated by controversial ex-MP Pappu Yadav, burnt tyres on an adjacent road.

They also vandalised an ambulance which tried to make its way through the road and head towards a residential locality nearby.

In Jehanabad, which had been a stronghold of the ultra-Left movement in Bihar, CPI-ML activists disrupted traffic on national highways.

In Maharashtra, the Congress, NCP and various other parties came together under a front called ‘Hum Bharat Ke Log’ for a protest rally at Mumbai’s August Kranti Maidan, the place where in 1942 Mahatma Gandhi told the then British rulers to quit India.

Noted freedom fighter G G Parikh (94), who participated in the Quit India movement in 1942, was present at the Maidan.

“The Constitution, drafted by Dr B R Ambedkar, is being violated and is under attack. This is the reason that the entire country has chosen this day to condemn the unconstitutional and divisive laws of the BJP government,” the front said.

The rally saw thousands of people, including workers of political parties, students, professionals and also a smattering of Bollywood personalities, who made a strong case against the act and the NRC. However, Maharashtra’s ruling alliance partner Shiv Sena kept itself out of the rally.

Protests in West Bengal, Assam and Meghalaya, which were at the centre of the stir initially, were largely peaceful. Protests were also held in Telangana, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Chandigarh, Jammu, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, among other states.

At a rally in Kolkata, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee dared the Modi government to go for a UN-monitored referendum over the amended law and the proposed nationwide NRC and said the BJP will have to quit if it fails such a “mass vote”.

Two persons were arrested for hurling crude bombs on a group of anti-CAA protesters in West Bengal’s North Dinajpur district, police said.

At some places, including in the national capital and Mumbai, pro-CAA demonstrations were also held by some groups of people.

A protest against the CAA and the NRC in the Muslim-dominated Shah-e-Alam in Ahmedabad turned violent on Thursday, with at least five policemen getting injured in stone-pelting.

The police lobbed teargas shells to disperse the mob of around 2,000 persons.

Protesters shouted slogans and held placards saying “No CAB No NRC”. When the police tried to disperse them, the protesters started throwing stones and brick pieces.

A video clip aired by a local news channel showed agitators hurling stones at police vehicles.

In the footage, some policemen at the site can be seen taking cover behind moving police vehicles to save themselves from the stones coming from both sides of the road.

Another video showed some people thrashing a policemen who fell down from a moving police bus.

In Hyderabad, hundreds of protestors, including activists of Left parties and about 50 students of the University of Hyderabad were taken into preventive custody to foil attempts to hold protests against the act.

CPI national secretary K Narayana, party’s Telangana state secretary Chada Venkat Reddy, Telangana Jana Samiti chief M Kodandaram were among 350 people taken into custody.

Police also prevented a protest rally by the Left parties against the CAA.

In Thiruvananthapuram, hundreds of activists of the Democratic Youth Federation of India, the youth wing of CPI-M took out a protest march to Raj Bhavan here.

CPI activists burnt an effigy of Union Home Minister Amit Shah in Kozhikode.

Activists of SFI, the students wing of the CPI-M, took out a march to the Kannur railway station in north Kerala against the implementation of the Act.

Tanur municipality in Malappuram witnessed high drama on Thursday as some of the councillors tried to present a motion against the CAA, which was objected to by the BJP members saying the issue was under the consideration of the court.

In Tamil Nadu, protests were held in Chennai, Tirupur, Tiruchirappalli, Nagercoi and Vaniyambadi.

Outfits, including Makkal Adhikaram, an ultra-Left outfit, and CPI were among those who held protests.

In Chennai, noted Carnatic music vocalist T M Krishna, and Tamil actor Siddarth were among the hordes of people from different walks of life who participated in a demonstration against the CAA.

The demonstration, organised by a collective of civil society members, Left liberals and volunteers of outfits including the Jamaat-E-Islami Hind and NGOs saw high pitched slogans against the BJP-led Centre, the RSS, and Hindutva.
