Protesters post, stay ahead of all clampdown

TOI

NEW DELHI: It was a day when social media became an indispensable mass instrument for disseminating rapid information.On Thursday, as anti-CAA protests rocked the nation, dissenters relayed short videos and put out photographs of the demonstrations on Twitter, Instagram and Facebook to keep everyone connected and on the ball. There were also live updates from protest sites, pleas for aid, advisories by lawyers and offers of help.In Bengaluru, minutes after historian Ram Guha was detained, social media erupted. Tweets flew in even from abroad. Around 12pm, Ram Guha was trending on the seventh spot in India.In Delhi, with section 144 imposed in both Red Fort and Mandi House , the two main gathering points for protestors, police swiftly detained people and whisked them away in buses. They also dispersed the crowd. But people found ways to communicate what the next meeting point would be: Shahid Park, Barakhamba Road, Jantar Mantar One of the protestors at Mandi House, who was busy with his phone broadcasting live videos on Facebook, toldthat the purpose was to make sure that “everyone had proper information”. The suspension of internet service in affected areas did affect connectivity, but several people had come prepared. There were advisories on how to tweet through text messages. Purpose was singular – to be ahead of the curve and pass on information.As politician Yogendra Yadav was being led away by police, he tweeted in real time the location where he was being taken. “I have just been detained from Lal Qila. About a thousand protesters already detained. Thousands on the way. Am told we are being taken to Bawana,” Yadav wrote around 12pm.Pictures from Mumbai, Kalaburagi, Patna, Ahmedabad and Lucknow were also shared widely to inform netizens of the wide scale of the protests. Gujarat politician Jignesh Mevani also tweeted about his detention. Videos showing political activist Umar Khalid being led away by police while shouting slogans asking for the repeal of CAA was also shared live by protestors at the Red Fort.Even Mastodon , an open-sourced platform, whose policies are driven by its users, had a message for India. “We do realize that the internet itself may have been shut down in certain parts of India by their government. If that's the case, our software can be configured to operate via LAN as a private instance, though that does severely hamper the organizing potential. Stay safe!” the platform tweeted from its verified handle on Tuesday to allay fears of communication blockade.Several posters and memes also went viral on Twitter. One of them showed a college student offering a red rose to Delhi police. A video of students offering roses to cops was also posted by the account diary_of_jamian, an Instagram page that shares information on Jamia Milia University. The picture, with the caption "tum students pe goli chalate ho, aur gulab se darr jate ho," garnered over 30,000 views in just 4 hours.
