All-India protests against Citizenship Act

In Bengaluru

Fellow citizens don’t need to visit Kashmir anymore to witness their subjugation. BJP has brought Kashmir right to… https://t.co/iWm55VdXLk — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) 1576740614000

The voice of a people cannot be silenced by force. Every time force is applied to dominate and rule, every time you… https://t.co/x1qf54EN25 — Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) 1576743598000

The country witnessed by far the most extensive protests against the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act on Thursday with tens of thousands of people taking to the streets across cities. Two protesters succumbed to injuries after police firing in Mangalore.Police detained many politicians, activists and students for defying prohibitory orders in Delhi, Bengaluru and some other cities, and there were clashes between police and protesters in places such as Mangalore, Lucknow and Ahmedabad.Protests were held against CAA as well as police atrocities against students of Jamia Millia and Aligarh Muslim University across cities from Lucknow and Patna to Mumbai and Ahmedabad to Bengaluru and Chennai. Several districts including most of Uttar Pradesh, parts of Delhi and Karnataka had imposed Section 144 of Criminal Procedure Core, banning assembling of people.In the Capital thousands of people braved chilly weather and imposition of Section 144 in several locations to hold mostly peaceful protests even as mobile internet services were suspended in some parts for some time and many metro stations in central localities remained closed for most of the day.Almost the entire top Left leaders, including Sitaram Yechury, D Raja and Prakash Karat, were detained here along with the Delhi Congress leaders Ajay Maken and Sandeep Dikshit during the Left-sponsored anti-CCA protest near Mandi House and Jantar Mantar area that saw an impressive turnout.“The government resorting to shutting down internet, closing down metro stations and clampdown on anti-CAA protests in the national capital on Thursday is worse than what was witnessed during the emergency,” Yechury alleged after his release in the evening.In Maharashtra, cities of Mumbai, Nagpur, Solapur, Malegaon, Nashik, Amravati, Osmanabad, Ahmednagar and Aurangabad saw massive but peaceful protests supported by almost all political parties barring Shiv Sena and BJP.Different NGOs and college students, backed by Congress, NCP and Left parties, held a massive protest at Mumbai’s August Kranti Maidan where the Quit India movement call was given against the British rule in 1942. Several celebrities including Bollywood actors Rahul Bose, Farhan Akhtar , Swara Bhasker, Sushant Singh, Huma Qureshi, Aditirao Hydari and director Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra came to the grounds to express solidarity with the protesters.Farhan Akhtar told reporters that “the idea of the nation is under threat”, while Rahul Bose said: “We are all together in this. I have come purely as a citizen…we will progress while being together.”In Ahmedabad, police resorted to lathi charge and tear gas lobbing as the protesters became aggressive in some areas and started pelting stones at police. Some policemen were injured. Gujarat Crime Branch chief Ajay Tomar reached the spot and appealed for peace along with the local leaders.Bengaluru Police detained historian Ramachandra Guha, among the others, on Thursday after he participated in a protest against CAA in front of Town Hall, touching off strong protests from prominent citizens, including from corporate India.“This is shocking and reflects the total lack of understanding of fundamental freedom to express dissent — a peaceful protest should not be mishandled in this manner,” Biocon founder Kiran Mazumdar-Shaw tweeted.Others raising concern included former Infosys director TV Mohandas Pai and former Infosys board member V Balakrishnan.Chief minister BS Yediyurappa disapproved of the police action, saying police were expected to act only against goonda elements. “If any police officer is found targeting common man, the government will take strict action against such officials,” he told reporters.In Mangalore, two protesters succumbed to injuries after police firing, as per police sources. Police imposed curfew in parts of the coastal city in the evening. Sources said curfew in the station limits of Mangalore North, South, Barke, Kadri and Urva was meant more to prevent any violence on Friday. The police have clamped Section 144 in Bengaluru and Mangaluru for three days till Saturday midnight.In Chennai, hundreds gathered at Valluvar Kottam chanting slogans and holding up placards. Police did not stop people from coming to the venue despite denying permission on Wednesday. Carnatic vocalist TM Krishna, Tamil cinema actor Siddharth and representatives from regional parties addressed the gathering. “This is a draconian law and we should keep protesting,” Siddharth said and told protesters not to lose their calm.Condemning the establishment’s handling of the protesters, former Jammu & Kashmir CM Mehbooba Mufti tweeted: “Fellow citizens don’t need to visit Kashmir anymore to witness their subjugation. BJP has brought Kashmir right to the doorstep of every Indian.”Accusing the government and BJP of being egoistic and arrogant in their attitude towards the growing protests across the states and for internet restrictions in Delhi, AICC spokesperson Abhishek Singhvi said, “Airtel and Vodafone have officially issued statements clarifying it was under the direction from government they have suspended the internet services.”AICC general secretary Priyanka Gandhi tweeted, “The voice of a people cannot be silenced by force. Every time force is applied to dominate and rule, every time you beat and suppress, every time you push people to the wall, they will rise up stronger, their resolve will strengthen and their voice will grow louder. Our freedom movement was proof of this, our constitution is the guarantor of it and our people are the soul of it.”CPI leader D Raja said, “BJP is working against the legacy of Sardar Patel and citizenship cannot be based on religion... Citizenship Amendment Act is undeclared subversion of the Constitution by Modi and Shah.”
