Patriots’ protest

Ramachandra Guha, the 61-year-old Gandhi biographer, was detained in Bengaluru while protesting the enactment of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA); and he is not alone. A very large section of democratic India is with him. In fact, the government has succeeded in forcing thinking youngsters out into the streets to protest against the CAA all across the country. These students are not urban Maoists supporting Islamist secessionists at the beck and call of some foreign intelligence agency. These are the best of Indian minds, young and idealistic, who want to peacefully debate, discuss and disagree with the government. Instead of engaging with them, the government is pushing them rudely into waiting buses. Detention is antithetical to democracy. And the worst possible sight in a democracy is a peaceful, conscientious protester getting dragged into a police van.

The CAA, per se, seems benign; but coupled with the proposed National Register of Citizens (NRC), it holds the potential to render legitimate Indian citizens stateless. India’s worst colonial inheritance is its inept and corrupt lower bureaucracy. Even the best of All India Service officers often fail to get this clerkdom to work. An NRC costing thousands of crores of rupees may end up leaving a lot of bona fide Indians in the lurch, particularly Muslims, simply because of bureaucratic sloth. The CAA protects members of all communities, even if they be illegal migrants, except Muslims. Suddenly, Indian citizenship has become conditional to a citizen’s religion. This militates against the soul of Gandhian nationalism and lays the foundation for a new ethno-religious republic, and is obviously unacceptable to a large section of Indian citizens — primarily Hindus. They believe that even if an illegitimate Muslim immigrant gets citizenship, no legitimate Indian citizen should be left out because of his religion.

An NRC with the possibility of the babudom inflicting untold pain on poor Muslims will only radicalise them and hurt the Indian nation. Hence, Indian patriots are protesting today to uphold the majesty of the Indian Constitution and Gandhian ideals. Our rulers should understand that they are detaining nationalists for whom the nation is bigger than their religion.
