Looking back: The city has a tepid protest history

Namma Bengaluru

public protests

dharna

strike

protest

Bengaluru

Bangalore

CAA

By Dr Sandeep Shastrihas always been known as a city with infrequentand citizen participation in aor demonstration. It would not come as a surprise to many that since 1983, the district with the lowest voter turnout in all Lok Sabha and Assembly elections has beencity district! Over the last four decades many of the public protests and demonstrations (save a few celebrated exceptions ) have been linked to mobilization by political parties involving hired crowds that often were not aware what they were agitating for!Five protests which were linked to some element of voluntary participation in Bengaluru stand out in the last four decades. The first was the protest in Bengaluru in response to Jayprakash Narayan's call to Save Democracy, which ultimately led to Indira Gandhi declaring emergency. This pro-democracy participation saw a spontaneous participation of a cross section of society including the younger generation, who were agitated by the assault on individual freedoms and liberties. In the 1977 Lok Sabha elections which saw the rout of the Congress and the subsequent lifting of Emergency, theLok Sabha seats was one of the few seats that the Janata party was able to win in Karnataka.The early 1980s saw a strong and sustained pro-Kannada agitation (popularly called the Gokak Chaluvali) in Bengaluru besides others parts of Karnataka, which led to the first ever defeat of the Congress party in state assembly elections in the state in 1983. The agitation for primacy to Kannada needs to be seen in the backdrop of the dramatically changing demographic profile of Bengaluru. The agitation assumed special significance in the city to protect and promote the use of Kannada.The 1990s saw several protests in Bengaluru on the Cauvery issue. Besides the Cauvery belt in the old Mysore region, Bengaluru became an important centre of public protest involving a cross section of the citizens. Given the emotional overtones linked to the dispute with neighbouring Tamil Nadu, the Cauvery agitation saw several flashpoints through the 1990s and 2000s.As one got closer to the end of UPA II, the anti-Corruption agitation evoked a response across the country, with Bengaluru contributing it’s fair share. Youth and college students rallied to the call of Anna Hazare and frequently flooded Freedom Park in Bengaluru to register their opposition to what they perceived as the rising spiral of corruption. One recalls meeting young agitated students at Freedom Park who saw in Anna Hazare a role model they were desperately in search of, to challenge the political class. Yet this did not translate itself to any significant electoral participation in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls as Bengaluru continued to be at the bottom in terms of voter turnout.In the last few days, one has seen signs of the start of yet another protest against theand linked developments. It has once again involved a cross section of youth. The fact that Bengaluru is home to a huge student population from the North East, could well account for the protest as a form of identifying with the concerns back home. One needs to add an important caveat at this stage. Given the high level of polarization that one is witnessing in society, this protest is mirroring this political divide that the polity is witnessing.Which side of the agitation one is on, is often not linked to the immediate issue but which side of the political spectrum one supports. Bengaluru is no exception to this trend. Often these agitations and participation in the same represent a strong expression of an anti-establishment sentiment and the way in which authority is exercised by those on power. Youth have often been anti-establishment as they believe (and often rightly so) that power is often exercised without exercising necessary discretion and without a sense of accountability. This trend is patently visible this time too. How this pans out will all depend on the response of those in power to the issues at the core of the agitation.(Sandeep Shastri has written this piece as a citizen of Bengaluru and his views do not reflect the stand or position of professional organizations and institutions he is associated with)
