Two CAA protesters die in Mangaluru firing

MANGALURU: Two persons died in police firing in Mangaluru as thousands of protesters, defying the prohibitory orders which are in force for 48 hours, descended on the streets to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) on Thursday evening.At least 20 police personnel, including DCP (law and order) Arunangshu Giri and DCP (crime and traffic) Lakshmi Ganesh, were injured in the violence that started around 2pm. Former Mangaluru mayor K Ashraf who tried to pacify the protesters took a hit in the free-for-all and was shifted to a hospital where his condition is said to be stable.For the first time in Karnataka, the government announced a 48-hour suspension of mobile internet services in Dakshina Kannada district from 10pm Thursday to prevent misuse of social-media platforms, an order issued by the home department said.Chief minister BS Yediyurappa appealed for peace, harmony and calm in Karnataka, which became the first state in the south to witness violent protests over the controversial citizenship law.Mangaluru City police commissioner PS Harsha told reporters late in the evening that the dead have been identified as Jaleel Bengre, 49, and Nauseen Kudroli, 23. He said the duo suffered bullet injuries when police personnel opened fire in “legitimate use of force” after a mob tried to set the Mangaluru North police station ablaze.Police have clamped curfew on five police station limits — Mangaluru North, Mangaluru South, Barke, Urva and Mangaluru East — in Mangaluru Central subdivision till Sunday midnight. Dakshina Kannada deputy commissioner Sindhu Roopesh declared a holiday for schools and colleges in the district on Friday. Trouble began around 2pm Thursday when police stopped a group of protesters near Hamilton Circle, citing prohibitory orders. Crowds that gathered in large numbers on Nellikai Road started hurling stones on the police who wielded their baton to disperse them.The coastal city’s central business district suddenly resembled a warzone. Police tried many crowd-controlling measures — caning and use of tear gas — before resorting to firing after the protesters who had gathered to oppose the CAA and the proposed National Register of Citizens turned violent.When they failed to bring the situation under control, police fired tear-gas shells around 3.30pm. By 5pm, police fired in the air when the protesters regrouped in various streets of Bunder area — Azizuddin Road and Bibi Alabi Road, among others. They started burning tyres and two-wheelers, damaging parked cars and allegedly attacking police personnel with stones. “I regret Mangaluru violence. I’m sending senior officers to prevent a repeat of the incident. I appeal to my minority Muslim brothers that this law (CAA) will in no way affect you...,” CM BS Yediyurappa said.
