Different communities come together to oppose CAA

Ludhiana: Spreading the message of integrity and unity, members from Hindu, Muslim, Sikh, Christian and Dalit communities gathered at Jama Masjid in Field Ganj on Thursday to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA), terming it to be against the Constitution of India.

The Shahi Imam Punjab, Maulana Habib ur Rehman Sani Ludhianvi chaired the meeting which was attended by Pritpal Singh from Gurdwara Dukhniwaran Sahib, social activist and former councillor Parminder Mehta, pastor Ram Lal from Calvari Church CNI and Sandeep Prem Masih Youth secretary were present.

Shahi Imam Punjab said protests going on in the country are not against any community, but these protests are against policies of the Union government against the Constitution. He said CAA is based on religion and will divide the country.

He said in 1947 Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians and Dalits had rejected policies of Mohammed Ali Jinnah, but now democracy of this country is in danger. The Shahi Imam said Delhi police’ violence against students in Jamia Millia Islamia has embarrassed humanity.

Pritpal Singh from Gurudwara Dukhniwaran Sahib said people from all religions should have been given equal status, but attempt has been made to break the unity of country by excluding one religion. He said the Union government is doing well by giving citizenship to refugees, but Muslims should have been included in this act as well.

National spokesperson from Adi Dharma Samaj, Rajkumar Atikay said hatred has never won in India and history is proof of that. He said communal forces are trying to divide the countrymen for their selfish means. He alleged Delhi police attacked the students in Jamia Millia Islamia like General Dyer had done in 1919 in Jallianwala Bagh with innocent people.

Former councillor Parminder Mehta said Muslims are also integral part of India and even they have sacrificed their lives in the war for independence. He said the Union government should consider this act once again.

Ram Lal, the pastor of Calvary Church CNI, said there is no room for hatred in India and all communities are united against any such law that will divide the country.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
