Protests rage across Delhi, Mumbai, K’taka

Police lathicharge protesters in Lucknow

Ramachandra Guha detained in Bengaluru

Sitaram Yechury in Delhi

Yogi Adityanath

Delhi Metro

Demonstrators offer roses to security personnel at Jantar Mantar

Red Fort

Massive traffic jam on NH-8 after police block Delhi-Gurgaon entry point

Mamata Banerjee

A cop flees amid violence inside the Madehganj police chowki in Lucknow

One dead in alleged police firing in Lucknow, two in Mangaluru, scores detained; curfew in UP; voice calls, SMS, data services banned in Delhi.Three people were allegedly killed in police firing on Thursday as protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act turned violent in several cities across the nation.After protesters allegedly attempted to lay siege to the Mangalore North police station and tried to attack police personnel, two persons received bullet injuries in police firing and later succumbed, police said.The deceased were identified as Jaleel Kudroli, 49, and Nausheen, 23. Twenty police personnel were injured in the violence. Curfew has been clamped in parts of Mangaluru.Mohammad Wakeel, 25, suffered a firearm injury when he was passing through Lucknow’s old city area where clashes took place, his family members alleged. The police, however, denied that the firearm injury had anything to do with the protests or the police action.On Thursday, protests raged in multiple cities with thousands-strong crowds of students, activists and others defying prohibitory orders to voice their dissent against the newly amended citizenship law. Violence was reported in several parts of UP, Delhi, Karnataka, Gujarat and Bihar. Hundreds of protesters, including Left leaders Sitaram Yechury, D Raja, Nilotpal Basu and Brinda Karat, activist Yogendra Yadav and historian Ramchandra Guha were detained in various parts of the country.In UP, while a state transport bus was set on fire in Sambhal, violent protests broke out in capital Lucknow too when a mob pelted stones and torched police vehicles and police posts. DGP OP Singh said police had to fire tear-gas shells to control the situation in Madeyganj area, while nearly 20 people have been taken into custody. Mobile internet services have been suspended in Ghaziabad for 24 hours from 10 pm on Thursday.Authorities resorted to barricading and clamping down on mobile services, including an unprecedented one in the national capital, where voice calls, SMS and data services were barred.Opposition parties also joined forces to attack the Modi government on the new law which they said goes against the “idea of India”, even as the ruling BJP asserted there would be no rethink on implentation of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and that the National Register of Citizens (NRC) would also be brought in.In Delhi, protesters offered roses to policemen, saying love is their only answer even for tear gas shells and batons.In neighbouring UP, where violent clashes saw at least a dozen vehicles including bikes, being set afire, CMsaid those who damaged public property would have to pay for it and the culprits have been identified through video and CCTV footage. “We will take revenge” by auctioning their property to compensate for the losses, he said. There were incidents of stone pelting and arson in Bihar. Barricades by police in and around the national capital, closing ofgates at several stations and an unprecedented suspension of mobile voice, messaging and internet services in parts of Delhi added to woes of the public. “India today has the ignominy of being the largest internet shutdown in the world. It is unacceptable. Metro stations were closed. This is worse than what we saw during the Emergency. The manner in which they are dealing with democratic protests is unacceptable,” Yechuri said.CrPC Section 144 was imposed by Delhi Police inarea, but that did not deter students and activists from converging there to raise their voice against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) and the police crackdown in JMI and AMU.Guha, who was detained in Bengaluru for defying prohibitory orders, said it was “absolutely undemocratic” that police were not allowing even a peaceful protest, which is the democratic right of citizens. Protests were also held at several places in Karnataka, including in Hubballi, Kalaburagi, Hassan, Mysuru and Ballary. In Mangaluru, vehicles were set on fire and stones hurled at police personnel as protesters allegedly went on the rampage.In Bihar, members of Left-wing student organisations squatted on railway tracks at Rajendra Nagar Terminus early in the morning. In Jehanabad, which had been a stronghold of the ultra-Left movement in Bihar, CPI(ML) activists disrupted traffic on national highways.Protests in West Bengal, Assam and Meghalaya, which were at the centre of the stir initially, were largely peaceful. Protests were also held in Telangana, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Chandigarh, Jammu, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, among other states. At a rally in Kolkata, CMdared the Modi government to go for a UN-monitored referendum over the amended law and the proposed nationwide NRC and said the BJP will have to quit if it fails such a “mass vote”.
