Activists defy prohibitory orders to raise voice against CAA in north Karnataka

In Hubballi, cops detained protesters for defying prohibitory orders and released them later

HUBBALLI: Despite the imposition of prohibitory orders under the provisions of Section 144 of CrPC, activists from various organisations gathered near Ambedkar Circle on Thursday to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). However, the protesters were dispersed by police personnel.

Although cops tried to ward off protesters by citing the clamping of prohibitory orders across the state, the activists went ahead with the demonstration. The protesters, refusing to heed to the cops’ pleas, raised slogans against the central government and called for repealing the contentious law. Fearful of vehicular gridlock along the thoroughfares of Hubballi, cops dispersed the activists and detained around 30 protesters, who were shifted to the New City Armed Reserve (CAR) Ground on Gokul Road.

Mahesh Pattar, Babajan Mudhol, Vijay Guntral, Siddu Teji were among the 30 activists detained by Hubballi police, and released. Deputy commissioner of police (law and order), Hubballi Nagesh DL warned the protesters that they would be booked under the provisions of Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, adding that cops had made elaborate security arrangements in the wake of clamping down of prohibitory orders.

Supplemented by staff from the CAR, the streets comprising Hubballi’s Central Business District (CBD) were crawling with police personnel, turning the heart of the city into a veritable fortress. Heightened police presence prevented untoward incidents in the city.

Meanwhile, police commissioner R Dileep told TOI that they would book 55 protesters detained for violation of Section 144. “We have made all the necessary arrangements to ensure peace prevails in the twin cities,” he said.

Will file petition in apex court, says acclaimed writer

Padmashri award recipient, writer, critic and president of the Rashtra Seva Dal GN Devvy said that, along with the chief of the Sarva Seva Sangh Mahadev Vidrohi, would file a petition challenging the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in the Supreme Court.

Decrying the Parliament’s decision to pass the bill, Devvy said, “Predicating citizenship on the basis of religious identity strains the idea of secularism that is inherent in our Constitution.”

Dubbing the law ‘arbitrary’, the acclaimed author questioned the omission of all countries barring Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh under the remit of the legislation. “Our petition will question the government’s decision to deny citizenship to members of some of the most vulnerable communities who have fled Bangladesh,” Devvy added.

Hundreds hold rally in Kalaburagi

Defying the prohibitory orders imposed in the town, hundreds of activists, uniting under the banner of Peoples Forum, descended on Nagareshwar on Thursday to protest the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 passed by the BJP-led central government.

Owing to a call for bandh given by the forum in Kalaburagi, holiday had been declared for schools and colleges, and operations in the market area were suspended. However, daily life was, by and large unaffected, in most parts of the town.

Among those detained for participating in the demonstration against the Centre were Maruthi Manapade, Asgar Chulbul and Naasir Hussain. Their detention by cops triggered fresh protests by the protesters, who climbed on top of the police van, blocking its passage.

The protesters were subsequently released when the situation threatened to go out of control. In the meanwhile, left-leaning parties and like-minded organisations staged protests in other parts of the town.

A few Muslims who participated in the protest offered prayers during the demonstration at Jagat Circle, following which they proceeded to the office of the Kalaburagi deputy commissioner and submitted a memorandum. Meanwhile, Kalaburagi city police commissioner MN Nagaraj expressed his displeasure with those who staged demonstrations despite the government clamping Section 144. However, cops said that no public property had been damaged during any protest.

Left parties rally forces against CAA

In Ballari, activists of the Communist Party of India (CPI) and Communist Party of India (Marxist) led the protest against the implementation of the Citizenship Amendment Act and the National Registry of Citizens. The protest passed off peacefully, with no damage to public property being reported, nor were there any untoward incidents. Owing to the clamping of prohibitory orders under Section 144, Ballari police took a few protesters into custody, who were released later.

Secretary of CPI, Karnataka Swati Sunderesh, who spoke at a rally in Ballari, said that there was too much ambiguity surrounding both the CAA and NRC. “The CAA is against the spirit of the Constitution. The central government is in a hurry to implement the agenda of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, and divide this country based on religion,” said Swati.

Secretary of CPI(M) Ballari unit RS Basavaraj said that the Parliament approving both the CAA and NRC amounted to dividing the country based on religion. “All of us are equal in the eyes of the law. Such being the case, how can the Parliament clear CAA and NRC?” he asked.


