MC asked to ensure all benefits to safai karamcharis

Ludhiana: The member of National Commission for Safai Karamcharis, Manju Diler, has passed on directions to the civic body to ensure workers get proper uniform/gumboots etc, and ensure they have working hours as per guidelines and norms. She asked officials concerned to extend benefits such as provident fund and healthcare facilities, and get the workers connected with various government welfare schemes such as Ayushman Bharat, so that they are covered under the scheme.

She also urged officials to organise health check-up camps for safai karamcharis at least twice a year, and other awareness camps for their welfare. She said the commission was working with a mission to ensure the uplift of the workers across the country, and it would not let anyone exploit them.

Diler held a meeting with representatives of safai karamcharis as well as officials of the district administration at Bachat Bhawan on Thursday. During the meeting, the representatives of safai karamcharis raised several issues related to their work, after which Diler issued instructions to officers. She also asked the representatives of the karamcharis to come forward for their rights, and especially provide education to their children. She said authorities must provide security kits to safai karamcharis, besides implementing welfare schemes of education, health, and social welfare departments.

Terming the regular medical examination of safai karamcharis as their basic right due to the nature of their work, she asked municipal corporation officials to ensure their medical check-up twice a year. She also asked the authorities to stop exploitation of workers by contractors through providing their salaries in bank accounts, and ensure manual scavenging was completely banned in the district.

MC commissioner Kanwal Preet Kaur Brar, ADC (General) Iqbal Singh Sandhu, MC joint commissioner Swati Tiwana, MC zonal commissioner Neeraj Jain, district welfare officer Rajinder Kumar, all executive officers of nagar councils, and other senior officials of Ludhiana district attended the meeting.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
