Will Take Revenge: CM Yogi's Warning To Anti-CAA Protesters Who Damaged Public Assets

Lucknow:

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Thursday said that there is no place for violence in democracy and his government will ‘avenge’ the destruction of public assets during the protests over the Citizenship Amendment Act. The chief minister said that those involved in violence have been identified and their property will be seized and auctioned to compensate for the losses.

“There is no place for violence in a democracy. In the name of opposing the Citizenship Amendment Act, the Congress, SP and Left parties have pushed the entire country into the fire. There was violence in Lucknow and Sambhal and we will deal with it strictly. All property of those involved in damaging public assets will be seized and auctioned to compensate for the losses,” he said.

He said those damaging properties have been captured in video and CCTV footage. “We will take revenge from them by seizing their property,” he added.

The statement from Adityanath came after violent protests erupted in Lucknow and other parts of Uttar Pradesh over the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act. The police in Lucknow cracked down on protesters using tear gas and batons after the agitation against Citizenship Act turned violent in the Hasanganj area of the old city. According to reports, protesters pelted stones and set many vehicles on fire during the protests.

Angry protesters allegedly set afire 20 motorcycles, 10 cars, 3 buses and 4 media OB vans around the Parivartan Chowk area during protests against "divisive act". UP police chief OP Singh said cops had to fire tear-gas shells to control the situation in the Madeyganj area. The protesters had defied the prohibitory orders, put in place across the state, and gathered on the streets of the city.

UP government spokesperson later told PTI that the chief minister’s remarks were in the context of a Supreme Court observation that those who damage public assets should be asked to pay for them.

Adityanath said prohibitory orders under section 144 of the CrPC have been in force in the state since November 8 and no demonstration can take place without permission.

“Violence in the name of the demonstration is not acceptable. I have talked to the officers and will ensure that the common man does not have any problem. We will strictly deal with those involved in violence,” the chief minister said.

He alleged that the opposition is creating confusion on the Citizenship Amendment Act as it is sidelined and ignored by the people.

“The CAA is not against any religion or section of society. It will ensure security and help refugees from other countries,” Adityanath said.

With PTI Inputs
