Delhi Metro update: Gates at all stations, except Jama Masjid, Jaffrabad and Maujpur-Babarpur opened - DMRC

Delhi metro update on metro stations closed today | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights DMRC has closed gates of 13 Metro stations in the national capital in view of the protests Massive protests broke out in areas surrounding Jama Masjid 22 metro stations were shut down in Delhi on Thursday as well to deter protesters from mobilising to join anti-CAB demonstrations in the capital

New Delhi: In view of the ongoing protests in the national capital, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) closed the entry and exit gates of various metro stations. By 7.30 pm, DMRC further said that entry and exit gates at all stations, except Jama Masjid, Jaffrabad and Maujpur-Babarpur have been opened.

Security Update



Entry & exit gates of Jamia Millia Islamia are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station. — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 20, 2019

Earlier, the DMRC opened two stations on the Magenta Line which were shut earlier in the morning in the backdrop of planned demonstrations in the national capital.

DMRC had in the morning announced that two metro stations - Jamia Millia Islamia and Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh - on the Magenta Line will remain shut. The announcement came just a day after 20 stations were shut temporarily to deter protesters from holding mass demonstrations against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 (CAA).

Security Update



Entry & exit gates at all stations have been opened.



Normal services have resumed in all stations. — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 20, 2019

“Entry and exit gates of Jamia Millia Islamia and Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations. All other stations are open and services are normal,” DMRC tweeted early Friday.

The Delhi Police also denied permission to political outfit Bhim Army from holding demonstrations at the busy Rajiv Chowk on Friday.

Security Update



Entry & exit gates of Jamia Millia Islamia and Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations.



All other stations are open and services are normal. — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 20, 2019

On Thursday, internet was snapped partly in Delhi and Section 144 of Code Of Criminal Procedure (CrPC), which prohibits the gathering of more than four people, was imposed in several parts of the capital.

Anti-CAA protests continue to rage across several cities in various states across the country ever since the contentious bill was cleared by both the Houses of the Parliament last week.

Three deaths were reported on Thursday - two deaths in Mangaluru and one in Lucknow amid violent protests. The national capital witnessed massive traffic jams amid diverted routes to curb protesters from taking onto streets and flights stood cancelled owing to congestion on roads leading up to the Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA).
