Protests against CAA intensify across country: How Indian newspapers covered the stir

Massive protests over the amended Citizenship Act spread across the country on Thursday. (Photo: PTI)

The protests over the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) intensified across the country on Thursday as several politicians, student leaders and activists accompanied lakhs to voice their dissent to the government's move.

Heavy police deployment, internet clampdown, shutting of Metro stations, blocking highways and what not was witnessed on the day of the massive protests. Where in Mumbai and Rajasthan, the protests were largely peaceful, those held in Mangalore, Lucknow and Patna witnessed violence as three deaths were reported -- two in Mangalore and one in Lucknow.

With much happening in just a day, the national dailies highlighted protests and their aftermath in their Friday edition.

The Telegraph

"We the people" -- was the headline on the front page of the national daily 'The Telegraph'. The kicker followed: "Cap Off Volcano: Constitution in hand, the forgotten Indian speaks".

Moving further was another headline: "Vanar Sena versus Ram and a multitude in Bangalore". The article includes the account when the historian Ramchandra Guha was speaking to reporters but was then dragged and detained by police personnel.

The Hindustan Times

The Hindustan Times did extensive coverage of the protests, with almost five to six pages dedicated to it.

"Capital, interrupted" - the lead headline was carried on the front page of the newspaper with events that took place in New Delhi as the city saw a series of protests on the day.

The Gurugram-Delhi highway blockage was headlined as "Gurugram 2.0, courtesy Delhi Police barricades".

Under the third headline - "Three killed as protests break out nationwide" - it notified the toll across the country.

On the next page, "RESTRICTED, DISCONNECTED", mentioned that it "was the first time since the anti-Sikh riots that prohibitory orders were issued for such a large area." The image of Yogendra Yadav protesting supported the article.

The Hindustan Times even used a graph titled "capital clampdown" that showed various parts of the country which were under lockdown.

It was in the fourth page that the newspaper carried the news of shutting down of metros and peaceful protests carried out by students who handed over roses to police officials.

Not leaving the politics over matter, The Hindustan Times mentioned the Congress's attack on the BJP for "for 'muzzling' dissent through draconian moves".

Deccan Herald

The daily focused on the deaths caused during the protests and used "Two killed in M'luru, CAA flames spread" as the umbrella headline.

It covered the news across eight pages, giving sufficient attention to the historian Ramchandra Guha's detention, violence in Uttar Pradesh and Delhi protests on the sideline.

Under reactions from the political parties, the newspaper carried CPI (M)'s reaction in which it "condemned the killing of two in police firing".

The Times of India

The first page, however, focused on Donald Trump's impeachment, on the lower half of the newspaper, it decided to carry, "Unity in diversity out greatest strength, says BJP ally" as the headline.

In a box, it mentioned - "India now the global leader in Internet shutdown" -- a similar story in BBC world a day back". This was also carried by the BBC world a day before.

Even a list of politicians who supported the protests and the ones who spoke against it was written in a small column below.

Under the headline "A first of Delhi: Cell services blocked", the newspaper wrote on the protests in Delhi, around Red Fort and Jantar Mantar.

The fifth and sixth pages of the newspaper were solely dedicated to the protests against the CAA.

The Indian express

The lead headline used by the Indian Express was a single word: CITIZENSHIP

It also focused on the several protests that happened across the country on Thursday and headlined it as "Protest against NRC and CAA beyond campus".

The newspaper gave a special focus on the fact that the Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal launched a free wifi scheme amid the internet clampdown in the state.

It was on the sixth page that the newspaper carried a big story: At the Barricades

See more pics of anti-CAA protests on IndiaContent.in
