Arjun Mathur, Amrita Puri, Jim Sarbh: Bollywood joins anti-CAA protest at Mumbai's August Kranti Maidan

Bollywood celebrities take to streets, join protests against CAA | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Bollywood celebrities joined protesters in peaceful demonstration against CAA in Mumbai last night To name a few, celebrities like Alankrita Shrivastava, Amrita Puri, Arjun Mathur and Jim Sarbh were present at August Kranti Maidan Many celebrities including Farhan Akhtar later took to social media and thanked the Mumbai police for ensuring the safety of one and all

The protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act have gripped the entire nation. In several parts of the country, citizens have taken to the streets to protest against CAA. Joining the bandwagon of citizens who are carrying out peaceful demonstrations across the country are a volley of celebrities from the film industry - not just Bollywood, but other industries too.

To name a few, actors like Farhan Akhtar, Arjun Mathur, Amrita Puri, Jim Sarbh and directors like Anurag Kashyap and Alankrita Shrivastava joined the protesters in Mumbai on Thursday night.

Arjun Mathur took to social media and shared two video glimpses of the protests at August Kranti Maidan, wherein people were chanting Azaadi slogans peacefully. Along with the videos, an overwhelmed Arjun expressed his gratitude towards everything Mumbai - beautiful people of the city and the Mumbai police. Calling Thursday's gathering as a "breathtaking first step", a part of Arjun's post read as, "See how they meant to divide us.. and just look at how we unite! Thank you so much for this feeling.."

Farhan, who had previously expressed his opinion on CAA and had condemned the violence meted out on the students of Jamia Millia Islamia, took to social media and congratulated the citizens of Mumbai for pulling off peaceful protests. He also expressed his gratitude towards the Mumbai Police for ensuring the safety of one and all. In his tweet, the actor wrote, "Well done Mumbai on a peaceful protest today and a special shout out to the @MumbaiPolice for overseeing the safety and security of all gathered. #Respect."

Well done Mumbai on a peaceful protest today and a special shout out to the @MumbaiPolice for overseeing the safety and security of all gathered. #Respect — Farhan Akhtar (@FarOutAkhtar) December 19, 2019

Anurag Kashyap, whose photos from the protest surfaced on the internet last night, also thanked the Mumbai police for their work.

Dear @MumbaiPolice you rock.. the best in the country .. https://t.co/WtJ4QNg9BF — Anurag Kashyap (@anuragkashyap72) December 19, 2019

Director Alankrita too felt "overwhelmed" looking at the turnout and tweeted, "It was powerful, and peaceful. I felt the heartbeat of a nation where the democratic pulse is alive and healthy. Let us continue the resistance against divisive politics. Let no power divide India. We are one."

Overwhelmed with the turnout at August Kranti Maidan in Mumbai. It was powerful, and peaceful. I felt the heartbeat of a nation where the democratic pulse is alive and healthy. Let us continue the resistance against divisive politics. Let no power divide India. We are one. — Alankrita Shrivastava (@alankrita601) December 19, 2019

Actress Amrita Puri had shared a photograph of herself wherein she was holding a placard that read, "Inqilaab Zindabaad".

Actor Jim Sarbh had taken to social media and posted a bird-eye view of the protest. He had captioned the video as, "Bombay against divisive politics. Bombay against CAA/NRC. Inquilab Zindabad."

Bombay against divisive politics. Bombay against CAA/NRC. Inquilab Zindabad. pic.twitter.com/094xhJXzCU — Jim Sarbh (@jimSarbh) December 19, 2019

Stay tuned for more updates on entertainment and lifestyle.
