Mumbai: 25,000 citizens protest Citizenship (Amendment) Act at August Kranti Maidan

MUMBAI: Call for “azaadi” or freedom dominated the student-driven protest of over 25,000 Mumbaikars, including 7,000 women, against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the proposed National Register of Citizens (NRC) at the historic August Kranti Maidan at Grant Road on Thursday. The protest was supported by political parties and activists.Students from Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), IIT-Bombay and Mumbai University mobilised their peers and other citizens from across the city. “The first call was given on my Twitter handle on December 11 and though I have only a few thousand followers, the tweet was seen by over one lakh individuals,” said Fahad Ahmad, PhD student of TISS who was one of the main organisers. “I am on 24 WhatsApp groups coordinating with students from across the city.”Apart from the three institutions, the organisers also got support from students of St Xavier’s College, International Institute of Population Sciences (IIPS) and Wilson College, among others.On the turnout, the organisers said, “People had finally found a platform to vent their anger and frustration.”Appeals to attend the rally were made at protests in other places too. “I can see people from Mumbra and Mira Road, Govandi and Bhendi Bazaar. They are outraged because they know once you allow inequality in the Constitution, you cannot stop it,” said activist Teesta Setalvad.Former IAS officer Kannan Gopinathan, who quit over abrogation of Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir, said, “People have realised it is now or never. Mumbai is an aware city but anti-CAA and NRC protests are happening across the country. The discourse will now be set by the people.”Named ‘Hum Bharat Ke Log’, the opening line of the preamble to the Constitution, they resolved to uphold it. “We can die but cannot accept CAA and NRC,” said activist M A Khalid. The demonstration was part of a nationwide protest, coinciding with the commemoration of martyrdom of revolutionaries Ram Prasad Bismil and Ashfaqullah Khan on December 19 (1927).“Apart from the martyrdom of Bismil and Khan, it was Mahatma Gandhi who on this very day (December 19, 1947) had convinced thousands of Meo Muslims in Haryana to return from the border while they were trying to cross over to Pakistan,” said activist Feroze Mithiborewala, one of the organisers.As anchor Varsha Vidya Vilas kept calling speakers, many jostled to reach the stage. Student bands belted out revolutionary songs and shouted slogans. CPI’s Prakash Reddy told the crowd that Mahatma Gandhi had galvanised India with his ‘Quit India’ call from the very ground on August 8, 1942, and Aruna Asaf Ali had unfurled the Indian flag here. G G Parikh (94), who had participated in Quit India Movement, was at the protest. He said Thursday’s turnout was bigger than that in 1942. Ex-Congress MP Milind Deora said his party had backed the protest since it believes in secularism. (With Yogita Rao & Vinamrata Borwankar)
