CAA protests: Aligarh on red alert in view of Friday prayers, heavy security deployed

Aligarh Muslim University

Key Highlights 10 companies of PAC and four companies of RAF have also been deployed The heavy security measures are in place in view of the Friday prayers, said officials The cities facing a complete internet shutdown include Lucknow, Bareilly, Aligarh, Ghaziabad, Prayagraj, Sambhal, Meerut, Mau and Kanpur

Aligarh: Aligarh is on red alert and has been put under heavy security cover in view of the first Friday prayers since the police crackdown on the students of Aligarh Muslim University who were protesting the Citizenship (Amendment) Act earlier this week.

District Magistrate Chandra Bhushan Singh has issued a red alert, and 10 companies of Provincial Armed Constabulary (PAC) and four companies of Rapid Action Force (RAF) have been deployed as a precautionary measure.

The heavy security measures are in place in view of the Friday prayers, said officials.

Meanwhile, internet services remained suspended for the fifth consecutive day while banking services and businesses have also been badly hit.

Around 60 students were injured when hundreds of them clashed with the police at a campus gate on Sunday while carrying out protests against the amended Citizenship Act.

In solidarity with the students, teachers from AMU also took out a protest march on Thursday while shopkeepers in some areas of the city briefly closed their shops in support.

The internet services have been shut down in seven cities of Uttar Pradesh including Lucknow.

The cities facing a complete internet shutdown include Lucknow, Bareilly, Aligarh, Ghaziabad, Prayagraj, Sambhal, Meerut, Mau and Kanpur.

The decision was taken after Thursday's protests over the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) turned violent in Lucknow and Sambhal and led to large scale destruction of public and private property.

Talking to ANI, UP Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Avanish Awasthi said that the shutdown would continue till December 21 midnight. He further said that all private telecom operators have also shut down their service after the government order.

Reports are coming that protests have been planned after Friday prayers in several cities.

As per a senior police official, the UP Police found late on Thursday night that the violent protests that took place that day were being live-streamed on the social media which further escalated the situation.
