United Muslim Action Committee holds meeting over new citizenship law; Owaisi asks to protest peacefully

All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) chief Asaduddin Owaisi attended a meeting conducted by the United Muslim Action Committee regarding the Citizenship Amendment Act in Hyderabad.

The meeting was held at the head office of All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) in Hyderabad. In the meeting, Owaisi said that they will strongly oppose the new law but will also take police permission for the demonstrations.

He further added, "As you know in Lucknow & Delhi, there was police brutality & violence, in Mangaluru two Muslims died. If there is violence then we will condemn and disassociate ourselves from it".

A Owaisi in meeting: Have to oppose this act strongly,but only after taking police permission&peacefully. As you know in Lucknow&Delhi,there was police brutality& violence,in Mangaluru two Muslims died. If there is violence then we will condemn and disassociate ourselves from it https://t.co/fZIMfXPVVB — ANI (@ANI) December 20, 2019

Owaisi also pitched to conduct meetings across Telangana to build consensus.

Asaduddin Owaisi, AIMIM: It is our right to protest, however we condemn violence and anyone who is involved in violence is enemy of entire protest. Protest should be held but it will be successful when peace is maintained. #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/3BsMNoweLD December 20, 2019

This comes amid widespread protests against the newly-enacted citizenship law across the country.

AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi had torn a copy of the Citizenship Amendment Act (then Bill), 2019 when it was being debated in the Lok Sabha.

During the debate, he has said, "This is another partition which is going to happen (Ye aur ek partition hone ja raha hai...). This bill is against the Constitution of India and disrespect to our freedom fighters. I tear the bill, it is trying to divide our country."

AIMIM leader has opposed the Citizenship Amendment Act and has said that it is against the constitution.

(Inputs from an agency)
