Don’t let the movement die: Jamia website hacked in support of student protesters

Stone-pelting at Jamia Millia Islamia by protesters | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Hackers also slammed JNU vice-chancellor Jagadesh Kumar for remaining silent on the protests Website of the university is handled by a third party and its server was hacked The protest by Jamia students on Sunday hit the headlines after it witnessed violence and arson, stone pelting by protesters and some buses were burnt Police resorted to lath-charge and tear-gas shelling, Jamia students allege outsiders had hijacked protests and students are not to blame

New Delhi: The website of Jamia Millia Islamia was hacked on Thursday with a message supporting the students protest against the amended citizenship law.

The message on the site read, "Hacked by Dark Knight to support Jamia students.. Jai Hind!"

The website was hacked in the evening and the hackers told Jamia students to ensure that the movement does not die.

"Brave students of Jamia keep fighting against oppression. Don't let the movement die. Every time they hit you Rise up stronger! Rise up stronger! Rise up stronger! Rise up stronger!" the message read. They also put forth four demands -- rollback CAA, rollback NRC, free unlawfully detained students and probe police brutality.

The hackers also slammed JNU vice-chancellor Jagadesh Kumar for remaining silent on the protests in his varsity.

"And two minutes of silence for Delhi Police. Remember the time they were protesting after the Tees Hazari incident. Mike Drop!" they said.

As per the initial reports, the website of the university is handled by a third party and its server was hacked.

The third-party was informed and it is on the job to restore it, said university spokesperson.

On Sunday, December 15, 2019, a protest was organised by the students of Jamia Millia Islamia University, as they were already organising for three days last. Apart from the students' protest, another protest was organised by the residents of the colonies around Jamia against the Citizen Amendment Act, 2019. The protestors were marching on the MA Jauhar Marg when the procession was stopped by the police. Some protesters resorted to stone-pelting and burning of buses, leading to police action of baton-charge and tear-gas shelling. That action also affected the students who were on protest.

The police had allegedly entered the varsity campus to detain outsiders who were involved in arson and violence during protests against the CAA.

Meanwhile, the Delhi High Court issued a notice to the Central government and Delhi Police on multiple petitions related to Jamia Milia Islamia incident matter.

Various petitioners had moved the High Court seeking remedies including forming of a fact-finding committee to probe the violence that took place after Delhi Police attacked students protesting against (Citizen Amendment) Act.

Terming it as the “most significant attack” on the students since independence the petitioners appealed the Solicitor General Tushar Mehta to work as Amicus Curiae.
