No Bangladeshi will enter Assam by means of amended Citizenship Act, assures CM Sarbananda Sonowal

Sarbananda Sonowal, Assam chief minister | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights CM Sonowal said that the CAA only grants citizenship to non-Muslims who are living in the state for decades and the number is ‘negligible’, so it won’t threaten the social construct He assured the people that the government is committed to preserving the linguistic and cultural identity of the people of the state Sonowal stated that his government respects democratic rights of the people but doesn’t support people who commit violence in the name of protest

Guwahati: Amid raging protests against the amended Citizenship Act, Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal, who leads the BJP government in the state, assured the people of Assam that their rights are safe and the legislation is not a threat to the language or indigenous identity of the Assamese people.

Defending the law, Sonowal said that the legislation does not encourage an influx of new individuals from Bangladesh but only grants citizenship to those who arrived in the state decades ago due to religious persecution.

The Chief Minister insisted that the number of claimants of Indian citizenship would be “negligible” and therefore will not threaten the cultural and linguistic identity. "It is certain that granting of citizenship cannot have any impact on our social construct”, he added.

He stated, “I want to assure people that no one can steal rights of the sons of the soil of Assam, there is no threat to our language or our identity.”

Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal: I want to assure people that no one can steal rights of the sons of the soil of Assam, there is no threat to our language or our identity. #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/A01uX9jhZy — ANI (@ANI) December 20, 2019

Further, he asserted that he respected the democratic rights of citizens but not the violence committed in its name. "I and my government respect all the protesters including students, activists and media personalities who are agitating for democracy, but we do not support the violence that was being committed on the side-lines of it," said Sonowal, reported news agency IANS.

Sonowal slammed the people who were spreading rumours to fuel the CAA stir and termed such people to be enemies of the state.

He iterated that the government is committed to safeguarding the rights and identity of the people.

Violent protests broke out in the state after Parliament passed the contentious Citizenship (Amendment), Bill. The Bill was later made into an Act, with the President's assent. The stir intensified and the Army and Paramilitary personnel were deployed to assist the state administration in tackling the situation. The Army also staged a flag march in Guwahati, that was worst hit by the protests.

The authorities imposed indefinite curfew in Guwahati and mobile internet broadband services were suspended on the eve of December 11 to avert the spread of any information that might incite violence or disturb law and order. The clampdown by the state authorities as an attempt to handle the situation brought life to a grinding halt in the state.

Normalcy is gradually returning to the state and slowly the restrictions are eased. Mobile internet services have been restored by the government on Friday morning. The broadband services resumed earlier.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Act seeks to grant citizenship to non-Muslims who fled to India from three neighbouring Islamic nations namely Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan because they faced religious persecution in their home countries.

The people of Assam and few other north-eastern states have been protesting against the Act because they fear the legislation will grant citizenship to illegal Bengali-speaking Hindu immigrants from Bangladesh. They fear that this will change the demography of the region and threaten the cultural and linguistic identity of the indigenous people.
