Hisar farmers on dharna over insurance claims

editorial@tribune.com

Deepender Deswal

Tribune News Service

Hisar, February 4

After waiting for about four months, farmers in six villages denied insurance claims by Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Company Limited have been sitting on indefinite dharna in Bhatol Jatan village of the district for the past 10 days.

The farmers said they were given an assurance by the district authorities on October 1 last year that they would be provided claims for their damaged crops, but nothing had been done.

A total of 760 farmers of Bhatol Jatan, Bhatol Rangdan, Kharkhara, Jeetpura, Bhadala, Kharbala and Seesar villages had got their crops insured during the kharif season in 2017. The local branch of the Bank of Baroda deducted the premium, totalling about Rs 1.6 lakh, from the bank accounts of the farmers in six villages.

After untimely rain and hail damaged cotton and paddy crops in their fields, farmers applied for insurance claims, which were turned down on the plea that they had not deposited premium and their crops were not insured.

Enraged farmers locked the bank branch in Bhatol Jatan village on October 1. Later, it was found that the bank had deducted premium, but deposited it with the insurance firm after the last date. The firm had rejected the claims and deposited the premium amounts into farmers’ accounts.

Anil Singh, sarpanch of Bhatol Jatan, said they had taken up the matter with bank officials, who assured them that they would find a way out. His crop on seven and a half acres had been damaged and he too was denied insurance claim. “Bank officials asked us to wait till January 1, but nothing happened. We have no option but to start a dharna,” he said.

“Politicians visited the dharna site to extend support. We have not got any assurance from the bank or the authorities,” he said. The dharna would continue till affected farmers got their insurance claims. Hansi SDM Rajiv Ahlawat said the local branch of Bank of Baroda had taken up the matter with the higher authorities.

All about premium
