December of democracy: Demonstrators in Delhi's Jantar Mantar reclaim Indian constitution

Demonstrators at Jantar Mantar in New Delhi on Thursday (Photo Courtesy: Amrtansh Arora) | Photo Credit: People

Key Highlights At least 1,200 people were detained by Delhi Police on Thursday Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were brought to Jantar Mantar to supervise the demonstrations As many as 13,000 security personnel patrolled sensitive areas across the national capital on December 19

New Delhi: Prohibitory orders disallowing more than four people in a specified space were imposed in the national capital on Thursday morning. The following afternoon, a faction of students and citizens gathered on a street that overlooks an 18th-century astronomy complex that has come to be known as the midwife of 'peaceful protests' in modern-day India.

Around 2.30 pm, Delhi Police personnel were issued a rallying cry outside Himachal Bhawan in Mandi House. Minutes later, multiple parties were dispatched towards Jantar Mantar where over 500 demonstrators had gathered in solidarity with the students of Jamia Millia Islamia and other universities. A common notion among those present was staunch criticism of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, which was signed into law exactly one week ago by President Ram Nath Kovind.

Meanwhile, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) announced that 17 metro stations across the national capital will be shut until further notice as a safety precaution. Office-goers sitting in front of shuttered metro station gates were a common sight in various parts of India's capital city.

(Photo Courtesy: Amrtansh Arora)

The morning had started off with the detention of several apolitical social activists and political leaders from across party lines from Mandi House, ITO and Red Fort. Among those detained by Delhi Police for taking part in the demonstrations, was former Lok Sabha representative of the East Delhi Parliamentary constituency and Indian National Congress (INC) leader Sandeep Dikshit. Dikshit said that he and a few others were escorted into buses and asked to disembark on a highway from where he travelled to Jantar Mantar. The former member of Rajya Sabha from Tamil Nadu and General Secretary of the Communist Party of India (Marxist), D Raja narrated a similar account about him and other members of his party being detained and left to sit in a stationary bus at Anand Vihar Inter State Bus Terminal (ISBT).

By 4.00 pm, the condition which had prompted the invocation of Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) had been subdued by local law enforcement. "The situation in Mandi House is under control," said Devender Arya, Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) South West District. "We acknowledge that Jantar Mantar and Ramlila Maidan are the designated spots for protests as long as they are peaceful," added another senior Indian Police Services (IPS) officer.

(Photo Courtesy: Amrtansh Arora)

The gathering itself was a spectacle as crowds swelled to over a thousand people on a street enclosed on both sides by police pickets and security personnel clad in riot-gear. A water cannon was also parked on the north end of the street. Slogans heard in that cacophony of voices were filled with condemnation of the Delhi Police for its gruff handling of university students, commentary on the contentious 'CAA-NRC' combination. Songs in praise of freedom fighters Ram Prasad Bismil, Ashfaqulla Khan and Roshan Singh were also echoed on the 90th anniversary of their martyrdom.

As the day descended into dusk and temperatures soared below 17° Celcius, a number of metro stations were made operational and witnessed long queues of people who had been waiting to return home. Overheard on the Delhi Metro's Blue Line were stories about how the demonstrations had affected commute across the national capital.

(Photo Courtesy: Amrtansh Arora)

At the same time, students and citizens of Delhi paid tribute to the words of former member of India's Constituent Assembly Pramatha Ranjan Thakur, who during a session on December 19, 1946, said, "I do' feel there are many obstacles in our way, but we know we shall have to surmount them. If we look back into the history of the democratic nations of the world, we would see that every constitution-making body had to face very many difficulties and sometimes difficulties. But still, they were successful at the end."

Even 73 years later, the month of December continues to be one of dissent, deliberation and denunciation. Ironically, while internet shutdowns have been imposed in various parts of Uttar Pradesh and Mangaluru in Karnataka, Indians are using micro-blogging and social media websites to bring about a cultural revolution by taking part in their democracy. One can fairly speculate that this is a testament not just to the Constitution, but also to the very idea of an India where citizens see the constitution as their one true religion.

(Photo Courtesy: Amrtansh Arora)
