Assam VCs ask students to ‘maintain peace’

Vice-chancellors of universities from across Assam hold discussions with chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal, in Guwahati on Thursday

GUWAHATI: Vice-chancellors (VCs) of leading state and central universities of Assam appealed to their students, who in large numbers are protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, to help bring back normalcy to the campuses. The statement drew sharp criticism from the All Assam Students’ Union (Aasu) which slammed the VCs for supporting the government and “toeing its line” on the contentious legislation.

The VCs, who met chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal on Wednesday, said that the current situation might have an adverse effect on the future of the students. Through a joint statement, they urged the students to “maintain peace”.

The statement by the VCs read, “May the students of Assam go ahead keeping pace with the globalized world. Because they are our resources for future. The vice chancellors will also accompany the students as their guardians in their prospective journey. We appeal the students, guardians and all sections of the society to uphold the age-old peace-harmony, unity, fraternity and friendly environment.”

The stand by the heads of various educational institutes drew flak from Aasu leaders. Aasu president Dipanka Kumar Nath, calling the statement “a dishonest act”, said that it was unfortunate that the VCs who haven’t uttered a single word regarding the Citizenship Act are appealing to the students to be patient and are thus trying to derail the agitation spearheaded by students in Assam.

“People who head leading universities in Assam have never spoken a word against the bill which has rattled the Assamese community and is a threat to its social, linguistic and cultural norms. The statement from the VCs is clear indication that they are not worried about CAA as they are taking no step to oppose it. They are just trying to misguide us,” Nath said.

Aasu adviser Samujjal Bhattacharyya, reiterating Nath’s comments, said, “It has already been resolved that study and struggle will go hand in hand till the Citizenship Act is scrapped. We urge the VCs to lead this people’s movement from the front.”

Reacting to the appeal by the VCs of leading universities including, Gauhati University, Dibrugarh University and Tezpur University, Aasu general secretary Lurinjyoti Gogoi said that the heads of the educational institutes are trying to subdue the anti-CAA movement where students are playing a proactive role.


