At Centrestage, Mamata fights on

laxmi@tribune.com

Kolkata/New Delhi, February 4

A political firestorm raged today as Mamata Banerjee’s sit-in against CBI’s bid to question the Kolkata police chief in chit fund scam cases entered the second day, with the West Bengal Chief Minister declaring her agitation to save the “Constitution and country” will go on till Friday and she was ready to face the consequences.

The ripple effect of political tremors in West Bengal were felt in New Delhi and several state capitals, as Banerjee’s combative posturing on the issue drew support from several regional satraps trying to sew up an anti-BJP alliance ahead of the Lok Sabha polls.

Editorial: Battlefield Kolkata

“This is a satyagraha and I’ll continue (it) till the country is saved...Constitution is saved,” the firebrand TMC boss said, as she escalated her confrontation with the Modi government.

As Trinamool Congress workers took to the streets, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh called the developments “unfortunate and unprecedented” and indicative of a “breakdown of the Constitution”.

“Under the Constitution, the Centre has been vested with the power to maintain normalcy,” Singh told the Lok Sabha. He also sought a report from Governor KN Tripathi, which was promptly sent. Its contents were, however, not known.

“I do not have any grudge against any individual. But I am angry over the way institutions are being destroyed and misused,” Banerjee said. She added it was her government that arrested Saradha group chairman Sudipta Sen and claimed Rs 250-300 crore was returned to the depositors who were duped.

“Today you are labelling those who helped arrest the culprits as thieves. You are calling Rajeev Kumar (Kolkata Police Commissioner) a thief! Whose money has he taken? You are calling me a thief! Whose money have I taken? I have fought all through my life but never given up. I am ready to face any consequences.” — PTI/TNS

Top cop row

CBI says Rajeev Kumar needs to be questioned regarding missing documents of Saradha and Rose Valley scams, but he has not responded to notices to appear before the agency

On CBI officials

West Bengal government claims CBI had no warrant and move was part of a ‘secret operation’. CBI refutes the charge

Honest labelled as thieves: Didi

"If you are labelling people who are honest as thieves without proof, I will definitely stand by their side. And for that, if I need to give up my life, I’m ready." Mamata Banerjee, WB CM

Turf war trigger
