Protest against CAA: Where do political parties stand?

West Bengal Chief Minister and TMC chief Mamata Banerjee led a protest march in Kolkata and declared that her government would not implement the Citizenship Amendment Act. Other Opposition parties have largely stayed away from street protests over CAA.

One week is a long time in Indian politics. The reaction by political parties to the Citizenship Amendment Act in the past one week is yet another proof to this assertion.

The Citizenship Amendment Act was passed by Parliament on December 12. The BJP-led NDA easily sailed through without any surprise to their calculation in both the houses, particularly in the Rajya Sabha, where it does not have majority of its own.

But some of the parties have changed their stand in the one week since the passage of the Citizenship Amendment Act. So, where do political parties stand on Citizenship Amendment Act and anti-CAA protests?

BJP

The BJP, which rules at the Centre and is in power in 17 states including all in the Northeast, has maintained that the Citizenship Amendment Act is in sync with the policy of the central governments since the days of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.

The party has done little than slamming the protesters to soothe the nerves of those out on the streets in the chilly winters in Delhi and elsewhere. Even Prime Minister Narendra Modi pointed to the "clothes" of the protesters while referring to violence in these protests. The government has, however, released a point-wise explainer on the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Union Home Minister and BJP president Amit Shah "assured" that no Indian Muslim needed to worry over the Citizenship Amendment Act. But this assurance has fallen short in addressing the anxiety of the protesters. And, none of the top BJP leaders has reached out to the protesters, particularly from the Muslim community to explain why - repeat why - Muslims need not worry about their identity in India.

CONGRESS

The Congress's students wing the NSUI has been part of protests almost everywhere against the Citizenship Amendment Act. From the top leadership, Congress president Sonia Gandhi criticised police action in Jamia campus.

Senior Congress leaders including Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra too opposed the amended Citizenship Act and criticised police action against the protesters. Priyanka Gandhi even sat on a dharna at the India Gate for few hours.

Rahul Gandhi has been largely missing from action against the Citizenship Amendment Act barring a few tweets. This is curious but explainable. Rahul Gandhi had assiduously built his and his family's image as worshippers of Lord Shiva during the Lok Sabha election only six months ago.

Being seen as supporting the "Muslim cause" may backfire. This assessment might be preventing him from taking lead in the protest against the new law. He was already put on the backfoot for choosing a Muslim-dominated constituency for Lok Sabha election after he faced serious challenge at his family bastion of Amethi. The fact that Rahul Gandhi is "on an official visit" outside India seems to be helping him shield him from criticism.

TMC

Mamata Banerjee was the first chief minister to declare that her government would not implement the Citizenship Amendment Act in Bengal. She even dared the Narendra Modi government to dismiss her government in Bengal for openly saying this.

Not only did Mamata Banerjee decline to implement the Citizenship Amendment Act, rather she ordered to halt the ongoing process to update the National Population Register, a project initiated during the Manmohan Singh government in 2010.

She took out a public march in Kolkata opposing the Citizenship Amendment Act. Mamata Banerjee has called the new law discriminatory and demanded equal protection be given to all irrespective of their religion. This is certainly a shift from her earlier stance when she wanted detection and deportation of illegal immigrants from Bengal.

Now, in the face of protests and violence in the past few days, Mamata Banerjee has made a surprising demand for a referendum on the Citizenship Amendment Bill with United Nations playing as observer. She challenged the BJP to agree to her demand.

SHIV SENA

The Shiv Sena, which recently snapped its 35-year-old ties with the BJP to form a government in Maharashtra with the Congress and the NCP, has done a flip-flop on the CAA. It voted in favour of the Citizenship Amendment Bill in the Lok Sabha, where the BJP has majority.

The new allies of the Shiv Sena, namely, the Congress and the NCP reportedly expressed displeasure and built up pressure on the party after the Lok Sabha vote. In the Rajya Sabha, the Shiv Sena stayed away from voting.

Now, when protests are in full swing against the Citizenship Amendment Act, Maharashtra Chief Minister and the Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray linked it with Hindu Rashtra and questioned the BJP saying the new law is an insult to VD Savarkar, a controversial freedom fighter dear to both the BJP and the Shiv Sena.

At best, the Shiv Sena is in a catch-22 situation - opposing the new law but finding it difficult to sympathise with the cause of the protesters at Jamia and Seelampur in Delhi.

AGP, BJD and JDU

The story of Asom Gana Parishad and the Biju Janata Dal (BJD) is same as the Shiv Sena. These parties voted for the passage of the CAB in Parliament. But as the protest intensified in their respective states - Assam and Odisha - they changed their stand. Now, the AGP is against the new law and will be arguing in the Supreme Court against the Citizenship Amendment Act that it supported in Parliament.

The JDU appears to be in bind over the Citizenship Amendment Act as well. The party leadership decided to go with the BJP-led government on the CAB in Parliament. But as protests became more evident senior party leaders including Prashant Kishor and Pawan Verma openly said a mistake was made. They even criticised the party leadership, which decided not to censure any of them.

AIMIM of Asaduddin Owaisi, who tore the Citizenship Amendment Bill in the Lok Sabha during debate over the new legislation, is not seen taking out protests agains the CAA on the streets. Owaisi gave a call for a townhall meet in Hyderabad but the TRS government of K Chandrasekhar Rao seems to have been a stronger buffer in Telangana.

LEFT FRONT

While the Left Front seems to be tatters in electoral politics, it banks heavily on the support base in universities with JNU being the most significant. The Left Front has come out in open support of students in Jamia Millia. It gave the call for a bandh on Thursday against the CAA and police action in Jamia campus.
