Anti-CAA protests: Why political parties are hiding behind students

With university students becoming the face of protests, agitation against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) continues unabated. From Assam to Kerala, students have been at the forefront of protests with their innovative slogans to sting the government over amended Citizenship Act.

Curiously, political parties except the Trinamool Congress of Mamata Banerjee have generally been hiding behind the students, though almost all Opposition political parties have instructed their students and youth wings to supply the manpower required to make protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act look massive.

The student unions affiliated to the Left parties, the Congress and even the AAP have extended support to the protesters at Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia University, which banned student union politics 13 years ago. The Jamia campus does not have a student union.

In Assam, it was the All Assam Students Union that took the centre-stage in protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act. Though, their grounds for protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act were different from those protesting in Jamia or elsewhere in Delhi.

After police action in Jamia campus, students in nearly a dozen university campuses came out supporting the protesters from the Delhi varsity. Protests have been violent at many places - Delhi, Lucknow, Mangalore, Sambhal, Aligarh - with three protesters dying on Thursday.

Yet, the political parties have remained firmly behind the curtains of protest by the students. This situation suits them. The students or student unions don't contest general elections. The political parties do. The political parties, if they come out openly in support of these students, face the risk of "justifying" the BJP's charge that the Opposition stands for Muslim appeasement.

Two narratives have been built around the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

First, the Citizenship Amendment Act is discriminatory and violates constitutional scheme. The political parties opposed to this law argued on the same line in Parliament. But there have been strong arguments suggesting that the Citizenship Amendment Act may actually pass the constitutional test in a court of law.

Second, Muslims are out in the streets to demand inclusion of fellow Muslims from other countries in the Citizenship Amendment Act. This narrative is based on the argument that such a demand puts Muslim identity over Indian identity.

This is a sharply polarizing narrative. Till now, this narrative is limited to "some students misguided by people with vested interests". The BJP has been trying to pin the blame for "misguiding the students" on the Congress, which looks more cicrumspect.

If the leading Opposition parties - namely Congress, the Left Front, the AAP, the Shiv Sena, the NCP, the SP, the BSP and the like - join the protesting students at this moment, they fear being sympathetic to Muslim immigrants. No political except Mamata Banerjee's TMC has shown the nerve to take this risk.

There is an argument that sharp polarisation works in Mamata Banerjee's favour in Bengal, which will go to the polls in 2021 and where Muslims comprise around 27-30 per cent of the voters. The BJP is said to be thriving well in polarised electoral scene and may gain if polarisation becomes sharper in Bengal.

Then there are certain non-NDA and non-UPA parties such as TRS, TDP and the BJD, and also the AIADMK and the DMK. These parties have largely maintained silence. This makes almost the entire stretch of eastern coast below West Bengal aloof from the protest agains the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Organisational weakness the BJP in these states -- except Odisha -- may have prompted most of these parties to take a rather neutral stand.

The students' protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act is directed against the BJP and the Narendra Modi government. If it succeeds in building a new narrative, the public anger will be against the Modi government and the BJP. The Opposition parties seem to be waiting to reap dividends out of protests by students against the CAA and the BJP without actually hitting the ground with full might.

However, the students' agitation fails to sustain for long enough, the same Opposition parties will have to face the barrage of charges for "Muslim appeasement" from the BJP, which has a far bigger organisational network nationwide than its competition. But the tricky question is, are Opposition parties so nervous of a BJP attack that they develop cold feet even on issues that may help them revive at national level?
