Uflex highlights its pharma packaging solutions at CPHI 2019

Uflex displayed a wide range of engineering, packaging, tubes and holographic material at CPHI India 2019 held from 26-28 November 2019 at India Expo Centre, Greater Noida.

Ashok Chaturvedi, chairman and managing director, Uflex, said, “CPHI is widely used as a barometer of the pharma industry in India. Being one of the marquee platforms that brings together Indian and global brands on one stage, this mammoth expo helps in reflecting and enhancing the value of Uflex product offerings in various segments as well as pushing the prosperous pharma industry towards a brighter future.”

He added that to benefit the pharma businesses, well-being of the environment and the consumers’ welfare, Uflex has been constantly working in the engineering, research and development space.

As part of its engineering business, the company showcased multi-lane VFFS stick pack machine VFFS; multi-lane VFFS MT 1200; unit dose packing machine model FFS unit dose and VNS machine.

The Multi-lane stick pack machine model Stick Pack 200, which was launched at CPHI, is a five-lane machine for packing powder, granules and paste at a speed of up to 250-sticks per minute. This machine can pack content in centre seal tubular shaped sachets ranging in weight from 1 to 20-gm and is best used for pharma products that can be consumed in a single dose.

The company’s capabilities for uncompromised packaging were demonstrated through its multi-track four-side seal sachet packing machine model MT 1200. This machine is designed to pack powder in sachets at a speed of up to 1,000 packs per minute. This machine can pack four to five different types of powders simultaneously through its various tracks in different sachets. This machine garnered huge interest from participating pharma companies looking to offer combination packs of different products.

The FFS unit dose is designed to pack unit dose powder in sachets. This machine is designed to pack powder weighing 250-mg to 10-gm in three-side and four-side seal sachets.

The VNS Machine is designed to pack various pharmaceutical powders and granules in large quantity of up to 5 kg.

The packaging business of Uflex displayed sustainable PET based alu-alu packaging and fast-tear strip foil.

Uflex's alu-alu packaging comes with a special polyester film that replaces nylon and PVC in conventional cold form laminate while retaining aluminium, making it an indigenous product since both PVC and BON have to be imported from other countries. For this, Uflex had also been granted a US Patent in 2018.

In fast-tear strip foil, the company showcased its 20-micron pin-hole free soft tempered foil. It contributes in providing higher yield gain of 28% leading to tremendous cost savings for pharma companies. Offering excellent printing on matt finish with superior readability through multi-colour reverse printing design on special PET film in special PET/Foil/PE laminate, fast-tear strip foil is produced in-house to impart easy tear-ability of the laminate without any effort.

The products displayed by the holography business ranged from narrow-web technologies like holograms, security seals, void holograms and self-adhesive labels, which include state-of-the-art unique features like lens and unigrams providing covert and overt security features. It also includes holographic product labels for syrup and carton packaging for pharma products.

Another range shown at CPHI, this year, consists of Holographic Hot Stamping Foils for Pharma Cartons & Labels, Lamination Films with customized holography for pharma cartons. Cognizant of need for sustainable pharma packaging-UFlex exhibited holographic paper and board for Pharma Cartons and Labels (Sans Plastic Components) that includes company’s speciality of Registered Lens Products on Cartons and Labels.
