Parineeti Reportedly Dropped As ‘Beti Bachao’ Ambassador Post Anti-CAA Tweet

Protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act rocked the country yesterday. Prominent intellectuals and leaders like Ramchandra Guha, Yogendra Yadav, and Sitaram Yechury were detained along with thousands of other protesters.

The Red Fort saw a scene that was quite unbelievable. Protesters were running while the police were chasing them and trying to catch them. It was like an adult version of run and catch. Mumbai saw a crowd of 1.5 lakh people gather to speak out against what they see to be a draconian and discriminatory law. Since it’s the capital of Bollywood, many celebrities showed up. August Kranti Maidan saw the likes of Farhan Akhtar, Sushant Singh, Swara Bhaskar, Anurag Kashyap, Huma Qureshi, Nandita Das, and Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra.

Many tweeted against the brutal force the police have used, especially against students in Jamia Millia Islamia University and Aligarh Muslim University. Parineeti Chopra was one of them. She wrote, “If this is what’s gonna happen everytime a citizen expresses their view, forget #CAB, we should pass a bill and not call our country a democracy anymore! Beating up innocent human beings for speaking their mind? BARBARIC.”

If this is what’s gonna happen everytime a citizen expresses their view, forget #CAB, we should pass a bill and not call our country a democracy anymore! Beating up innocent human beings for speaking their mind? BARBARIC. — Parineeti Chopra (@ParineetiChopra) December 17, 2019

Parineeti reportedly stripped of ‘Beti Bachao Beti Padhao’ ambassadorship

Multiple news reports have claimed that Parineeti, who is from Ambala in Haryana, has been removed as the state’s brand ambassador for the Beti Bachao Beti Padhao scheme. She was made ambassador in 2015. Twitter was abuzz with it.

After tweet in favour of students, Haryana govt has removed @ParineetiChopra as Brand Ambassador of Beti Bachao Project



So ironic at so many levels — Ashish (@AshishXL) December 19, 2019

Haryana govt has removed @ParineetiChopra as Brand Ambassador of Beti Bachao Project after she tweeted in support of VIolent protestors.

more good news coming just wait — Yletmetell( ex- coolyouth) (@yletmetell) December 19, 2019

Other Bollywood celebs have spoken out against violence

Priyanka Chopra spoke out against the violence meted out to students yesterday.

Anurag Kashyap came out of Twitter hibernation to tweet against the brutal force used by the police to deal with protesting students.

This has gone too far.. can’t stay silent any longer . This government is clearly fascist .. and it makes me angry to see voices that can actually make a difference stay quiet .. — Anurag Kashyap (@anuragkashyap72) December 16, 2019

Ayushmann Khurrana did the same. He reminded Indians that this is the land of Ahimsa and that we must not forget the basis on which we were formed as a country.

The Haryana government has refused to comment on the rumours of Parineeti being removed as Beti Bachao Beti Padhao’s brand ambassador and Parineeti herself has not spoken about it. If it is true, then irony just died a thousand deaths because the Beti Bachao campaign is meant to empower women to speak up and take a stand for their rights by educating them.
