Huge anti-CAA protest at Delhi's Jama Masjid, confusion over Bhim Army chief's detention: 10 points

Demonstrators attending at a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act after Friday prayers at the Jama Masjid in Delhi, on December 20, 2019. (Photo: Reuters)

Hundreds gathered today at Delhi's Jama Masjid, located in the old city, to join a protest against the amended Citizenship Act, a law dealing with the naturalisation of illegal immigrants that is seen by critics as anti-Muslim.

The protesters were led by the Bhim Army and the movement's leader, Chandrashekhar Azad.

The police had earlier denied Azad permission to hold the march.

Here's what you need to know about the protests in Delhi, in 10 points.

1. A massive crowd gathered at the Jama Masjid today to protest the Citizenship Amendment Act, the latest in a series of demonstrations that have grown in intensity since the Delhi Police were accused of using excessive force against students at Jamia Millia Islamia on Sunday.

2. The authorities are keeping a close watch on the demonstrators and have taken steps to contain the protest. Fifteen metro stations, including some in the area, have been closed (Scroll down to the bottom of this page for a full, updated list of closed stations.). The police used drones to monitor the crowd at the site of the protest.

3. There are conflicting reports on whether or not Chandrashekhar Azad, the Bhim Army chief, has been detained.

4. The police had earlier denied permission for a march from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar near Connaught Place. Delhi Police PRO MS Randhawa has asked protesters to disperse peacefully.

5. Some protesters carried posters of BR Ambedkar, Kanshi Ram and Bhagat Singh. The crowd raised the slogan "Inquilab Zindabad"; some sang "Saare Jahan Se Accha". A section of the crowd that reached Delhi Gate was contained there; they insisted on moving towards Jantar Mantar.

6. Meanwhile the Delhi Police conducted a flag march in Seelampur, located in the city's northeast, where violent protests broke out on Tuesday. DCP Northeast VP Surya said the region was peaceful today, and that paramilitary forces were among the security personnel deployed in sensitive areas. Drones have also been deployed, he said.

7. Three people died yesterday of injuries they suffered during protests in Mangaluru and Lucknow; hospital officials said two of them were shot.

8. Several public figures like activist-politician Yogendra Yadav and historian Ramachandra Guha were detained during nationwide protests yesterday.

9. The Citizenship Amendment Act fast-tracks naturalisation for illegal immigrants from six non-Muslim minority religious groups who fled persecution in Pakistan, Afghanistan or Bangladesh.

10. The government denies the charge that the law is anti-Muslim and insists Indian Muslims need not worry.

METRO STATIONS CLOSED

Yellow Line: Rajiv Chowk, Chawri Bazar

Violet Line : Mandi House, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Delhi Gate, Khan Market, Janpath

Blue Line: Rajiv Chowk, Mandi House, Pragati Maidan

Pink Line : Jaffrabad, Shiv Vihar, Maujpur-Baburpur, Johri Enclave

Magenta Line : Jamia Millia Islamia

Red Line: Dilshad Garden

[NOTE: Interchange facilities are available at Rajiv Chowk (Yellow-Blue) and Mandi House (Blue-Violet) . Commuters can follow the Twitter handles of the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) and the Delhi Traffic Police (@dtptraffic) for traffic updates.]

Inputs from agencies
