Protests outside Tamil Nadu CM’s house against AIADMK’s support to Citizenship Amendment Act

Help India!

By NewsDesk, TwoCircles.net

Condemning the support of the AIADMK to the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act, hundreds of people from across Tamil Nadu led a protest from the Pattinampakkam beach to the state Chief Minister’s house.

Support TwoCircles



Manithaneya Makkal Katchi (MMK) carried out a siege of the house of Edappadi K Palanisamy, the Joint Coordinator of AIADMK who is also the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu. Prof. M. H. Jawahirullah, President, Manithaneya Makkal Katchi led this protest in which thousands of cadres of Manithaneya Makkal Katchi participated and went in procession in Chennai.

The Citizenship Amendment Act which is contrary to the basic structure of Constitution was passed in the Rajya Sabha only because of the votes of 11 AIADMK Members. AIADMK has voted in favour of this Act which discriminates against Srilankan Tamils and Muslims.

Addressing the gathering, Prof. M.H. Jawahirullah stated that the Citizenship Amendment Act contradicts the Indian Constitution. “The AIADMK has voted in favour of this Act without taking into consideration the fact that certain section of Muslims of these three countries and Tamils and Muslims in Sri Lanka are also persecuted. To select three countries Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh neglecting countries like Myanmar and Sri Lanka is yet another discrimination,” he added.

The demand of Parties of Tamil Nadu that Tamils in Sri Lanka mostly Hindus affected by Buddhist Majoritarianism who have fled Sri Lanka and settled in Tamil Nadu must be granted Citizenship has been neglected. They said that the AIADMK cannot claim the legacy of Selvi Jayalalitha who during her Chief Ministership had brought several legislations in favour of Srilanka Tamils. The AIADMK by voting for this linguistic and discriminatory bills has supported the disintegration of India and betrayed the Muslims and Sri Lankan Tamils.
