CAA Protest Ahmedabad: Bandh turns violent in Ahmedabad, 30 injured

People attack a policeman in Shah-E-Alam area in Ahmedabad on Thursday.

AHMEDABAD: Major violence erupted in Shah-EAlam area of Ahmedabad on Thursday evening as protests over Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) led to major mob clashes with police. At least 30, including 12 policemen, among them officials including a DCP, an ACP and a PI, were injured due to stone pelting and assault.

Scenes of police-mob clashes with youngsters hurling bricks and large stones on cops in Shah-EAlam and police resorting to lathi-charge and lobbing tear-gas shells went viral. The protest reportedly turned violent when cops detained around 30 persons. Angry protesters blocked police vehicles which escalated to widespread clash.

Ahmedabad police commissioner Ashish Bhatia said situation has been brought under control. “Perpetrators will be identified and FIRs lodged against them. Barring the stone pelting in Shah-EAlam area, no untoward incident took place in the city today. We have also detained some persons,” he said. Nearly 200 protesters were detained on Thursday.

Minister of state for home and law Pradeepsinh Jadeja appealed for peace. “Gujarat is known for its peace. Government appeals to citizens to not get provoked by elements with vested interest and resort to violence. The CAA is in national interest. No citizen of Gujarat needs to panic,” said Jadeja.

Minority dominated areas in Gujarat observed near-total shutdown in response to the the ‘Gujarat Bandh’ call given by civil rights groups.

Skirmishes between protesters and cops were reported in other areas such as Shahpur, Khanpur and Mirzapur.

“Two companies of SRP have been allotted to Ahmedabad police for bundobust. Relatively, state has remained peaceful. No will be allowed to take law in their hands," said DGP of Gujarat Shivanand Jha.

In other parts of Gujarat, Chhapi town, 17 km from Palanpur in Banaskantha district, was on edge after hundreds of people from the minority community jammed the Ahmedabad-Abu highway. A mob even made an unsuccessful attempt to overturn a police jeep.

In communally sensitive Godhra, business establishments including petrol pumps in the minority dominated areas remained completely shut. Sources said that one side of the highway was blocked from afternoon to evening.

In Palanpur, minority community dominated areas like Nani Bazaar and Baradpura and Vadani village near Patan observed a complete bandh.

In Vadodara, minority pockets observed a complete bandh while a peaceful protest was organized in Vasna area in the evening.


