Students stage protest rally in capital on Kashmir Day

Schoolchildren holding placards participate in a rally expressing solidarity with the people of occupied Kashmir. PHOTO: SABAH

ISLAMABAD: A large number of students on Monday marched in the capital to express solidarity with the Kashmir cause ahead of Kashmir Day.



The rally had been organised by the Anjuman Talaba-e-Islam (ATI). A large number of students from various schools participated in the rally and marched from the Post Graduate College in Sector H-8 to Zero Point. The students protested against the ongoing brutalities by the Indian military in the disputed Himalayan territory. They held up placards denouncing India and expressing solidarity with the Kashmiris



They also highlighted the weak role of the United Nations(UN) and wore black armbands.



The rallies were held under the supervision of ATI International Affairs Secretary Syed Waqar Ali and ATI Islamabad Nazim Sabtain Alam Gujjar.



Addressing the protesters, Ali said that India had been committing human rights abuses in Kashmir for years while the international community remains silent, including those nations who claim to be torch-bearers of justice.



India has flouted international laws and UN resolutions on the Kashmir issue, he added



He urged the international community to cut off all kinds of ties with India to force it to end brutalities in the disputed territory.



Ali expressed the support of Pakistanis with Kashmiri brothers and said that that they would fight for the freedom of occupied Kashmir until the last drop of their blood.



Gujjar urged the international community to pressurise India to stop its atrocities in occupied land.



Indian atrocities condemned



Meanwhile, Pakistan Hindu Council Chairman Pritam Das on Monday condemned the atrocities committed by the Indian military against peaceful Kashmiris.



Das said that they enjoyed religious freedom in Pakistan, adding that the fire currently raging in Kashmir will eventually engulf entire India.



He demanded the international community, as well as Muslim countries, review their relations with India over the Kashmir cause. While talking to Daily Express, he said that the Hindus living in Pakistan will express their solidarity with the oppressed Kashmiris on February 5 — Kashmir Day — by offering special prayers in temples across the country. Further, he said that the Muslims in India should also raise their voice against the hostility of the Indian army.



Das said that a curfew was imposed whenever Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited occupied Kashmir and labelled the Indian military as the most cowardly force in the world.



Published in The Express Tribune, February 5th, 2019.
