11 Injured During Anti-Citizenship Act Protests In Kanpur, Many Sustain Bullet Injuries: Reports

New Delhi:

At least 11 people were injured in Uttar Pradesh’s Kanpur during protests against the Narendra Modi government’s Citizenship Amendment Act, that excludes Muslims while granting Indian citizenship to illegal migrants from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan. According to the initial reports, most of them sustained bullet injuries and were being treated at the Hallet Hospital in critical condition. As per the reports, gun shots were fired by police as well as protesters. However, it was not clear who started the firing first. However, those injured were protesters.

Earlier in the day, fresh clashes between police and anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protesters in several parts of Uttar Pradesh. Thousands of people gathered in Ghaziabad, Gorakhpur, Kanpur, Hapur, Bahraich, Bulandshahr and many other parts of the state to register their protest against the contentious law.

In Ghaziabad near national capital Delhi, the police resorted to lathi charge against the protesters, who also said to have pelted stones at them. Several protesters were injured after in the police action while some policemen were also reportedly injured in the clashes.

In videos, police in riot gears can be seen chasing away the protesters with batons and guns in their hand. Internet services are banned in Ghaziabad since 10 pm last night.

In Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's home constituency Gorakhpur, hundreds of protesters gathered around the city's Jama Masjid after Friday prayers. The protesters, who were raising anti-CAA and anti-government slogans were seen exchanging stones with the police.

Similar protests erupted in Muzaffarnagar, Hapur, Bahraich and Bulandshahr, Kanpur, Meerut following which the police used force to disperse the protesters, who defied prohibitory orders under section 144 that bans gathering of more than 4 people at one place.

Anti-Citizenship Act protesters also hit the streets in Prime Minister Narendra Modi's parliamentary constituency Varanasi, where Police conducted flag march in a bid to ensure law and order situation doesn't deteriorate.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
