8 minors among 40 detained after violence near Delhi Gate in Daryaganj

Hours after a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) on Friday turned violent with pelting of stones at police and torching of a car in front of the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Central, near Daryaganj, protesters gathered at the Delhi Police Headquarters at ITO and shouted slogans.

The police brought the situation under control by using water cannons to disperse the mob. A few protesters who resisted the attempts made by police to clear the area were detained and taken into the police station in front of which the car was set on fire.

Delhi Police detained 40 people, which included eight minors, in connection with the anti-CAA protest that turned violent later in the evening on Friday at Daryaganj, officials said.

According to reports, while all eight minors have been released, others continue to be in detention. Lawyers were, however, given permission to meet adult detainees inside the Daryaganj police station.

The violence near Delhi Gate came towards the end of a largely peaceful demonstration held in the area through the day. People protested against the Citizenship Amendment Act and even offered namaz in the evening.

Late Friday evening, some elements from within the gathering pelted a few stray stones at the the police contingent that was keeping an eye out on the gathering. This led to the police opening up their water cannon.

This led to more stone pelting and the situation turned chaotic with a car being set on fire right in front of the office of Delhi's Deputy Commissioner of Police for the central zone.

The police brought the situation under control by using water cannon and a mild lathicharge. Some protesters were detained and taken inside the Daryaganj police station located nearby.

The situation near Delhi Gate was an outlier on Friday as Delhi witnessed peaceful protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act, which provides for expedited citizenship to non-Muslim refugees from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.

Follow live updates from the anti-CAA protests here

Protests against the Act, which was recently passed by Parliament, have been taking place across cities in the country for two days now. The protests have mostly been peaceful, but incidents of violence have been reported from some areas.

At least three people -- one in Uttar Pradesh and two in Mangalore -- have been killed in these protests. Several protesters and police personnel have also been injured.

READ | Protest against CAA: Where do political parties stand?
