Mamata vs CBI Highlights: Mamata Banerjee ends 'Save the Constitution' dharna

Mamata vs CBI Highlights: Mamata Banerjee ends 'Save the Constitution' dharna

India

oi-Chennabasaveshwar P

Kolkata Feb 5: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Tuesday called off her dharna, which she had started on Sunday night after the CBI's attempt to arrest Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar.

Her protest came hours after officials of the Central Bureau of Investigation attempted to question Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar in connection with two Ponzi scams.

Today, all eyes were on the Supreme Court which will hear the CBI Vs Bengal case . On Monday, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) sought for an urgent hearing after its officers were detained by the West Bengal police, while attempting to probe into chit fund scams.

CBI vs Bengal: Gov took into account all aspects while submitting report

The Supreme Court directed Kolkata police commissioner Rajeev Kumar to appear before the CBI after the investigative agency filed filed additional documents in the court to back up its claim that he had destroyed evidence related to the Saradha and Rose Valley chit fund scams.

"We will direct the Police Commissioner to make himself available and fully cooperate. We will deal with contempt petition later," observed CJI.

The Police Commissioner of Kolkata Rajeev Kumar will appear before the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in Shillong, Meghalaya as a neutral place.

Appear before CBI at neutral venue, SC tells Kolkata Police Commissioner

Mamata vs CBI: Highlights

Newest First Oldest First West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee in Kolkata: This dharna (Save the Constitution) is victory for the Constitution and democracy, so, let us end it today. Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu meets West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee at the stage where she has been sitting on 'Save the Constitution' dharna since February 3 over CBI issue. Andhra Pradesh CM and Telugu Desam Party (TDP) chief N Chandrababu Naidu arrives in Kolkata. Mamata Banerjee says, "Media is misinterpreting that Rajeev Kumar will have to face CBI. Supreme Court has upheld the previous order; it is not about facing CBI but co-operating with the CBI." Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik backs West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee. “CBI must do a professional, non-political job,” says Patnaik. "No one from TMC has been in contact with us for at least a year. We would like the CBI to do a professional and non-political job, " says Odisha CM Naveen Pataniak "I feel that in West Bengal democracy is in peril. Someone occupying a constitutional post is violating the federal structure of the country. This certainly does not augur well for the democracy of the country," Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Keshav Prasad Maurya was quoted by PTI. Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad, says, "Today we've to ask larger questions on behalf of the party. Lakhs of small investors were cheated&looted off their money. Is it not our moral obligation for an investigation? Why is Mamata ji silent on this? Why are the other political parties silent on this?" Despite the “moral victory”, Banerjee has said that she won’t call off her dharna yet and will only take a decision after consulting opposition leaders like Andhra Pradesh chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu, who will reach Kolkata today afternoon to offer her support. Mamata Banerjee on SC order that no coercive steps would be taken against Rajeev Kumar, "It’s a moral victory. We have great respect for judiciary&all institutions. We are so grateful. We're so obliged." Nalin Kohli, senior lawyer & BJP leader, says, "CJI bench ordered that Rajeev Kumar would make himself available in the light of prayer of the application of CBI to join the investigation, make himself available & cooperate fully. The SC pointed out that no coercive steps would be taken." Mamata Banerjee's first reaction after SC order, She says, "I haven't seen it (judgement) yet. Will talk only after reading the entire judgement." The Supreme Court orders Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar to appear before the CBI in the Sarada chit fund scam case. No coercive action will be taken against Kumar, the court has said. The top court will take up the contempt of court plea of February 20. The Police Commissioner of Kolkata Rajeev Kumar will appear before the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in Shillong, Meghalaya as a neutral place. West Bengal CBI matter: Yesterday Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar had filed a petition in Kolkata HC seeking interim relief. Today court postponed the case as the matter between WB Police and CBI is sub-judice in SC. Next hearing on Thursday, 7 Feb Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu will meet Mamata Banerjee today afternoon. The investigative agency has claimed that there is a nexus between the Police and the chit fund firms. SIT did not act against Sarada, Rose Valley as they had contributed to the ruling party, CBI has claimed. Affidavit also states,return of crucial evidence to main accused by the SIT, despite regular monitoring by HC, clearly show connivance of SIT to a larger conspiracy wherein local authorities obstructed probe&attempted to destroy evidence prior to transfer of the case to CBI by SC West Bengal CBI matter: CBI files an affidavit in the Supreme Court alleging there are several incriminating material/correspondence that was collected during the investigation by the CBI against the senior police officials as well as senior politicians. On Mamata Banerjee's dharna, former chief minister of Karnataka Siddaramaiah, says, "I support it, Mamata Banerjee did the right thing. She'll face court later but nobody should misuse ED, IT or any agency. Narendra Modi is creating anarchy. Can anybody raid your house? They have rights to work as per law. They didn't have any order or warrant." With bad intention & by keeping election in mind, they are (Centre) misusing the power & conducted raid at Commissioner's house. Mamata Banerjee opposed it by saying this is part of political vendetta West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee with DMK MP Kanimozhi (L) and RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav at Banerjee's sit-in over the CBI attempt's to question the Kolkata Police Commssioner in connection with chit funds scam, in Kolkata, Monday, Feb 4, 2019. (PTI Photo) Union Minister Arun Jaitley on February 5 called West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee’s move to stage a dharna over the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)’s attempt to quiz Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar in relation to the Sarada chit fund scam case a 'disgraceful and disproportionate over-reaction'. Opposition leaders meet at Pawar's residence, discuss 'misuse' of CBI Leaders of various Opposition parties met at NCP chief Sharad Pawar's residence in Delhi yesterday and discussed their joint strategy to take on the ruling BJP on various issues, including what they say is misuse of CBI by the Centre. Sources said among those present at the meeting included Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu and former J&K chief minister Farooq Abdullah. TMC leader Derek O'Brien and NCP leader Supriya Sule were also present, besides AAP leader Sanjay Singh. (PTI) Kolkata: Latest #visuals from the site of West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee's 'Save the Constitution' dharna near Metro Channel. The stage is currently covered with curtains. The dharna over the CBI issue began on the night of February 3. pic.twitter.com/orN4Krt6sB — ANI (@ANI) February 5, 2019 Latest visuals from the site of West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee's 'Save the Constitution' dharna near Metro Channel. The stage is currently covered with curtains. The dharna over the CBI issue began on the night of February 3. Actress and TMC's Indrani Halder meets Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee at 'Save the Constitution' dharna in Kolkata. The CM has been on the dharna since the night of February 3. Chandrababu Naidu on West Bengal CM blocking BJP leaders for rallies: Nobody is blocking anybody. If you behave vulgarly, then they have to attack. Even they have gone to Andhra,they're talking as they like. Then I've to attack, I have to use the same language Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu on West Bengal CM's dharna over CBI issue: We're all together to save this country and protect democracy.There's attack on democratic institutions.A month before elections,they went to Commissioner of Police&harassed him. It's totally undemocratic Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu on West Bengal CM's dharna over CBI issue: We're all together to save this country and protect democracy.There's attack on democratic institutions.A month before elections,they went to Commissioner of Police&harassed him. It's totally undemocratic Chandrababu Naidu on West Bengal CM blocking BJP leaders for rallies: Nobody is blocking anybody. If you behave vulgarly, then they have to attack. Even they have gone to Andhra,they're talking as they like. Then I've to attack, I have to use the same language Actress and TMC's Indrani Halder meets Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee at 'Save the Constitution' dharna in Kolkata. The CM has been on the dharna since the night of February 3. Kolkata: Latest #visuals from the site of West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee's 'Save the Constitution' dharna near Metro Channel. The stage is currently covered with curtains. The dharna over the CBI issue began on the night of February 3. pic.twitter.com/orN4Krt6sB — ANI (@ANI) February 5, 2019 Latest visuals from the site of West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee's 'Save the Constitution' dharna near Metro Channel. The stage is currently covered with curtains. The dharna over the CBI issue began on the night of February 3. Opposition leaders meet at Pawar's residence, discuss 'misuse' of CBI Leaders of various Opposition parties met at NCP chief Sharad Pawar's residence in Delhi yesterday and discussed their joint strategy to take on the ruling BJP on various issues, including what they say is misuse of CBI by the Centre. Sources said among those present at the meeting included Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu and former J&K chief minister Farooq Abdullah. TMC leader Derek O'Brien and NCP leader Supriya Sule were also present, besides AAP leader Sanjay Singh. (PTI) Union Minister Arun Jaitley on February 5 called West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee’s move to stage a dharna over the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)’s attempt to quiz Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar in relation to the Sarada chit fund scam case a 'disgraceful and disproportionate over-reaction'. West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee with DMK MP Kanimozhi (L) and RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav at Banerjee's sit-in over the CBI attempt's to question the Kolkata Police Commssioner in connection with chit funds scam, in Kolkata, Monday, Feb 4, 2019. (PTI Photo) On Mamata Banerjee's dharna, former chief minister of Karnataka Siddaramaiah, says, "I support it, Mamata Banerjee did the right thing. She'll face court later but nobody should misuse ED, IT or any agency. Narendra Modi is creating anarchy. Can anybody raid your house? They have rights to work as per law. They didn't have any order or warrant." With bad intention & by keeping election in mind, they are (Centre) misusing the power & conducted raid at Commissioner's house. Mamata Banerjee opposed it by saying this is part of political vendetta West Bengal CBI matter: CBI files an affidavit in the Supreme Court alleging there are several incriminating material/correspondence that was collected during the investigation by the CBI against the senior police officials as well as senior politicians. The investigative agency has claimed that there is a nexus between the Police and the chit fund firms. SIT did not act against Sarada, Rose Valley as they had contributed to the ruling party, CBI has claimed. Affidavit also states,return of crucial evidence to main accused by the SIT, despite regular monitoring by HC, clearly show connivance of SIT to a larger conspiracy wherein local authorities obstructed probe&attempted to destroy evidence prior to transfer of the case to CBI by SC Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu will meet Mamata Banerjee today afternoon. West Bengal CBI matter: Yesterday Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar had filed a petition in Kolkata HC seeking interim relief. Today court postponed the case as the matter between WB Police and CBI is sub-judice in SC. Next hearing on Thursday, 7 Feb The Supreme Court orders Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar to appear before the CBI in the Sarada chit fund scam case. No coercive action will be taken against Kumar, the court has said. The top court will take up the contempt of court plea of February 20. The Police Commissioner of Kolkata Rajeev Kumar will appear before the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in Shillong, Meghalaya as a neutral place. Mamata Banerjee's first reaction after SC order, She says, "I haven't seen it (judgement) yet. Will talk only after reading the entire judgement." Nalin Kohli, senior lawyer & BJP leader, says, "CJI bench ordered that Rajeev Kumar would make himself available in the light of prayer of the application of CBI to join the investigation, make himself available & cooperate fully. The SC pointed out that no coercive steps would be taken." Mamata Banerjee on SC order that no coercive steps would be taken against Rajeev Kumar, "It’s a moral victory. We have great respect for judiciary&all institutions. We are so grateful. We're so obliged." Despite the “moral victory”, Banerjee has said that she won’t call off her dharna yet and will only take a decision after consulting opposition leaders like Andhra Pradesh chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu, who will reach Kolkata today afternoon to offer her support. Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad, says, "Today we've to ask larger questions on behalf of the party. Lakhs of small investors were cheated&looted off their money. Is it not our moral obligation for an investigation? Why is Mamata ji silent on this? Why are the other political parties silent on this?" "I feel that in West Bengal democracy is in peril. Someone occupying a constitutional post is violating the federal structure of the country. This certainly does not augur well for the democracy of the country," Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Keshav Prasad Maurya was quoted by PTI. "No one from TMC has been in contact with us for at least a year. We would like the CBI to do a professional and non-political job, " says Odisha CM Naveen Pataniak Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik backs West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee. “CBI must do a professional, non-political job,” says Patnaik. Mamata Banerjee says, "Media is misinterpreting that Rajeev Kumar will have to face CBI. Supreme Court has upheld the previous order; it is not about facing CBI but co-operating with the CBI." Andhra Pradesh CM and Telugu Desam Party (TDP) chief N Chandrababu Naidu arrives in Kolkata. Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu meets West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee at the stage where she has been sitting on 'Save the Constitution' dharna since February 3 over CBI issue. West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee in Kolkata: This dharna (Save the Constitution) is victory for the Constitution and democracy, so, let us end it today.

The failed attempt by the CBI to question Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar in connection with the Saradha and Rose Valley chit fund scams on Sunday became the latest flashpoint between the BJP-led Centre and Banerjee, one of its bitter critics. The CBI has accused Kumar of destroying evidence related to the two fraud cases.

A CBI team was bodily prevented from entering the residence of Kumar by Kolkata police personnel, bundled into vehicles, and detained. Contingents of West Bengal police also descended on CBI premises in the city, as a furious Banerjee rushed to Kumar's residence before beginning a dharna opposite Metro Cinema, one of Kolkata's landmarks.
