Delhi news: Protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act in Delhi: Top Developments

Protests erupt across Delhi

Priyanka Gandhi joins anti-CAA protests at India Gate

'Born here, will die here' chant protesters at Jama Masjid

Bhim Army protests at Jama Masjid

Bhim

Army

Protest turns violent in Daryaganj

Police says "outsiders" involved in violence

18 metro stations shut down

Delhi

Delhi

Policemen working 20 hours a day due to protests in Delhi

NEW DELHI: Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 continue to rage in Delhi since the controversial legislation got presidential assent on December 12. Students and citizens in the national capital have been regularly taking to streets demanding that the government take the legislation back.Here are the top developments from today's protests:While the epicentre of protests in Delhi on Friday was Jama Masjid area, there were simultaneous protests in Jamia Millia Islamia, Seemapuri, Jantar Mantar, India Gate and northeast Delhi's Seelampur, the site of large scale violence by protestors on Tuesday. A group of youths held a "shirt-less" protest in Daryaganj shouting slogans demanding scrapping of the new law. Scores of protesters also raised slogans against the proposed National Register of Citizens (NRC).Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra joined a protest march, at India Gate, on Friday evening. The Congress leader said that the Citizenship Act and the proposed NRC are "against the poor"."The poor will be most affected by it. What will the daily wage labourers do?; Demonstrations should be held peacefully," said Priyanka.The protests at Jama Masjid started after Friday prayers ended in the mosque. Placards were held aloft by the protesters denouncing the CAA along with pictures of B.R. Ambedkar and Paramveer Chakra awardee Abdul Hamid and the tricolour. Residents of the Jama Masjid area carried placards saying "We are born here and will die here".chief Chandrashekhar Azad on Friday said his protest was to safeguard the Constitution. Azad's outfit, Bhim Army, led the anti-CAA protest march from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar on Friday despite no permission from police. When Delhi Police tried to detain Azad, he managed to slip away.The stone-pelting began after the protesters, who intended to march from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar, were stopped by the barricades set up by the police some distance from Delhi Gate. The police then used water cannons as stones were pelted at the police as well as the media gathered to cover the protest, and then they torched a car parked in front of the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Central, near the Delhi Gate, as per the police.Delhi Police said "outsiders" were involved in the violence near Delhi Gate. "We used mild force and water cannon, didn't lathicharge protesters or lob tear-gas shells. Many of our personnel have been injured. Some people have been detained," said Delhi Police PRO Mandeep Singh Randhawa said. In context of setting the car on fire, he said investigation is underway.According to Delhi police sources, protesters from Seelampur and Jafrabad area in northeast Delhi joined in the protest and indulged in violence.At least 18 metro stations including Rajiv Chowk, Chawri Bazar, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid andGate were closed to stop movement of protesters in the area. Police deployed drones to keep a vigil on the gathering.Prohibitory orders were imposed in 12 police station areas of Northeast, officials said. In the morning, police carried out flag march in Seelampur area in the wake of intelligence inputs about the security situation.Delhi Police personnel, who have been on duty during the multiple protests in the capital, said they want normalcy to be restored.A constable from Parliament Street police station said, "The anti-CAA protests have made us work almost non-stop. The entire police station staff has been deployed for the protests keeping all other cases aside. I am at the protest spot since six days. I leave home at around 7 am on one meal."The policemen claimed they are working for more than 20 hours in a day since last six days.
