Citizenship Amendment Act Row: FIR Filed Against Actor Siddharth & Others For Protesting In Chennai

The nation is witnessing a wave of mixed reactions over the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) Bill and National Register Of Citizens. While many are applauding the Prime Minister Narendra Modi led government and Home Minister Amit Shah, for such bold steps, a huge section is protesting against it. While Bollywood stars including Shah Rukh Khan, Salman Khan, and others, are being questioned for their silence over the CAA issue, celebrities Down South like Rajinikanth and Siddharth have marked their opinion on the same.

Advertisement

Particularly the Rang De Basanti actor Siddharth, he has been very vocal on the policies of the Modi government from the very start and this time too, he participated in the protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act. The protest took place yesterday at Valluvar Kottam, Chennai. But seems like the actor has to pay a heavy toll for raising his bold voice.

As per the latest reports that are flowing in, Siddharth along with other 600 protesters, are booked by Chennai Police. His name has been included in an FIR filed by police. It is learned that an FIR was lodged because the protest took place despite the permission being rejected by the police.

Confirming the same, ANI tweets, “Tamil Nadu: Police has filed a case against 600 protesters, including Actor Siddharth, musician TM Krishna, MP Thirumavalavan & MH Jawahirullah, who gathered at Valluvar Kottam in Chennai yesterday to protest against #CitizenshipAct.”

Tamil Nadu: Police has filed a case against 600 protesters, including Actor Siddharth, musician TM Krishna, MP Thirumavalavan & MH Jawahirullah, who gathered at Valluvar Kottam in Chennai yesterday to protest against #CitizenshipAct. — ANI (@ANI) December 20, 2019

Advertisement

“Tamil Nadu: The case has been filed as Chennai Police had revoked permission for the protest to be held against #CitizenshipAct in Valluvar Kottam yesterday, still, the protest was held in Valluvar Kottam,” the further update reads.

Tamil Nadu: The case has been filed as Chennai Police had revoked permission for the protest to be held against #CitizenshipAct in Valluvar Kottam yesterday, still, the protest was held in Valluvar Kottam. https://t.co/IREZnQZ4lR — ANI (@ANI) December 20, 2019

Android & IOS users, download our mobile app for faster than ever Bollywood & Box Office updates!
