Inspirational women honoured

Two inspirational women in Prince George were honoured with a financial donation to further celebrate their causes. During last year's International Women's Day breakfast those in attendance heard from Colleen Fitzpatrick, who lost her son, Corp.

Two inspirational women in Prince George were honoured with a financial donation to further celebrate their causes.

During last year's International Women's Day breakfast those in attendance heard from Colleen Fitzpatrick, who lost her son, Corp. Darren Fitzpatrick, when he stepped on an improvised explosive device while on patrol in Zahari district, near Kandahar City on March 6, 2010. The Silver Cross Mother of 2016-2017 has received $800 to go towards the installation of a plaque in Darren Fitzpatrick Bravery Park that will memorialize her beloved son. The plaque was originally donated by CP Rail.

The other speaker at last year's International Women's Day event was Shobha Sharma who started the Our Satya Foundation which supports women in positions of distress, poverty, and unequivocal socio-economic and political conditions.

Sharma received $800 that will go to the foundation to further engage women in rural India in programming around education, empowerment, health and wellness.

The International Women's Day celebration breakfast is hosted by MLA Shirley Bond in partnership with the Ramada Plaza Prince George which allows for the donations to be made.

"This was a win-win," Bond said. "It was a chance for us to highlight incredible women and the things they are doing in our community and then be able to, through people attending the breakfast, support them with the monetary gift."

Bond said there are so many inspirational stories that go untold and the breakfast offers a way to tell some of them that ultimately inspire others to go out in the community and make a difference.

The seventh annual International Women's Day Breakfast will be held on Friday, March 1 at the Ramada Plaza Prince George.

Doors open at 7 a.m. and breakfast will be served at 7:30. Tickets are on sale now for $30 each. Purchase tickets through Laura in the Ramada sales office by calling 250-561-5685.
