Priyanka joins citizenship law protestors as Congress decides to take lead

Follow us on Image Source : PTI Priyanka Gandhi joins protesting students at India Gate, says citizenship law, NRC 'anti-poor'

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Friday joined the students protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and a proposed countrywide National Register of Citizens (NRC) at the India Gate, saying the measures are "anti-poor".

She said the government wants every Indian to stand in line to prove one's citizenship in the same manner in which they did after note ban. Priyanka Gandhi was accompanied by her daughter Miraya at the protest. This is the second time the Congress leader protested at the India Gate this week against the law. She earlier protested in a sit-in at the India Gate in support of Jamia students who were allegedly attacked by the police on Sunday.

"This is basically anti-poor. The most affected will be the poor. If someone has to take out old documents about their land, will they be able to do that? Will your grandparents be able to show?

"In what state are they putting the country into. The way they put the entire country in line after note ban (demonetisation), they are now wanting to put the entire country in line the same way. Who will be affected by this. The rich will show their passports, but the poor will suffer," she told reporters after joining the students protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and the proposed NRC at the India Gate.

Priyanka Gandhi also said that she had come to show solidarity with the protesters. She also said demonstrations should be held peacefully as in a democracy everyone has the right to protest.

Priyanka's decision to join the protestors follows a scathing attack on the Centre by Congress President Sonia Gandhi hours before, in which the parliamentarian accused the authorities of employing brute force to quell the ongoing demonstrations. News agency IANS reported that Congress has made up its mind to actively participate in the ongoing protests against the law, marking a shift in party's strategy.

The party General secretary K.C. Venugopal led the protest at Alphuzza in Kerala and was detained by the police for agitating against the CAA.

The party is organising peace marches in various state capitals and asked the party president to lead the march on December 22, the foundation day of the party. The Congress President has directed the state presidents and chief ministers to lead the agitation in their respective states on that day.

In her video address, Sonia condemned the use of violence during protests and expressed solidarity with the peaceful protesters.

"The CAA is discriminatory and the proposed NRC will target the poor and vulnerable sections of the society."

The Congress, which has not been directly involved in the protests so far with only a few leaders participating, has now come at the forefront of the agitation with its party chief expressing her support to the nationwide stir.

At a meeting of the party's core group on Thursday, many leaders, including General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi, had suggested that the party should support the anti-CAA agitation. The ruling BJP, on the other hand, has long been accusing the Congress of instigating the protests.

(with inputs from PTI and IANS)

Latest India News
