Protest against citizenship rules spreads all over India

Protest against citizenship rules spreads all over India

Even while the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) 2019 was being discussed in the two houses of parliament before it was passed, massive protest rallies and demonstrations were being held in the north-eastern states particularly in Assam where people's fury seems to be seeing no end.

One of the biggest blow to the ruling BJP came from none other than its ally-Asom Gana Parishad (AGP)- in the coalition government in Assam which said that it is going to move to the Supreme Court to challenge the validity of the CAA.

The government has already notified the Act but protests are not stopping despite heavy deployment for central security forces and the Army.

Even Prime Minister Narendra Modi's appeal to Northeast to have trust in him are falling on deaf ears. Addressing an election rally at Dhanbad, Modi devoted much of his speech allaying fears of the northeastern states. "I want to assure every state, every tribal society in the northeast and the eastern part of the country including Assam that preserving their culture is our priority".

"Today I appeal to my brothers and sisters of Assam to have faith in Modi. No harm will come to them and their traditions, culture and way of living", the Prime Minister said on December 12 but agitation has been spreading like the wild fire. More and more areas are coming under curfew with internet and mobile services being cut.

There seems to be a realisation with both Modi and his alter ego Union Home Minister Amit Shah that they need to assuage the hurt sentiments of the people of the Northeastern region as the latter indicated at a rally on Saturday.

Earlier, Shah's trip to Meghalaya's capital Shilong on Sunday-15 December, to inspect a passing out parade at the North-East Police Academy had be cancelled. Shah's scheduled visit to Arunachal Pradesh to participate in a festival at Tawang on Monday has also been cancelled.

Northeastern states have been engulfed in violent protests over the new Citizenship Act which facilitates Indian citizenship for non-Muslims from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan who entered India before 2015. The new Citizenship Act says Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jains, Parsi and Christian refugees can apply for Indian citizenship after living in India for five years instead of 11 years earlier.

Northeasterners fear that the law will lead to legitimizing of immigrants from neighbouring Bangladesh and change the existing demographics of the region.

Continuing protests have resulted in cancellation of three high profile visits. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who was to attend a summit in Assam's Guwahati next week, has cancelled his visit. Two Bangladesh ministers too have cancelled their visits. Even the US has flagged off its concerns on the issue.

The Modi government, in its reckless pursuit of the Hinduatva agenda without thinking through its consequences on the overall socio-economic conditions, has created a situation in which native Hindus of Northeast have turned against Hindus coming from foreign lands.

Yet another unintended consequence of the BJP-led government's action isthe new lease of life to United Liberation Front ofAssam (ULFA) and secessionist tendencies in Assam that seem to gaining traction.

The situation in Bengal is also not very happy as protests on the Citizenship Amendment are spreading with one Railway station being set on fire. The BJP, in its desperation to win the coming assembly elections, is trying to woo Hindu votes in the name of a National Register of Citizenship (NRC) promising to throw out all illegal immigrants from Bangladesh but even that doesn't seem to be paying political dividends.

Enactment of the Act has also sharpened conflict between the Centre throwing a serious challenge to the federal polity of the country. Many non-BJP ruled state chief ministers who have declared that new rules of the amended Citizenship Act are not going to implemented in their states thus bringing the Centre and States against each other. The Modi government, instead of addressing the relevant issues, is flexing its muscles trying to tell states that they have to fall in line.

Resolve of the agitating students and youth in Assam is clearly demonstrated in words of former state chief minister Prafula Mahanta who said "the people of Assam are determined to defeat this divisive and unconstitutional tool called CAB. We will not relent till it is scrapped".

While violence protests against the Act are continuing in Northeast, there have been demonstrations in other parts of the country also. Delhi police had to lathicharge and use tear gas against Jamia students who were protesting against the Citizenship Act. Earlier, Delhi University teachers and students have held demonstration against the Act.

The citizenship law is being internationally criticised with more and more critical comments condemning the discriminatory character of the new Act.

Even the Human Rights office at the United Nations has expressed concern over the new law saying that it is "fundamentally discriminator in nature". "We are concerned that the new "Citizenship Amendment Act' is fundamentally discriminatory in nature. Goal of protecting persecuted groups is welcomed but the new law does not extend protection to Muslims including minority sects," the council tweeted on 13 December.

In a statement, the UN body of human rights said, "The amended law would appear to undermine the commitment to equality before the law enshrined in India's Constitution and India's obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to which India is a State party, which prohibit discrimination based on racial , ethnic or religious grounds. Although India's broader naturalization laws remain in place, these amendments will have a discriminatory effect on people's access to nationality".

While the BJP government can easily dismiss international adverse opinion but an indication of whether people have approved of the latest measure would be available on December 23 when results of the assembly elections in the state of Jharkhand are declared. Move to amend the Citizenship Act 1955 was made to reap political dividends. Prime Minister did campaign extensively in the state with focus on the issue.

—[IFS]
