People will close door on BJP: Andhra CM Naidu hits back at Amit Shah

People will close door on BJP: Andhra CM Naidu hits back at Amit Shah

"Amit Shah is speaking as if somebody is asking him to open the doors. Nobody is asking him. They should remember whom they approached in 2014," Naidu said.

news Politics

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu on Monday hit back at BJP President Amit Shah, saying people will close their doors for his party. The Telugu Desam Party (TDP) chief reacted strongly to Shah's remark that the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) has closed its doors forever for him.

"Amit Shah is speaking as if somebody is asking him to open the doors. Nobody is asking him. They should remember whom they approached in 2014," Naidu said alluding that BJP leaders came to him for an alliance.

Naidu was reacting to Shah's comments made earlier in the day during a public meeting in Srikakulam district of Andhra Pradesh.

"This highhanded and egoist behavior is not good. Where was he (Shah) before 2014. What is his history. I can speak a lot but will do it at an appropriate time," Naidu said.

He said BJP betrayed people of Andhra Pradesh and that was why TDP came out of NDA. "When we are asking what they have done for the state, instead of replying they are attacking and threatening us. We are not the one to be afraid," said Naidu.

The TDP chief said he would visit Kolkata to express solidarity with West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who was on a sit-in to protest against the Centre.

Accusing the BJP was misusing institutions to reopen old cases to target its political opponents, he termed this as a threat to democracy and said democrats should condemn and rise against this.

Naidu was in the national capital to submit a representation to the Election Commission along with leaders of other non-BJP parties.

Stating that going back to paper ballot is the only way to save democracy, Naidu said since there was no time for this, they urged the Election Commission to audit at least 50 per cent of EVMs with corresponding VVPATs in all constituencies.

Naidu's main political rival in Andhra Pradesh and YSR Congress Party President Y S Jaganmohan Reddy was also in New Delhi on Monday to meet Chief Election Commissioner.

The TDP chief lashed out at Jagan, as the leader is widely called, for the allegations that he (Naidu) was promoting police officers of his caste with an eye on the elections. "In my 40-year-long political career I have never seen such cheap politics," he said.

Naidu alleged that Jagan was trying to create rift among different castes for electoral gains.

Meanwhile, TDP activists on Monday staged a protest during BJP President Amit Shah's visit to Andhra Pradesh to express their anger over the Modi government's 'unjust' attitude towards the state.

Holding black flags and posters, the protestors raised slogans of "Amit Shah go back" near the venue of his public meeting at Palasa town in Srikakulam district. They also carried an effigy of Shah but the police seized it.

The protest led to tension in the town. Police forcibly shifted a few leaders of Telugu Desam Party (TDP) including an MLA and dispersed the demonstrators. Naidu had asked party workers to wear black badges to protest against Shah's visit.

Shah was on a day-long visit to North Andhra to interact with BJP workers in four Lok Sabha constituencies in the region. Shah was to address a public meeting. In a change of plans, he stood atop the campaign vehicle of the BJP to address the people.

IANS inputs
