Kashmir solidarity day: Pakistan reaffirms its stand on Kashmir

Srinagar

Every year on February 05, Pakistan country celebrates the day as “Kashmir Solidarity Day” when they organize protest rallies against the human rights violation in Kashmir. In different statements to the press, Pakistan President Dr Arif Alvi, Prime Minister Imran Khan, and Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi reaffirmed “Pakistan’s continued and resolute moral, diplomatic and political support to the people of Jammu and Kashmir in their valiant struggle for the fundamental right to self-determination.”

In their separate messages on Kashmir Solidarity Day on Tuesday, they said that the killing spree by the forces in Kashmir could not weaken the resolve of the people of Jammu and Kashmir.

Pakistan Presidents Message

President Dr Arif Alvi has said the indifference of the international community towards grave human rights violations in Kashmir raises doubts in the minds of the Kashmiris and hinted at the double standards where “every atrocity goes unpunished and every human rights violation uncondemned.”

“It reduces the United Nations Human Rights charter to mere verbal rhetoric,” the Pakistan President in a message on the Kashmir Solidarity Day said.

In a message, Pakistan President said February 5, offered an opportunity to pay tribute to the unparalleled commitment of the Kashmiris for the attainment of the legitimate right to self-determination.

He said that the entire Pakistani nation stands with its Kashmiri brethren in their valiant struggle to achieve the legitimate right to self-determination.

“We reassure our Kashmiri brothers and sisters that we will remain consistent in our principled position on Kashmir,” he said. “It is our firm belief that the Kashmiris will succeed in their struggle.”

Pakistan PM s Message

PM Imran Khan in his message said that the observance of the ‘Kashmir Solidarity Day’ commemorates the strong and unflinching resolve of the Kashmiris to achieve the inalienable right to self-determination.

He said the people of Pakistan join their Kashmiri brothers and sisters in observing ‘Kashmir Solidarity Day’ today (Tuesday) to reaffirm our moral, diplomatic and political support to the legitimate struggle of the Kashmiri people for their basic human rights, especially the right to self-determination enshrined in the relevant UN Security Council resolutions.

The statement quoted Imran as having said that “the resolution of the Kashmiris had not weakened rather strengthened with every passing day and with each new act of Indian cruelty in the Jammu and Kashmir.”

According to the statement, he said for the last seven decades India has denied the valiant people of Jammu and Kashmir the right to self-determination promised to them by the international community through numerous UN Security Council resolutions.

He said the report of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) on Jammu and Kashmir echoed Pakistan’s repeated calls to the international community to take stock of India’s brutal use of pellet guns, indiscriminate firing, use of human shields and promulgation of the draconian Armed Force Special Powers Act (AFSPA) and Public Safety Act (PSA) that were making lives of the people in Jammu and Kashmir a living hell.

“Ruthless killings, pellet injuries to children and infants, rapes and torture; Indian atrocities in Jammu and Kashmir continue unabated and so does the spirit and courage of Kashmiris in their fight to achieve the legitimate right to self-determination,” he added.

Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi

Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi in a special message on ‘Kashmir Solidarity Day’ said that the Government and the people of Pakistan re-affirm their unflinching support to the people of the Jammu and Kashmir in their just and legitimate struggle for self-determination.

The Pakistan office quoted Qureshi in a statement having said that “India’s consistent denial of this right recognized by the United Nations Security Council resolutions is a telling example of impunity. The human rights violations in Jammu and Kashmir are a blot on the conscience of humanity and demand immediate corrective action by the international community.”

“The Reports of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on Jammu and Kashmir and the UK’s All Parties Parliamentary Kashmir Group (APPKG) have lifted the veil off decades of obfuscation by India of massive human rights violations and unspeakable crimes against humanity in Jammu and Kashmir,” the statement reads.

“Pakistan remains committed to finding a just and peaceful resolution to this long-standing dispute. Our principled position on the Jammu and Kashmir dispute is based on none other than the United Nations Security Council resolutions. These resolutions provide for the final disposition of Jammu and Kashmir dispute through a free and impartial plebiscite under the auspices of the United Nations,” said Qureshi according to the statement.

“Jammu & Kashmir is the core dispute between Pakistan and India. The dream of peace and prosperity of the people of this region will remain elusive without resolving this dispute in accordance with the aspirations of its people. The world community should not forget its obligation towards the people of Jammu and Kashmir and understand that continued apathy to the sufferings of the Kashmiri people could have disastrous consequences not only for the region but potentially for the world at large,” he said in his message.

“As far as the role of Pakistan is concerned, we would continue to pursue a steadfast policy of extending political, moral and diplomatic support to the people of Jammu and Kashmir in their just struggle for the right to self-determination,” the Pakistan foreign office quoted Qureshi as saying.
