Four cyber scammers, including two Nigerians, held for looting Rs. 5.58 lakh from city homemaker

Mumbai

scammers

Nigerian

Indian herbal oil

cyber police station

DCP

Vishal Thakur

cyber

: Four cyber, including twonationals, who looted over Rs. 5.58 lakh from a housewife in the city under the pretext of exporting, were nabbed by the, on Friday.Deputy Commissioner of Police (), Cyber,told Mirror Online that Anthony Gazi (27), William Igahe alias Willi (41) (both Nigerians), Dilawar Noormohammad Shaikh (21) and Manju Noormohammad Shaikh (20) were nabbed from a hideout in Nalasopara from where they ran the con operation. A hunt is on to track down other members of the gang, he added.Thakur said that almost three months back, one of the gang members had befriended the home-maker from western suburbs and her husband over a social networking site, by posing as a female executive in a London-based multinational company dealing in herbal products. Through subsequent chats, the imposter allegedly told the victim that the company sources herbal oil from India at a premium price. "She then asked the victim if the later could directly source the raw material from the supplier in India at a cheaper price and supply it to the company for a hefty premium," Thakur said. The imposter also provided the victim with the contact number of the supplier to facilitate the deal."The unsuspecting victim fell into the trap and put the order for the raw material (herbal oil) after depositing the amount (Rs. 5.58 lakh) in installments," Thakur said. Interestingly, the victim had received around 3 litres of vegetable oil via courier from the unknown supplier after depositing the amount. However, when the imposter did not respond to messages over the social networking site about the delivery, the home-maker realised that she had been conned. She subsequently lodged a complaint with thepolice station."Through technical and digital intelligence we managed to trace the gang from Nalasopara," Thakur said.The police have recovered 15 mobile phones, three laptops, five international dongles and three pen drives from the arrested accused. Police suspect the gang had cheated many more using the same modus operandi in the past.
