Call of duty towards nation

Call of duty towards nation 'Citizenship (Amendment) Act is unconstitutional and the leaders rooting for it should first read the Constitution'

| Calcutta | Published 20.12.19, 10:54 PM

READ THE CONSTITUTION A group of schoolteachers decided to join the protest because the Citizenship (Amendment) Act is “unconstitutional” and the leaders rooting for it should “first read the Constitution”.

Advertisement

The teachers of Kolkata Public School, near Science City, said they wanted to voice their protest because the act was “discriminating” against one religion. “How can there be discrimination on the basis of religion? Our Constitution does not say that. We are educated people and they cannot make fools of us,” said Shamsher Alam, the vice-principal of the school. The teachers came with posters that called for furnishing degrees if one had to produce documents. Alam said India has been his country ever since he gained consciousness. “We have not seen Pakistan or Bangladesh. Our forefathers have always been here. What if some of our friends or those in the community have lost documents in a flood or a fire? Does that mean they cease to be Indians?” he asked. The group has been following the nationwide protests keenly and felt it is time for them to act. “If not now, then when?” said teacher Aiysha Ramiza.

THERE ARE SO MANY ISSUES TO FOCUS ON S.K. Dawood Hossein, 24, struggles to move around because of polio. But on Friday he walked 3km from his home in Topsia, with the help of crutches, to take part in the protest meeting against CAA and NRC at Park Circus Maidan. “This government is trying to exterminate Muslims. So I decided to protest and came to the meeting overcoming my physical constraints,” said Dawood, who runs a small business near his home. “It was heart-warming to see that the communities are trying to protest the move collectively.” Dawood was accompanied by a friend who carried a poster with the slogan “Ready to die, but not ready to accept CAB”. He wondered why the government was trying to drive a wedge between Hindus and Muslims who have co-existed peacefully in the country so far. “There are so many issues to focus on, such as controlling price hike of basic amenities and bringing business to the country. Instead, the government is creating tension,” he said. “It was heart-warming to see that the communities are trying to protest the move collectively,” he said.
