Autorickshaw unions stage protest against Hyderabad traffic police's 'My Auto is Safe' initiative

The project is aimed at making passengers feel safe while travelling in the autos, reducing crime rates and controlling traffic violations by drivers (Representative image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Hyderabad: The city police's initiative to register autorickshaws under the 'My Auto is Safe' project is witnessing an opposition by the autorickshaw unions. The unions plan to stage a protest on Tuesday. The project is aimed at making passengers feel safe while travelling in the autos, reducing crime rates and controlling traffic violations by drivers.

Deputy Commissioner of Police traffic-1, LS Chauhan, said that about 11,000 of the one lakh autorickshaws in the city have registered with the project. Under the initiative, a digitised board would be installed between the seats of driver and passenger. A QR code on the board would help the passenger get the details of the auto driver. Installation of the board costs about Rs 200. A senior police official said that the Supreme Court had asked for the implementation of the project immediately.

#MyAutoIsSafe project has citizen's acceptancy. They raise their voice in favour of digitalisation of Autos. @HYDTP request citizens,

Whenever they travel in autos, insist the driver to get register under #MyAutoIsSafe project, which is aimed at Safety N Security of passengers. pic.twitter.com/5K5bDuEH82 — Hyderabad Traffic Police (@HYDTP) February 4, 2019

The city police commissioner, in a press release, said that the autos are operating in an unsafe and haphazard manner, the drivers do not have documents and proper licenses. He also pointed out to the issues that passengers face such as drivers charging undue fares, misbehaving with commuters and driving rashly.

One driver, while appreciating the project, said that 'My Auto is Safe' would benefit both passengers and drivers. He added that the cops would be able to trace his auto in case it was stolen. However, autorickshaw unions are opposing the initiative saying that they have given their details to the Road and Transport Authority (RTA) and thus they need not register with the traffic police. Telangana Auto Drivers' union JAC president B Venkatesham alleged that the police are charging Rs 250 extra from them.

Also Read: Soon, BMTC's Pink Sarathi vehicles to address concerns of female bus commuters in Bengaluru
