Cosmos Bank ex-chief faces pre-poll heat

Campaign run by friends of woman allegedly run over by Mukund Abhyankar



For Mukund Abhyankar, the former chairman of Cosmos Bank, a three-year-old hit and-run case could not have haunted him like ever before as he is seeking election on Sunday from about 60,000 members of the group. If chosen, he will be one of the board directors of the group.



Family and friends of the deceased, Arundhati Girish Hasabnis, have taken a stand against Abhyankar and they are appealing bank members not to cast their votes in his favour.



Abhyankar was arrested by Deccan police for allegedly knocking down two-wheeler rider Hasabnis with his car on Bhandarkar Road on July 17, 2016. Hasabnis lost her life in the accident after which a case under section 304 (A) for causing death due to negligence was registered against him and the case is going on in the Pune district court at present. Shortly after the incident, her family members and friends came together to form ‘Justice for Arundhati’ forum through which they have been constantly holding protest against Abhyankar.



For the elections, there are two panels, Utkarsh and Sahakar, who are contesting for the board of directors. Abhyankar is part of Utkarsh panel along with the present chairman Milind Kale. However, before the elections, the ‘Justice for Arundhati’ panel have demanded voters of Cosmos Bank not to cast vote in favour of Abhyankar. Speaking about the campaign, her husband Girish told Mirror, "I have no connection with Cosmos Bank or any of its members. Our fight is only against the person called Mukund Abhyankar who is an accused in the hit-andrun case in which I lost my wife."



Giving reason for campaigning against Abhyankar, Girish stated that the former had tried to misuse his position of Cosmos Bank when he was being arrested. "It was Abhyankar because of whom I lost my wife. When he was taken to police station on that day, he tried to throw his weight around to influence the police."



In the case, Girish stated, police submitted a charge-sheet on October 21, 2016, and 16 eyewitnesses have recorded their statements. “The hearing is going on in the court and due to the case against Abhyankar he has certain restrictions of travelling. However, when there was a cyber attack on Cosmos Bank last year, he submitted an application to the court, seeking permission to go to Hong Kong in connection with the case. However, there was no need for him to travel and the court rejected his application. These are some of the examples where he has tried to misuse the name of the bank for his personal gain and therefore we are appealing the voters to not to vote for him,” Girish said.



In the past also, members of ‘Justice for Arundhati’ have carried out protest marches against Abhyankar in various parts of the city. Nilesh Vakil, one of the members of the group, told Mirror, "We are not campaigning in favour or against any panel which are contesting the election. Our aim is to keep Abhyankar out of the directors’ board so that he cannot influence anybody for his personal gains. We are using social media to reach out to the voters and we are also trying to get their contact numbers to send them the message to appeal not to vote to him.”



When contacted, Abhyankar refuted all the allegations and claimed that he was not involved in the road mishap. “My car was not involved in the accident in which the woman died. Police registered a case on the basis of false allegations made against me. Had my car hit the woman, I would have taken her to the hospital but when she met with an accident, I was not present there.”



Reacting to the campaign started by the forum against him ahead of the election, he said, “I have a doubt that the campaign is politically motivated. The possibility of the campaign being run at the behest of the other panel cannot be ruled out.”


