Anti-CAA stir: Bengaluru students thronged to protest against CAA, NRC in Central College grounds on Friday

Citizenship Amendment Act

#AntiCAAProtests in #Netherlands: Indian students, professionals protest against the #CitizenshipAmendmentAct and… https://t.co/xMDzRYSl4L — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1576854432000

Bengaluru Central University

Anti-CAA protests: Bengaluru students protest against Citizenship Amendment Act, National Register of Citizens (NRC) at Central College Grounds 00:43

Bangalore

The government should address the issue in a better way rather than shutting our voices. It seems like we live under Draconian laws – Ranjani, MPhil student

Indians sing 'Hum honge kaamyaab ek din' & national anthem, and raise Azadi slogans to protest against #CAA_NRC in… https://t.co/8x0fSz7H00 — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1576857052000

Bengaluru

#AntiCAAProtests: Students from across Bengaluru have gathered at Central College Grounds for a peaceful protest.… https://t.co/L3F3DwXbSA — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1576847328000

B S Yediyurappa

Students say they missed out on a concert to fight for their fundamental rights. #CAA_NRC_Protests… https://t.co/YzO1fttGsU — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1576849142000

Karnataka High Court has adjourned the hearing of petitions challenging the imposition of Section 144 of the Crimin… https://t.co/2nMYrcOGbO — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1576849054000

Amid the growing ire of protesters over #CitizenshipAmendmentAct (#CAA), @BJP4Karnataka has slammed noted historian… https://t.co/lc3hLxNTAg — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1576838934000

#Bengaluru: DCP Central Chetan Singh Rathor appeals everyone not to violate #Section144. He says 8 cases were reg… https://t.co/PJscnB4qC6 — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1576834134000

#AntiCAAProtest: A single protester arrived near Bengaluru's Town Hall. Police Inspector Tanveer asked his men to s… https://t.co/gMK3zYtNnq — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1576822232000

Despite the Town Hall area being cordoned off on Friday, students thronged to protest the(CAA) in the Central College grounds.Despite a slow start to the protest and Section 144 still in effect in the State, by evening, around 400 students had gathered at the Central College grounds with placards.One of the students protesting at thegrounds held a placard that read, ‘Should have been at Prateek Kuhad concert - But that was before the country turned into a cold/mess’, alluding to Cold/Mess a song by Kuhad, who was performing in the city on Friday. Another student Charu Mishra said, “I am trying to take a light hearted approach to what is otherwise a grave situation. On Friday, we were planning to go to Prateek Kuhad concert but instead we are here to fight against CAA. We have to fight for secularism because the government is trying to divide and rule us.”Unlike Thursday, nobody was detained on Friday and the protest went on till late evening.Around 50 students of Indian Institute of Management,on Friday staged a silent protest in support of ongoing agitation against NRC and CAA. IIM-B students protested from within the campus, due to the imposition of Section 144. The students carried placards without any slogans written on them. A wheelchair-bound student was among the students who expressed their solidarity with the ongoing nation-wide agitation. On Thursday, the IIM-B students had kept their footwear outside the gate as a symbolic gesture of being out of the campus on protest. The police left the venue after the students went back into the campus.In a first, the Karnataka government on Friday declared a two-day mobile internet shutdown in Mangaluru. Cable internet, however, is still on. The Home department’s decision came after tension escalated following the death of two persons, reportedly due to a police firing on Thursday. On Friday, the situation remained tense but under control.A delegation of senior Congress leaders who landed in Mangaluru to meet the families of the two deceased and those injured in the protests were denied permission and detained at the airport in Mangaluru. The delegation included Leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Council SR Patil, former Home Minister and MLA M B Patil, former Speaker and MLA K R Ramesh Kumar and former MP V S Ugrappa. Former Chief Minister Siddaramaiah also had to cancel his trip to Mangaluru fromon getting information that the chartered aircraft he was to take was denied permission to land at the airport. Meanwhile, Siddaramaiah, who held a press conference in the city, demanded a high-level probe by a sitting HC judge into the police firing, in which two persons were killed.Scribes from Kerala who interviewed relatives of those killed in the December 19 police firing in Mangaluru during protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act were detained by the law enforcers on Friday, leading to protests in Kerala. The issue echoed at the highest level in the two states, with Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan taking up the matter with his Karnataka counterpart. Eight journalists and camera crew of Kerala-based TV channels, who had interviewed relatives of those killed in the December 19 police firing during protests against CAA were released seven hours after being detained by police in front of the Government hospital in Mangaluru on Friday, sources said. Soon after their release, Yediyurappa told reporters in Bengaluru that police had questioned some people in the backdrop of the violence in Mangaluru and on coming to know they were reporters, were escorted till the Kerala border.
