Yogi Adityanath holds rally in Purulia despite warning, says Mamata is saving a corrupt officer

highlights Top cops said that Yogi was not granted permission to hold the rally.

Bengal govt had earlier denied permission to Yogi's chopper to land.

Banerjee had earlier denied Amit Shah's chopper entry in West Bengal.

Kolkata:

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Aditynath on Tuesday slammed the Mamata government in West Bengal for not allowing his chopper to land in Balurghat for a rally. Addressing a public rally in West Bengal's Purulia, where he reached by road from Bokaro in Jharkhand, he said poor people have been exploited under the Mamata Banerjee's rule in the state, she is trying to protect officer allegedly involved in Saradha scam. Earlier in the day, senior police officials on Tuesday said that the UP chief minister was not granted permission to hold the rally. "Action will be taken against the Chief Minister if holds the rally," said Superintendent of Police, Purulia.

The state government had earlier denied permission to Yogi's chopper to land in Bengal where he was scheduled to address rallies. Following which, Adityanath's chopper will be landing in Jharkhand from where he will be taking roadway to reach Purulia.

Earlier, the UP chief minister who was scheduled to address the "Ganatantra Bachao Rally" at Balurghat in South Dinajpur district on Sunday could not attend the rally after permission was denied for his chopper to land near the venue.

"The TMC government didn't allow me to come and meet you all. That is why I had to resort to Digital India of Modiji to address you. This TMC government is anti-people, anti-democratic and have compromised with national security," Adityanath said while addressing the rally via the audio link. "The TMC government is afraid of the BJP as it very well knows that its days in Bengal are numbered," he said.

Yogi Adityanath holds rally in West Bengal's Purulia | Highlights:

17:12 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In "Poor people have been exploited under the Mamata Banerjee's rule, she is trying to protect officer allegedly involved in Saradha scam," says Yogi Adityanath.

16:55 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In "Nothing can be more shameful for a democracy than a Chief Minister sitting on a dharna," says Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath in Purulia, West Bengal.



Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath in Purulia, West Bengal: Nothing can be more shameful for a democracy than a Chief Minister sitting on a dharna. pic.twitter.com/5HKFsKDbmx

— ANI (@ANI) February 5, 2019



16:54 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Mamata Banerjee is trying to save a man accused in the Saradha chit fund scam, says Yogi Adityanath referring to Kolkata police commissioner Rajeev Kumar

16:43 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In UP CM Yogi Adityanath on his way to Purulia, WB from Bokaro, Jharkhand: This (West Bengal) government is embroiled in undemocratic and unconstitutional activities and that is the reason why a 'sanyasi' and 'yogi' like me is not being allowed to step on the soil of Bengal.



UP CM Yogi Adityanath on his way to Purulia, WB from Bokaro, Jharkhand: This (West Bengal) government is embroiled in undemocratic and unconstitutional activities and that is the reason why a 'sanyasi' and 'yogi' like me is not being allowed to step on the soil of Bengal. pic.twitter.com/pgS64tqz2T

— ANI (@ANI) February 5, 2019



16:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Yogi Adityanath enters West Bengal. He is on his way to Purulia to address a public meeting.



#ModiVsDidi | Yogi Adityanath enters West Bengal. He is on his way to Purulia to address a public meeting.



Follow LIVE updates: https://t.co/CMmIINB1b7 pic.twitter.com/FgqXacjrY8

— News Nation (@NewsNationTV) February 5, 2019



16:13 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Jharkhand: UP CM Yogi Adityanath's convoy en route from Bokaro to Purulia in West Bengal where he will address a public rally.



Jharkhand: UP CM @myogiadityanath arrives in Bokaro. He will leave for Purulia, West Bengal by road to address a public rally there.



ðŸ“¸: ANI



Follow LIVE updates here: https://t.co/CMmIINB1b7 pic.twitter.com/Xgxrw2r7MU

— News Nation (@NewsNationTV) February 5, 2019



15:50 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath's chopper lands in Bokaro. He will now proceed to Purilia by road.

15:15 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Action will be taken against Yogi if he holds the rally," said Superintendent of Police, Purulia.

15:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Mamata Banerjee had earlier denied Amit Shah's chopper entry in West Bengal for his rally on January 21.

15:00 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In “You can see democracy is being murdered. Anybody from any political party can go anywhere in country. CM of an elected govt of largest state isn't being permitted to land there and address rally but he will go via Jharkhand. People of Purulia are waiting for him,” Jharkhand CM Raghubar Das.



Jharkhand CM on UP CM: You can see democracy is being murdered. Anybody from any political party can go anywhere in country. CM of an elected govt of largest state isn't being permitted to land there&address rally but he'll go via Jharkhand. People of Purulia are waiting for him. pic.twitter.com/up8v3qdh2Z

— ANI (@ANI) February 5, 2019



14:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In There is no democracy in Mamata's government and then she is talking about democracy, Dilip Ghosh, West Bengal BJP chief.

14:56 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Earlier, the West Bengal government has denied permission to Yogi’s chopper to land in the state.
