Protests in Delhi: 40 detained, Chandrashekhar Azad taken into custody

Here's how the day unfolded

Live updates:

Priyanka

Gandhi

NEW DELHI: The Delhi Police detained at least 40 people on Friday after largely peaceful protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act across the national capital took an ugly turn when a group of protesters went on the rampage in Daryaganj, setting a car on fire and pelting stones at the cops. Bhim army chief Chandrashekhar Azad , who led a protest march at the Jama Masjid earlier in the day, was among those detained during yesterday's protests.* Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad dramatically appeared at the protest in Jama Masjid in the morning, slipping away before police could nab him.* People also protested at India Gate and Jamia Millia Islamia , besides Seelampur and Seemapuri in east Delhi.* Around 2pm, the protesters at Jama Masjid decided to march to Jantar Mantar, but were stopped by the cops near Delhi Gate. They were joined there by residents of Daryaganj. When the swelling crowd threatened to break past the barricades, police moved in water cannons and riot control vehicles. At least 45 people, including 12 cops, were injured in the violence.* Azad, who had managed to reach the mosque despite efforts by the police to stop him, read out the Preamble to the Constitution on Jama Masjid's steps. Following that he was detained, but his supporters freed him and spirited him away.* Police requested local leaders for help in controlling the protest. Accordingly, around 4.30pm, the imam of a local mosque appealed to the protesters to offer namaz and return home. The crowd did offer prayers, but stayed put at the site. Azad reappeared again and addressed the crowd.* Soon after, groups began marching to Delhi Gate with candles in their hands. According to police, one of the groups threw petrol on a car parked near the DCP’s office in Daryaganj and set it afire. When the cops intervened, others started pelting stones, forcing them to use a water cannon and cane-charge the crowd.* Within the hour, police rounded up the men alleged to have burnt the car as well as some others who had thrown stones at the cops. They were booked for rioting, arson, damaging property, attempt to murder, damaging public property and obstructing a public servant from discharging his duty.* Among the 40 people rounded up by the police, six were found to be juveniles. They were medically examined by the police and handed over to their parents after verification.* The roads to Daryaganj and Chandni Mahal were closed to hem in the rioters. Police sources claimed that some of those arrested had come from north-east Delhi with the sole purpose of creating a disturbance.* Meanwhile, Congress general secretaryVadra, accompanied by her daughter Miraya, joined protesters at the India gate lawns in the evening.* Azad was taken into police custody from outside the Jama Masjid in the early hours of Saturday morning.
