Indian-Americans, students protest against Citizenship Act in the US

Indian-Americans, students protest against Citizenship Act in the US

Chicago : Indian-Americans and Indian students were seen protesting in a peaceful manner against the Citizenship Amendment Act in the US cities of Chicago and Boston.

The protesters held a protest march from the Indian consulate from the Tribune Tower in Chicago.

"Chicago condemns the egregious behaviour of the Indian government," the protesting students said in a statement.

"We are outraged by the violence and actively condemn the brutality inflicted upon students at Jamia Milia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University (AMU)," said the Indian students in Chicago.

Indian-American Muslim Council (IAMC) also strongly condemned the reports of brutality against the students of Jamia Millia Islamia and AMU in India.

"We have watched this tragic unfolding of events with great concern and anguish. The all India National Register of Citizens (NRC) and Citizenship Amendment Law will have a primal impact on the Indian polity. This is a step towards rupturing India''s social fabric and students should at the very least have the democratic right to protest," said IAMC president Ahsan Khan.

Rozina Amin Zama from Indian American Muslims Council Boston Chapter, which is a part of the The Boston Coalition, said, "The religious test of CAB is without a doubt unconstitutional and goes against universally accepted human rights framework. For example the Hindus and Buddhists from Sri Lanka, Atheists from Bangladesh, and Ahmadi Muslims from Pakistan are excluded while the Indian government claims to protect its minorities."

According to the passed Citizenship Amendment Bill, Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities - who migrated in India from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014 following religious persecution - will be granted Indian citizenship.

The protesters have been claiming that segregation based on religion is unconstitutional.
