Delhi Metro update: Commuters breathe easy as services resume on Saturday morning

Delhi Metro update [Photo: Twitter]

Key Highlights All metro stations have been opened and normal services have resumed in all stations in the national capital On Friday, several metro stations including Jama Masjid, Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi Gate among other were shut in view of massive protests in Delhi against CAA Over the past week, DMRC has shut several stations on orders of Delhi Police, in an attempt to restrict movement of people who intend to participate in the CAA protests

New Delhi: The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), on Saturday informed that all 285 metro stations have been opened and normal services have resumed in the national capital. India’s largest metro network closed entry and exit points of several metro stations on Friday in order to restrict the movement of people who intended to participate in the protests against the amended Citizenship Act.

Security Update



Entry & exit gates at all stations have been opened.



Normal services have resumed in all stations. — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 21, 2019

Over the past week, the DMRC had shut several stations near the areas where demonstrations were taking place as a part of safety and security measures.

On Friday, as many as 13 metro stations were shut in view of the ongoing protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 (CAA). Metro Stations including Chawri Bazar, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid & Delhi Gate on violet line, Jaffrabad & Maujpur-Babarpur on pink line and Jamia Millia Islamia on the magenta line were closed as per instructions of security agencies to DMRC.

DMRC through its official Twitter handle, at different times on Friday, informed that exit and entry at Kashmere Gate, Central Secretariat, Mandi House, and Rajiv Chowk was closed but the interchange facility was available at these stations.

However, in the evening by 7:30 pm on Friday, DMRC reopened entry and exit at all stations except Jama Masjid, Jaffrabad, and Maujpur-Babarpur.

On Thursday, cellular internet and calling services were suspended in several parts of the capital owing to anti-CAA protests. Prohibitory orders under Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code were imposed as an attempt to control the protesters.

People defied the restrictions and took to streets to march against the CAA. Several political leaders and activists including D Raja, Sitaram Yechury, Nilotpal Basu, Yogendra Yada, Brinda Karat, and others were detained at Mandi House and were forcibly put in buses.

Mega anti-CAA protests continue to flare up across the country ever since parliament passed the contentious legislation.
