CAA protests worsen: Child among five killed in clashes

CAA protests worsen: Child among five killed in clashes

The latest deaths have taken the toll from the violence to 20.

By Reuters Published: Sat 21 Dec 2019, 9:02 AM Last updated: Sat 21 Dec 2019, 5:48 PM

An eight-year-old boy and four protesters have been killed in India in clashes between police and demonstrators, officials said Saturday, as unrest over a controversial citizenship law rages into a second week.

The latest deaths have taken the toll from the violence to 20.

The four protesters died after suffering bullet wounds when demonstrations turned violent on Friday in Uttar Pradesh, the state’s police spokesman Shirish Chandra told AFP.

The boy died in a stampede during a large rally of 2,500 people in the holy city of Varanasi, district police chief Prabhakar Chaudhary said.

Modi summons ministers to discuss security



India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi called a meeting with his council of ministers to discuss the security situation in the country following protests against a controversial citizenship law, said two government sources.

At least 14 people have been killed in violent clashes between the police and protesters since parliament last week passed a contentious citizenship law, that critics say discriminates against Muslims and undermines the country's secular constitution.

Bhim Army leader Chandrashekhar detained, 10 more held



Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad, who was protesting at the Jama Masjid against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and National Register of Citizens, was detained Friday late night, a police official said.

Ten more people were also arrested in Daryaganj area in violence related incidents, he added.



Ten people have died in Uttar Pradesh in various incidents of violent protest against the new Citizenship Act. Two persons died each in Firozabad, Kanpur, Bijnor, Sambhal and Meerut.

Amid the raging protests, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath appealed to people to maintain peace and do not believe in any rumours. "No one should take the law into their hands," Adityanath said in a statement.

The Chief Minister has also directed police to search for those who are misleading people regarding the Act and spreading rumours and causing violence.

On Friday, police-protestors clashes erupted in different districts of Uttar Pradesh including Bahraich, Bareilly, Varanasi, Bhadohi, Gorakhpur, Sambhal etc.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, seeks to grant citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Parsis, Buddhists and Christians fleeing religious persecution from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh and came to India on or before December 31, 2014.

Section-144, prohibiting the assembly of more than four people in an area, was imposed in various parts of the state in view of the law and order situation.


