Anti-CAA protests rage across Rajasthan

JAIPUR: BJP held a massive protest march against the Gehlot government for opposing CAA and NRC in Jaipur on Friday. State BJP president Satish Poonia has held those who are opposing the CAA responsible for disrupting peace and harmony of the country. He cleared that Gehlot government cannot escape from the Act as it will be unconstitutional for any state to oppose the law that deals with a Central government subject. The protest march began from the BJP headquarters to Saheed Samarak at 11 am. Here the party leaders paid floral tributes at the Samarak and proceeded towards civil lines Phatak for a public address.Former CM Vasundhara Raje joined the leaders at Civil Lines. Here the leaders gave fiery speeches against the Congress and the civil society leaders for opposing the CAA. Taking the lead, Poonia said that country belongs to those Muslims who patriots. “India belongs to Muslims like former president APJ Abdul Kalam, freedom fighter Ashfaqullah Khan and Param Vir Chakra recipient Abdul Hamid Khan. Those (Muslims) who will believe in the constitution and is a patriot will live in India. Those (Muslims) who are against the country, constitution, Modi (PM)….i have come to know that those who are against the nation are holding a march on December 22. If you (Gehlot) have the courage then stop those anti-nationals (from holding the protest),” said Poonia. Muslim groups in Jaipur have called for a protest march on Sunday.The protest march of BJP was attended by almost all senior leaders. Former chief minister Vasundhara Raje recalled her emotional experience of meeting with illegal immigrants from Pakistan in Jodhpur . “I literally cried to hear the gory stories of illegal migrants during my first tenure as a CM. Until this act comes into existence, we did it all to help them during the Atal Bihari Vajpayee rule. It resulted in camps for these people. Our efforts have resulted into citizenship of 13,000 people. By opposing this act, Congress is misleading people and causing great injustice to these people,” said Raje.Clearing the air of confusion, Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said that India belongs to Muslims as much as it belongs to Hindus. “The law is not applicable to any existing citizen of this country. We do not believe in the vote bank politics and those who are opposing should understand that it is not against any community. Modi government sees every citizen as an India,” said Prasad. The protest was attended by Jal Shakti minister Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, former BJP state president Ashok Parnami and leader of opposition Gulab Chand Kataria to name a few.
