Sonia Gandhi Decries Use of 'Brute Force', Supports Citizens' Right to Dissent

New Delhi: In the light of the second day of massive public protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act in various parts of New Delhi and across large swathes of the country, Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi issued a public statement, expressing “deep anguish” at the use of “brute force” to “suppress dissent”.

Gandhi, who read out her statement in a video shared by the Indian National Congress from its official social media handles, said, “In a democracy, people have a right to raise their voice against the wrong decisions and policies of the government and register their concerns equally. It is the duty of the government to listen to the citizens and address their concerns.”

In a democracy people have the right to raise their voice against wrong decisions & policies of the govt & register their concerns… BJP govt has shown utter disregard for people’s voices & chosen to use brute force to suppress dissent: CP Smt. Sonia Gandhi #IndiaAgainstCAA pic.twitter.com/5AKOpn76Dx — Congress (@INCIndia) December 20, 2019

She said the government has shown “utter disregard to these voices” and “chosen to use brute force to suppress dissent”.

“This is unacceptable in a democracy,” she said, adding that her party condemns the actions and “expresses solidarity with the students and citizens of India in their just struggle”.

Also read: BJP Worker, Supporters ‘in Skullcaps’ Held for Pelting Stones on Train, Says Report

Terming the “spontaneous” protests in “universities, IITs, IIMs, and other leading academic institutions against the divisive and anti-people agenda of the BJP government”, the Congress leader said people’s apprehensions “are real and legitimate”.

“The Congress party assures the people of India that it is fully committed to stand up and defend their fundamental rights and uphold the foundational values of our constitution,” she added.

Gandhi called the Act “discriminatory”, and said that the proposed countrywide National Register of Citizens “would particularly hurt the poor and the vulnerable like at the time of notebandi (demonetisation).”
