'Entire Country Is Weeping & Burning', Bollywood Celebs Express Concern Over CAA & NRC Protests

UPDATE: A spokesperson from the Women & Child Development Department of Haryana Government recently issued a clarification on why Parineeti Chopra is no longer the face of Beti Bachao Beti Padhao campaign.

There's widespread unrest in the nation and people are taking to streets to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) as well National Register Of Citizens (NRC).

The protests have turned violent with about 14 protesters reported dead and more than 4,000 detained, reports AP.

But people haven't given up. Not only the students and opposition, even the celebrities are expressing their concern over the current situation in the nation.



Many of them including, Jim Sarbh, Farhan Akhtar, Swara Bhasker, Huma Qureshi, Suhasini Mulay, Kabir Khan, Siddharth, Rahul Bose, Konkona Sen Sharma, Javed Jaffrey, Sanjay Suri, Sushant Singh and Anubhav Sinha among others took part in the protest against CAA and NRC on Dec 19.



Twitter

Expressing concern over the nationwide protests, Mukesh Bhatt recently said, "the country is weeping".

"I am personally very upset from CAA. Entire country is weeping, entire country is burning. If you still can't see anything then it is unfortunate. If this is happening in our entire country and our young children have took to the streets then we have to notice that something is wrong," he was quoted as saying by ANI.



cinestaan.com

Condemning violence during protests, Bhatt said, "I am against violence but with the protests that are taking place, the government has to notice that why is it happening."



BCCL

Filmmaker Vishal Bhardwaj also shared his opinion on the current political situation and told IANS, "The current scenario is grim as people are being divided on the basis of religion, which is not the India I grew up in."

Sushant Singh, who also took part in the protests said, “I want to tell people that everyone has their viewpoint and we all need to respect each other’s views. Celebrities who are talking against it (CAA), they are with you (people), so appreciate that. We shouldn’t have any problem with celebrities who are not expressing their opinions. Whenever a revolution has happened — not just in India — it hasn’t been brought by celebrities. It has been brought by the youth of the country, whether it was our fight for freedom or anything else. Now, too, the youth is opposing the government through peaceful protests.”



Taapsee Pannu thinks something big is going to happen soon.

"I haven't expressed my views on CAA because I haven't studied about it. But the visuals which I saw in Jamia, I didn't feel those were pleasant. I felt really sad when I saw the videos where students were talking about their plight. I feel something big has happened or something big is going to happen," she was quoted as saying by IANS.



Meanwhile, a complaint has been filed against Farhan Akhtar and an FIR has been lodged against actor Siddharth and 599 others. Two days back reports surfaced saying that Parineeti Chopra had been removed as the face of Beti Bachao Beti Padhao campaign after her anti-CAA tweet. Now, a spokesperson from the Women & Child Development Department of Haryana Government recently issued a clarification.



The statement read, “News of Parineeti Chopra being dropped (for tweeting against #CAA) as brand ambassador of 'Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao' is false, baseless and malicious. MOU was for 1 year, till April, 2017.Thereafter MOU was never renewed.”


