After Siddharth, Complaint Against Farhan For Posting 'Seditious' Tweet & 'Causing Fear'

One day after an FIR was lodged against Rang De Basanti actor Siddharth, a complaint has been filed against Bollywood actor Farhan Akhtar as well.

bccl

Advocate Karuna Sagar Kashimshetty has filed the complaint against Farhan for allegedly posting a "seditious" tweet, creating fear, chaos and thereby "instigating" Muslims, transgender, atheists, Dalits to wage war against Nation which may lead to anarchy and also for promoting enmity between communities.



Kashimshetty has requested the police to take necessary legal action against the actor under Section 121, 121 (A), 120 (B) 505 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Srinivas, Circle Inspector of Saidabad Police Station, told ANI, "Today we had received a complaint from an Advocate, Karuna Sagar stating that while he was browsing the net he noticed Bollywood Actor Farhan Akhtar has posted alleged seditious tweet on his official twitter handle, creating fear, chaos and thereby instigating Muslims, transgender, atheists and Dalits to wage war against the nation."



"This may lead to anarchy and also for promoting enmity between the different communities. We have made a Police General Diary entry and we will be taking legal opinion in the issue and will proceed further in the case," he added.



indianexpress.com

"While I was browsing my twitter account I saw a tweet posted on Farhan Akhtar's twitter handle dated December 18, saying--Here's what you need to know about why these protests are important. See you on the 19th at August Kranti Maidan, Mumbai.



"The time to protest on social media alone is over" along with a picture having a message that --the recently enacted Citizenship Amendment Act 2019, will inhumanly exclude Muslims, transgender, atheists, Dalits and landless without documents, and also that they could be jailed deported and placed in camps," Kashimshetty stated in his complaint.



TOI

The complaint further read, "With intent to cause fear and alarm to the public and induced to commit an offence against the State or against the public tranquillity and more particularly instigating Muslims, transgender, atheists, Dalits to wage war against Nation which may lead to chaos and anarchy and also the picture contained the distorted map of India showing PoK and Aksai chin separately, which is an act of sedition."



According to Kashimshetty, Farhan Akhtar had deliberately posted the picture on his Twitter handle in order to create fear and instigated people of different communities, after which several protesters all over India indulged in violence.



This comes a day after actor Siddharth, TM Krishna and MP Thirumavalavanand Americai Narayanan were named among 600 people against whom FIR has been lodged. They all were accused of "unlawful assembly" and "staging protest" defying orders at Valluvar Kottam in Chennai on Thursday.



On the other hand, Parineeti Chopra who was the face of Beti Bachao Beti Padhao campaign in Haryana, has reportedly been removed as the brand ambassador after her tweet against CAA. However, nothing as of now can be confirmed or said to be true.














