India‘s protests have breaking Indian forces behind them

Freelance journalist Ashali Varma has authored the biography of her father late Lt. Gen. PS Bhagat — ‘The Victoria Cross: A Love Story’. She was executive producer with the International Commentary Service Inc, New York in 1990. She was the executive publisher of The Earth Times, New York (1992- 98). She has also worked as the editor of Choices Magazine, United Nations Development Programme. She writes on various issues including human rights, population and sustainable development. LESS ... MORE

After days of protests it is pertinent to notice that leaders of the protests are known Congress sycophants, along with communists and opposition that hate the strides India has made under the BJP.

There have been a number of major changes brought by the BJP since it’s overwhelming victory in 2019. The first was the dilution of article 370 and the negation of article 35A. This was termed as high handedness although it was passed by a two third majority both by the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha. Mehbooba Mufti, the last CM of Jammu and Kashmir said that if this came through India would burn . But nothing happened. The Kashmir valley was calm and the locals happy that finally they did not have to face terror on a daily basis from across the border.

In fact the people of J&K are happy that dynasties ruling over them are finally out of the scene . They did little for their development or well being but instead built themselves estates in India and abroad from the large amounts of monies sent by the Central Government, to bring about prosperity in the region.

Than came the Ram Janam Bhoomi case where the court declared that the original area had a temple, which was an archeological find and Babur’s minister had broken it to build the Babri Masjid. It took long years for the court to give this verdict and finally when it was given, again the Breaking India forces said there would be riots and bloodshed but it went off without any such thing.

In Fact, both the Muslims and Hindus heaved a sigh of relief and distributed sweets and came together though politicians like Owaisi screamed— I want my Masjid back — but soon learnt to shut up as no one was behind him.

Today with the Citizen Amendment Act, there have been many like Owaisi trying to muddy the waters and rile up the minority community saying their rights will be taken from them even though the CAA does not mention Muslims at all and only those Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsees and Christians that have been denied their rights to worship and have been discriminated against in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. These are a very small number that managed to escape to India and have been living in limbo for several decades. They were not given citizenship in India or allowed to work or own any land. Finally they will get justice.

Why would Ramchandra Guha, Barkha Dutt or Owaisi mind this humanitarian gesture for people who had escaped an environment where they were daily discriminated against and where their places of worship were bombed and many were killed in such horrific blasts.

They say that the Bill should include persecuted Muslims from neighbouring countries which follow Islam and have a majority of Muslims. But they don’t say that the Muslims in these countries are first class citizens and have the rule of law and courts to take up their cases whereas the minorities are stigmatised and few lawyers can take up their cases as than the lawyers too become tarred as anti Muslim. To say Muslims are unhappy and discriminated and harassed in their own countries would be like saying these countries are not following the true tenets of Islam and interfering in their politics.

How can India do this and why should it?

The CAA has been passed democratically by both Houses of Parliament. The plight of minorities living in Pakistan was first brought up by PM Nehru, and than onwards by many governments. Finally in 2003 by the Congress under PM Manmohan Singh, who declared that India must take responsibility for its minorities in neighbouring countries but none on the political parties put their concerns into practise and now that the BJP has done it, why are they screaming it is anti- Muslim even though it does not concern Muslim citizens in India at all.

Yet we see riots , protests breaking out in Muslim institutions led by politicians who are openly scare mongering and inciting hatred against the very land that has been their country not only since 1947 but for hundreds of years before .

I miss our President Abdul Kalam as he would have been able to rise above politics and give our misguided youth and political dissidents the truth. He was after all India’s People President and never minced his words to tell the youth and Indians what they owed to this great democracy . He was loved by all, old, young, the poor and the rich, because he spoke the truth.

He would be truly grieved by the way the opposition and the vested interests are trying to rile up the youth. It seems they will do anything for power. Anything to break up India as they have no stake in this great civilisation. They would rather make us forget our past and break us into several small states. This is their endeavour. They work with India’s enemies; they write against India in illustrious newspapers and magazines abroad in order to get world opinion against us. For them India must never become a world power. They would rather bat for China and Pakistan.

For such people who call themselves the intelligentsia of India, I have nothing but contempt for they play with our democratic freedoms to speak against us and destroy us from within. They are worse than our external enemies for they try and weaken us from inside. All democracies have such people but it is now time for us to name and shame them for their what they truly are.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
