Top 10 Weekly Current Affairs: 16 December to 21 December 2019

What is the difference between CAB and NRC?

The passage of the Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2019 or CAA recently instigated violent protests across various parts of India including the National Capital Delhi, leading to police atrocities on Jamia Millia Islamia's students. The country also saw protests against the National Register of Citizens- NRC.

Kuldeep Yadav becomes first Indian bowler to take two ODI hat-tricks

Indian bowler Kuldeep Yadav became the first to take two ODI hat-tricks. Internationally, Yadav became the sixth bowler to achieve the feat. The other bowlers are Lasith Malinga, Chaminda Vaas, Wasim Akram, Saqlain Mushtaq and Trent Boult.

Jharkhand Election Result 2019 – All You Need To Know

Jharkhand Assembly Elections 2019 concluded successfully on December 20, 2019. The State saw the polling in separate five phases for 81 constituencies. Check here the complete details of the Jharkhand Elections including the exit polls.

Donald Trump Impeached: Motion passes in House, Know what will happen next

The House of Representatives of the United States recently voted in favour of the impeachment of President Donald Trump for misuse of power. The US house had voted 229-197 for Trump’s abuse of power.

Sahitya Akademi Awards 2019: Cong MP Shashi Tharoor, 22 writers among winners, Get Complete List of Winners Here

India's National Academy of Letters, Sahitya Academy has announced the winners of Sahitya Akademi Awards 2019. This year, the academy has awarded a total of 25 writers, including Congress MP Shashi Tharoor.

Cyrus Mistry reinstated as Tata Sons’ Executive Chairman

Cyrus Mistry was reinstated as the Executive Chairman of the Tata Sons by the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. Mistry was abruptly removed from the company in 2016, following basis the former Chairman Ratan Tata was recalled to serve the position on an interim basis.

Jamia Violence: Delhi HC to take up plea against police crackdown on Jamia students

The Delhi High Court will be hearing the petition against the police atrocities on Jamia Milia Islamia University students. The petition seeks to constitute a fact-finding committee for inquiring police crackdown. The Jamia students were protesting against the CAA - Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019.

WEF Gender Gap Index: India slips to 112th rank, in bottom 5 on health, economic fronts

The World Economic Forum (WEF) recently released the Gender Gap Index 2019. India slipped to 112th position in the index this year. Iceland has been ranked as the most gender-neutral country.

SC sets up committee for speedy disposal of rape cases

The Supreme Court recently constituted a two-judge committee comprising ustices R Subhash Reddy and MR Shah for speedy disposal of rape cases in India. The rape cases will now be monitored at the High Courts.

Jamaica's Toni-Ann Singh Crowned Miss World 2019, Suman Rao finishes third

Jamaica-based Toni Ann Singh has been crowned as the Miss World 2019, defeating Miss France Opélie Mezzino and Miss India Suman Rao, the first and second runner-ups.
