Anti-CAA Protests: 15 Held In Connection With Daryaganj Violence Sent To 2-Day Judicial Custody

New Delhi :

The Delhi Police on Saturday produced 15 people arrested in connection with the violence in the capital city’s Daryaganj area before a city court. They have been sent on a two-day judicial custody. The police had sought 14 days’ judicial custody of the accused. One of the arrested persons said that he is a juvenile but police denied his claim and said he is 23-year-old. In Seelampur violence case, the court has sent all accused to 14 days judicial custody with right to move bail immediately.

Violence had erupted in Old Delhi’s Daryaganj area on Friday during protests against the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act, the excludes Muslims while granting Indian citizenship to illegal immigrants from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh. The protests which started after the Friday prayers at historic Jama Masjid were peaceful throughout the day. However, they turned violent in the evening and at least one police vehicle was torched. The police then resorted to fire water canon and lathi charge to disperse the protesters and arrested 15 people, said to be “outsiders”, for instigating the violence.

Earlier in the day, Delhi’s iconic Jama Masjid became epicentre of the massive anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protests. Bhim Army, a political outfit, also took part in the protests. Bhim Army chief Chandrashekar was seen in the crowd. Protesters were seen waving Tricolours and banners of Dr BR Ambedkar. Despite of Delhi Police denying permission to the Bhim Army, several of its workers gathered outside Delhi’s biggest mosque.

Many of the devotees, who had come to the mosque for Friday prayer, didn’t leave the premises. Protesters were shouting slogans on the steps of the mosque at gate number 1. As a precautionary measure, the Delhi Metro closed the entry and exit gates of Jama Masjid, Lal Qila and Chawri Bazar stations.

The protesters are demanding the act be repealed in toto, saying it was discriminatory to the Muslims. The government has sought to clear the "confusion" over CAA by issuing multiple clarifications and FAQs, saying that the law won't affect any Indian citizen. However, critics of the law said that when the NRC will be implemented throughout the country, a promise Union Home Minister Amit Shah has made in Parliament, a lot of Muslims will be rendered stateless.

They say that when nation-wide NRC will be implemented, a lot Muslims and non-Muslims may not be able to provice decuments to prove their citizenship. Now, as per the provision in CAA, non-Muslims will be granted Indian citizenship but people from Muslim community will be declared illegal residents, they claimed.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
