CAA protests: Chandrashekhar Azad's bail plea dismissed, Bhim Army chief sent to 14-day judicial custody

A Delhi court dismissed the bail plea of Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad who was taken into police custody from outside the Jama Masjid on Saturday morning. Chandrashekhar Azad has been sent to 14-day judicial custody.

After the court order, Chandrashekhar Azad was taken to Tihar jail. He was earlier denied permission for a protest march from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar.

Chandrashekhar Azad was inside the mosque in protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. The Bhim Army chief had given the Delhi Police a slip to reach the Jama Masjid on Friday.

Chandrashekhar Azad was produced before Delhi's Tis Hazari Court on Saturday in connection with the violence during a demonstration at Delhi Gate in Daryaganj against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) on Friday evening.

Delhi: Bhim Army Chief, Chandrashekhar Azad being taken to Tihar jail from Tis Hazari Court. He has been sent to 14-day judicial custody. He was earlier denied permission for a protest march from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar. https://t.co/7e1OzzgA1U pic.twitter.com/IzlWJtMRtZ ANI (@ANI) December 21, 2019





A total of 40 people were detained after a clash broke out between the police and the protesters. An FIR was registered against Chandrashekhar Azad which mentioned that he gave a hate speech to the protesters resulting in the violence at Delhi Gate.

Appearing before the Tis Hazari Court, Chandrashekhar Azad denied the allegations and said he was not at Delhi Gate in Daryaganj before or during the demonstration against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

During the arguments, Chandrashekhar Azad said his role in the Daryaganj violence was limited to the FIR itself. He said he did not give any speech but only read the Constitution and also maintained that he was not at Delhi Fate or Daryaganj during the protests.

"FIR says I had given a call for the protest and threatened the police that there will be a massive protest. FIR alleges I gave a "bhadkau bhashan [hate speech]". Where is the proof of any speech given? I had taken the Constitution of India in my hands and marched with it. If saying we have to protect the Constitution is "incitement to violence" then the entire country is guilty," Chandrashekhar Azad said.

It should be noted that the police have not produced any video CD or transcript in connection with their allegations on Chandrashekhar Azad. "All that is said in my speech was we have to protect the Constitution. Jama Masjid and Delhi gate are 2 km away. I was not at Delhi Gate or even in Daryaganj. I had no role in the breaking of the barricades or unrest by protesters."

"The only allegation against me is that I gave a speech. I was never at the DCP office. How am I responsible for inciting the crowd when I was not there? How am I accused of threatening the police about the protests? I was arrested because I was raising the voice of the people. There is no document or video showing my presence at the spot."
