Anti-CAA Stir: Death Count Climbs To 16 In UP, Protesters Indulge In Vandalism In Bihar | 10 Points

New Delhi:

Protests against the amended Citizenship Law continued across the country on Saturday as a police post was torched in Kanpur, while the death toll in the violence in the last two days rose to 16 in the state. In Kolkata, thousands of Left-leaning students marched to the state BJP headquarters, demanding rollback of the Citizenship Amendment Act and the proposed nationwide NRC, which they dubbed as the saffron party's "gameplan to divide the country".

Over 260 policemen were also injured, of whom 57 received gunshot wounds in Kanpur, IG (Law and Order) Praveen Kumar told PTI on Saturday.

In Muzaffarnagar, 25 policemen were injured in stone pelting on Friday and SP City got pellet injury when someone in the crowd used an illegal firearm, SP Abhishek Yadav told PTI on Saturday.

Anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protests | 10 Updates:

At least 15 people have lost their lives in Uttar Pradesh since protests broke out on Thursday against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, IG Kumar said. In Kanpur, anti-CAA protestors on Saturday set Yatimkhana police post on fire and indulged in heavy brickbatting, leading to injury to some people. A bandh call was given by the protesters in Rampur on Saturday even as section 144 of the CrPC, which bars assembly of people, is in force in the region and internet remains suspended. In Bihar, carrying bamboo sticks and party flags, supporters of bandh called by Rashtriya Janata Dal, against the amended Citizenship Act gathered at bus stands, railway tracks and other vantage points in all districts of the state since the crack of dawn, unfazed by the winter fog and chilly winds. They squatted on railway tracks, disrupting train movement, and blocked bus terminuses at various places to enforce the day-long bandh. The protesters also smashed windshields of taxis and three-wheelers and damaged cycle-rickshaws that plied on the roads in defiance of the call for the shutdown at the towns of Bhagalpur, Muzaffarpur and outskirts of Patna. The Delhi Police produced 15 people arrested in connection with the violence in the capital city’s Daryaganj area before a city court. They have been sent on a two-day judicial custody. The police had sought 14 days’ judicial custody of the accused. One of the arrested persons said that he is a juvenile but police denied his claim and said he is 23-year-old. In Seelampur violence case, the court has sent all accused to a 14- day judicial custody with right to move bail immediately. A Delhi court on Saturday sent Bhim Army chief Chandra Shekhar Azad, who was arrested in connection with the violence in Old Delhi's Daryaganj area, to 14 day's judicial custody. Azad, who was arrested earlier in the day, sought bail from the court on the ground that there is no evidence that he instigated the Jama Masjid crowd to go to Delhi Gate where the protesters had turned violent. The police opposed his bail plea on the ground that he may threaten witnesses and his judicial remand is necessary for the sake of law and order. After a lull of four days, AMU campus again witnessed protests on Saturday with hundreds of AMU non-teaching staff joining hands with AMU teachers' association, protesting against the CAA and "police atrocities" against the agitators in various parts of the state on Friday. The Jamia Millia Islamia students staged a demonstration yet again outside the varsity campus against amendments in the citizenship law, days after violent clashes between police and agitators in its vicinity. As protesting crowd swelled by minutes, the women students specifically asked them not to use abusive or unparliamentary language during the protest. The varsity has been at the forefront of the protest against the citizenship law. Students from Jadavpur University, Presidency University, Alia University, Satyajit Ray Film & Television Institute and Calcutta University took out a rally from Esplanade to Mahajati Sadan, from where the state BJP office is a short distance away. The protesters shouted slogans and held placards that read 'Scrap NRC & CAA' and 'We won't allow fascism to rule in India', as they passed by the saffron party's West Bengal headquarters at Muralidhar Lane. The Delhi Waqf Board announced that it will give a financial assistance of Rs 5.5 lakh each to the families of those killed during violent protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. Board chairman Amanatullah Khan, also an AAP MLA, in a Facebook post claimed that several people were killed in Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka's Mangalore during protests against the CAA and NRC, due to "police bullets". Hundreds of students, professionals and civil society activists gathered at the India Gate in Delhi to protest against the amended Citizenship Act. The protesters raised slogans against the BJP government and said the new law would tear into the secular fabric of the country.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
