Mamata Banerjee calls off dharna, says SC decision was positive

Mamata said this "dharna is victory for the Constitution and democracy, so, let us end it today". (Photo: ANI)

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee ended her three-day long dharna, on Tuesday evening. Addressing a gathering at her dharna venue in Kolkata, Mamata Banerjee said that the protest was a victory for the Constitution and the democracy. "Hence, we have decided to end the dharna," she said.

"We consulted both Chandrababu Naidu and Tejashwi Yadav when they came today. They said this protest is victory for democracy. They suggesting ending the dharna because the Supreme Court gave a decision which is positive," Mamata Banerjee said.

Also Read | Yogi Adityanath's ilaka tera, dhamaka mera moment in Purulia: Bengal belongs to BJP

Mamata said the Opposition would organise a programme in Delhi on February 12, 13 and 14. "The SC gave a positive judgment today. Next week, we will continue to take up the issue in Delhi," she said.

"They [Central government] want to control all the agencies including the state agencies also? PM you resign from Delhi and go back to Gujarat. One man govt, one party government is there."

Mamata Banerjee's dharna began on Sunday in protest against the alleged "CBI misuse" by the Central government.

On Sunday, five Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) officers were detained after they reached Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar's official residence to question him in the Saradha chit fund scam case.

'BJP using central agencies to blackmail people'

Mamata Banerjee alleged that the BJP is "blackmailing" people by using central agencies like the CBI against them and then getting them into the party fold.

Banerjee said she has "great respect" for the CBI and urged it to speed up its probe into theft of the Nobel medal of Rabindranath Tagore with the same alacrity with which, she alleged, the agency executes the orders of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP national president Amit Shah.

She said once the people who are being blackmailed by the BJP join the saffron party, the cases lodged against them by the central agencies are dismissed. "Once you join the BJP, then there will be no cases. There will be no CBI, no ED, no I-T (Income Tax Department) against you," Mamata Banerjee said.

'Why is the central government so scared?'

Mamata Banerjee slammed the Centre for asking West Bengal government to initiate proceedings against Kumar for indiscipline and violation of service rules, and termed the act a "political vendetta".

"Why is the central government so scared? Has Rajeev become their nightmare? I do not know what is going on. He never joined the dharna. Absolutely blatant lie," Banerjee told reporters.

She said it was the job of a police officer to give protection to the prime minister and chief ministers.

"And please remember the duty of the police as per protocol is to be with the prime minister, the chief minister or the governor to give security to them. That is the law. Even during election time, the CPs, SPs stay at the spot with VIPs while performing their duty," she said.

"I am the chief minister. Can't they talk to me downstairs if any consultation is needed," she said adding that she held a Cabinet meeting with all her ministers inside a police outpost next to the dais Monday. What is this going on," she asked slamming the MHA missive.

Also Read | To take on Mamata Banerjee in Bengal, Yogi Adityanath becomes Bengali for a day

Also Read | Kolkata top cop ordered to join probe as CBI accuses Mamata govt of armed rebellion

Also Watch | Mamata Banerjee being paranoid or being targeted?
