India CAA protests grow; death toll rises

New Delhi: Nine people died Saturday during clashes between demonstrators and police in northern India, raising the nationwide death toll in protests against a new citizenship law to 23, police said.

Aam Aadmi Party MLA and Delhi Waqf Board chairman Amanatullah Khan on Saturday announced compensation of Rs500,000 each to the families of those who lost their lives during protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act and the National Register of Citizens (NRC), across the country. The compensation will be paid by the Delhi Waqf Board.

Uttar Pradesh state police spokesman Pravin Kumar said the nine fatalities increased the death toll in the state to 15 in the protests against the new law, which the demonstrators say discriminates against Muslims.

The "majority of the dead are young people," Singh said. "Some of them died of bullet injuries, but these injuries are not because of police fire. The police have used only tear gas to scare away the agitating mob.''

Protestors participate in a rally against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, in Kanpur, Friday, Dec. 20, 2019. Image Credit: PTI

Around a dozen vehicles were set on fire as protesters went amok in the northern Indian cities of Rampur, Sambhal, Muzaffarnagar, Bijnore and Kanpur, where a police station was also torched, Singh said.

The ongoing backlash against the law marks the strongest show of dissent against the government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi since he was first elected in 2014.

The law allows Hindus, Christians and other religious minorities who are in India illegally to become citizens if they can show they were persecuted because of their religion in Muslim-majority Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan. It does not apply to Muslims.

Critics have slammed the law as a violation of India's secular constitution and have called it the latest effort by the Modi government to marginalise the country's 200 million Muslims. Modi has defended the law as a humanitarian gesture.

Uttar Pradesh state is controlled by Modi's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party.

Guards called in

An anti-terror squad was deployed and internet services were suspended for another 48 hours in the state.

Six people were killed during clashes in Uttar Pradesh on Friday, and police said Saturday that more than 600 in the state had been taken into custody since then as part of "preventive action. In addition, five people have been arrested and 13 police cases have been filed for posting "objectionable" material on social media.

Police have imposed a British colonial-era law banning the assembly of more than four people statewide. The law was also imposed elsewhere in India to thwart an expanding protest movement demanding the revocation of the citizenship law.

India's Ministry of Information and Broadcasting issued an advisory Friday night asking broadcasters across the country to refrain from using content that could inflame further violence. The ministry asked for "strict compliance".

In the northeastern border state of Assam, where internet services were restored after a 10-day blockade, hundreds of women on Saturday staged a sit-in against the law in Gauhati, the state capital.

It's also been decided that internet services will remain suspended from 6 am to 8 pm on Sunday in Jaipur to maintain law and order, said the Jaipur Commissionerate to ANI.

Women from various organizations hold placards and shout slogans during a demonstration against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA), in Guwahati on Saturday. Image Credit: ANI

"Our peaceful protests will continue till this illegal and unconstitutional citizenship law amendment is scrapped,'' said Samujjal Bhattacharya, the leader of the All Assam Students Union, which organised the rally.

He rejected an offer for dialogue by Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal, saying talks could take place when the "government was hoping to strike some compromise'.'

Protestors arrested for violence during yesterday's demonstration against Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) being produced by Delhi Police to a court, in New Delhi, Saturday, Dec. 21, 2019. Image Credit: PTI

In New Delhi on Saturday, police charged more than a dozen people with rioting in connection with violence during a protest Friday night in the capital's Daryaganj area.

Meanwhile, claiming that there is "no single evidence" against him for inciting violence during the anti-CAA protests, Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad on Saturday hit out at Prime Minister Narendra Modi saying that latter is busy in election rallies at a time when the whole country is burning.

"Modi should do table talks at least. He is doing the task of dividing the country. There is no single evidence against me. The country is burning and Modi is only concerned about his rallies," Chandrashekhar told media after Tis Hazari court sent him on 14-day judicial custody after dismissing his bail plea.

Delhi Court on Saturday dismissed bail plea Azad and sent to 14-day judicial custody. Azad was taken to Tihar jail from Tis Hazari court.

International outcry

Two US Democratic presidential candidates, Sen. Elizabeth Warren and Sen. Bernie Sanders, denounced the new law on Twitter, and Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad criticised it at a news conference following the conclusion of an Islamic summit in Kuala Lumpur.

Mahathir said Saturday that India is a secular state and people's religion should not prevent them from obtaining citizenship.

"To exclude Muslims from becoming citizens, even by due process, I think is unfair,'' he said.

Following the remark, India's foreign ministry summoned the Malaysian Charge d'Affaires to lodge a complaint. Government ministers have said Muslims of foreign origin will not be prohibited from pursuing Indian citizenship, but will have to go through the normal process like other foreigners.

Protests against the law come amid an ongoing restive period in Kashmir, the region was stripped of its semi-autonomous status and demoted from a state into a federal territory in August.

The demonstrations also follow a contentious process in Assam meant to weed out foreigners living in the country illegally. Nearly 2 million people were excluded from an official list of citizens, about half Hindu and half Muslim, and have been asked to prove their citizenship or else be considered foreign.

People hold placards and shout slogans during a protest against Citizenship Amendment Act 2019, in Tezpur on Saturday. Image Credit: ANI
