BJP leader H Raja justifies police brutality, says guns will be used to reply to guns

Protests against CAA have been going on in the country for a while now | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights H Raja justified police action taken against the protesters during the anti-CAA protests He said 'guns will be used to reply to guns' He also showed his support to actor Rajinikanth who said that violence is no solution to anything at all

Chennai: BJP leader H Raja, while speaking about the anti-CAA protests, justified the police brutality and their violent clashes with the protesters in different parts of the country. He said that ‘guns will be used to reply to guns’. His remarks are being considered as a justification to the police opening fire at the protestors in Mangaluru.

He also supported actor Rajinikanth’s statement about the issue. He said, “What wrong did friend Rajinikanth say? What was wrong in his statement? He only said violence is not good. Why are the people against him?" His support to the actor came after the latter’s statement on the CAA issue. Amidst the ongoing protests in the country, the actor had taken to Twitter to say, “Violence cannot be a way out for any issue. Rather it should not become a solution. People must have a love for the country, think better for the country and have unity amongst themselves. The present situation of violence pains my heart.”

However, Rajinikanth did not make it clear whether he stood in support or against the amended Citizenship Act. His statement had gathered attention from both the supporters as well as the critics of the Act. Several other BJP leaders have also, in the recent past, vocalised their views about the support they extend to the Citizenship Amendment Act. One such opinion came from the BJP Chief of West Bengal who said that the protesters who damage public property during the agitation should be shot dead.

The Citizenship Amendment Act aims at protecting the non-Muslim refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. It has received a lot of criticism as the public has been of the view that the Act divides and discriminates on the basis of religion. Owing to that, there have been numerous anti-CAA protests in different parts of the country during the last couple of days.


