Mamata Calls off Dharna Over CBI Raid Against Kolkata Top Cop, to Take Up Issue in Delhi

AGENCIES / KOLKATA

Terming her three days’ dharna as a victory for the constitution and democracy, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee today called off her protest against the CBI’s move to raid the residence of Kolkata Police Commissioner in ponzi scam cases.

Banerjee said she was calling off her dharna after consulting leaders of major opposition parties and following “a favourable court order”.

“The request came from all political parties and hence I am calling off the dharna. The Court gave a positive judgment today. Next week, we will continue to take up the issue in Delhi,” said Mamata.

The move came after the Supreme Court cautioned the CBI against using any coercive measure, including arrest, against Rajeev Kumar. Mamata asked why the Centre was scared of a police officer.

In another development, the Ministry of Home Affairs has written to chief secretary of west Bengal seeking disciplinary action against Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar for sharing stage with Mamata.

She had been sitting on the dharna since Sunday night at the Metro channel in Esplanade area, the spot where she had held a 26-day fast against the acquisition of farm land for the Tata Motors small car unit at Singur in 2006.

On Tuesday TDP chief and Andhra CM Chandrababu Naidu visited Mamata and shared the stage with her. He said said that the Bengal CM will be the main face of opposition. He further predicted that The TMC will win all 42 seats in the state in the Lok Sabha election.

A plan is on to have Chief Ministers of all like-minded parties to sit on a protest at Delhi’s Jantar Mantar over the alleged attack on the country’s federal structure, sources said. The tentative date is February 12. “We spoke to Sharad Pawar, Arvind Kejriwal, Sharad Yadav etc. Everybody has arrived at a consensus that Mamata Banerjee should end this dharna. We will take up this issue in Delhi,” Chandrababu Naidu said.

Earlier on Monday, Tejashwi Yadav of RJD and Kanimozhi of DMK had visited her at the dharna spot.

The Supreme Court had earlier in the day directed Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar to appear before the CBI and “faithfully” cooperate into the investigation of cases arising out of the Saradha chit fund scam, while making it clear that he will not be arrested.

To avoid all “unnecessary controversy”, the apex court also directed the Commissioner of Kolkata police to appear before the investigating agency at a neutral place in Shillong, on such dates as may be fixed by the probe agency.
