Net blocked, protesters use offline chat apps

Delhi saw 30-time spike in app’s user base, downloads

NEW DELHI: Amid internet shutdowns following protests over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, offline messaging apps such as Bridgefy, Fire-Chat and others are seeing a spike in usage. Indian protesters may be taking their cue from Hong Kong where these two apps became the popular method of connecting during the recent political crisis.Both apps use a mesh network, which means that smartphones use short-range Bluetooth connections to form their own network independent of the carrier cell masts and the internet.Data from US app intelligence firm Appotopia shows that starting December 12, when net was shut down in Assam and Meghalaya , Bridgefy downloads and usage have grown 80 times on an average. And when internet was shut in various cities, users elsewhere downloaded such apps too.The contrast is visible when pre-shutdown and post-shutdown data is compared. From an average 25 daily downloads in India, Bridgefy installations spiked over 100 times to 2,609 on December 12. Its active user base, too, rose almost 65 times from 184 on December 11 to 12,118 on December 12. When shutdowns happened in Delhi, there was a 30-time spike in both downloads and active user base of the app.On its Twitter page, Bridgefy has acknowledged this surge in traffic from India and said it’s trying to provide adequate customer support to the users there as fast as possible. Fire-Chat’s usage surged nine times and installations by 18 times between December 17 and 18. The user base, though small, is steadily expanding as protests continue to grow.The efficacy of US-based Bridgefy, which counts Twitter founder Biz Stone among its early investors, was noticed by Mumbai-based political activist Ruben Mascarenhas, who downloaded it along with a team of 20 organisers earlier this week . Bridgefy is best suited for communication within small gatherings and is used to relay safety pointers during protests. “The intention (with these apps) is not to instigate violence or mobilise crowds but to save life and limb in case of emergencies,” Mascarenhas said, noting that while Mumbai still has net connectivity, the app’s use has grown largely in Delhi.
