Cabs to food, e-biz hit by internet shutdown

We’ve seen a 10-20% impact on our biz, says biryani chain

Internet services suspended in parts of UP

NEW DELHI: India’s internetbased economy is feeling the pinch of the first major national disruption in connectivity following protests over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. The impact is most pronounced in UP and NCR, where the consumer base is quite large for most online service providers. As many as 24 UP districts, including Ghaziabad, and parts of Delhi have seen internet shutdowns over the past week.Food delivery apps have seen volumes dip by 10-20% in these areas even as supply chain disruption has impacted online retail and e-grocery businesses. Ride-hailing services have stopped working too in the shutdown-hit areas.Most of these startups that rely on the internet for everything have been caught unawares. “We are not prepared for this contingency,” said the founder of a logistics startup.Industry pundits say North India, which has seen the most protests, accounts for about 30-40% of e-tail logistics deliveries, making it the largest market.Residents of Ghaziabad, where internet was shut down from Thursday night, struggled to book cab rides with Uber and Ola. Drivers were also refusing trips from Delhi to Ghaziabad because of this. Some drivers also stayed off the road on Thursday and Friday, fearing violence and damage to their vehicles.TOI reached out to Uber and Ola for a reaction. The Uber spokesperson didn’t respond to messages while the Ola spokesperson declined to comment.Online food deliveries were also massively hit. Food delivery apps like Zomato , Swiggy and UberEats together handle 2-2.5 million orders daily. UP accounts for up to 60,000 of their orders. All three players saw a virtual shutdown of their business on Friday, said a logistics industry executive who didn’t want to be named.“Of course, it is a disruption, but we are trying to work around it. We have seen a 10-20% impact on our business,” said Vishal Jindal, co-founder of Biryani By Kilo, which gets over two-thirds of its orders online and has a presence in both NCR and Lucknow, besides Pune, Mumbai, Chandigarh, and Jaipur. He said that in places where there is an internet shutdown, the company is trying to route customer queries to its call centre.Orders are piling up for grocery delivery companies too. Grofers rescheduled 20,000-25,000 orders on Friday, primarily due to disruptions in Lucknow. Elsewhere in Guwahati, where curbs have been lifted, their business has resumed.“Our systems don't work without the internet. While the delivery workforce showed up, we have tried to figure out a manual way to deliver orders. We did not get new orders (in Lucknow) because of internet shutdown,” CEO Albinder Dhindsa told TOI.
