Mamata withdraws dharna; all opposition parties to meet and ‘take up issue’ in Delhi

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee called-off her ‘Save India’ dharna that entered its third day on Tuesday. All anti-BJP Opposition parties will meet in Delhi later this month, “and take up the issue”.

According to Banerjee, the Supreme Court order is a “moral victory”.

“We are calling-off the dharna, as of now. I had said earlier, that I will take a call on withdrawing the agitation once I speak to all parties concerned and to the leaders of my party (Trinamool Congress). All leaders have requested me to call-off the protest,” Banerjee said.

“All Opposition parties will meet to take up the issue in Delhi later this month. And I will also be present there,” she added.

The stand-off

The West Bengal CM took to the streets Sunday night after a show-down between CBI officials and the State police force (Kolkata Police) over questioning of the city police commissioner, Rajeev Kumar, in relation to a multi-crore Ponzi scheme scam.

The stand-off saw police officers lay siege to CBI offices and detaining the officials. It was resolved two hours later, but not before para-military forces were deployed at CBI offices.

Following this stand-off, Banerjee alleged “high-handedness” and launched her “ satyagraha ”. The CBI on the other hand moved the Supreme Court.

Opposition support

Banerjee’s ‘ dharna ’ received support from almost all non-BJP parties that include the Congress, the TDP, the AAPa and the DMK among others.

While Tejashwi Yadav of RJD, DMK’s Kanimozi and SP’s Kiranmay Nanda joined shared the dais with her on Monday; TDP leader and Andhra Preadesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu visited the Chief Minister, thereby expressing solidarity. Tejashwi was also present on Tuesday. “The Constitution and democracy is under threat. Autonomy of institutions is being compromised. Agencies are being misused for political vendetta,” Naidu said.

MHA takes on Mamata

Meanwhile, the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has asked the West Bengal government to initiate disciplinary action against the Kolkata Police commissioner Rajeev Kumar.

The MHA said it has information on Kumar and some other officers being present at the ‘ dharna ’ site, ‘prima facie in contravention’ of his service rules.

Banerjee once again defended the top cop and denied his presence at the protest stage. Calling the allegation “politically motivated”, the West Bengal CM took on the BJP yet again.

“Why is the BJP so afraid of one officer? This is a political vendetta. He (Rajeev Kumar) never attended the dharna and has not done anything wrong,” the CM said.
