Here is the latest news from The Associated Press at 11:40 p.m. EST

Estimated read time: 3-4 minutes

This archived news story is available only for your personal, non-commercial use. Information in the story may be outdated or superseded by additional information. Reading or replaying the story in its archived form does not constitute a republication of the story.

LAS VEGAS (AP) — Las Vegas authorities say a fire in a three-story apartment building in downtown Las Vegas where residents were apparently using their stoves for heat killed six people before dawn Saturday. A fire department spokesman says some residents were forced to jump from upper-floor windows to escape the heavy smoke. Firefighters arriving at the scene began treating the injured and using ladders to rescue numerous people hanging from windows. The spokesman says the fire started in the area of a first-floor apartment's stove and appears to be accidental. Three people were found dead in the apartment where the fire started.

SEOUL, South Korea (AP) — North Korea says leader Kim Jong Un has convened a key ruling party meeting to decide on steps to bolster the country’s military capability. The meeting comes amid speculation that the North could abandon diplomacy with the U.S. and launch either a long-range missile or a satellite-carrying rocket if Washington doesn’t accept its demand for new incentives to salvage faltering nuclear negotiations by year’s end. North Korea is to hold a higher-level Workers’ Party gathering, a Central Committee meeting, later this month to discuss what it previously described as crucial issues in line with the changed situation at home and abroad.

GUATEMALA CITY (AP) — Authorities say a trailer truck has collided with a passenger bus in eastern Guatemala, killing at least 20 people and leaving a dozen wounded. Volunteer firefighters told reporters the truck appeared to have collided with the bus from behind early Saturday. Photos of the scene show the truck toppled onto its side along a curve on the two-lane highway, with the bus a little further ahead, its rear section destroyed. T he national disaster agency says the bus had been headed from the northeastern Peten region to the capital.

NEW DELHI (AP) — Violent protests against India's citizenship law that excludes Muslim immigrants have swept the country over the weekend despite the government's ban on public assembly and suspension of internet services in many parts, raising the nationwide death toll to 23. Police say nine people died in clashes with security forces in Uttar Pradesh on Saturday, most of them young protesters. A spokesman denied police were responsible saying they only fired tear gas to scare away the mobs. The backlash against the law marks the strongest show of dissent against the Hindu nationalist government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi since he was first elected in 2014.

WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) — President Donald Trump is encouraging young conservatives to stand up to what he calls the “radical left" days after he was impeached by the House. Trump told students in West Palm Beach, Florida, at the conservative conference organized by the group Turning Point USA that “each of you are on the front lines of defending our way of life." Trump complained about House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's delayed transmission of the articles of impeachment to the Senate, which may delay a trial in the GOP-controlled chamber. Trump told young conservatives that ït's so unfair," adding, “They are violating the Constitution.”

Copyright © The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

×

Tags World
