Citizenship Act protests HIGHLIGHTS: 17 dead in three days of protests in Uttar Pradesh

The Opposition is trying to frame the CAA debate as a rich vs poor issue, underlining repeatedly that it is the latter who would have to stand in lines, like during the note ban, to prove their citizenship. (File Photo)

Amid protests against the amended Citizenship Act, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday said his government’s schemes had never discriminated on the basis of religion and assured people that the Citizenship law and proposed National Register of Citizens (NRC) had nothing to do with Muslims. In one of his longest speeches that spanned over an hour at Delhi’s Ramlila Maidan, barely a km away from Old Delhi’s Daryaganj area that was hit by violence two days ago, PM Modi accused the Opposition of stoking fears and misleading people over the amended Citizenship law.

To which, the Congress reacted sharply by calling the amended law anti-Muslim and asserted the government had created an “environment of fear, uncertainty”. Modi drew flak for his speech from various quarters, including Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot, who accused the PM of misleading the country in his name, PTI reported.

The death toll in protest-related violence in Uttar Pradesh in three days rose to 17, with two deaths being reported from Meerut and Kanpur on Sunday.

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra visited Bijnor in UP on Sunday and demanded judicial probe into the deaths of two youths, killed during violent protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act. Gandhi met family members of the two youths earlier in the day.

Uttar Pradesh DGP OP Singh on Sunday denied permission to the delegation of Trinamool Congress leaders who were planning to visit the families of those killed in the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protests in the state. Led by senior party leader Dinesh Trivedi, the delegation, including MPs Pratima Mondal, Mohammad Nadimul Haque and Abir Biswas, was expected to reach Lucknow on Sunday.

On the other hand, the BJP on Saturday announced it will run a nationwide campaign in the next 10 days to “expose” the “conspiracy” of Congress, TMC and Left parties to “spread hatred and violence” in the country over Citizenship Act. The party’s national general secretary Bhupinder Yadav said the party will go door-to-door as part of its nationwide campaign and connect with 3 crore families.
