Imran Khan expresses concern over CAA unrest, says ‘threat to Pak from India increasing due to protests’

Islamabad (Pakistan) | Jagran News Desk: Amid the violent protests against the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Act in the country, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said that under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, India has been moving towards ‘Hindu Rashtra’ with its ‘Hindutva Supremacist’ fascist ideology.

In a series of tweets, Khan expressed his concerns that India could carry out a ‘false flag operation’ against it to divert attention from its domestic situation and warned that it will give a befitting response to any such action.

He further said that Pakistan will have no option but to give a befitting response to India if New Delhi undertakes any operation against it.

Also Read | Anti-CAA Stir: Death toll mounts to 16 in UP, Delhi court sends Bhim Army chief to 14 days’ judicial custody; internet resumes in Meghalaya

“Over the last five years of Modi's government, India has been moving towards Hindu Rashtra with its Hindutva Supremacist fascist ideology. Now with the Citizens (Amendment) Act, all those Indians who want a pluralist India are beginning to protest and it is becoming a mass movement,” he said in a tweet.

“I have been warning the international community of this for some time and am reiterating again: if India does such an operation to divert attention from its domestic chaos plus whip up war hysteria to mobilise Hindu nationalism, Pakistan will have no option but to give a befitting response,” he added.

I have been warning the int community of this for some time & am reiterating again: if India does such an operation to divert attention from its domestic chaos plus whip up war hysteria to mobilise Hindu nationalism, Pak will have no option but to give a befitting response. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) December 21, 2019

In another tweet, Khan said that the increasing protests against the Citizenship Act is a concern for India the recent statements from the Indian Army chief General Bipin Rawat only adds to Pakistan’s concerns.

“At the same time the siege by Indian Occupation forces in IOJK continues and a bloodbath can be expected when it is lifted. As these protests are increasing, threat to Pakistan from India is also increasing. Indian Army Chief's statement adds to our concerns of a False Flag ooperation,” he said.

Also Read | Facing wrath over CAA, BJP to launch info campaign to reach out to three crore families

General Rawat on Wednesday said that the situation along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir can escalate any time and the Army is ready for any ‘escalatory matrix’. His remarks came in the backdrop of spurt in ceasefire violation by Pakistan along the LoC since the abrogation of Article 370 in August.

Earlier, Pakistan Army spokesman Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor had termed Gen Rawat's remarks as a tactic to take the global attention away from domestic issues.

Tensions between India and Pakistan escalated after New Delhi revoked Jammu and Kashmir's special status by scrapping provisions of Article 370 of the Constitution.

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
