'Never sought to bar Muslim refugees from citizenship'

Prakash Karat

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: CPM politburo member Prakash Karat said that Left parties have never taken a stand to exclude Muslim refugees from being granted citizenship. In response to a widespread campaign on social media triggered by BJP leaders that Prakash Karat, who was the general secretary of CPM, wrote to the then Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in 2012, requesting him to grant citizenship for Hindu refugees from Bangladesh, Karat said his demand was specifically for granting natural citizenship for Namasudra communities among Bengali refugees.

"That was the consensus reached in Parliament when the issue was debated in 2003. It is true that I wrote to Manmohan Singh in May, 2012, seeking natural citizenship for Namasudra community members. But, nowhere there had been a stand taken by any of the Left parties that had advocated exclusion of Muslim refugees from citizenship. Regarding Assam and other northeastern states, we have made it clear that clauses in Assam Accord need to be strictly adhered to while granting citizenship for refugees from Bangladesh," Karat wrote in an article published in CPM mouthpiece 'Deshabhimani' on Saturday.

"We need to expose the fake campaign that communist parties have double standards in granting citizenship for Bangladesh refugees. We are opposing BJP's communal and divisive stand in the refugee issue," Karat said.

According to him, the growing protest in Assam is a result of the deceit felt by the Assamese people. "By legalizing illegal migration through extension of deadline to December 31, 2014, the citizenship Amendment Act has sabotaged Assam Accord of 1985. Assam police have already murdered five youths. Internet remains suspended and curfew has been imposed in most parts of the state. But, such steps couldn't stop large influx of protesters to the designated protest venues every day," said Karat.

He said the Act needs to be read along with the National Registry of Citizens (NRC) which will be launched soon. "The first will legalize citizenship of non-Muslim immigrants, NRC will target Muslims who will be labelled as intruders," Karat wrote in the article. The larger aim is to create second-grade citizens, argues Karat who also cited V D Savarkar's writings to substantiate his argument. "The accusation of Amit Shah that Congress is responsible for bifurcating India is deceptive. In fact, ancestors of BJP and Muslim League had the parities which had argued for two nation theory," said Karat.


