Jamia Protest: No holding back for these Jamia girls protesting against Citizenship Amendment Act

NEW DELHI: On any regular day, Nargis, a student pursuing Masters in Chemistry at Jamia Millia Islamia , would begin her day by attending classes, meet her friends after the class, go visit the Jamia Central library and then head straight to hostel campus.Clad in a hijab and worried about all the project deadlines for her masters, Nargis would often sit in the library to collect study material, hoard the best of books and sit outside the Zakir Hussain Library and discuss all things under the blue sky with her friends on winter afternoons."It was the best of times, we would sit over there and study for hours,” Nargis says while pointing towards the building which has now been shut following Delhi Police 's crackdown on the students of the university.The recent protests against the Citizenship Amendment Bill broke her heart.On December 12, President Ram Nath Kovind gave his assent to the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill turning it into an Act. The controversial Act grants Indian citizenship to persecuted minorities belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi, and Christian communities in Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan. The Act excludes Muslims. The passage of the Bill was vehemently opposed by opposition parties and resulted in widespread protests across the country. On December 15, Delhi Police stormed the campus of Jamia Millia Islamia University after a local protest against the Act took a violent turn.The university administration alleges that the police vandalised the campus, fired tear gas inside the library, where students were studying, physically assaulted the staff and the students resulting in injury to dozens of students. The police also detained 50 students who were released the next day. The violence in the university sent shockwaves across the nation.The university has since then wore a deserted look. However, violence has failed to deter the likes of Nargis and her friends from protesting.The new legislation which the government has announced that it plans to implement pan-India, has, like so many other students of the University, made her insecure, angry and anxious.Nargis, who hails from Uttar Pradesh, has been attending the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Bill since December 15, when the protests turned violent and many Jamia students were badly beaten up by the Delhi police. “I am coming to the protests every day. Many of my friends from West Bengal, Bihar who were living in hostels have gone back but since I have relatives here, I am coming each day. We will not stay silent and the protests will go on till our demands are met,” she says.Nargis’ parents, who have mostly been conservative and worried about their daughter living alone in a big city, are supportive of her to actively participate in the protests. “Earlier they asked me not to go anywhere but after they saw what happened with the Jamia university students, they did not stop me from joining the marches but also told me to be safe,” she says.Nargis along with her friends including Ayesha and Shehnaz is not in the mood to settle down with what they consider a discriminatory action of the government against a few communities.Her friend Shehnaz, a student of B.Ed at Jamia Millia Islamia, is also concerned about her studies. She says that her mind is split into two things: The protest and the upcoming exams. “We keep watching the news. There were a lot of viral videos of Jamia students being attacked by Delhi police. We were very disturbed by all those visuals. We are unable to focus on our studies. How can we study in such tough times?" Shehnaz questions.Another friend of the duo, Ayesha, who is also doing her masters in Chemistry, says she is deeply upset with the way the protest was dealt with. “Even JNU does so many protests, when did the police enter their campus?” She asks.Even Ayesha’s parents are backing her in the dissent by Jamia students against the act. “My dad said go and join the protests and now I am not scared at all. I don’t know why the students ran away. I am attending the protests since day one and I will come each day.”The parents have been immensely supportive. Sayyed Shakil, Ayesha's father, says that he is proud of her daughter's move and that the protest should be taken forward peacefully so that no student gets harmed. "There are hundreds of children taking part in protests. Why would I stop my daughter from participating?" he asks.Fatima, a Jamia student from Kashmir is attending the protests across the city to voice her dissent against the Act and the atrocities against Jamia students. She says there has been a tremendous amount of pressure and the students have lived in fear. “So many of them left the hostel after what happened but we couldn’t even go back because the tickets were expensive. For a few days, even the hostel authorities asked us to leave the hostel. We were deeply disturbed but we didn’t leave. Now more students are coming back again,” Fatima says.Simi, a student of finance at the university says that she is very upset about how the whole protest was treated by the authorities but is optimistic that they will get justice.“Right now all we want to do is fight against CAA and we are hopeful that the courts will listen to us and also investigate who all were responsible for injuring my friends in Jamia. This is not the time to back off but to go out and protest against the brutalities inflicted upon us,” Simi adds.
