UP simmers: Crackdown fails to cap violence against CAA

Demonstrators set ablaze vehicles near Yateemkhana police station area in Kanpur during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act on Saturday

KANPUR: The industrial city was rocked by fresh violence on Saturday, a day after two people died of gunshot wounds during protests against the new citizenship law at Babupurwa. Several people were injured in Saturday’s violent protests at Yateemkhana area, where two policemen suffered gun-shot injuries and were being treated in Lala Lajpat Rai hospital. The area remained under siege for three hours during which vehicles inside a police outpost were torched.

ADG (Zone) Prem Prakash said three policemen suffered bullet injuries in the violence. “Rioters hurled petrol bombs and opened indiscriminate firing, leaving three policemen injured. Among the three injured is sub-inspector Prabal Pratap, who sustained gunshot wounds. Besides, Arpit, a constable, sustained gun-shot wounds on his chin and one other police officer suffered head injuries.” Three FIRs were lodged at separate polices stations and 10 rioters have been arrested, he said.

Two persons, who suffered bullet injuries on Friday at Babupurwa, succumbed to injuries in hospital. Their bodies were shifted to mortuary for autopsy where a massive police force and crowds were present. The administration decided to take the bodies directly to the cemetery, but later decided to hand them over to family members.

Earlier, Samajwadi Party MLAs Amitabh Bajpai and Irfan Solanki, former MLAs Munindra Shukla and Lal Singh Tomar and some other party leaders met the district magistrate at his camp office and demanded an inquiry into administrative lapse. They also demanded that culprits be punished, but innocent people should not be harassed.

The SP leaders thereafter reached the morgue and met family members of the deceased. Soon, sparks began flying between ADG Prem Prakash and Amitabh Bajpai and then the MLA was taken into custody.

Earlier, the city erupted again and protesters fought pitched battles with police at Yateemkhana area of Bankerganj locality where six vehicles — four four-wheelers and two two-wheelers — parked by the side of Yateemkhana police outpost, were torched amidst heavy brickbatting. Protests were triggered off around 3 pm, when police handed over bodies of the two killed in Babupurwa violence to their families. Aftab, 23, and Saif, 22, died during protests late Friday. Police said hundreds of people demanding immediate release of protesters during protests and disbursement of Rs 50 lakh compensation to families of those killed hit the roads in Yateemkhana and the situation remained tense all day long.

Protesters fought pitched battles with police attacking them with country-made firearms, bricks, stones, petrol bombs and bottles. Many among them took position from rooftops. The ADG said, “Crowds gathered in areas like Babupurwa, Nai Sadak, Moolganj, Dalelpurwa and Haleem College and police were deployed in large numbers to keep vigil.”


