Tamil Nadu: Agitators take to streets in Trichy, Madurai; shops shut in Nagore

A large number of people took part in the protest called by Jama Athul Ulama Sabai at Goripalayam in Madurai against Citizenship Amendment Act

TRICHY/MADURAI/COIMBATORE: Hundreds took to the streets in Madurai and Trichy while shops downed shutters in Nagapattinam as protests against the new citizenship law continued to reverberate across the state. In Coimbatore, 18 members of Students' Federation of India (SFI), including four girls, were detained for protesting.

Rallies were taken out by members of the Muslim community in Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Tiruvarur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai. About 600 traders downed shutters at Nagore putting hundreds of tourists who arrived at Nagore Dargah and Velankanni to difficulty.

Sathakathulla, district president of Jamath Ulama Sabai, led the protest in Pudukottai district. Congress MP S Thirunavukkarasar, Karur MP Jothimani, Ramanathapuram MP Nawas Gani, Sivaganga MP Karti Chidambaram, MLAs Ragupathi, Meiyanathan and Periyannan Arasu participated. A large number of people headed by district jamath president Ayubkhan gathered near the old fish market at Kumbakonam. DMK MLAs Sakkottai G Anbalagan, Govi Chezhiyan and various leaders from MDMK, VCK, Viduthalai Puligal Katchi and Makkal Adhikaram staged a protest opposing the Act.

In Madurai, the protest called by Jama Athul Ulama Sabai at Goripalayam Palli Vasal Street saw about 1,500 people, including 150 women, taking part. IUML, SDPI, MMMK and PFI members were also in attendance. The agitators said if the Centre uses the Act to convert India into a Hindu country, they will have to face another freedom struggle. They said BJP was trying to oppress Muslims by turning the country difficult for them to live. As the protest intensified, police ensured it did not go out of control and affect traffic. In another protest organized by Campus Front of India, more than 200 women and 30 men took part. Later, a few members of Students Federation of India tried to stage a protest at Gandhi Memorial Museum but they were forcibly evicted and arrested.

In Coimbatore, SFI protesters participated by wearing various religious symbols and attires. Dhinesh Raja, a district representative of the CPM's student outfit, said road rokos, hunger strike and demonstrations were held by the SFI across the state.

"Religion is only one's faith. We would go and help a person who is suffering irrespective of religion. The Centre should stop trying to divide the country on religious lines," he said.


