Anti-CAA protests continue to roil Chennai, Tamil Nadu

Protesters who staged a road blockade against CAA were arrested near Raj Bhavan on Saturday

CHENNAI: A large number of people protested across the city and the state against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) on Saturday, though normal life was not affected. The city was rocked by a series of agitations with protests at Raj Bhavan near Guindy and another at MGR Chennai Central railway station. Police slapped cases against at least 225 people for attempting to march towards the high security Raj Bhavan zone and Central station.

Scores of CPM workers and members of the Students Federation of India (SFI) tried to block trains at the railway station though it was foiled. Outfits affiliated to the CPM, including the Democratic Youth Federation of India, also attempted to block trains at the station leading to a scuffle between the protesters and police personnel. The protesters led by SFI coordinator Mariappan gathered near Chennai suburban Moore Market Complex (MMC) railway terminus around 11am and raised slogans against CAA and NRC. There were about 150 police personnel from Periamet and Flower Bazaar police stations, apart from the armed reserve personnel, deployed at the spot for crowd control. Police blocked the agitators using barricades. As the agitation happened in front of the suburban railway terminus, traffic was not affected on Poonamallee High Road. Police apprehended the protesters when they tried to breach the security by marching towards the railway station. There were, however, no untoward incidents.

CPI veteran Nallakannu led the march to Raj Bhavan as part of the "besiege Raj Bhavan" agitation, in which scores of Congress workers, volunteers of outfits, including the CPI-affiliated All India Students' Federation, took part. Nallakannu hit out at the Centre for passing the amendment to the Citizenship Act in Parliament without hearing the views of people and political parties.

All India Youth Federation and other youth outfits led by Dinesh and Bharathi gathered near Maraimalai Adigal bridge in Saidapet and raised slogans against the Centre and Union minister Amit Shah. As they tried to march towards Raj Bhavan via Chinna Malai, reserve police personnel arrested at least 25 protesters for trying to block vehicular movement. Traffic was disrupted for about two hours. Police registered cases against the protesters under IPC Section 143 (Unlawful assembly) and City Police Act 41(6) (gathering in huge numbers without the permission of police).

A section of youngsters and students held a sit-in protest at Madras University.They were later removed from the spot.


