Assam women hit the streets to oppose CAA

Women from various organizations take out a protest rally against the Citizenship Amendment Act 2019, in Guwahati on Saturday (Photo credit: ANI)

GUWAHATI/ DIBRUGARH: Responding to a call given by the All Assam Students' Union (Aasu) and 30 other indigenous organisations, thousands of women took to the streets of Guwahati on Saturday to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA). This was a part of a series of protest demonstrations held by women across several districts of Assam on Saturday, with various women's organizations as well as women leaders, educationists and college girls taking part.

Hundreds of housewives and elderly women also hit the streets, demanding that the Centre should repeal the CAA unconditionally to secure the future of the indigenous communities of the state. Holding placards and shouting anti-CAA slogans, the women groups said the CAA was an 'unconstitutional' and 'communal' law. The protesting women marched from various parts of the city to meet at the Latasil Playground.

"Participation of women is the key to success of any movement in the world. The women of this state had contributed immensely towards the success of the Assam Agitation. This relentless, non-violent and disciplined movement will continue till the CAA is scrapped," Aasu chief adviser Samujjal Bhattacharyya, president Dipanka Kumar Nath and general secretary Lurinjyoti Gogoi said in a statement.

On Monday, men and women from all walks of life will come together to stage a sit-in demonstration across the state against CAA. In Guwahati, the protest programme will be held at the Latasil Playground.

Meanwhile, in Dibrugarh, more than 5,000 women from various parts of Dibrugarh district assembled at the Chowkidinghee Playground on Saturday to voice their protest against the Act. In Sivasagar, thousands of people from across the district, carrying anti-CAA banners and placards, marched to the Boarding Field and held a demonstration against the Act. Addressing a gathering at Sivasagar, leading actor Barsha Rani Bishaya said, "You (government) cannot go on challenging the people. You (leaders of the ruling BJP) are the flag-bearers of peace. Scrap CAA and bring back peace to Assam."

Meanwhile, the curfew, which has been in force in Tinsukia district since December 11, was relaxed in the district from 5am to 8pm on Saturday. In Dibrugarh, the curfew period was relaxed by two more hours, up to 10 pm.


