Protests against CAA continue across India

Around 500 members of Islamic outfits and scores of CPI(M) activists staged demonstrations here on Sunday as protests continued against the Citizenship Amendment Act in parts of Tamil Nadu.

While members of the Islamic outfits, including women, staged a protest holding placards in Chepauk, CPI(M) cadres distributed pamphlets in Thousand Lights area. Hindu Munnani workers, led by their leader Arjun Sampath staged a demonstration, holding placards and party flags, at Vallurvarkotam area.

Protests were also held in Theni by members of some Islamic organisations. In Madurai, activists of Campus Front of India and an Islamic outfit were booked for staging a protest against the CAA on Saturday without taking permission, police said

“We have booked cases against around 2,000 members, including those from Campus Front of India and another Muslim outfit”, a senior police officer told PTI. Earlier, senior BJP Leader L Ganesan told reporters in Chennai that there was nothing in wrong in police using weapons to disperse mobs who damage public property.

He said police can use weapons at their disposal in an official capacity as otherwise the protesters may cause more damage to public property. He claimed that there has been a decrease in protests against CAA nationwide and slammed opposition parties for their “false propaganda” over the Act.

Other CAA protests

Situation peaceful in Bengal

The situation in West Bengal was peaceful on Sunday morning, with no incidents of violence reported from any part of the state, police said.According to sources, police administration has increased vigil and beefed-up arrangements in trouble-torn areas to maintain law and order.

Curfew lifted in Shillong, streets decked out in X-mas lights

Curfew was on Sunday morning lifted in Shillong, as no report of violence or arson over the amended citizenship Act was reported from any part of the city.Curfew was imposed on areas under Sadar and Lumdiengjri police stations in the city since December 12 as anti-citizenship law protests turned violent, leaving several injured and properties vandalised.

Nearly 3 lakh carry out peaceful march against CAA, NRC in Jaipur

Rajasthan chief minister Ashok Gehlot on Sunday led a massive peaceful march called the ‘Samvidhan Bacho rally’ against the amended citizenship law and demanded that the centre repeal the act, saying it is against the constitution and an attempt to divide people in the name of religion. Members of different political parties including CPI, CPI(M), AAP, SP, RLD and JD(S), a large number of people from the minority communities and civil society, as well as intellectuals and youths participated in the ‘silent march’ which started here from the iconic Albert hall and culminated at Gandhi circle, covering nearly 3 kms on JLN road.

People march in S Delhi in support of Jamia students, those facing police action

Scores of people took out a march in South Delhi on Sunday in support of Jamia Millia Islamia students and those facing police action for violent protest against the new citizenship law.

Holding placards, people shouted ‘Inquilab Zindabad’ and demanded scrapping of the contentious law during the march in Alaknanda area. A group of Jamia students also participated in the protest.

Curfew lifted in Mangaluru: No untoward incident reported

Curfew clamped in Mangaluru in the aftermath of the violent protests against the Citizenhip Amendment Act on December 19 was lifted on Sunday for 12 hours, as no untoward incident was reported from the city.Two people were killed in police firing on Thursday as protests against the CAA turned violent. Mangaluru city police have named two people killed in police firing in the city on Thursday as accused in the First Information Report (FIR) on the violent protests against Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).Jaleel, 49, and Nausheen, 23, were killed due to bullet injuries when police opened fire at an anti-CAA protest march in Bunder area in the heart of the city on December 19.

CAA not against any community or religion: Fadnavis

CAA not against any community or religion: Fadnavis Nagpur, Dec 22 (PTI) Former Maharashtra chief minister Devendra Fadnavis on Sunday said the Citizenship (Amendment) Act is not against any community or religion and alleged that some political parties are spreading falsehood about the new law to create unrest in the country.

Addressing a pro-CAA rally organised in Nagpur by a local body ‘Lokadhikar Manch’, he said people were now coming out on streets in support of the amended citizenship law.
