PM Modi, Amit Shah Destroyed Future Of Country's Youth: Rahul Gandhi

New Delhi:

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Sunday said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah have destroyed the future of the youth of India. He also blamed the duo for dividing the country.

“Modi & Shah have destroyed your future. They can’t face your anger over the lack of jobs & damage they’ve done to the economy. That’s why they are dividing our beloved ðŸ‡®ðŸ‡³& hiding behind hate. We can only defeat them by responding with love towards every Indian,” the former Congress President tweeted while addressing the youth of India.

Dear Youth of ðŸ‡®ðŸ‡³,



Modi & Shah have destroyed your future.They can’t face your anger over the lack of jobs & damage they’ve done to the economy. That’s why they are dividing our beloved ðŸ‡®ðŸ‡³& hiding behind hate.



We can only defeat them by responding with love towards every Indian. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) December 22, 2019

The tweet from Rahul Gandhi comes amid Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s allegation at the rally in Delhi’s Ramlila Maidan that Congress and other opposition parties are misleading people over Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

Rahul Gandhi is likely to make his first appearance along with his sister and Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra at Rajghat today. The member of Parliament from Kerala’s Wayanad Constituency will be accompanied by senior party leaders. On Friday, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra joined the students protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and a proposed countrywide National Register of Citizens at the India Gate and said the government is "anti-poor".

Also Read: Anti-CAA Stir: Death Count Climbs To 16 In UP, Protesters Indulge In Vandalism In Bihar | 10 Points

Rahul Gandhi was earlier criticised for travelling abroad while the people and students of the country launched a nationwide agitation over the CAA.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
