Don't communalise: IIT Kanpur students respond to professor who accused them of chanting anti-India slogans

Nationwide protests have been raging across country over the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and National Register of Citizens (NRC) (Photo: PTI)

Don't communalise the peaceful gathering at IIT Kanpur -- The students of the institute gave a befitting reply to the professor who complained against them for raising "anti-India" and "communal" statement while they staged protest in solidarity with Jamia students.

An article published on IIT Kanpur student media portal clarified what exactly happened on the day of protest and how their chant was given a "communal", "misleading" turn.

The students "strongly condemns the blatant communalisation and misinformation being circulated in digital media around the peaceful march on 17th December at the IIT Kanpur campus".

They mentioned a video shared by a right-wing magazine reporter on Twitter in which the protesters are seen chanting lines from a poem by famous Pakistani poet Faiz Ahmed Faiz's -- "Hum Dekhenge". The professor at IIT Kanpur, who filed a complaint to the institute's director against students for "spreading hate against India", found the lines objectionable.

In the video, the students recited few lines from Pakistani poet Faiz Ahmed Faiz's poem "Hum Dekhenge" while protesting against the police crackdown at Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia last week.

The IIT-Kanpur students said what the magazine did was a "literal-but misleading- translation by the complainants of two lines of the poem, which read: "When All Idols Will Be RemovedOnly Allah's Name Will Remain."

"This is exactly how propaganda is manufactured to create ruckus in an otherwise peaceful community: lines were taken out of context, the events of the march were grossly misrepresented, the publication did not contact the students to cross-check the claims made by Sharma, and half-truths are being circulated to drive an agenda," the article read.

The IIT-Kanpur professor, in his complaint, alleged that the students made anti-India and communal statements during their demonstration in solidarity with Jamia students, a right-wing magazine reported. The faculty's complaint was based on two lines of the poem, which she misinterpreted: "When all idols will be removedonly Allah's name will remain"

"Organisers and masterminds must be identified and expelled immediately," the professor demanded in his complaint, the media report said. Fifteen other students have signed the complaint filed by the professors against the protesting students, it said.

The poem actually reads: "Lazim hai ke hum bhi dekhenge. Jab arz-e-Khuda ke kaabe se. Sab but uthwae jaenge. Hum ahl-e-safa mardood-e-harm. Masnad pe bethae jaenge. Sab taaj uchale jaenge. Sab takht girae jaenge. Bas naam rahega Allah ka. Hum dekhenge." It was the last line that turned as bone of contention, which when translated to English meant: When thrones will vanish, only Allah's name will remain -- implying the misleading translation by the professor.

This poem, penned by Faiz, draws deeply from religious symbolism. He talks about that 'Day of Judgement', "when the crowns will be tossed". Here, it is speculated that the poet is directly criticising Zia’s regime in Pakistan and its authoritarian style of functioning, eventually urging people to overthrow the tyrannical regime.
