CAA protests: At Gurugram, many speak up to wipe out divide

GURUGRAM: People from diverse backgrounds, among them students, homemakers, social workers and activists, gathered at Leisure Valley Park on Saturday afternoon to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), which they denounced as discriminatory, and the proposed nationwide National Register of Citizens (NRC).The peaceful protest took place amid a big police deployment. To make their point, the protesters read out, together and aloud, the Preamble to the Indian Constitution to underline the values India stands for.Towards the end of the three-hour meet, the protesters tore a page from copies of the CAA they carried to send the torn pages to the President.Among the speakers was Syeda Hameed, a former member of the erstwhile Planning Commission and a social rights activist. Addressing the crowd, Hameed said that as a kid, she was scared of disclosing her identity fearing that other children might refuse to play with her. However over time, things improved and she forgot about those days. “But today things have gone back to what they were,” she said.Md Adeeb, a former MP, was also among the protesters. “The government today is hell-bent on dividing the nation on the basis of religion. Who are they to ask us for our documents?” he said.In order to maintain law and order, Gurugram police had deployed around 150 men at the protest site. The protest was organised by the Gurugram Nagrik Ekta Manch and the organisers of the NotInMy Name movement. The Leisure Valley Park meet drew around 800 people.“We are here to assert our right to assembly. Any rightminded secular Indian understands that this Act is against the Constitution and will oppose it,” said Smita Sethi, a city-based doctor. One of those at the protest site was Sara Patel, a 15-yearold student. “Since we were in Class 1, we have been told India is a secular nation and then suddenly one day, they take that away from us. We are here to save our Constitution and save our nation.”A young student took to the stage and said her mother had objected to him coming to protest as he is Hindu. “Today, I am a Hindu and tomorrow I will be a Dalit or a Brahmin because this division will not stop with Hindus and Muslims,” he said.
