Congress worker Sadaf Jafar arrested, beaten up during Lucknow protests as she filmed police inaction

Social activist Sadaf Jafar has been booked in connection with the anti-CAA protests in Lucknow, UP. (Photo Courtesy: Facebook)

Sadaf Jafar, a UP-based Congress worker and social activist, was arrested and allegedly beaten up in custody during a demonstration against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in Lucknow. Before her arrest, she had posted critical videos accusing the police of inaction during the clashes.

Violent protests broke out in Lucknow on December 19 during a demonstration against the new citizenship law when protesters pelted stones and torched vehicles parked outside a police post.

Over 200 people were detained following the clashes between the anti-CAA protesters and security forces. One of the detainees is social activist Sadaf Jafar.

Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra took to Twitter to demand the immediate release of Sadaf Jafar. She said, "Our activist Sadaf Zafar was telling the police to grab the miscreants but she was picked up and beaten up by the UP police....Such repression will not do."





Sadaf Jafar was at the protest site in Lucknow when she was picked up by the police. An FIR was registered against 34 people, including Sadaf Jafar, at Hazratganj police station in Lucknow.

Before being picked up by the police, Sadaf Jafar had posted two videos on Facebook highlighting police inaction when the protests turned violent in Lucknow.

In one of the videos, she is heard asking the police why they were not acting against the unruly protesters. She is also heard saying that the stone-pelting incident was staged.

"Why are not you stopping them? Why are you standing and watching the show and not nabbing them? What is the use of your helmets?" Safad Jafar is heard saying in the video.

In another live video on Facebook, a women cop caught Sadaf Jafar at the protest site and took her in custody. All this while, Sadaf Jafar was heard asking the woman cop why she was being detained.

"What have we done? Why are you arresting me? Why didn't you arrest the people who were pelting stones? How can you arrest me?" Sadaf asked the woman police officer when she was picked up.

"Sadaf was unarmed and never raised any slogan against the government. She was all for upholding the Constitution that governs the law of the land," Naheed Varma, Sadaf's sister, was quoted as saying by Hindustan Times.

In a Facebook post, Naheed Varma alleged that her sister has been slapped with sabotage and attempt to murder charges.

"My sister Sadaf has been arrested yesterday from Parivartan Chowk. Totally uncalled for and cowardly action of the police! They have slapped charges like sabotage and attempt to murder on her while she was reporting live on how police were complicit in sabotage at the dharna," she said.

"None of us were informed or apparently allowed to talk to her family. The children are in panic and so are we! Please pray for her early release," Naheed's Facebook post reads.

The people who were detained by the police for their alleged involvement in the Lucknow violence against the CAA have been booked for rioting, unlawful assembly, attempt to murder, wrongful constraints, criminal intimidation, criminal assault on public servant, among other charges.

'SADAF KICKED IN BELLY'

Sadaf Jafar's niece has alleged that she has been brutally beaten up by the police. She said Sadaf has now been shifted to Lucknow jail.

Speaking to The Quint, Sadaf Jafar's sister said, "She has been beaten with a baton on her legs and hands. The police also kicked her on the belly, following which she had internal bleeding."

Following Sadaf Jafar's arrest, her friends and family took to social media to demand her unconditional release.

"we get to hear that she has been arrested and was brutally beaten up by male police officers after police picked her up. She was bleeding profusely. We need to demand her unconditional release!" Former JNU student and activist Umar Khalid said.
