Anti-CAA stir: UP Govt alleges Islamic outfits PFI, SIMI behind violence as death toll mounts to 16; protests continue in Delhi

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: The violent protests against the contentious Citizenship Act continued on Sunday. Due to the protests, as many as 16 people, including an eight-year-old, have died in Uttar Pradesh while hundreds have been injured. The UP government, however, has blamed ‘outsiders’ for the violence during the protests and said that six people from West Bengal associated with Islamic outfits PFI and SIMI have been arrested.

Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that the controversial attack has nothing to do with Indian Muslims and attacked the Congress for spreading lies on it. Addressing a rally at Delhi Ramlila maidan, he said that people were incited and people sitting on high positions shared fake videos.

Here are today’s highlights of the protests against the contentious Citizenship Act:

Uttar Pradesh:

The UP government on Sunday blamed ‘outsiders’ for the violence during the protests -- due to which 16 people have died -- and said that six people from West Bengal associated with Islamic outfits PFI and SIMI have been arrested. The authorities also detained a TMC delegation at Lucknow airport when it was heading to meet the families of those killed in the clashes.

“There is involvement of Popular Front of India (PFI). They have connection with SIMI. Six people from Malda have been arrested,” Deputy Chief Minister Dinesh Sharma said adding that as many as 288 police personnel sustained injuries, of which 62 were due to firearms, during the violent protests.

Meanwhile, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Sunday met the families of two persons who were killed in violence in the Bijnor district. She also interacted with people in Nahtaur area.

The situation, however, remained peaceful in the state though internet services have continued to be suspended in many areas, while prohibitory orders remained in force across the state.

Meanwhile, Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav attacked the state government alleging that the new citizenship law has been brought in to ‘divert the attention’ from the ‘virtually destroyed’ economy and rising unemployment.

“As far as riots are concerned, those inciting riots are sitting in the government itself. Only those sitting in the government will be benefited by riots. BJP is deliberately spreading hatred, scaring people. They have failed on the front of real issues,” he said.

The Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission (UPSSSC) also announced the postponement of certain examinations that were scheduled to be held on December 24 and 26. According to an official notification, these examinations for recruitment of junior assistants and computer operators will now be held on January 4 and January 10 respectively.

Delhi:

The protests against the amended Citizenship Act continued in Delhi on Sunday and protests were held in different parts of the city. In South Delhi, hundreds of people came out in support of Jamia Millia Islamia students and demanded scrapping of the law during the march. They also raised solgans such as ‘Inquilab Zindabad’. However, the police had made elaborate arrangements to ensure that there was no protest around the Ramila Ground where PM Modi addressed rally.

Meanwhile, people of LGBT community also hit the streets, voicing opposition against the CAA and NRC at the Jantar Mantar and expressed concern that a countrywide National Register of Citizens will lead to ‘

‘exclusion’ of most of them.

“What if my parents throw me out of the house. People elope, leave their house because of violence. In such a situation, all they have is an Aadhaar card,” said a protester.

Hundreds of people also march at Delhi’s Nizamuddin, holding placard saying “when injustice becomes law, resistance becomes a duty”.

Maharashtra:

Protests were also held in Maharashtra’s Mumbai on Sunday with hundreds of people holding a march in the state capital’s Dharavi. The protest march was held on 90-feet road in Dharavi and saw participants holding placards against CAA and the National Register of Citizens exercise that some BJP leaders have been claiming would be held nationwide.

However, people widely praised the Mumbai police as they endured whose efficiency ensured a massive rally against CAA and NRC went off without any untoward incident.

Meanwhile, former Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis said that the Citizenship (Amendment) Act is not against any community or religion and alleged that some political parties are spreading falsehood about the new law to create unrest in the country. Addressing a pro-CAA rally organised in Nagpur by a local body ‘Lokadhikar Manch’, he said people were now coming out on streets in support of the amended citizenship law.

West Bengal:

In West Bengal, the situation remained largely peaceful and on untoward incident was reported. According to sources, police administration has increased vigil and beefed-up arrangements in trouble-torn areas to maintain law and order.

The state has witnessed unabated violence and arson from December 13 to 17 owing to protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

(With PTI inputs)

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
