UP Cop Saved By Wallet After Bullet Pierced Through His Vest During Anti-CAA Protests

New Delhi:

A policeman in Uttar Pradesh had a narrow escape during anti-CAA protests in Firozabad after a bullet pierced his bullet-proof vest but got stuck in the wallet he had kept in the pocket of his jacket. The officer, identified as Vijendra Kumar, said that he was feeling like he has been granted another life.

"I was on duty in the Nalband area when some of the protestors opened fire at us. The bullet pierced my bullet vest and got stuck in the wallet that was kept in the pocket of my jacket. There were 4 ATM cards and some pictures of Shiv Ji and Sai Baba. It feels like this is my second life," Kumar said narrating the incident.

Firozabad: Narrow escape for Police Constable Vijendra Kumar after a bullet pierced his bullet proof vest and got stuck in his wallet that was kept in his jacket's front pocket. He says 'It happened yesterday during the protests, I really feel like this is my second life.' pic.twitter.com/XlnkXqZX61 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 22, 2019

Meanwhile. the death count in violence related to protests against Citizenship Amendment Act in Uttar Pradesh has climbed to 18, officials said on Sunday. Over 260 policemen were also injured, of whom 57 received gunshot wounds in Kanpur, IG (Law and Order) Praveen Kumar was quoted as saying by PTI. In Muzaffarnagar, 25 policemen were injured in stone-pelting on Friday and SP City got pellet injury when someone in the crowd used an illegal firearm, SP Abhishek Yadav said.

Internet services have been suspended in 25 districts of Uttar Pradesh. The internet will remain suspended till Monday noon. Districts, where the internet will remain suspended, are - Lucknow, Sitapur, Aligarh, Saharanpur, Meerut, Shamli, Muzaffarnagar, Ghaziabad, Bareilly, Mau, Sambhal, Azamgarh, Agra, Kanpur, Chandauli, Varanasi Firozabad, Mathura, Pilibhit, Bulandshahar, Amroha, Rampur, Bijnor, Moradabad Monday and Prayag. All the schools, colleges and other educational institutes in the state capital will remain closed till December 24.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
