Ahead of its Rajghat ‘Satyagrah’, Congress, Rahul accuse Modi of “destroying” India’s future

NEW DELHI: Congress on Sunday rejected prime minister Narendra Modi ’s claims that the opposition was “inciting” people and clarified that statements made by home minister Amit Shah in both Houses of Parliament were, in fact, responsible for creating an environment of fear and uncertainty in the country.During the discussion on the Citizenship Amendment Bill in Lok Sabha, Shah had said a nation-wide NRC will be implemented after the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). In contrast, however, Modi on Sunday said his government since it came to power in 2014, “had no discussion on NRC anywhere”. Modi even said the Assam NRC was implemented on Supreme Court directives.Congress leader Rahul Gandhi accused Modi and Shah of “destroying” the future of India’s youth and “hiding behind hate” to escape their anger over lack of jobs and state of economy. “Dear Youth of India, Modi and Shah have destroyed your future. They can't face your anger over the lack of jobs and damage they've done to the economy. That's why they are dividing our beloved India and hiding behind hate. We can only defeat them by responding with love towards every Indian,” Rahul said on Twitter.On Monday, Congress will also stage a ‘Satyagrah’ at Rajghat where senior party leaders are expected to participate in protest against CAA and NRC.Ahead of the protest, Congress’ Twitter handle put out “mythbusters” to counter Modi’s claims, senior spokesperson Anand Sharma also said it was the government, not the opposition, responsible for the atmosphere of fear in the country.“The home minister’s statement in both Houses of Parliament created an environment of fear, insecurity and uncertainty. The government is responsible for that,” Anand Sharma said.He rubbished the PM’s claims that there are no detention centres in the country. “Detention Centres exist in India. People are being kept there...those who fought for us in Kargil War have also been sent to those detention centres...even international media made films of those detention centres and showed 600 persons being lodged in five rooms in Assam. Kids separated from their mothers, families torn apart,” he said.Congress also said the PM, if he is serious about providing a “healing touch” to bring an end to the violent protests against CAA across India, he should call all chief ministers to a meeting of the National Integration Council. Asking the PM to “speak responsibly”, Congress also said only the PM himself can improve the situation in the country.“Right now, the complete attention of the Indian government should be on economy that is in tatters. At this time, no other discussion should be done. If you look at the kind of narrative there is in the country today, we find that the attention from the real issues has been diverted,” Sharma said.
