Jharkhand election 2019 all you need to know: From key candidates, exit poll to 2014 Assembly election results

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The 81-member Jharkhand Assembly went to polls in five phases from November 30 to December 20 BJP is hoping to retain power while the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM)-led Opposition alliance is eyeing comeback in the state Chief Minister Raghubar Das, who contested from Jamshedpur East against ex-cabinet colleague Saryu Rai, is one of the prominent candidates

Ranchi: Results of five-phased Jharkhand Assembly elections will be declared on Monday with the ruling BJP hoping to retain power while the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM)-led Opposition alliance eyeing comeback in the state.

The 81-member Jharkhand Assembly went to polls in five phases from November 30 to December 20. The counting will start at 8 a.m. in all the 24 district headquarters while the first result is expected to be announced around 1 pm.

Meanwhile, elaborate arrangements have been made by the Election Commission for counting at all the districts' headquarters.

The BJP and Congress alliance had held several rallies and campaigned extensively to woo the voters. Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP president and Union Home Minister Amit Shah addressed nine rallies each while Congress leader Rahul Gandhi addressed five rallies and Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra addressed one rally.

Also Read: Jharkhand Election 2019 results LIVE

Which are the main political parties?

Jharkhand Assembly polls is being seen as a direct fight between BJP and Jharkhand Mukti Morcha-led grand alliance. The other political parties that in the elections fray are – AJSU, LJP, JD(U) and Jharkhand Vikas Morcha-Prajantarik.

Who are the key candidates?

Chief Minister Raghubar Das, who contested from Jamshedpur East against ex-cabinet colleague Saryu Rai, is one of the prominent candidates.

Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM) executive president and former Jharkhand chief minister Hemant Soren is another key contender, who fought the Assembly polls from Dumka and Barhet. He has been pitted against Social Welfare Minister Louis Marandi at Dumka.

Former chief minister and Jharkhand Vikas Morcha-Prajantarik (JVM-P) president Babulal Marandi, who has been fielded from Dhanwar Assembly seat is also among key players.

Other top candidates who are in poll fray include, Jharkhand Agriculture Minister Randhir Singh from Sarath constituency, former deputy chief minister and sitting JMM MLA Stephen Marandi from Maheshpur and JD(U)'s Jharkhand unit chief and ex-MP Salkhan Murmu from Sikaripara.

The AJSU president, who lost the 2014 Assembly poll, is trying his luck again from Silli seat.

What exit polls predict?

Most of the Jharkhand election 2019 exit polls indicated return of JMM-Congress alliance to power in the state while some predicted a hung assembly.

Times Now exit polls predicted that the Opposition Grand Alliance led by Hemant Soren's Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM), which includes Congress and RJD may come to power in the state by winning 44 seats while the BJP is expected to bag 28.

According to India Today-Axis My India exit polls, the Opposition alliance is likely to unseat the BJP while the ruling party is expected to be limited to just 30 seats.

The IANS-CVoter-ABP exit poll forecasted 31 to 39 seats for the JMM-led alliance and 28 to 36 seats for the BJP.



Last Assembly elections results

The BJP had won 37 seats in 2014 Assembly elections in the state and formed the government with its ally AJSU that bagged five seats.
