CAA protests: Method in madness? Violence by ambush

Policemen on vigil in Old Lucknow on Saturday

LUCKNOW: Small groups hiding in alleys mounting a sudden attack, illiterate children holding placards in English in the vanguard of protests, maximum mob mobilisation in areas with minimum police deployment — this seems to be the strategic blueprint of protesters against the new citizenship law, say senior police officers in Uttar Pradesh.

Cities like Lucknow, Kanpur, Varanasi, Meerut, Bahraich, Agra, Firozabad, and Gorakhpur were all witness to planned violence, which led to 15 deaths since Thursday.

Inspector general of police (law and order) Praveen Kumar told TOI that based on reports sent by district police chiefs, the pattern of protests in the state resemble guerrilla tactics and was conducted with clinical precision.

“We observed brickbatting was done during specific time periods, only in areas where deployment of forces was low,” Kumar said, adding in many districts police overheard protesters talking in Bengali and hurling stones at cops and mediamen without provocation,” said the IG.

In Varanasi, senior superintendent of police (Varanasi) Prabhakar Chaudhary told TOI that in Bhelupur police station under Bajardiha area, eight-year-olds were handed over placards and made to protest on roads. “The children and their parents are mostly illiterate, how can they prepare placards in English,” he pointed out. The officer said in Bajardiha area some pamphlets were distributed two days ago with slogans against the Indian state, for which 70 persons have been arrested and will be in custody till January 4. Chaudhary said in Madanpura area as many as 10,000 persons assembled on Friday. “While children and teenagers were spotted, no elder person could be seen in the area as part of the protest,” said Chaudhary. A similar pattern was witnessed in Mau, Azamgarh, Jaunpur, Bhadohi when people returned from mosques after offering ‘namaz’.

“Teenagers and boys remained at the forefront and indulged in brick-batting while the elderly stood several ranks behind,” said Braj Bhushan, ADG Varanasi Zone.

In the state capital, additional superintendent of police (West) Vikas Tripathi said, “Those pelting stones and bricks were outsiders. In Parivartan Chowk, suddenly a large cache of bricks were spotted.” He said he had never seen such a form of protest where even after being pushed back, protesters kept hurling stones and torching police outposts and vehicles. Likewise, there was a method in the madness during protests in western UP too.

Inspector general of police (Agra range) A Satish Ganesh told TOI, “We scanned 500 images between 1.56pm and 4pm in clash-hit areas, including Agra and Firozabad, in which some elders are talking to policemen and then suddenly they move to the crowd, giving a signal to young people and then disappear. Later, the younger lot takes policemen head on,” he added.

The officer also added the attacks were organised by small groups. “They were hidden in alleys and lanes and mounted attacks on the police and mediamen in areas which had thin force,” he said. Ganesh said.312 bore bullet injuries were noticed on many cops in his range handling the protests.

DGP OP Singh had hinted at a conspiracy by outsiders. Local intelligence units in Lucknow, Varanasi, Agra and Meerut told TOI that from Monday some people were distributing pamphlets which had anti-India messages.


