‘Time to show you are an Indian’: Rahul Gandhi gives call to the youth to join Rajghat ‘satyagraha’ today

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Monday gave a call to the students and youth of the country to come out and join him as he holds a ‘satyagraha dharna' at the Rajghat here against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

The ‘satyagraha dharna’ is being organised by the Congress party today at Rajghat – a memorial for the Father of the Nation, Mahatma Gandhi – to demand protection for the Constitution and the rights of people. Apart from Rahul, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and other senior leaders are expected to join the 'satyagraha dharna'.

Giving the call to the youth, Rahul this morning tweeted that it was important to protest against the hate and violence unleashed by the duo of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah.

“Dear Students & Youth of India, it’s not good enough just to feel Indian. At times like these it’s critical to show that you’re Indian & won’t allow India to be destroyed by hatred. Join me today at 3 PM at Raj Ghat, to protest against the hate & violence unleashed on India by Modi-Shah” the former Congress president’s tweet read.

Dear Students & Youth of,



It’s not good enough just to feel. At times like these it’s critical to show that you’re & won’t allow to be destroyed by hatred.



Join me today at 3 PM at Raj Ghat, to protest against the hate & violence unleashed on India by Modi-Shah. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) December 23, 2019

Congress general secretary KC Venugopal had said on Saturday: "Senior Congress leaders will undertake a satyagraha at Mahatma Gandhi's Samadhi at Rajghat, day after tomorrow, December 23 from 3 pm to 8 pm. In line with the path of non-violence, yet consistent and unequivocal opposition shown by the Father of the Nation, the party's satyagraha will fight against this dictatorial government and to protect Baba Saheb's (B R Ambedkar) sacred Constitution."

The Congress decided to hold the silent protest at a meeting on Saturday attended by interim president Sonia Gandhi and other senior leaders.

On Sunday, PM Modi hit out at the opposition led by the Congress for pursuing "divide and rule politics" in the name of CAA and NRC (National Register of Citizens). Blaming the Opposition for instigating violence over the amended citizenship law, the PM stated that the legislation and the NRC are not aimed at Indian Muslims.

The PM categorically said that the citizenship law aims at giving rights to persecuted religious minorities from three neighbouring countries. He added that the CAA or the NRC do not snatch anybody's rights, in a message to the Muslims who have been made to believe that their citizenship could be in trouble.

"Since my government first came to power in 2014, I want to tell 130 crore countrymen, there has never been a discussion on this NRC," the PM said, adding that the exercise was undertaken in Assam on the directions of the Supreme Court.

"Congress and its friends have been shouting that see the crow has flown after cutting your ear. And some people began chasing the crow. They should first check if the crow has cut their ears or not.... First you find out if anything has been done on the NRC," he said.

"The citizenship law or the NRC has nothing to do with Indian Muslims. They have nothing to worry," the PM added.
