India Insight: Onion prices add to nation’s tears

The world is anxiously watching as protests erupt across India, including in the capital New Delhi, over a controversial new law handing some non-Muslim migrants a quick path to citizenship. At least 20 lives have been lost in skirmishes in Assam, Uttar Pradesh and other states. The disruption adds to frustrations as many Indians face day-to-day struggles, such as the surging price of onions.

MUMBAI - The unassuming bulb goes into almost every meal - raw, pickled, powdered, fried. Indians buy the curry staple by the sack-load: “No onions, no flavour,” or so the mantra goes. Consequently, when onion prices soar, people are reminded up to three times a day of the failures of their political class. If volatile water supply is a defining feature of climate change, as Mridula Ramesh of the Sundaram Climate Institute says, that reminder will come more often.

Onions “offer a metaphor for much that ails Indian agriculture, particularly the market inefficiencies at the heart of the system - poor infrastructure, wastage and cartelisation,” says Mukund Rajan, chairman of ECube Investment Advisors, a fund manager focused on environment, social and governance issues in India. “The changing weather patterns, thanks to global warming, make the situation even more complex.”

Indeed, in some cities the veggies have been selling for up to 200 rupees, roughly $3, per kilogram, representing an up-to tenfold increase. Late rains delayed sowing and then post-monsoon flooding destroyed crops in Maharashtra and Karnataka, two of the top-producing states in a country home to 1.3 billion people. Many of the specimens now on sale are either unripe or black with rot, and sky-high prices are eating into incomes: the monthly average per capita is barely $160.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is acutely aware of the dangers rising onion prices present to his government. Onion-price spikes helped Indira Gandhi’s Congress party take back power in 1980. They also helped to bring down the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in 1998 assembly elections.

That’s why Modi’s BJP abruptly banned export of the flavour-bombs in September, sending prices soaring in Bangladesh and beyond. Indians have clamoured, some in stampede-like situations, to buy the few onions imported by the government and sold at subsidised rates. The cost-to-income pain of the essential kitchen ingredient is especially palpable in a slowing economy.

A new harvest means prices are likely to fall in the coming month, providing some relief. But only temporarily: India’s onion squeeze offers a glimpse into how warmer temperatures threaten to exacerbate dangerous inefficiencies in the country’s agricultural system, foreshadowing more of the price volatility infamous for toppling governments.

Onions have had a rough time, even for a crop accustomed to seasonal price variations. Roughly one year ago, prices collapsed to as low as one rupee per kilogram, one eighth the cost of production. Urban consumers shared some of the benefits and rejoiced. Hard-up farmers, perhaps unsurprisingly, dumped their produce on the road in protest.

India doesn’t need to grow more onions, it already produces more than it consumes. But poor storage, a shortage of food-processing facilities and greedy middlemen leads to widespread waste. These issues also whack the production of other vegetables that could otherwise be in plentiful domestic supply.

All of this is costing India. Half the workforce is in some way dependent on agriculture, though it generates barely 17% of gross domestic product. The pain hurts rural demand, leaving a large portion of the consumer base struggling. Fixing the productivity gap would, among other measures, enable politicians to end the electioneering practice of doling out waivers of farm loans, which in turn cost India’s few taxpayers billions of dollars.

Rajan of ECube points to market solutions for some of the challenges, including better cold-storage infrastructure; drone- and satellite-based weather mapping systems and early warning systems; and encouragement of farmer-producer organisations that can aggregate supply and develop products like chutneys and powders on scale. “Would a fund like ours be interested in supporting some of these ideas - absolutely, yes!” he says.

Water woes go beyond ruined crops, desperate farmers and taxpayers, argues Amit Chandra, Chairman of Bain Capital Private Equity India and head of the A.T.E Foundation, a philanthropic organisation focused on agricultural issues. The pain reverberates across government finances and is felt by companies in the form of a higher cost of capital, Chandra said at a Breakingviews Predictions event in Mumbai earlier this month. That leads to a lower risk appetite for businesses.

It’s logical to conclude that increasing climate change will magnify India's costly agriculture problems. Warmer temperatures will bring more floods, just like the ones that destroyed the last onions crop. It also means more droughts such as the one that crippled Maharashtra earlier this year, prompting quasi refugee-camps for farmers and their cattle to open in parts of the state home to the financial capital of Mumbai. Mass migrations aren’t hard to imagine.

Onions are about to get cheaper but, in many ways, the tears will continue to stream.

(Editing by Rob Cox and Katrina Hamlin) ((una.galani@thomsonreuters.com; Reuters Messaging: una.galani.thomsonreuters.com@reuters.net))
