Bengaluru: CAA supporters, protesters have town hall

BENGALURU: Hundreds of citizens hit the road here on Sunday morning in support of the citizenship law. The ‘India Supports CAA’ rally was in front of Town Hall, where a couple of days ago, hundreds opposing the law had been detained by police.Prohibitory orders in place here from Thursday morning were lifted at Saturday-Sunday midnight.Over 1,000 persons gathered at the three-hour rally organised by pro-BJP and Hindutva organisations and slogans hailing Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union home minister Amit Shah were raised. “We welcome our persecuted brothers across the border with open arms. Let’s come together and celebrate their homecoming,” declared an organiser.Terming anti-CAA protesters as those misled and misinformed, Bengaluru South MP Tejasvi Surya said there was a need to communicate CAA to all Indian citizens. He called upon the gathering to take the message to friends and neighbours and explain the benefits of the long-pending law.“Illiterate and roadside puncture shop workers are protesting against CAA,” he said. Alleging that a former minister and Congress leader provoked people with his speech in Mangaluru, he said, “If we make provocative speeches, ‘they’ won’t survive.”“Many advocates, IT professionals, common public and auto drivers have come out in large numbers to support CAA. It’s a peaceful rally to support the government move. The lives of Hindus in Pakistan and Bangladesh are pathetic. For the last 4-5 generations, they’ve been seeking citizenship in India and now it’s coming true because of CAA,” Surya said.“Congress is playing with the lives of young Muslims and it must stop politicising the matter. The party has been provoking the community by saying the country has not been safe for Muslims since 2014 when Narendra Modi came to power. That’s a lie. The CAA doesn’t discriminate between a Hindu and an Indian-born Muslim,” Surya said.Writer-activist Chakravarthi Sulibele said anti-CAA protests were provoked by the Congress to mislead the public. “Had we wanted it, we could have gathered half of Bengaluru’s population in support of CAA. The crowd today is just a sample,” he said.Sulibele added that NRC was implemented in Assam by the central government based on the Supreme Court order. The current government at the Centre is only implementing it, he added. However, he said the need of the hour is to erase fear and doubts among Indian Muslims.The protest led to traffic snarls on JC Road till late Sunday afternoon.
