‘Hindu-Muslim colour given to anti-CAA stir’

‘Hindu-Muslim colour given to anti-CAA stir’

NEW DELHI, Dec 22 (Agencies): People from the north-east gathered at Jantar Mantar here on Sunday, claiming that the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) were given a Hindu-Muslim colour and the voices from the region fighting for the rights of indigenous people ignored.

The protesters, including students and civil society members, said they were deeply hurt and distressed by the police “brutality” on those against the CAA, but “our protest is about our rights.”

“We will not let others hijack our agenda. We are here to speak about our people. You cannot always ask one to take more people,” Tripura’s royal scion Pradyot Deb Barman, who is also present there, said.

“We respect their protest. We sympathise with the students of Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University. It does not matter if you are a Hindu or a Muslim, the CAA is going to trigger a massive demographic change in the north-east,” a protester said.

In Madurai, activists of Campus Front of India and an Islamic outfit were booked for staging a protest against the CAA on Saturday without taking permission, police said.

"We have booked cases against around 2,000 members, including those from Campus Front of India and another Muslim outfit," a senior police officer told agencies.

Earlier, senior BJP Leader L Ganesan told reporters in Chennai that there was nothing in wrong in police using weapons to disperse mobs who damage public property.

He said police can use weapons at their disposal in an official capacity as otherwise the protesters may cause more damage to public property.

He claimed that there has been a decrease in protests against CAA nationwide and slammed opposition parties for their 'false propaganda' over the Act.

In Delhi at Nizamuddin later on Sunday, 22-year-old Khalid nervously held a placard that said "when injustice becomes law, resistance becomes a duty" as she heard speakers at a public meeting in Delhi explain the implications of the controversial citizenship law and the proposed all-India NRC.

Khalida was among the hundreds of people who gathered at the Musafir Khana Park in Nizamuddin Basti on Sunday to hear what could be the impact of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and the National Register of Citizens (NRC).

"We will follow the path of Mahatma Gandhi. We will never use violence, but will peacefully oppose the CAA and NRC and give reply of love with hate," the college student said.

Among those explaining the implications of the CAA was former JNU student and activist Umar Khalid, who said the most important fight right now was to save the country.

"No one can scare the people of India. I salute all the people out on the streets," Khalid said. "How do we prove our loyalty to our own country? The Indian Muslims are not accidental Muslims, but are Indian Muslims by choice."

Senior advocate Sanjay Hedge told the people that "all of us fighting this battle (against the legislation) are warriors of the Constitution".

"Our Constitution is alive till we are here to fight for it. We have not written this Constitution under normal circumstances. It was written after a lot of thought," Hedge said.

Amid heavy police deployment who stood outside the location of the meeting, Hedge said "we oppose this legislation not as a Hindu or Muslim but as an Indian".

Khalid Saifi, another senior advocate, said peaceful demonstration had become the most dangerous thing in this country in the past few days.

"We have freedom of speech. That is our strongest right and that very thing has become difficult in this country," he said.

Rahul Roy, one of the organisers of the Not In My Name campaign, said, it was a question of citizenship.

"Our Constitution said that citizenship will not be linked with religion. There is no question of linking it now," Roy said.

"Waving the national flag, scores of people held placards carrying couplets and catchy messages like 'bure din wapis de do (give back bad days)', 'Rebel with a cause - reject CAA' and 'Digital India without Internet - Shame'.

Shabnam said this is the "fight for our existence" and this is the fight for not only the survival of the Muslims, but also other religions.

When an eight-year-old Satish was asked why he was there he said he was here to save the country.

"I want to protect my country," he said, holding a placard of 'Reject NRC and CAA'.

In Chennai, the Madras High Court held a special sitting to hear a plea seeking to restrain DMK and its allies from holding a rally in Chennai tomorrow against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

The Tamil Nadu government has told the court that it has rejected permission for the rally.

In Assam, protest against the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act continued on Sunday with the Opposition Congress kicking off an 800-km long 'Padyatra' from

Sadiya to Dhubri. Sadiya is a far east town of Assam and Dhubri is the headquarters of the western most district, which is located along the India-Bangladesh border.

"We have been stating it very clearly that Assam will never accept this Act. It is anti-Assam and anti-Northeast. Congress party is with the people of Assam," Assam Pradesh Congress Committee president Ripun Bora said.

In Mumbai, several thousand people participated in a march in Dharavi to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act and the December 15 police action against Jamia Millia Islamia students.

Similar protests were held in Malvani in the northern suburb of Malad, though people here also shouted slogans in favour of the Mumbai police whose efficiency ensured a massive rally against CAA and NRC went off without any untoward incident on Thursday at August Kranti Maidan near Grant Road station.

In Ghatkopar, a BJP stronghold in the metropolis, several people came out for a pro-CAA rally, with participants hailing the Narendra Modi government for the Act.

In the meanwhile, a four-member TMC delegation, which was scheduled to meet the grieving families of those killed in Uttar Pradesh during protests over the new citizenship law, was "detained" at Lucknow airport on Sunday afternoon, party sources claimed.

TMC Rajya Sabha MP Md Nadimul Haque, who is part of the delegation, said he and other party memebers were staging a sit-in near a hanger at the airport. "We have been detained at Lucknow airport. As soon as we got down from the aircraft, we were surrounded by the police and were taken by the police to a secluded spot on the runway. We are staging a dharna near a hanger," Haque told PTI over phone from Lucknow.

The delegation, led by party's former MP Dinesh Trivedi also includes parliamentarian Pratima Mondal and Abir Biswas.

“I am sure if Muslims are included in the list of communities to be granted citizenship through CAA, they will not protest. But we will protest anyway,” she added.

Ningthem Meitei, 23, said the movement against the CAA started from Assam, but “it has been hijacked in a way. We are not being represented.”

“We condemn the violence against students and unarmed protesters. We stand with all those protesting against the CAA. But our protest is also about the demographic challenges confronting us,” he said.

For the people of the North-East, the issue of CAA goes beyond Hindus and Muslims, Denis (25) said.

“In Tripura, indigenous people account for only 30 per cent of the population. People from other regions and neighbouring countries are migrating to the state,” he said.

The protesters also demanded that police release RTI activist Akhil Gogoi and others arrested for demonstrating against the CAA.
