Claiming the streets: Indian women smash stereotypes, take front line in faceless anti-CAA protests

Protestors hold placards during a demonstration against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The nation-wide movement was escalated after the Delhi Police crackdown on the students of Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) Following the Prime Minister’s public address on Sunday evening, scores of youth and working professionals had amassed to stage a protest at Jantar Mantar Scholar and protesters closely watching the demonstrations stated that it has helped to empower women and break certain stereotypes

“It is high time that we step out of our comfort zones and join these Delhiites who have been staging protests against the government’s divisive Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA)”, said 33-year-old, Sana, a working professional who joined the ongoing protests against the contentious CAA and NRC bill during the weekend. Sunday’s demonstrations marked a week of the nation-wide demonstration against both the bills, due to which the state machinery had to resort to imposing Section 144, along with detention and internet and SMS services were suspended in several places across the country.

The nation-wide movement was escalated after the students of Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) took to the streets to protest against CAA and NRC on December 15. The forces entered the campus allegedly without permission and lobbed tear gas shells inside the varsity where students were reportedly also stuck inside the library.

This faceless and leaderless movement is gaining momentum but something different was witnessed this time - women taking charge of the protest and standing at the forefront. Women, during the protests across the country, were ready to face the arsenal of police weapons while actively engaging in the stand-off. Be it the photograph of three women captured in the JMI campus during the late evening of December 12 under the giant statue of poet Mirza Ghalib or the massive protest organised by the Pinjra Tod - an autonomous women’s collective involving students and alumni of various colleges - women were seen leading the faceless movement.

(Photo courtesy: Bharvi Dasson)

Following the Prime Minister’s public address at the Ramlila Maidan on Sunday evening, scores of youth and working professionals had amassed to stage a protest at Jantar Mantar. Women were again seen leading the demonstration while the atmosphere was filled with slogans condemning the police brutality and women raising slogans like ‘hum lekar rahenge, azaadi, tum kuch bhi karlo and 'BJP, murdabad, murdabad’.

While the Delhi Police personnel maintained a strict vigil and were well-equipped with water canons and tear gas shells to be used in case of emergency, a woman police officer, who did not wish to reveal her name stated, “It is the duty of police to help citizens.” Taking cognizance of the number of people protesting at the spot, “a large team of female police officers is always stationed to handle the women protestors”, she added.

The protestors did not just include students but several working professionals who swarmed Jantar Mantar. A 32-year-old protestor, named Shivani, a software developer told Mirror Now, "As a citizen, I have been scared to enter protests because we do not know when the police will attack the demonstrators. But today on a Sunday, I decided to visit here just because I saw a lot of women heading protests and standing against the government’s unconstitutional moves."

(Photo courtesy: Bharvi Dasson)

The scholar and protestors closely watching the demonstrations stated that it has helped to empower women and break certain stereotypes about female protestors. Kavita Krishnan, Secretary of the All India Progressive Women's Association, said “Women are always at the forefront and in solidarity with every citizen. This time, they have sensed fear, if India becomes a Hindu Rashtra, women’s freedom will be curtailed first and we will make way to a Hindu Saudi Arabia.” And CAA along with NRC is just a back-door entry to Hindu Rashtra, she added.

While the Aligarh Muslim University has preponed the winter vacation citing tensions, demonstrations in the varsity continue with women students taking the forefront and protesting from 11 am to 4 pm.

(Photo courtesy: Twitter)

Ayesha Renna, a Masters student from JMI was seen leading the protests in the varsity and her photograph with two other women was an instant hit across the social media. Talking about how women are at the forefront of this faceless movement, Renna said, “Not only me, but a lot of women are standing in solidarity. We realised if we do not stand against the system now, we will never get a chance to.”


