At Raj Ghat protest against CAA, NRC, Rahul Gandhi accuses PM of 'suppressing voice of country'

Follow us on Congress protest at Delhi's Raj Ghat against NRC, CAA

The Congress party on Monday resorted to sit-in protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and National Registrar of Citizens (NRC) as several key party leaders were present at Delhi's Raj Ghat.

Congress leaders including interim chief Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi, ex-PM Manmohan Singh, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, Ghulam Nabi Azad, Kamal Nath, AK Antony, Ahmed Patel and Anand Sharma are present at Raj Ghat to protest against CAA and NRC.

As part of the protest, Sonia Gandhi, Rahul and Manmohan Singh read the Preamble of the Constitution where the party is staging protest against CAA.

Hitting out at the Centre over CAA, Rahul Gandhi said, "Narendra Modi ji, when you get students shot by bullets and when you get them lathicharged, or when you threaten the journalists, then you try to suppress the voice of the country."

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi at Raj Ghat where the party is staging protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct: When it comes to clothes, the entire nation knows you because of your clothes. It was you who had worn a suit worth Rs. 2 crore, it was not the people of the country. pic.twitter.com/jAGGVHg7k1 — ANI (@ANI) December 23, 2019

The grand-old party has been against Centre's controversial act accusing the government of being insensitive to the minorities in the country.

Earlier in the day, Rahul Gandhi took to Twitter and said, "Dear Students & Youth of India, it’s not good enough just to feel India. At times like these it’s critical to show that you’re Indian and won’t allow India to be destroyed by hatred. Join me today at 3 PM at Raj Ghat, to protest against the hate & violence unleashed on India by Modi-Shah."

Congress has launched an all-out protest against NRC, CAA a day after Prime Minister Narendra Modi during his mega-rally at Ramlila Maidan slammed the Congress party for spreading lies against the CAA, and NRC to mislead the people.

The Prime Minister said that the opposition was not able to digest how he (Modi) was relected to power, therefore, had run out of issues to counter the government.

PM Modi appealed to all those who were protesting against the CAA to read first what is this act and then make an opinion. Prime Minister also requested to protesters to burn as many as effigies of him but do not damage poor man's property.

He also said that Citizenship Amendment Bill was not to take anybody's citizenship but it is for the people who have been facing religious persecution in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.

ALSO READ: Cong's top brass Sonia Gandhi, Rahul, Priyanka, Manmohan Singh at Delhi's Raj Ghat to protest against CAA, NRC

ALSO READ: Massive protests against NRC, CAA at Millers Road in Bengaluru

Latest India News
