Puducherry University gold medalist, who refused to remove her hijab, 'denied' entry to convocation ceremony

Rabeeha also said that she rejected the honour to protest police brutalities against students in various universities across India. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Puducherry University student allegedly denied permission to attend convocation Student Rabeeha Abdurehim had refused to remove her hijab in the presence of President Kovind The student was allowed to enter the venue only after the President left

Puducherry: A Puducherry University student was allegedly denied permission to attend her convocation ceremony after she refused to remove her hijab.

The victim identified as Rabeeha Abdurehim was the gold medalist in MA Mass Communication course.

According to a report in The Times of India, Rabeeha was prevented from attending the university's convocation ceremony in the presence of President Ram Nath Kovind at the event.

The student was allowed to enter the venue only after the President left. Later, Rabeeha rejected the gold medal as a mark of protest for refusal of permission to attend the convocation in the presence of President Kovind.

The 2018 batch student also registered her protest against the passing of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA), National Population Register (NPR) and National Register of Citizen (NRC).

The woman said she was stopped from entering the Jawaharlal Nehru Auditorium, the venue of the event, just before the arrival of the President. The security guards asked her to remove her hijab, which the student refused.

After the President left, the officials continued to distribute the certificates and medals to students, but Rabeeha refused to collect the medal and only took her certificate.

"I rejected the medal to protest the ill-treatment meted out to me. The security guard prevented me from going to the venue and treated me as a suspect as if I was going to do something and I don't know what. I have also rejected the medal as a show of solidarity to students across India who are fighting for what is India right now," Rabeeha said.

Rabeeha also said that she rejected the honour to protest police brutalities against students in various universities across India for their protest against the NRC and the CAA.
