WB Guv Jagdeep Dhankhar shown black flags by Jadavpur University students

‘Profoundly shocked’: Mamata writes to PM Modi over Centre's move to reject Bengal tableau from R-day parade

Proposal to change rules for central deputation of IAS officers affects states' administration: Mamata to PM

WB Guv Jagdeep Dhankhar shown black flags by Jadavpur University students

India

oi-Mousumi Dash

Kolkata, Dec 23: The students and staffs of Jadavpur University in Kolkata staged a black flag demonstration and they blocked West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankar as he arrived at University for the convocation ceremony on Monday.

A large number of students and staffs also showed the posters of 'BJP activist Mr Jagdeep Dhankar Go back' along with this they raised slogans 'Go back' with black flag.

The demonstrators' posters branded the Governor as 'Padmapal' (lotus) they alleged that he has failed to show impartiality as Governor.

No fresh violence: Bengal remains peaceful

According to the news agency ANI some posters were also showed where it was written, "Rajbhavan has become Nagpur (headquarters of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh)."

The students also claimed that he supported the controversial newly amended citizenship law.

Amid high security the protesters surrounded Dhankhar's car as he arrived to the campus over the university court meeting.

The demonstrators also demanded withdrawal of the Citizenship Amendment Act and not to implement the exercise of National Register for Citizens (NRC) in the country.

The students and the Trinamool-affiliated staff association stopped Dhankhar to enter the campus.

Earlier, the Governor said that the advertisement, in which Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee states that NRC and citizenship law will not be implemented in West Bengal, is unconstitutional and a head of government can't use public money for such campaigns.

He also called on Mamata government to brief him about the protest violence that took place across Bengal over the anti-CAA protest. The Governor has been at loggerheads with the Mamata Banerjee government over several issues earlier.

Mamata has said earlier that she won't allow NRC exercise in Bengal, opposing the citizenship law the TMC supremo has led several rallies in the state.
