Fact Check: Anti-CAA protests in Hyderabad passed off as police crackdown post NRC in Assam

The National Register of Citizens and Citizenship (Amendment) Act have evoked strong protests in parts of the country. On social media, multiple videos have been doing the rounds, often with misleading claims.

A video showing police taking men and women into custody is going viral with the claim that people whose names are missing in NRC are being picked up from their homes in Assam.

Facebook page Girda Jagar posted the video, the first portion of which shows female police personnel taking a few women in burqa inside a police vehicle. In the same video, another man is also seen held by policemen and pushed inside a vehicle.

The archived version of the post can be seen here.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the claim to be misleading. The viral video is not from Assam or any northeastern state, but Hyderabad.

Cops seen in the video are not targeting people whose names are missing in the NRC list in Assam, but it is Telangana police taking anti-CAA protesters into custody in Hyderabad.

This particular video, along with a few more, has gone viral on Facebook with a similar claim that this is how police in Assam are detaining people whose names are missing in the NRC list.

AFWA probe

After closely observing the video, we found TSP written on the insignia of both female and male police personnel in the viral video.

TSP is the abbreviation of Telangana State Police. The blue-coloured badge of Telangana police is also visible on the police uniform.

Using Invid verification tool, we reverse-searched a few frames from the viral video and found articles related to anti-CAA protests in Telangana. In articles published in The Times of India, Telangana Today and News Meter, it is mentioned that police had detained hundreds of protesters in Hyderabad between December 15 and 19 following several anti-CAA protests by various Muslim organisations.

Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (JIH) was one of the major organisations that took part in the protests. As per the above news reports, many men and women supporters of JIH, along with their leader and Telangana president of Ameer e Halqa Jamaat-e-Islami Hind Hamid Mohammed Khan, were detained by police.

We looked for the video of the protest on YouTube with the help of keyword search related to Jamaat-e-Islami Hind, CAA and Hyderabad.

YouTube channel JIH Telangana uploaded a video on December 19 with the caption Moulana HAMID Mohammed Khan addressing Media after arrest 19 12 2019 protest against NRC,CAB 1.

Several other YouTube channels such as Hyderabadnews Urdu and Asia Express Aurangabad uploaded the same news with similar videos of JIH leader Hamid Mohammed Khan’s arrest during anti-CAA protests in Hyderabad. Hamid Khan is the same person seen in the viral video being taken in a police vehicle.

We searched YouTube further to look for the particular portion of the viral video where a few women in burqa were seen held by female cops. YouTube channel News Planet had uploaded the same video on December 18 with the caption, Ladies from Halqa Telangana Jamaat e Islami Hind (JIH) arrested.

The YouTube channel of Siasat Daily also uploaded a news clip with the same video, with the caption CAA - NRC: Protesters taken into custody in Hyderabad.

With these videos, it is clear that it is not people whose names are missing in NRC in Assam, but anti-CAA protesters in Hyderabad who are being detained by police.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Viral video is of police in Assam picking up people from their homes whose names are missing in NRC Conclusion Video is of police detaining anti-CAA protesters in Hyderabad JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
