U.S. watchdog condemns violence against protesters in India

As the death toll in India's citizenship law protests reaches 22, an independent U.S. government monitor has condemned the use of violence by the Indian government.

USCIRF condemns the use of violence and calls on @narendramodi govt officials and law enforcement to resist use of force on those expressing concern on the citizenship bill that excludes Muslims; and reconsider the #NRC. https://t.co/65iy2CDiFu — USCIRF (@USCIRF) December 23, 2019

The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom is an independent, bipartisan federal government entity that monitors threats to religious freedom around the world. Their statement comes after police said on Dec. 21 that at least 15 people died in Uttar Pradesh during protests against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB). According to CNN, two people were killed in protests in the city of Mangalore and five others were killed in northeastern Assam state when protests first erupted in early December.

The next day, India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi defended himself in a speech before supporters. "Respect the Parliament! Respect the Constitution! Respect the people elected by the people! I challenge the ones who are spreading lies. If there is a smell of discrimination in anything I have done, then put me in front of the country," he said, as reported by the New York Times.

Widespread protests against the CAB began on Dec. 4 in Assam, Delhi, and a number of other northeastern cities and spread to many other parts of India. Indian police responded with violent tactics documented in videos that went viral on social media, and local governments have placed restrictions on public gatherings. The Indian government has also shut down access to internet in parts of the country including New Delhi, Aligarh and the states of West Bengal and Assam.

The CAB amended the Citizenship Act of 1955 to exclude Muslims from a path to citizenship for religious minorities fleeing persecution, marking the first time religion was used to determine eligibility for Indian citizenship.

Meanwhile, the State Department and other members of the Trump administration have offered muted responses to the protests, which are the latest point of tension between the Indian government and its Muslim population.

“We care deeply and always will about protecting minorities, protecting religious rights everywhere. We honor Indian democracy as they have a robust debate inside of India on the issue that you raised, and the United States will be consistent in the way that we respond to these issues, not only in India but all across the world,” said Secretary of State Mike Pompeo after a meeting with his Indian counterpart on Dec. 18.

Other branches of the government have been more critical of the Indian government. The House Foreign Affairs Committee tweeted a statement on Dec. 9 when the CAB passed the lower house of the Indian Parliament.

Religious pluralism is central to the foundations of both India and the United States and is one of our core shared values. Any religious test for citizenship undermines this most basic democratic tenet. #CABBillhttps://t.co/7wyeXMFfxl — House Foreign Affairs Committee (@HouseForeign) December 9, 2019

The State Department has updated its travel page for India with an alert warning U.S. citizens to "exercise caution in light of continued protests and demonstrations" as well as warning embassy personnel traveling to Uttar Pradesh, where violence demonstrations continue.
