Opposition party in India calls for repeal of new citizenship law

NEW DELHI — India’s main opposition party staged a silent protest in the capital Monday against a contentious new citizenship law, a day after Prime Minister Narendra Modi defended the legislation and accused the opposition of inciting unrest.

About 2,000 people joined the protest at the Raj Ghat, a memorial dedicated to Mahatma Gandhi, where the Congress party demanded “protection for the constitution and the rights of people enshrined in it.”

Tens of thousands of protesters have taken to India’s streets to call for the revocation of the law, which critics say is the latest effort by Modi’s government to marginalize the country’s 200 million Muslims. The law allows Hindus, Christians and other religious minorities who are in India illegally to become citizens if they can show they were persecuted because of their religion in Muslim-majority Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan. It does not apply to Muslims.

Monday’s protest was led by opposition Congress party chief Sonia Gandhi along with other senior leaders, including former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.

The party’s former president, Rahul Gandhi, had urged young people in New Delhi to join the protest. “It’s not good enough just to feel Indian. At times like these it’s critical to show that you’re Indian & won’t allow to be destroyed by hatred,” Gandhi tweeted on Monday.

Other protests were held across the country Monday, including in the southern cities of Bangalore and Kochi, where thousands came out on the streets against the law.

Twenty-three people have been killed nationwide since the citizenship law was adopted this month in protests that represent the first major roadblock for Modi’s Hindu nationalist agenda since his party’s landslide re-election earlier this year.

Authorities across India have taken a hard-line approach to quell the protests. They’ve banned public gatherings, and internet access has been blocked at times in some states. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has asked broadcasters across the country to refrain from using content that could inflame further violence.

The communication shutdown has mostly affected New Delhi, the eastern state of West Bengal, the northern city of Aligarh and the entire northeastern state of Assam.

Undeterred, protesters have continued to rally throughout the country. Protests against the law also come amid an ongoing crackdown in Muslim-majority Kashmir, the restive Himalayan region stripped of its semi-autonomous status and demoted from a state into a federal territory in August.

Sheikh Saaliq is an Associated Press writer.
