55 arrested in Dibrugarh for violence

According to the police, the persons were arrested from various parts of the district on the basis of incriminating video evidence collected from CCTV cameras and mobile video clips.

Dibrugarh police have so far arrested 55 persons for indulging in acts of vandalism and violence in the district during the recent anti-Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 protests. All of them have been sent to jail.

They have been found involved in violence, vandalism, posting objectionable messages on social media and destruction of public properties.

Altogether 75 cases have been registered in connection with the recent vandalism in the district, with the most in Chabua. Dibrugarh police have already announced rewards to persons who can provide video evidence.

Superintendent of police Sreejith Tiraviam said, “So far we have arrested 55 persons for indulging in vandalism and violence during anti-CAA protests in Dibrugarh. We have registered 75 cases and on the basis of the cases we have arrested them. More arrests are likely to be happen.”

Among the important installations damaged during anti-CAA protests are the post office, United Bank of India branch, circle office, Chabua, Zila Parishad chairman’s office, Chabua, Chabua town committee office and several gaon panchayat offices.

Chabua MLA Binod Hazarika’s house was burnt down as well. The police arrested Paragmoni Das from Nagaon on Sunday for allegedly posting fake news on the death of a girl in police firing at Bokul Tinali in the district on December 12. A team of Dibrugarh police went to Nagaon and arrested him.

Das had posted fake news on Sweta Thakuria’s death in police firing on his Facebook page, terming her the first “martyr” in protest against the CAA. Dibrugarh police on Monday arrested Sringkhol Chaliha, the organising secretary of the Bir Lachit Sena from Lepatkata of Dibrugarh for his “provocative speech” against the government.

Later, he was arrested by Gaurisagar police in Sivasagar district for anti-CAA protests and anti-government speeches. Bir Lachit Sena organised a meeting at Barbarua here against the Act.
