Bhim Army gives clarion call for anti-CAA rally in Koregaon Bhima

AIMIM also supports the issue; dist admin says such protest should be at an alternate venue



Another showdown with the law-enforcing agencies is on the horizon, as several organisations, including Bhim Army and All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul-Muslimeen (AIMIM), are mustering numbers to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) and National Register of Citizens (NRC) while gathering at the victory pillar at Koregaon Bhima on January 1.



However, the Pune district administration has made it clear that they will not allow any CAA/NRC protest at the Koregaon Bhima commemoration.



Every year, lakhs from various parts of the state visit the victory pillar at Perne phata near Koregaon Bhima to commemorate the victory of the army of East India Company, consisting soldiers from the Dalit community, over the army of Peshwas.



However, the commemoration to celebrate the 200th anniversary of the battle on January 1, 2018, turned violent with the riots in and around Koregaon Bhima. On the first anniversary of the riots, Koregaon Bhima witnessed a huge turnout of about 10 lakh people, although without any untoward incident.



Now, as commemoration day is nearing and people from not just the state but from various parts of the country are expected to visit the victory pillar, some Dalit organisations are now trying to include the protest against the CAA/NRC at the commemoration. Bhim Army, in particular, has started galvanising its supporters to protest against the CAA/NRC on January 1.



Speaking to Mirror, Ashok Kamble, Maharashtra chief of Bhim Army, said, “Earlier, we had a plan of organising a huge rally of our national president Chandrashekhar Azad but now he has been arrested for protesting against CAA/NRC, we had to make changes in the plan. However, the plan to show our opposition to the CAA/NRC is still on.”



Kamble added that their district-level units are reaching out to people to appeal them to join the rally to oppose the CAA/NRC when they will visit Koregaon Bhima. “Also, through social media, we are appealing visitors to carry placards to oppose the CAA/NRC. We are also reaching out to the Muslim organisations, appealing them to participate in the January 1 event to pay homage at the victory pillar as well as oppose the new act,” Kamble said.



Member of Parliament and AIMIM state chief Imtiaz Jaleel said, “We would love to be part of the commemoration at Koregaon Bhima where protests against the CAA/NRC can be done too. The protest against NRC/CAA is not by one particular community but it is by the people who believe in the Constitution. If Dalit organisations approach us, we will definitely give them positive response for participation in the Koregaon Bhima celebrations.”



Republican Party of India (A), which is part of National Democratic Alliance (NDA) at the Centre, has taken the opposite stand against Bhim Army, stating that the issue of protest against the new bill should not be clubbed with the Koregaon Bhima event. Senior RPI(A) leader Siddharth Dhende told Mirror, “We also have certain issues with the new act but the Koregaon Bhima is not the stage to protest against it. Over the years, lakhs of visitors have been visiting the victory pillar for celebrations and it should remain as it is. We are appealing all the Dalit organisations not to bring the issue of CAA/NRC at Koregaon Bhima.”



The district administration has also said it will not allow any protest rally against the CAA/NRC in and around Koregaon Bhima. District collector Naval Kishore Ram said, “We are very clear that we will not allow anyone to carry any placard or banner in connection with the protest to CAA/NRC at Koregaon Bhima commemoration. I have also give instructions to the police to make sure that nobody should shout slogans or hold a public rally in connection with the CAA/NRC there. We are not against anyone holding a protest. It is anyone’s right to protest but considering the background at Koregaon Bhima, we will not allow anybody to protest there. If anybody wants to protest, they can find an alternative location.”


