Citizenship (Amendment) Act protest: Curfew lifted in Assam's Dibrugarh, Tinsukia districts

Indian security personnel deployed in Assam's Guwahati | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) continued on Tuesday in several parts of the country. Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi were denied entry in Meerut by UP Police while they were on their way to meet families of the persons who were killed during anti-CAA protests. Also, the Central government announced that the updation process of National Popular Register (NPR) will be carried out between April and Septemeber next year while Home Minister Amit Shah answered a series of questions on National Register of Citizens (NRC) and CAA.

Citizenship (Amendment) Act Protest:

11.00 pm: A delegation of United Muslim Action Committee will meet Telangana Chief Minister, tomorrow. They will give a presentation to him on CAA, NRC and NPR. AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi will also be a part of that delegation.

10.45 pm: Uttar Pradesh Police arrested four people for attempting to disrupt communal harmony and violating section 144 in Kairana area on December 20. They have claimed that they are workers of Popular Front of India /Social Democratic Party of India. A probe is on in the case, confirmed SP Shamli, Vineet Jaiswal.

10.30 pm: Protesters organised a demonstration against the Citizenship Amendment Act, in Karnataka's Hubli earlier today. The protest was called by Anjuman-e-Islam.

Karnataka: Protesters organised a demonstration against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct, in Hubli earlier today. The protest was called by Anjuman-e-Islam. pic.twitter.com/NmmRjJKxsm — ANI (@ANI) December 24, 2019

10.00 pm: Curfew has been lifted in Assam's Dibrugarh and Tinsukia districts from today evening. Even the restrictions imposed on shops and other establishments retailing liquor have also been relaxed.

9.00 pm: Congress leader Ajay Maken slammed the Central government saying even Congress did NPR in 2011 but the party never took it forward to NRC. Ajay Maken was the then Minister of State for Home Affairs in 2011 and the head of Census Programme 2011.

8.00 pm: Union Home Minister Amit Shah asserted, "There is no link between NRC and NPR, I am clearly stating this."

While speaking to ANI in an exclusive interview, Amit Shah said, "There is no need to debate this (pan-India NRC) as there is no discussion on it right now, PM Modi was right, there is no discussion on it yet either in the Cabinet or Parliament."

He also responded to Asaduddin Owaisi's criticism of CAA, Shah said, "If we say that the sun rises from the east then Owaisi ji will say no it rises from the west, he always opposes our stand. Still, I again assure him that CAA has nothing to do with NRC."

Talking about NPR, he said, "It is possible that some names are missed in the NPR, still their citizenship will not be revoked because this is not the process of NRC. The NRC is a different process. I want to make it clear that nobody will lose citizenship because of NPR."

6.00 pm: West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankar has invited all vice chancellors for an interactive session on January 13, 2020, at 11 am at Raj Bhavan. The invitees have been advised to send in writing their concerns a week in advance, so the Governor is in a better position to understand their issues.

5.15 pm: Meanwhile, Union Minister Prakash Javadekar has denied reports claiming that the Central government will use the National Population Register (NPR) as National Register of Citizens (NRC).

"Currently, there is no proposal to conduct nationwide National Register of Citizens (NRC), on the basis of data collected through National Population Register (NPR)," stated Government of India in a statement.

5.00 pm: On violence during a protest against the CAA in Mangaluru, Karnataka Home Minister Basavaraj Bommai said, "We have ordered a magisterial inquiry, it was recommended by the National Human Rights Commission."

4.50 pm: Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan has called for an all-party meeting of leaders of political parties, religious and social organisations, over the Citizenship Amendment Act, on December 29 in Thiruvananthapuram.

4.45 pm: One of the accused in Seelampur violence case has moved an application in Delhi's Karkardooma Court for medical treatment. Court has directed jail superintendent to provide medical treatment and file a report by December 25.

4.30 pm: Uttar Pradesh minister Shrikant Sharma said, "People involved in the violence are being identified and strict action will be taken against them. Opposition parties tried to take political advantage of the situation in the state. Nobody will be spared."

4.15 pm: Meanwhile in Tamil Nadu, a case has been filed against eight thousand people including DMK president MK Stalin for holding a rally against the Citizenship Amendment Act in Chennai yesterday, without permission of the police.

4.05 pm: BJP's West Bengal vice president CK Bose questioned the credibility of the citizenship law asking, "Citizenship Act states that it's not based on religion. Then why are we stating that it's meant for Hindus, Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs? We should also include Muslims. If Muslims aren't being persecuted in their home country, they'll not come to India."

1.59 pm: Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra who were stopped outside Meerut by Police are now returning to Delhi.

1.47 pm: Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra stopped outside Meerut by Police. They were on their way to meet families of those killed in violence that broke out during protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra stopped outside Meerut by Police. They were on their way to meet families of those killed in violence that broke out during protests against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/kYlbmpDNDI — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 24, 2019

1.34 pm: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee raises slogans against Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Kolkata.

12.32 pm: Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra leave for Meerut where they will meet families of those killed in violence that broke out during protests against Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) 2019.

12.04 pm: Section 144 imposed in Mandi House area in view of a protest against Citizenship Amendment Act. Police teams have been deployed.

12.03 pm: Major Archbishop of Syro Malabar Church, Cardinal Mar George Alencherry in Kochi: Urge the Centre to review the Citizenship Amendment Act, we need a more democratic debate on this act.

10.28 am: Political strategist Prashant Kishor asks Congress to release an official statement saying No NRC will be implemented in Congress-ruled states. "Rather than trying to inform me what Congress CMs have said please share the OFFICIAL statement of the Congress President announcing that there will NO NRC in Congress-ruled states. I am sorry voting against CAB didn’t stop it, states saying NO to NRC will. So don’t get confused," he tweets.

9.54 am: BSP chief Mayawati, on Tuesday, appealed the centre to clear all the apprehensions of the Muslim community over CAA and nationwide NRC. "With this, people of Muslim society should also be careful that somewhere in the guise of this issue, they are not being exploited politically or they are being suppressed by this," Mayawati said in a tweet.

9.30 am: Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) MLA Amanatullah Khan has been booked for allegedly inciting violence during the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protest.

9.15 am: BJP MP from Tripura, has alleged that he has been given death threats from National Liberation Front of Tripura for voting in favour of the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), now an act, in the Parliament.
