Opposition accuses govt of neglecting Gwadar

Balochistan Assembly. PHOTO: ONLINE/FILE

QUETTA: The opposition members during Monday’s Balochistan Assembly session protested against the provincial government over its ‘non-seriousness’ towards the issues pestering the people of Gwadar, staging a sit-in inside the hall.



The session chaired by Qadir Nail witnessed uproar caused by the opposition parties, who were demanding government’s attention towards the issues of the port city of Gwadar.



Despite assurances, the opposition members staged a sit-in before the speaker’s dais and chanted slogans against the provincial government, accusing it of neglecting woes of the people of Gwadar.



“The citizens of Gwadar are the real owners of their resources; we will never compromise on the interest of the people of Balochistan,” said lawmaker Sanaullah Baloch while addressing the proceedings.



“Previous assembly adopted a resolution over land issues in Gwadar but we didn’t witness any implementation over it,” added Baloch as he sought three months ultimatum from the government over legislation on Gwadar’s land issues.



Sharing views on the problems of the port city, Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam Fazl’s MPA Syed Fazal Agha said the government has been increasing issues of Gwadar by neglecting its elected representatives.



Meanwhile, the Parliamentary Leader of Awami National Party Asghar Khan Achakzai proposed a Parliamentary Committee comprising all parties in order to proceed with a new legislation for Gwadar.



“Fortunately, our province is blessed with natural wealth thus the people of Balochistan should be taken into confidence over decisions that are being made concerning their province’s future,” said Khan.



Expressing astonishment over opposition’s protest, Finance Minister Zahoor Buledi refuted allegations regarding government’s non-seriousness towards the issues of Gwadar.



He said various mega-development schemes are underway in the coastal city.



“When we were forming the provincial government, people of Gwadar were facing the worst water crisis. The issue, however, has now been resolved. Similarly, a new university is also being constructed in Gwadar,” said Buledi as he brought attention towards the uplift projects that are being initiated.



“The government has started development projects in Gwadar worth 10 billion rupees apart from the MPA fund,” Buledi added. “The government will walk with the opposition members in taking any decision related to Gwadar, including legislation on its issues,” he maintained.



Buledi also suggested that the opposition members can table previous resolution in the house for debate.



He said the government has been working on various schemes for addressing the public’s concerns over Gwadar issue, remarking that the opposition will be taken into confidence over legislation and other matters related to Gwadar.



“Gwadar will see real development through the Master Plan, which has been prepared by a Chinese company with a cost of Rs400 million,” he said.



Last week, the opposition and treasury members of the Balochistan Assembly had strongly criticised New Delhi’s move to adopt controversial citizenship amendment bill, which the Indian parliament passed to deprive the Muslims of Assam of citizenship.



The new law applies to Hindus, Christians and other religious minorities who are in India illegally but can demonstrate religious persecution in Muslim-majority Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan. It does not apply to Muslims.



Opposition Leader Malik Sikandar Khan Advocate on a point of order took up the issue in the house when the assembly session started with Deputy Speaker Sardar Babar Khan Musakhail in the chair.



Published in The Express Tribune, December 24th, 2019.
