Anti-CAA protest: Bhim Army gives call for rally in Bhima-Koregaon

Bhima-Koregaon battle

Bhim Army

right-wing leaders Milind Ekbote

Sambhaji Bhide

Bhima Koregaon violence on January 1, 2018 led to violent protests in different parts of the country; (right) Bhim Army’s national president Chandrashekhar Azad

Chandrashekhar Azad

AIMIM also supports the issue; dist admin says such protests should be at an alternate venue.Ahead of the 202nd anniversary of theon January 1, several organisations are mustering numbers to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC) at Jay Stambh (victory pillar). Whileand the All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul-Muslimeen (AIMIM) are supporting the call for protest, the Pune district administration has made it clear that it will not allow any congregation at the site. Superintendent of Police Sandip Patil said the Pune police have also issued notices to 163 people, includingand. Ekbote was booked for instigating violence during the bicentenary celebrations of the battle on January 1, 2018.Every year, lakhs of people from various parts of the state visit the victory pillar at Perne phata near Bhima-Koregaon to commemorate the victory of army of East India Company comprising soldiers from the Dalit community over the army of peshwas. However, the commemoration to celebrate the 200th anniversary of the battle on January 1, 2018, had turned violent. On the first anniversary of the riots, Bhima-Koregaon witnessed a huge turnout of about 10 lakh people, although without any untoward incident.Now, as commemoration day is nearing and people from not just the state but from various parts of the country are expected to visit the victory pillar, some Dalit organisations are trying to include the protest against the CAA/NRC at the commemoration site. Bhim Army, in particular, has started galvanising its supporters to protest against the Citizenship Law on January 1.Speaking to Mirror, Ashok Kamble, Maharashtra chief of Bhim Army, said, “Earlier, we had a plan of organising a huge rally of our national president. But now that he has been arrested for protesting against CAA/NRC, we had to make changes in the plan. However, the plan to show our opposition to the CAA/NRC is still on.”Kamble added that their districtlevel units are reaching out to people to appeal to join the rally to oppose the CAA/NRC. “Through social media, we are also appealing visitors to carry placards to oppose the CAA/NRC. We are also reaching out to the Muslim organisations, asking them to participate in the January 1 event to pay homage at the victory pillar as well as oppose the new Act,” Kamble said.Member of Parliament and AIMIM state chief Imtiaz Jaleel said the organisation is in favour of protesting against CAA/NRC during the commemoration at Bhima-Koregaon. “The protest against CAA/NRC is not by one particular community but it is by the people who believe in the Constitution. If Dalit organisations approach us, we will definitely give them positive response for participation in the Bhima-Koregaon celebrations,” Jaleel said.Republican Party of India (A), which is part of the National Democratic Alliance at the Centre, has taken the opposite stand against Bhim Army, stating that the issue of protest against the Citizenship Act should not be clubbed with the Bhima-Koregaon event.The district administration has also said it will not allow any protest rally against the CAA/NRC in and around Bhima-Koregaon.
