German student at IIT-Madras made to leave country for protesting against CAA; Shashi Tharoor dismayed

Jakob Lindenthal taking part in anti-CAA protests | Picture tweeted by Sreeram S P

Chennai: An exchange student from Germany departed from India on Monday after he was asked to leave the country "immediately" by the immigration authorities here following his participation in an anti-CAA and NRC protest last week.

Jakob Lindenthal, part of a one-year exchange programme, was enrolled in a Master's course in the Department of Physics at Indian Institute of Technology, Madras.

Last week, the German student had participated in a protest at the IIT-Madras campus. On Monday around noon, Lindenthal reportedly received a verbal order from the Foreigners Regional Registration Office (FRRO) in Chennai to leave India immediately or face deportation.

The FRRO told the German student, who was due to complete his second semester, that his participation in the anti-CAA protests was in violation of the visa rules.

It was reported that Lindenthal, who hails from Dresden in Germany, was seen at a number of protest rallies over the past week.

He was summoned to the immigration department and informed that he had to leave the country. Reportedly, the student was asked about his views on CAA by the immigration officials.

At a short notice, the German student left India from Chennai airport. Reports aid he left for Amsterdam.

Reacting to the development, Congress leader and Lok Sabha MP from Thiruvananthapuram, Shashi Tharoor said the news was dismaying.

He tweeted: “German student at IIT Madras faces deportation for participating in anti-CAA protest. This is dismaying. We used to be a proud democracy, an example to the world. No democracy punishes freedom of expression. I call on @DrRPNishank to instruct @iitmadras to withdraw the expulsion & allow India to hold its head high in the academic world.”

Ever since the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 came into being, protests have broken out across the country against the legislation that seeks to grant citizenship rights to persecuted non-Muslim minorities from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan.

Students at the Aligarh Muslim University, Delhi’s Jamia Millia Islamia varsity and other institutions across the country have joined protests, some of them violent, against the CAA.
