West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar Shown Black Flags At Jadavpur University

New Delhi:

West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar on Tuesday was shown black flags at the Jadavpur University, a hotbed of anti-CAA protests. Protesting against the governor's stand on the proposed nationwide NRC and the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), the students surrounded his car, shouted slogans and showed him black flags when his convoy arrived at the university.

Denouncing the student action, Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar tweeted, “At Jadavpur University so that the students may get their degrees and enjoy the fruits of their labour and contribute to society. Unfortunately, the way to the venue in the University is blocked. Unwholesome. No affirmative role by concerned in sight. Worrisome situation.”

“The number of those obstructing is only around fifty. System being held hostage and those enjoined with the task are oblivious of their obligations. A collapse that can only lead to unwholesome consequences. Rule of law is no where in sight. As constitutional head concerned.” he said.

Kolkata: Protesting students block convoy of Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar as he arrived at Jadavpur University. Protestors show black flags and raise slogans against the Governor. pic.twitter.com/OWKkgLFFaT — ANI (@ANI) December 24, 2019

This was the second consecutive day when the Governor was heckled at Jadhavpur University. On Monday The governor was stuck amid chaos for around 30 minutes each time due to protests by the CPI(M)-backed SFI, Arts Faculty Students Union (AFSU), AISA and the Faculty of Engineering and Technology Students Union (FETSU).

When the students questioned him on police action at the Jamia Millia Islamia campus in Delhi, Dhankhar said he is the governor of West Bengal and can answer queries about this state only.



Stating that he believes in the autonomy of educational institutes and does not work at the behest of any political party, Dhankhar told them that he will be glad to sit and discuss their issues.



The university's Executive Council (EC) had on Saturday decided not to hold the special convocation in view of the threat of students' bodies to show black flag to him.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
