Anti-CAA Protests Highlights December 24: Rahul and Priyanka Gandhi stopped outside Meerut by police, returns Delhi

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: Amid rising unrest over the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019, Congress leaders Priyanka Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi are likely to hold protests in Meerut, Uttar Pradesh on Tuesday. Besides this, section 144 has been imposed in Delhi's Mandi house. Earlier on Monday, protests were held in Chennai by the DMK party against the CAA. The protests have gained pace in the last one week as people from several states, including Delhi, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and others have come out on the streets, expressing their anger over the Act-- passed by the parliament earlier this month.

The Citizenship Act aims to provide Indian nationality to minorities including Hindu, Sikh, Christians, Jews, among others except Muslims from Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan who reside in India since December 30, 2014. The critics say the Act discriminates against Muslims.

Here are the Highlights

4:00 pm: The Delhi High Court on Tuesday dismissed a plea which alleged that telecom services were disrupted in various parts of the national capital during the anti-citizenship law protests in violation of rules.

A bench of Chief Justice D N Patel and Justice C Hari Shankar declined to entertain the PIL after Additional Solicitor General (ASG) Sanjay Jain, appearing for the Centre, told the court the disruption was only for four hours on December 19 and was no longer in effect.

3:55 pm: Delhi's Seelampur violence case | One of the accused has moved application in Karkardooma Court for medical treatment. Court has directed jail superintendent to provide medical treatment and file a report by December 25. #CitizenshipAmendmentAct

3:40 pm: Police detain KSU (Kerala Students Union)-Youth Congress workers.

3:25 pm: Daryaganj violence | Other 9 accused have also moved bail application in Tis Hazari court. Matter has been listed for 26th December.

3:00 pm: Union cabinet, chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, approves over Rs 8,500 crore for updating National Population Register

2:45 pm: More than 20 people have died in protests after it was signed on December 11.

2:29 pm: Complaint filed against Sonia, Priyanka, Owaisi for giving provocative speeches against amended Citizenship Act.

2:25 pm: Shrikant Sharma, state minister: People involved in the violence are being identified and strict action will be taken against them. Opposition parties tried to take political advantage of the situation in the state. Nobody will be spared. #CitizenshipAmendmentAct

2:15 pm: CAA protests | Police release CCTV videos showing AMU students breaking gate, throwing stones

2:02 pm: Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra who were stopped outside Meerut by Police are now returning to Delhi.

1:55 pm: BJP's West Bengal Vice Pres CK Bose | Citizenship Act states that it's not based on religion. Then why're we stating that it's meant for Hindus,Buddhists, Jains& Sikhs? We should also include Muslims. If Muslims aren't being persecuted in their home country,they'll not come to India

1:41 pm: Rahul Gandhi and AICC GS Priyanka Gandhi were stopped outside Meerut by the Police. They offered to travel in a group of 3 people, however, they were still stopped. They were on the way to meet families of victims of the violent anti-CAA protests in UP.

1:40 pm: Karnataka | Protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct and #NationalRegisterofCitizens organized in Hubli

1:24 pm: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee raises slogans against Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Kolkata.

1:15 pm: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee leads a protest march against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct and #NationalRegisterofCitizens, in Kolkata.

1:05 pm: Traffic Alert | Sansad Marg is closed for traffic movement due to demonstration. Kindly avoid the stretch.

Traffic will remain affected on the following roads Ajmal Khan Road, Pusa Road, Todapur, Naraina, Rajouri Garden, NSP, Madhuban Chowk, Sector-9 Rohini and near Sant Sujan Singh International School Swaroop Nagar due to funeral procession of Sant Gurmukh Singh.

1:00 pm: Police teams have been deployed at the Mandi House area

12:46 pm: Delhi | Protesters gather at Mandi House to protest against Citizenship Amendment Act. Section 144 has been imposed in the area.

12:40 pm: West Bengal governor Jagdeep Dhankhar leaves after he was blocked by protesting students from entering Jadavpur University, Kolkata.

12:38 pm: Jamia Millia students join the protest in Mandi House

12:35 pm: Anti-CAA protesters take out rally in Hubballi, reported The Times of India.

12:30 pm: Darya Ganj violence | Court issues notice to police on bail plea of 6 accused.

12:25 pm: Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra have left for Meerut where they will meet families of those killed in violence that broke out during protests against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct

12:15 pm: Delhi | Section 144 imposed in Mandi House area in view of a protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. Police teams have been deployed.

Posted By: James Kuanal
