Boeing CEO Dennis Muilenburg resigns, David L. Calhoun to replace him : Bulletin: Business Today

Loading the player...

Will have to wait two quarters to see if momentum of green shoots sustains, says RBI Governor Shaktikanta Das



Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Governor Shaktikanta Das has said that the Indian economy is manifesting signs of economic recovery. He said that the green shoots of growth in the economy can be ascertained by the steady growth in project costs sanctioned by banks and financial institutions as well as increased investment in fixed assets by India Inc. However, the RBI chief said that it is important to wait for two quarters if the momentum of improvement in the economy can sustain before the apex bank arrives at a conclusion.

Boeing CEO Dennis Muilenburg resigns, David L. Calhoun to replace him



US-based aerospace manufacturer Boeing on Monday said that Dennis Muilenburg has resigned from his position as the chief executive officer (CEO) effective immediately. The company faced a series of setbacks under his tenure, including two fatal crashes of its top-selling 737 Max airplane. Muilenburg will be replaced by David Calhoun, who had served as chairman since October. Calhoun will assume the position of CEO and president on January 13, while CFO Greg Smith will lead the company till then.

'Save the country': Mamata writes to CMs, leaders of opposition parties on CAA



West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who is eyeing pan-India support in her fight against the Citizenship Amendment Act, wrote to chief ministers and senior leaders of opposition parties on Monday, urging them to unite and chalk out a plan to "save the country". Banerjee wrote separate letters to NCP supremo Sharad Pawar, Congress president Sonia Gandhi and National Conference leader Farooq Abdullah, among others, asserting the need for joint protests against the CAA and the proposed nationwide NRC.

Bengaluru highest paying city; and IT highest paying industry for talent in India: report



The IT capital of India, Bengaluru, continues to be the highest paying city for talent in the country, with the highest average annual cost to company for talent across junior, mid and senior levels, finds Randstad Insights Salary Trends Report 2019. Bengaluru topped the list in the year 2017 and 2018 Salary Trends report as well. Followed by Bengaluru, Hyderabad (at Rs 5 lakh) and Mumbai (at Rs 4.59 lakh) are top paying cities for junior level roles, finds the survey.

India amid significant economic slowdown, urgent policy actions needed: IMF



India is now in the midst of a significant economic slowdown, the International Monetary Fund has said, urging the government to take urgent policy actions to address the current prolonged downturn. In its report released Monday, the IMF Directors noted that India's rapid economic expansion in recent years has lifted millions of people out of poverty. However, in the first half of 2019, a combination of factors led to subdued economic growth in India.

Reliance calls government move to enforce arbitration payment 'premature'



Reliance Industries Ltd has called a government move to try and force the refinery-to-telecoms behemoth to pay dues from an offshore oil and gas field "premature" with an arbitration process still underway. The government and Reliance, along with partner Royal Dutch Shell Plc, are locked in a battle over the Panna-Mukta and Tapti offshore oil and gas field to the west of the country, with the government claiming it is owed revenue from the operators of the block. Reliance said in a statement on Monday that the government had approached the court prematurely to enforce its claim.
