Odisha govt assured to rebuild Mangu mutt: Punjab MLA

BHUBANESWAR: Two MLAs from Punjab along with some Sikh activists, who protested in Bhubaneswar on Sunday over recent demolition of Mangu mutt portions in Puri , said on Monday that the state government assured them to rebuild the monastery associated with Guru Nanak.A delegation led by Punjab’s Lok Insaaf Party MLAs Balvinder Singh Bains and Simarjit Singh Bains met minister of state for home Dibya Shankar Mishra here and expressed their concern over the demolition of vast portions of Mangu mutt by the state government for beautification of the periphery of Jagannath temple. Senior IAS officer Krishan Kumar, who is secretary of works department as well as chief administrator of the Jagannath temple, was present in the meeting.“We are happy after the discussion with the Odisha government. During our meeting, we expressed displeasure over razing of the mutt that was having memories of Guru Nanak. We urged the government to hand over the mutt site to Sikh community for construction of a Gurudwara in memory of Guru Nanak. The minister assured us that the state government will rebuild the mutt and construct a Gurudwara at the demolished site,” Simarjit told media persons.Simarjit said the state government also assured to preserve two other mutts—Punjabi and Bauli in Puri—having links with Guru Nanak and Sikhs. Significantly, Punjabi mutt faces imminent demolition like several other mutts, houses and commercial establishments that are being razed within 75-metre radius of Jagannath temple for beautification and protection of the shrine’s surrounding.“Our key demands, consisting construction of Gurudwara on Mangu mutt land and preservation of Punjabi and Bauli mutts have been accepted and approved by the state government. We are hopeful that the government will soon fulfil its promise and not disappoint us,” Simarjit said.Minister Mishra said the two Punjab MLAs and members of the Sikh community were unaware of the state government’s plan to rebuild and preserve the mutt culture and heritage. “We briefed them about our government’s noble cause of strengthening the security of Jagannath temple for which structures are being evicted within the 75-metre radius of the shrine. We told them that the government is preserving the temples, gaddis and other religious relics of different mutts. Only the unauthorized and illegally built commercial establishments were razed around Mangu mutt. They return happy and convinced after our meeting,” Mishra told TOI.
