Amid Deadly Protests, Animated Muslim Characters Are Being Used In Publicity Blitz. Why Not A Human Face?

Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) has launched a video with animated Muslim characters on social media in a publicity blitz aiming to bust "myths" around a new citizenship law that has sparked deadly protests across the country. The controversial law has been at the centre of the party's ideology and was vociferously pushed in the parliament by Home Minister Amit Shah, its former president.

AFP

The law has stoked concerns that Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government wants to marginalise India's Muslim minority, leading to widespread protests in most parts of the country. Interestingly, these protests are being led by students, who have accused the BJP government of being divisive in their agenda.

The short video clip that was released yesterday shows two bearded men in traditional Muslim clothing discussing the legislation before concluding that the country can only progress if there is "peace and brotherhood".

Reuters

Twenty-five people have died in protests so far, but demonstrations continue in places such as Chennai, Bangalore and Delhi.

In Kolkata yesterday, demonstrators also marched in favour of the law.

The video was released by Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party on its Twitter handle after Modi on Sunday said Muslims "don't need to worry" about the new law.

The ruling right-wing government also carried an advertisement across all national dailies with a "myths vs facts" explainer saying the law was not against India's 200 million Muslims.

The message also stated that there were no immediate plans to roll out a nationwide register of citizens. Muslims and others fear they could become stateless if they are unable to prove they are Indian.

Even if the register were rolled out, "the guidelines would be framed such that no Indian citizen would face any harassment whatsoever", the advertisement read.

The wave of protests across the country marks the biggest challenge to Modi's government since sweeping to power in the world's largest democracy in 2014.

AFP

The citizenship law, passed by parliament earlier this month, allows people of six religions from Muslim-majority Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan an easier path to citizenship. But Muslims are excluded.

Islamic groups, the opposition and others at home and abroad fear this forms part of Modi's aim to remould the country as a Hindu nation, something his government denies.

Demonstrations have been largely peaceful but protesters have also hurled rocks and torched vehicles, while heavy-handed police tactics including the storming of a Delhi university a week ago have fuelled anger. Authorities have cut mobile internet access in places and imposed emergency laws banning assemblies.

BCCL

The protests that first started in the northeastern state of Assam have since spread to the rest of the country. The tinderbox northern state of Uttar Pradesh has seen the most deaths.



Seventeen people have died, mostly from firearm injuries, in the state including a schoolboy who was crushed during a stampede that broke out as police tried to disperse the protesters, news agency AFP reported.
