Mangaluru Violence is Failure of State Govt & Politically Motivated

Mangaluru Violence is Failure of State Govt & Politically Motivated – Dinesh Gundu Rao

Mangaluru: “On December 19, during the police fired on the protesters two persons lost their lives and eight others were injured and admitted to various hospitals in the city. This is the first time in the state, such an incident has taken place. All over the country, 25 persons have lost their lives after the implementation of NRC and CAB which shows the concern of the Central government towards the citizens of this country. Prime minister Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah are directly responsible for the violence in the country. Mangaluru incident shows the total failure of the state government, this incident is also politically motivated”, said the KPCC President Dinesh Gundu Rao during the press meet held at the DCC office Mallikatta here on December 24.

Addressing the mediapersons Dinesh Gundu Rao said, “In Bengaluru, thousands of people have protested and the protests went on peacefully. But the Mangaluru incident was directed by the government to target a particular community. BJP wants to create animosity between Hindus and Muslims in the name of NRC and CAB. These bills are opposed by people from all walks of life, even intellectuals, activists and people from all walks of life oppose these bills. The BJP is blaming Congress for the protest. In Mangaluru the protesters had gathered in front of the DC office to protest against the CAB but the police resorted to lathi-charge. If the police would have allowed them to protest, giving them some time, they would have protested peacefully and dispersed. On December 18, section 144 was imposed and the protesters were not given a chance to express displeasure and opposition to the bill”.

Dinesh Gundu Rao further said, “In the police firing 2 people have lost their lives and 8 others were injured. CM B S Yediyurappa should take responsibility for this incident. A high-level inquiry should be done by a sitting judge of the high court. Already the government has handed over the case to CID and the CM has given an appreciation certificate to the police. If the investigation is done by the CID, how we can expect any justice in this case? In this incident political leaders are involved, a thorough inquiry should be done. The police commissioner who cannot control 200 protesters should be suspended along with the inspector. Most of the states in the country oppose this bill. In Karnataka, it is not possible to implement this bill. If the State government will implement the NRC and CAB in Karnataka, Congress will hold a huge protest. Instead of creating jobs the government is busy implementing various bills.”

DCC President Harish Kumar, former MLAs Abhaychandra Jain, J R Lobo, MLC Ivan D’Souza and others were also present.
