Akhil Gogoi: Chorus grows for Akhil Gogoi’s unconditional release

GUWAHATI: The chorus is growing for the unconditional release of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti ( KMSS ) adviser Akhil Gogoi , who was sent to 10-day NIA custody by a special court in Guwahati on Tuesday.Gogoi, who was arrested on charges of sedition while he was spearheading anti-CAA protests in upper Assam, was flown to New Delhi last Wednesday.On Monday, about 100 students from the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) were detained by police after they went to stage a demonstration in front of the Assam Bhavan in New Delhi, demanding Gogoi’s release. The students were released later in the day.“Not only Akhil Gogoi, the other student leaders who were arrested while leading democratic and nonviolent protest against the CAA must also be released without any delay. Their arrest is an attempt to divert the anti-CAA movement and is inhumane. The CAA hurts the secular ethos of the Constitution. Through our protest at the national capital, we are trying to highlight the problems the indigenous tribes and communities will be facing because of this Act. The problem of illegal influx to the northeast is huge. However, this has not been properly highlighted at the national level,” said Tanaya Kardong, a postgraduate student and Assam state representative at the North East Students’ Forum in JNU.Simultaneously, KMSS activists held demonstrations in Guwahati, seeking unconditional release of their leader. “The government must scrap the CAA and stop the atrocities unleashed on KMSS activists across Assam,” said noted intellectual Udayaditya Bharali, while addressing the protesters. KMSS adviser Subrat Chakraborty lashed out at the state government and the Centre for trying to “bulldoze the democratic protests with brutality”. He said the movement against the CAA will continue till the Act is repealed.“KMSS has resolved to carry forward the anti-CAA movement. We cannot compromise with the government on the CAA. Through atrocities, the government cannot suppress the spontaneous movement,” he added. There was huge deployment of police and security personnel in the Chasal area of Guwahati on Monday where KMSS activists staged the protest under strict vigil of top cops. KMSS has alleged that the government has been too harsh on its leading activists for taking an “uncompromising stand” on the CAA. While the organization has termed the arrest of Gogoi a “conspiracy”, the KMSS adviser (Gogoi) told the media while he was produced in court that the BJP-led government is trying to divert the anti-CAA movement to their favour by putting them behind bars.
