Chidambaram terms expulsion of German student as a reminder of dark chapter in world history

A day after German student Jakob Lindenthal from IIT Madras was sent back to his country by immigration department on charges of him joining a protest against CAA and NRC, Congress leader P. Chidambaram has taken to his twitter handle to criticise his expulsion.He also questioned the silence of IIT Madras Director and Chairman.

Hinting towards the events that unfolded in Nazi-Germany under Adolf Hitler, the Congress leader wrote, "The German is reminding us of a dark chapter in the world's history so that we may not repeat that in India. The student deserves our gratitude. Where is the Director of IIT? Where is the Chairman? Let us hear from both of them."

24-year-old Jakob Lindenthal was told to leave by the Immigration department that insisted on him violating his visa rules by indulging in political activities in India. Jakob Linthedal was a student in the Physics Department of IIT Madras.

On Monday, December 23, Jakob was asked to leave by the Foreigners Regional Registration Office.

"What we heard is that officials from the immigration department got in touch with him and asked him to leave because as per his visa he wasn't allowed to take part in political protests," said a student who was protesting with Jakob on the 16th. "He decided to leave as soon as the instructions came through," said the student on the condition of anonymity.

Holding a placard that had an indirect reference to the Nazi persecution of the Jews in Germany between 1933-45 during the Hitler regime, he had told co-participants at a protest last week that small measures against Jews had not attracted much attention initially.

Such measures eventually led to their mass killings, the German student had said.

The placard read "1933-1945 We have been there." He had also held another one which read, "No democracy without dissent." Jakob, who had also taken part in a protest at the institute's Gajendra Circle against the amendment to the Citizenship Act, was a student of the Technical University of Dresden in Germany.

A student Facebook page Chinta Bar has also come out in solidarity with Jakob thanking him for being part of the protests.

Earlier in the day, BJP MP Anantkumar Hegde had said how can "any Tom, Dick and Harry" be allowed to join protests against internal issues of India.

In a tweet, Anantkumar Hegde said, "Any Tom, Dick & Harry from any part of this globe can poke themselves and involve in their s**t protest in our internal issues!! Does any other country provide such liberty? Precisely #IndiaSupportsCAA!"
