Women, Especially Poor Women, Will Suffer The Most If There Is Nationwide NRC

The Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) has been dominating the news since it was passed on 11 December this year. Protests have rocked the country from north to south, east to west, with particular focus on the Northeast, which shares a long border of over 1700 km with Bangladesh. Bangladesh is one of the countries from which the CAA seeks to accept “persecuted minorities”, who will then be granted Indian citizenship.

On the face of it, the CAA seems innocent enough. It seeks to accept and grant citizenship to “persecuted minorities” who are non-Muslims from Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan. India has accepted refugees before, most notably Tibetan refugees who were fleeing Chinese persecution. In fact, in 2017, the Ministry of External Affairs allowed for Tibetan refugees born in India between 1950 and 1987 to be granted Indian passports as they would now be considered Indian by birth.

The NRC in Assam

What has alarmed people in the country is the combination of the CAA and the NRC--the National Register of Citizens. The NRC is a register that documents every citizen living in India. It was updated only once in 1951, post Independence. Currently, only the state of Assam has an NRC update in progress. The final list came out on 31 August, 2019.

A staggering 19 lakh people were left out, thus rendering them stateless and without a place to go. Detention centres have already been set up in the state for these newly declared “foreigners” or stateless people. The government has told the Rajya Sabha that 28 people have already died in detention centres across Assam so far.

NRC in Assam is only precedent

The only precedent we have of a post-1951 NRC is the NRC in Assam, which has turned out to be a very costly endeavour with the government spending Rs 1600 crores to implement it. This is not taking into account the detention centres that have been built to detain the ones left out of the NRC.

A subgroup of people who have ended up suffering the most in the entire NRC process has been, predictably, women. Single, married, widowed, transgender… all of them have had more trouble than their male counterparts to prove that they are citizens of India.

A fact-finding team from Women Against Sexual Violence and State Repression (WSS) has found that patriarchal norms, which govern the NRC process, have led to the exclusion of a large number of women from the NRC in Assam.

Only prove citizenship through birth family

The cut-off date to prove citizenship in Assam’s NRC is 25 March, 1971--the eve of the Bangladesh War of Independence. You either have to show that you yourself were an Indian citizen at that time or that you are directly related to an Indian citizen of that time.

The NRC in Assam has made one thing quite clear--you can only prove citizenship through your parental family. This has left married women in a bind. Many have married away from their ancestral villages, so they have had to travel to their parental homes to get documents to prove their citizenship.

The primary documents to prove citizenship are called “List A” documents, which include birth certificates, school board or university certificates, or land and tenancy papers. If you have any of these papers and were born post-1971, you then have to prove that you are related to someone who was an Indian citizen at that time.

The thing is, birth certificates are hard to come by, especially in rural areas where people still give birth in their homes and don’t register these births. As for school board or university certificates, women from poor backgrounds generally get married before the legal age of 18 and drop out of school in the process. Many don’t make it to the matriculation and/or university level.

As is the case in most patriarchal setups, many women don’t own land. So the question of land and tenancy papers does not even come into play. Even if they did inherit property, many choose to take cash instead of land as they live away from their ancestral villages and hence find no use for that land.

Considering patriarchy works on the assumption that married women are no longer a part of their parental homes but a part of their in-laws’ homes, this has proven to be a death trap for married Assamese women. Speaking to The Citizen, Nisha Biswas, the convenor of WSS said, “They are the worst kind of victims, I believe. Once again, their autonomy has been refused and in this patriarchal system they were told that their in-laws’ families, into which they are married, were their own. They have disinherited their parental family, but now they have to go to their parental family to produce documents regarding legacy.”

Then playing straight back into the patriarchy’s arms, a person’s maternal ancestry is immaterial to the NRC process, even if all your documents are in order. If there is a nationwide NRC, a big question mark would be placed over proving the lineage of matrilineal societies like the Khasis of Meghalaya (I am a Khasi myself). We trace our family bloodlines through the mother (not the father) and all our documents do so as well. Will all matrilineal tribes be left out of the NRC then?

Married women, disowned women, and transgender women are out of the NRC

The Wire reports that women have been left out of the NRC because they could not prove that they were the daughters of their own fathers. This is in spite of their brothers using the same legacy data as them and making it into the final NRC. The Wire tells the story of Shoburi, a woman who faced this situation. She said, “My father’s name is in the 1951 NRC. My brother used the same legacy data of my father and is in the final NRC but I am out. I was married in the same village and submitted the gaon burrah certificate which was rejected. My name was also not in the final draft. When I was called for re-verification, I gave my paternal family’s ration card where I am mentioned as my father’s daughter. Yet, I am out of the NRC.”

What’s worse is that once you have submitted documents, you can’t change them. They get “frozen” as there is no provision for the re-submission of documents. So even a simple spelling mistake could result in you being left out of the NRC. The Citizen tells the story of one woman whose father’s name was Ramizuddin while another man in the same village was called Ramiznuddin. While this woman’s older siblings all found their way onto the list, a simple mistake naming her father as Ramiznuddin instead of Ramizuddin while filling the form cost her her place on the NRC.

Mukul Sangma, former Chief Minister of Meghalaya, raised the issue of women from other states who married into Assamese families being left out of the NRC. "All brides who were from other states have been excluded. Brides born in West Bengal, Nagaland, Bihar, and Meghalaya were excluded from the NRC," Sangma said, during a discussion in the Meghalaya Assembly.

The Citizen reports of a woman who had been disowned because she married a man from another religion. WSS’ convenor, Nisha Biswas said, “We met one girl who was married to a person from another religion. She went to her parents for legacy data. Now they say we consider you dead. Humne toh tumhara shraad bhi kar diya. Now you are not in our family.” The woman’s father-in-law has provided his documents to prove her citizenship, but the NRC only accepts parental--and that too only paternal heritage--as evidence of citizenship. She is now deemed a foreigner and will most likely be sent to a detention camp.

Transgender women who have left their families, changed their names, and built families of their own within the LGBTQIA+ community are also in a bind. They can’t go back to their parental homes since they had been disowned. Their families are not going to help them prove that they are related.

If the CAA comes into force along with the NRC, those women who are not Muslim will at least have the chance to regain their citizenship through the CAA. Muslims will suffer in general but it will be Muslim women, transgenders, and poor women who can’t afford legal assistance who will really bear the brunt of the situation.

Image Credit: BCCL




