Azad lauds people for anti-Act protests

The leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha and AICC general secretary Ghulam Nabi Azad on Tuesday lauded the people of Assam for opposing the Citizenship (Amendment) Act cutting across religious lines.

“The death of five persons in the anti-CAA protests this month shows how people from all religions and communities in Assam stood united against the BJP’s divisive policy. Those who had died in the anti-CAA protests in the state were from different religions,” he said here.

Azad slammed the BJP for the deaths. “Five persons lost their lives and two dozen people were injured in unprovoked police firing. Students did not do anything to deserve bullets,” he said.

He alleged that it was not the BJP’s culture to behave in a civilised manner with the students and it had been proved numerous times in Assam or other parts of the country.

Assam is witnessing a series of protests ever since the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill was passed in the Lok Sabha. The Congress, which is also opposed to the CAA, launched a padayatra in the state on Sunday protesting against the CAA which continued on Tuesday. The CAA grants citizenship to non-Muslim persecuted minorities from three neighbouring countries who had entered India before December 31, 2014, even without proper documents. Various organisations have been pointing out how the CAA violates the Assam Accord according to which the cut-off date for detection and deportation of illegal migrants is March 24, 1971.

“March 24, 1971 should be the cut-off date. This is the stand of the Congress,” the veteran politician said.

Azad slammed the BJP for “dividing” the Northeast in the 11th hour to pass the citizenship bill. Referring to the Jharkhand Assembly election results, he said: “The more BJP comes out with contentious bills the more states will slip out of its hand.”

Facing stiff opposition in the Northeast against the bill, the Centre excluded the states with inner-line permits and Sixth Schedule areas out of the purview of the bill.
