Chant in JU: ‘Not our chancellor’

Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar, who is chancellor of JU, first “ordered” that the convocation could not be held without him and then allegedly tried to drive a wedge between the students and the university administration. The “Go Back” slogans were relentless during the one and a half hours he was on the campus.

Jadavpur University held its annual convocation on Tuesday without the chancellor, who was blockaded by employees on a campus replete with “Not Our Chancellor” posters put up by students.

The university almost defied the chancellor, holding a court meeting by itself and deciding to go ahead with the convocation, for which around 5,000 students and many parents had turned up.

Dhankhar turned up at 10.30am and entered the campus through Gate No. 5. When he was around 100 metres from the open-air-theatre, the venue of the convocation, his BMW was stopped by employees waving black flags and shouting “Chancellor, go back”.

The governor called up vice-chancellor Suranjan Das and asked him to reach the spot and resolve the issue. Das and the pro-VCs failed to reach the spot because they could not persuade the employees into withdrawing the protest.

Dhankhar stepped out of the car and said at an informal news conference under a tree: “I have instructed the vice-chancellor that the convocation cannot proceed when the chancellor is not being allowed to enter the university because of total administrative failure by the university authorities. This agitation is engineered.”

He then made a statement that many on the campus interpreted as an attempt at driving a wedge between the students and the administration.

“Our students are waiting in the convocation to get their degrees — fruits of their hard-earned labour. Their chancellor is here at the gate. Handful of people — students not being there — are holding the system to hostage…. University management is doing nothing at all. How can the employees be so at large to play havoc with the career of the students,” he said.

At the heart of the resistance was students’ decision to not accept their degrees from Dhankhar.

Ujaan Ganguly, who got the gold medal for being the best all-round graduate in the three faculties (engineering, arts and science), Bijetri Pathak, who was awarded the silver medal for being the best all-round female graduate, told Metro that they would not have accepted their awards from “this insensitive” chancellor.

The governor may have seen himself as the “guardian of the students” but had he been able to make it anywhere near the convocation venue, he would have got an idea about what was in store for him.

At the entrance to the venue was a poster that read: “We the students of Jadavpur University do not recognise you as our chancellor: NOT OUR CHANCELLOR”.

Students hung posters on their convocation gowns that had the words “NOT OUR CHANCELLOR” written on them. They also sported badges with “GO BACK Dhankhar, NO NRC, NO CAA NO NPR” written on them.

Some students outside the convocation venue held a huge black flag that had a number of posters pinned to it. One of the posters had “We won’t welcome RIOTER in our campus” written on it. “Aapnake barkhashto kara hoyeche (You have been sacked),” was written on another.

“We don’t want a chancellor who lacks jaankari (information) about what is happening on campuses such as Jamia Millia Islamia and Delhi University,” said Abhik Das, a student of engineering.

He was referring to Dhankhar’s reply to a question from a JU student on the campus on Monday. The student sought Dhankhar’s reaction to the death of 25 people during protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and the National Register of Citizens.

The governor had said: “For 12 hours I keep focussing on what is happening in West Bengal.... I don’t have time to look beyond Bengal....”

With the chancellor gheraoed by employees, the university authorities held an emergency meeting of the court, the highest decision-making body of the institute, at the convocation venue and resolved to go ahead with the programme in accordance with Section 104 (b) of the JU statute. The section empowers the VC to preside over the convocation in the absence of the chancellor.

The convocation was declared open at noon, after Dhankhar had left the campus.

VC Das hoisted the flag before announcing: “The convocation is declared open.” He said he was declaring the convocation open “by virtue of the authority conferred on me”.

There was a loud and long applause from the audience.

The VC told the gathering: “The honourable chancellor could not enter the campus. The members of the university’s court met here at the open-air theatre. In view of the statute of the university, the court unanimously resolved that the vice-chancellor should preside over the convocation.”

Registrar Snehamanju Basu then started to read out the names of the award winners and other degree recipients, who formed a queue and collected their awards and degrees from Das. “We have held the convocation in accordance with law as we could not deny the graduating students their degree,” said Das.

Dhankhar later said: “After being on the campus for over an hour I returned as the vice-chancellor had in defiance of my directive conducted the convocation. The strategy to compromise the position of chancellor is unfortunate and counter-productive.” He said he had called a meeting of all vice-chancellors “for a thorough interaction at Raj Bhavan”.
