Shah accuses WB govt of spreading anarchy, says 2019 election will be Modi Vs the rest

ALIGARH: A day after the apex court asked the CBI not to resort to any coercive action against the Kolkata’s top cop, BJP president, Amit Shah, launched a frontal attack on West Bengal chief minister, Mamata Banerjee , and accused her of spreading anarchy in the state. Claiming that Modi would once again be the Prime Minister of the country, Shah said that the ensuing Lok Sabha polls would be Modi versus the rest.Addressing booth presidents here on Wednesday, Shah said, “The West Bengal government is involved in scams, misappropriating money, killing of BJP workers and dharna politics”. He wondered how long can this go on and appealed to the people to give a befitting reply to such forces in the coming elections.He said the West Bengal CM wants to stop BJP’s entry into the state. “They did not give permission for CM Yogi’s helicopter to land, a small ground was given for PM’s rally and when I went there, she (Mamta) gave permission at 2 am. She cannot stop us. We will give a befitting reply to them (‘Eint se Eint Baja denge),” he said, adding that BJP will win 23 seats in West Bengal under the Modi’s leadership.Shah alleged that Mamta sat on a dharna to save those people, who are allegedly involved in the chit fund scam. He alleged that she was ‘scared” that the names of the others involved in the scam will be exposed. “It was a scam of Rs 40,000 crore, in which, 20,000 people were looted through a chit fund firm”, he said adding that the apex court had now ordered the official to cooperate with the CBI.He said, “Mamta ji Bakre ki Maa kitne din Khair manayegi” (how long can u escape). He alleged that over 65 BJP workers had been killed by “TMC goons”. He said the BJP does not believe in violence and the party and the people will give a befitting reply by making Modi the PM again.Shah also targeted the opposition parties over other contentious issues, including Ram Temple and the National Register of Citizens (NRC). Challenging the Congress, the Samajwadi Party (SP) and the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) to clarify their stand on the construction of the Ram Temple, Shah said the BJP is “committed” for the construction of the temple at its original site in Ayodhya.Shah said the Modi government had approached the apex court for the return of the undisputed land acquired near the disputed site in Ayodhya to its owners. “We want a grand Ram temple to be constructed at the same spot”, he said daring the opposition parties to speak up on the issue.On NRC, Shah said the Modi government wants to implement the registration of citizens but Congress president Rahul Gandhi and other opposition leaders are opposing it. “Should not we drive away the ‘Ghuspaithi’ (infiltrators) away,” Shah asked his party workers while claiming that 40,000 infiltrators had been identified.“We have decided that after winning 2019 Lok Sabha elections, we will drive out every single infiltrator from the country from Kashmir to Kanyakumari and Assam to Gujarat,” Shah said adding that these infiltrators can be vote bank for the SP and BSP but for the BJP they are a threat to national security.The BJP president mocked the opposition’s attempt for a ‘mahagathbandan” and dubbed it as a farce, which would have no impact on the electoral prospects of the BJP. He said the leaders of the so-called grand alliance have no national appeal and people will not accept them.Taking a dig at Rahul Gandhi’s announcement of assured income assistance scheme, Shah said while the previous Congress-led UPA government gave Rs 53,000 crore to farmers as loan waiver, the Modi government had in its recent budget announced an annual scheme of Rs 75,000 crore for assured income of farmers. He also accused the Congress of fooling the farmers on account of loan waiver.The BJP president lauded Adityanath and said that under his rule, law and order had been restored in the state, ending years of “jungle raaj”. "Upar Modi, neechey Yogi (Modi as prime minister and Adityanath as chief minister). This general election will be Modi versus the rest," he said, adding that this would be the poll scenario in Uttar Pradesh.Shah also ridiculed the “Buaa-Bhatija” (Mayawati and Akhilesh Yadav ) alliance and said that they have no agenda except to loot the state.
