Govt may challenge Musharraf’s conviction, says minister

TAXILA: Federal Avia­tion Minister Ghulam Sar­war Khan has said that the government is considering challenging the conviction of former president retired Gen Pervez Musharraf by the special court.

Talking to reporters here on Tuesday, he said the step would be taken to avert a clash between the country’s institutions and ease internal tension.

Answering a question, Mr Khan termed the special court’s verdict a result of the presidential reference against former chief justice of Pakistan (CJP) Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry.

He said the Supreme Court gave Mr Musharraf the power to amend the Constitution after he ousted the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) government in 1999.

“The special court’s verdict and the order pertaining to extension in the army chief’s tenure are part of a conspiracy,” he said.

Mr Khan was of the view that Para 66 of the special court’s verdict was shocking. “It [the verdict] has exposed the country’s judicial system to ridicule in the world.” He requested courts to desist from giving such verdicts that might give joy to Pakistan’s enemies.

Answering a question about the arrest of PML-N leader Ahsan Iqbal by the National Accountability Bureau, Mr Khan said that all those who had plundered the national wealth would face the same fate.

He said the Indian government might escalate tension along the Line of Control (LoC) in a bid to divert the international community’s attention from human rights violations in India and protests against its controversial citizenship law. The Indian government would not succeed in its nefarious design to divert the world’s attention from the oppression and persecution being perpetrated against minorities in India, he added.

He said the Indian army chief’s recent statement had added to Islamabad’s concerns about a false flag operation. The armed forces of Pakistan are fully vigilant and India would face a befitting response in case of any misadventure along the country’s borders or the LoC, he added.

Mr Khan was of the view that Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Hindutva agenda had put regional peace at risk, adding that Modi’s Hindutva and RSS agenda was turning the South Asian region into a dangerous zone.

In reply to a question about his aviation ministry, he said that an Airbus 320 would be included in the PIA fleet in a couple of weeks and five more aircraft would be acquired next year on a dry lease. He said the PIA fleet would be expanded to more than 45 planes within a period of four years. “The size of PIA fleet will enhanced up to 45 by 2023,” he added.

The minister claimed that the national flag carrier had reached break-even at the operational level.

Published in Dawn, December 25th, 2019
