Conspiracy theorists insist Ruth Bader Ginsburg is dead despite her appearing in public on Monday

Robert Barnes has been a reporter and editor at The Washington Post for more than 30 years. For the last 12, he has covered the Supreme Court.

This week he experienced something he says was a first in his career: a storm of commentators, many anonymous, swarming his social media accounts and email inbox to tell him something he saw with his own eyes and reported in The Washington Post did not actually happen: Ruth Bader Ginsburg, alive and well, attending a performance about her life at a museum in Washington - her first public appearance since she underwent cancer surgery in December.

A falsehood has been spreading in dark corners of the internet that Ruth Bader Ginsburg is dead - and in the hours after he published his report, conspiracy theorists pelted Mr Barnes with their doubt-mongering. Photos were not allowed at the event, so one of the doubters emailed Mr Barnes 21 questions about Ms Ginsburg's appearance - the size of her security detail, what gender they were, for example - telling Mr Barnes that if he did not answer every single one of them, then it was a sign his article was not to be believed.

Mr Barnes had unknowingly run into a distinct facet of the modern news cycle: a small but vocal crowd of fired up commentators organising online around a conspiracy theory with political undertones.

Conspiracy theories about political figures are not new, but social media and other digital tools that allow for and, at times, encourage their wide dissemination have given them a new prominence in the Trump era. Though it is impossible to know how large these groups are, the disruption they cause far exceeds their size, due in part to visibility social media algorithms lends to ideas that fire people up, regardless of their veracity.

World news in pictures Show all 50 1 /50 World news in pictures World news in pictures 30 September 2020 Pope Francis prays with priests at the end of a limited public audience at the San Damaso courtyard in The Vatican AFP via Getty World news in pictures 29 September 2020 A girl's silhouette is seen from behind a fabric in a tent along a beach by Beit Lahia in the northern Gaza Strip AFP via Getty World news in pictures 28 September 2020 A Chinese woman takes a photo of herself in front of a flower display dedicated to frontline health care workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in Beijing, China. China will celebrate national day marking the founding of the People's Republic of China on October 1st Getty World news in pictures 27 September 2020 The Glass Mountain Inn burns as the Glass Fire moves through the area in St. Helena, California. The fast moving Glass fire has burned over 1,000 acres and has destroyed homes Getty World news in pictures 26 September 2020 A villager along with a child offers prayers next to a carcass of a wild elephant that officials say was electrocuted in Rani Reserve Forest on the outskirts of Guwahati, India AFP via Getty World news in pictures 25 September 2020 The casket of late Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg is seen in Statuary Hall in the US Capitol to lie in state in Washington, DC AFP via Getty World news in pictures 24 September 2020 An anti-government protester holds up an image of a pro-democracy commemorative plaque at a rally outside Thailand's parliament in Bangkok, as activists gathered to demand a new constitution AFP via Getty World news in pictures 23 September 2020 A whale stranded on a beach in Macquarie Harbour on the rugged west coast of Tasmania, as hundreds of pilot whales have died in a mass stranding in southern Australia despite efforts to save them, with rescuers racing to free a few dozen survivors The Mercury/AFP via Getty World news in pictures 22 September 2020 State civil employee candidates wearing face masks and shields take a test in Surabaya AFP via Getty World news in pictures 21 September 2020 A man sweeps at the Taj Mahal monument on the day of its reopening after being closed for more than six months due to the coronavirus pandemic AP World news in pictures 20 September 2020 A deer looks for food in a burnt area, caused by the Bobcat fire, in Pearblossom, California EPA World news in pictures 19 September 2020 Anti-government protesters hold their mobile phones aloft as they take part in a pro-democracy rally in Bangkok. Tens of thousands of pro-democracy protesters massed close to Thailand's royal palace, in a huge rally calling for PM Prayut Chan-O-Cha to step down and demanding reforms to the monarchy AFP via Getty World news in pictures 18 September 2020 Supporters of Iraqi Shi'ite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr maintain social distancing as they attend Friday prayers after the coronavirus disease restrictions were eased, in Kufa mosque, near Najaf, Iraq Reuters World news in pictures 17 September 2020 A protester climbs on The Triumph of the Republic at 'the Place de la Nation' as thousands of protesters take part in a demonstration during a national day strike called by labor unions asking for better salary and against jobs cut in Paris, France EPA World news in pictures 16 September 2020 A fire raging near the Lazzaretto of Ancona in Italy. The huge blaze broke out overnight at the port of Ancona. Firefighters have brought the fire under control but they expected to keep working through the day EPA World news in pictures 15 September 2020 Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny posing for a selfie with his family at Berlin's Charite hospital. In an Instagram post he said he could now breathe independently following his suspected poisoning last month Alexei Navalny/Instagram/AFP World news in pictures 14 September 2020 Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga, former Defense Minister Shigeru Ishiba and former Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida celebrate after Suga was elected as new head of the ruling party at the Liberal Democratic Party's leadership election in Tokyo Reuters World news in pictures 13 September 2020 A man stands behind a burning barricade during the fifth straight day of protests against police brutality in Bogota AFP via Getty World news in pictures 12 September 2020 Police officers block and detain protesters during an opposition rally to protest the official presidential election results in Minsk, Belarus. Daily protests calling for the authoritarian president's resignation are now in their second month AP World news in pictures 11 September 2020 Members of 'Omnium Cultural' celebrate the 20th 'Festa per la llibertat' ('Fiesta for the freedom') to mark the Day of Catalonia in Barcelona. Omnion Cultural fights for the independence of Catalonia EPA World news in pictures 10 September 2020 The Moria refugee camp, two days after Greece's biggest migrant camp, was destroyed by fire. Thousands of asylum seekers on the island of Lesbos are now homeless AFP via Getty World news in pictures 9 September 2020 Pope Francis takes off his face mask as he arrives by car to hold a limited public audience at the San Damaso courtyard in The Vatican AFP via Getty World news in pictures 8 September 2020 A home is engulfed in flames during the "Creek Fire" in the Tollhouse area of California AFP via Getty World news in pictures 7 September 2020 A couple take photos along a sea wall of the waves brought by Typhoon Haishen in the eastern port city of Sokcho AFP via Getty World news in pictures 6 September 2020 Novak Djokovic and a tournament official tends to a linesperson who was struck with a ball by Djokovic during his match against Pablo Carreno Busta at the US Open USA Today Sports/Reuters World news in pictures 5 September 2020 Protesters confront police at the Shrine of Remembrance in Melbourne, Australia, during an anti-lockdown rally AFP via Getty World news in pictures 4 September 2020 A woman looks on from a rooftop as rescue workers dig through the rubble of a damaged building in Beirut. A search began for possible survivors after a scanner detected a pulse one month after the mega-blast at the adjacent port AFP via Getty World news in pictures 3 September 2020 A full moon next to the Virgen del Panecillo statue in Quito, Ecuador EPA World news in pictures 2 September 2020 A Palestinian woman reacts as Israeli forces demolish her animal shed near Hebron in the Israeli-occupied West Bank Reuters World news in pictures 1 September 2020 Students protest against presidential elections results in Minsk TUT.BY/AFP via Getty World news in pictures 31 August 2020 The pack rides during the 3rd stage of the Tour de France between Nice and Sisteron AFP via Getty World news in pictures 30 August 2020 Law enforcement officers block a street during a rally of opposition supporters protesting against presidential election results in Minsk, Belarus Reuters World news in pictures 29 August 2020 A woman holding a placard reading "Stop Censorship - Yes to the Freedom of Expression" shouts in a megaphone during a protest against the mandatory wearing of face masks in Paris. Masks, which were already compulsory on public transport, in enclosed public spaces, and outdoors in Paris in certain high-congestion areas around tourist sites, were made mandatory outdoors citywide on August 28 to fight the rising coronavirus infections AFP via Getty World news in pictures 28 August 2020 Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe bows to the national flag at the start of a press conference at the prime minister official residence in Tokyo. Abe announced he will resign over health problems, in a bombshell development that kicks off a leadership contest in the world's third-largest economy AFP via Getty World news in pictures 27 August 2020 Residents take cover behind a tree trunk from rubber bullets fired by South African Police Service (SAPS) in Eldorado Park, near Johannesburg, during a protest by community members after a 16-year old boy was reported dead AFP via Getty World news in pictures 26 August 2020 People scatter rose petals on a statue of Mother Teresa marking her 110th birth anniversary in Ahmedabad AFP via Getty World news in pictures 25 August 2020 An aerial view shows beach-goers standing on salt formations in the Dead Sea near Ein Bokeq, Israel Reuters World news in pictures 24 August 2020 Health workers use a fingertip pulse oximeter and check the body temperature of a fisherwoman inside the Dharavi slum during a door-to-door Covid-19 coronavirus screening in Mumbai AFP via Getty World news in pictures 23 August 2020 People carry an idol of the Hindu god Ganesh, the deity of prosperity, to immerse it off the coast of the Arabian sea during the Ganesh Chaturthi festival in Mumbai, India Reuters World news in pictures 22 August 2020 Firefighters watch as flames from the LNU Lightning Complex fires approach a home in Napa County, California AP World news in pictures 21 August 2020 Members of the Israeli security forces arrest a Palestinian demonstrator during a rally to protest against Israel's plan to annex parts of the occupied West Bank AFP via Getty World news in pictures 20 August 2020 A man pushes his bicycle through a deserted road after prohibitory orders were imposed by district officials for a week to contain the spread of the Covid-19 in Kathmandu AFP via Getty World news in pictures 19 August 2020 A car burns while parked at a residence in Vacaville, California. Dozens of fires are burning out of control throughout Northern California as fire resources are spread thin AFP via Getty World news in pictures 18 August 2020 Students use their mobile phones as flashlights at an anti-government rally at Mahidol University in Nakhon Pathom. Thailand has seen near-daily protests in recent weeks by students demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Prayut Chan-O-Cha AFP via Getty World news in pictures 17 August 2020 Members of the Kayapo tribe block the BR163 highway during a protest outside Novo Progresso in Para state, Brazil. Indigenous protesters blocked a major transamazonian highway to protest against the lack of governmental support during the COVID-19 novel coronavirus pandemic and illegal deforestation in and around their territories AFP via Getty World news in pictures 16 August 2020 Lightning forks over the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge as a storm passes over Oakland AP World news in pictures 15 August 2020 Belarus opposition supporters gather near the Pushkinskaya metro station where Alexander Taraikovsky, a 34-year-old protester died on August 10, during their protest rally in central Minsk AFP via Getty World news in pictures 14 August 2020 AlphaTauri's driver Daniil Kvyat takes part in the second practice session at the Circuit de Catalunya in Montmelo near Barcelona ahead of the Spanish F1 Grand Prix AFP via Getty World news in pictures 13 August 2020 Soldiers of the Brazilian Armed Forces during a disinfection of the Christ The Redeemer statue at the Corcovado mountain prior to the opening of the touristic attraction in Rio AFP via Getty World news in pictures 12 August 2020 Young elephant bulls tussle playfully on World Elephant Day at the Amboseli National Park in Kenya AFP via Getty

But there is often more to these movements than they first seem.

QAnon, the shorthand for a tale that fantasises about a vast, "deep-state" conspiracy aimed at thwarting President Donald Trump, was presented as an organic movement when it burst into mainstream consciousness last summer. But reporting later showed some of the main groups that had spread it were profiting off the attention it helped bring them.

The Pizzagate conspiracy theory spread through the fringes of right-wing Internet culture to Twitter, where it was amplified by people with huge followings - and also, as it turns out, Russian bots. And the conversation after major news events, like the Parkland shooting in Florida last year, is routinely distorted by complex processes that lend themselves to gaming and manipulation, experts say, though specific actors and motivations can be hard to immediately discern. They include spurious accounts, trending hashtags supported by bot networks, and opaque algorithms that surface buzzy content and commentary - no matter what the facts are.

Two anonymous Twitter accounts were behind the edited snippet of video about an encounter between a group of Catholic high school boys and a Native America activist that went viral, for example. One of the accounts was later booted from Twitter after the service said it was manipulating the conversation.

In Ms Ginsburg's case, doubt about her health began to spread around the time she missed the court's first case, 7 January, as she recovered from surgery on 21 December. It appears to have originated on the message boards that house the QAnon theory. An anonymous but influential account posted a stew of doubt-mongering, wondering about Ms Ginsburg's "real medical diagnosis," and wondering what kind of "off-market drugs" were sustaining her.

"The clock is ticking," the commenter wrote. "PANIC IN DC."

There was no panic in the District of Columbia.

The mini empire of amplifiers, profiteers, and fame seekers who benefit from QAnon's small but passionate audience went to work. Soon, videos questioning the official line on Ms Ginsburg's health were the top search results for the justice's name on YouTube. An online petition to impeach her failed to meet a 5,000 signature goal.

But its real boost came when a couple of right-wing personalities with large social media followings engaged with it. Ben Garrison, a prominent pro-Trump cartoonist, tweeted about Ms Ginsburg's whereabouts, musing on his blog about whether liberals would ever keep her death "a secret," so Mr Trump could not fill the seat with a conservative.

Fox News show Fox & Friends aired a graphic that briefly said she had died, though it quickly apologised and said it was a mistake. James Woods, an actor who is a mainstay of the conspiracy-laden parts of the pro-Trump Internet, helped to get the hashtag #WheresRuth trending on Twitter on 28 January. Two days later, Sebastian Gorka - a former adviser of President Trump's - tweeted to his 700,000 followers "Still no sign," noting the State of the Union was about a week away.

Next, the theory started to draw mainstream coverage - another way conspiracy theories spread, even when they are properly fact-checked, debunked and contextualised, experts say. And the Twitter hoaxes continued. An anonymous account shared an old photo of the presidential hearse carrying Ronald Reagan past the capitol building, writing "Prominent DC Funeral Home vehicle seen leaving the Ginsberg estate . . . what's going on?"

The conspiracy theory lives on in the algorithms. YouTube is still recommending "RBG dead" as one of its autofill searches. Twitter's autofill recommendations for "RBG" have an even wider selection: "#RBGWhereYouBe," "#RGBProofOfLife," and "RBG dead."

Ms Ginsburg did not attend the State of the Union on Tuesday night. Neither did Justices Thomas, Alito, Sotomayor or Breyer. The conspiracy theory may be given more oxygen by her absence.

If hoaxers were seeking attention for the theory, they have certainly succeeded. Targeting reporters like Mr Barnes with wide followings online is a good way to start. Other reporters who saw Ms Ginsburg on Monday night at the performance were hit with the same flood of replies and emails.

After the Parkland shooting, Whitney Phillips, a Mercer University professor who studies online culture, told the Post that conspiracy theorists and hoax spreaders are "really good at seeding a story with an establishment outlet so they can bring that prize back to those far-right circles." People know that journalists are on Twitter, searching for news and story ideas. It is considered a victory when those fringe conspiracies are amplified into the mainstream by a reporter attempting to debunk them. After the QAnon theory went viral, for instance, conspiracy theorists were delighted by the mainstream attention.

The Supreme Court has been the target of conspiracy theories before. After Justice Antonin Scalia died suddenly at a Texas ranch in 2016, conspiracy theories swirled about the nature of his death, and whether he was murdered as a political hit. The theories, which have no grounding in evidence, live on today.

The Supreme Court does not have another public session until 19 February, Mr Barnes said, noting that specialists said there is a six to eight week recovery typically expected for the procedure Ms Ginsburg had undergone.

"It seems logical that she would be back for it," he said.

Mr Barnes said he is less offended by suggestions he was fooled by a body double than those that say he made up Ms Ginsburg's appearance last night.

"Feeling grateful for tweeters who say I, and many others, saw RBG body-double, as opposed to those who think I lied," he wrote on Twitter. "They won't be happy if she skips speech tonight, as she has Trump's first 2. Thomas and Alito not likely either, but, I swear, also alive."

The Washington Post
