Students, youth to hold rally against Centre today

Young India Adhikar March to protest against govt’s policies

Students and youth from over 50 organisations from across the country are expected to participate in the Young India Adhikar March on Thursday. This comes after a month-long campaign across the country to protest the Central government’s education policy and growing unemployment. The rally is scheduled to begin at Red Fort and culminate on Parliament Street.

Young India National Coordination Committee (YINCC) said that youth movements that have fought against unemployment, corruption and paper leak in the employment exams like the SSC movement, railway movement, para-teachers’ movement and many more will participate in the march to convey to the people about what they have faced in last five years.

Demands of protesters

The participants are asking the government to immediately fill all vacant government positions, increase the number of government jobs and end the regime of paper leaks and corruption in recruitment.

Their other demands include spending at least 10% of Gross Domestic Product on education, end gender discriminatory rules, stop fund cut, scuttling of reservation norms and ensure freedom of expression.

“We will hold the upcoming government accountable to the future of the youth in the coming days. The youth of this country has now resolved to fight back all divisive campaigns and set out its agenda for the LS elections,” the YINCC said.

Those who have come from outside Delhi to participate in the rally are staying at gurdwaras in the city, at the Kashmere Gate community centre and at Haj Manzil in Old Delhi.

Permission for rally

Madhur Verma, DCP (New Delhi) said that they have refused to give permission to the protest march route proposed by the protesters.

“They wanted to start protest from Red Fort to Jantar Mantar but we will allow the march if it starts from Ramlila Maidan to Jantar Mantar. We have called a meeting with the protest organiser to resolve the issue,” Mr. Verma said.

The organisers said that Delhi Police were not giving them permission to hold the march and that they were still negotiating with them. “It is unfortunate that we have to seek permission from those we are protesting against to carry out a protest in the Capital,” said one of the organisers.
