People being misguided in the name of CAA: Mumbai Police chief; says 'illegal immigrants spreading rumors'

Mumbai Police Commissioner Sanjay Barve | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights There are a lot of misconceptions among the people regarding NRC and CAA: Mumbai CP 'Rumours are being fed by those illegally living in India' 'Mumbai Police is vigilant and has eyes on people who are trying to foment trouble'

Mumbai: Mumbai Police Commissioner Sanjay Barve has said that people are being misguided in the name of National Register of Citizens (NRC) and Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 (CAA) adding that those who are living India in India illegally are circulating rumours.

The Mumbai Police chief gave this statement after meeting senior leaders and preachers from the Muslims community. The meeting was organised to allay doubts and misconceptions of the minority community.

He further said that there are a lot of misconceptions among the people regarding NRC and CAA.

“I told them that Muslims born in India don’t need to worry. Even I don’t have my birth certificate as I was not born in a hospital but that doesn’t mean that I will be thrown out of this country,” said CP Barve.

Many people are still asking for a permit to protest and rumours are being fed by those illegally living in India.

It is right that people born between 1945 and 1965 may not have a birth certificate. Many births took place at home and not at the hospital so these people might not have a birth certificate. However, they may have a school certificate, college, office or any other documents, said CP Barve.

He also said that Mumbai Police is vigilant and has eyes on people who are trying to foment trouble by spreading misleading facts.

Meanwhile, BJP workers today came out on the streets in huge numbers in support of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) and urged the people to dispel any rumours regarding the Act.

Taking to ANI Rajeshri Palane, Mumbai BJP Secretary said that they have come on the streets not as BJP workers but as patriots against elements who are creating violence over the CAA.

Without naming anyone Palane accused few people of spreading rumours and instigating others including Muslims against the Act.
