Shivraj Singh Chauhan accuses Sonia, Kamal Nath of undermining constitution

Former Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chauhan on Wednesday slammed Congress President Sonia Gandhi, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and her Madhya Pradesh counterpart Kamal Nath for creating confusion about the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

Speaking to Media persons in Chandigarh, Chauhan accused Congress and other opposition leaders of pushing the nation into a cycle of 'violence' by creating panic and spreading disinformation. He also stressed on the need to differentiate between CAA and NRC, urging on the necessity to de-link the two.

"The opposition is trying to ignite fire. Doubts are being created about the CAA deliberately, besides unleashing efforts on streets to push the entire nation in the flames of violence. We will not let the Tukde-Tukde gang succeed, and will launch a Jangaran Abhiyan from next month. CAA has been passed to offer Citizenship and not to snatch it from anyone" Shivraj Singh Chauhan said.

Criticising Sonia Gandhi for her silence in the house and staging a protest outside the parliament against CAA, Shivraj questioned her opposition to the amended act which according to him mirrors Mahatma Gandhi's sentiments around opening up of doors for Hindus and Sikhs living Pakistan.

"I want to understand why Mrs. Sonia Gandhi is opposing CAA. It only safeguards the interest of persecuted minorities from South Asian countries. Mahatma Gandhi had said that Hindus and Sikhs who do not wish to live in Pakistan can come to India. This government is duty bound to ensure the safety of persecuted minorities living in our neighbourhood, ensure them education and jobs." The former Madhya Pradesh CM said.

Shivraj also asserted on the much cited data by his party that talks about Pakistan's minority population dipping from 23 percent in 1947 to 3 percent in 2011. Adding, "People now tell that not even 2 percent of minorities are left in Pakistan. They were persecuted for practicing a certain faith. Their properties were destroyed and their daughters were abducted, and forcibly converted to Islam."

Chauhan further asked if Cong- President had ever visited the families of Pakistani immigrants in New Delhi to know about their well-being. "Did Sonia Gandhi ever go to see a Hindu Pakistani refugee in Delhi"? He questioned.

The BJP leader also attacked Sonia Gandhi over her silence on violence that erupted post amendment of CAB (Citizenship Amendment Bill) stressing that Congress's silence hints as endorsement of violence by the party.

"It is important for Sonia Gandhi to explain her silence to the nation over violence that erupted over CAA causing loss of public properties." Chauhan asserted.

The former CM of Madhya Pradesh demanded resignation of Kamal Nath who has announced a Peace March in Madhya Pradesh against CAA.

"Kamal Nath is organising a Peace March, I wonder for what ?" Chauhan asked.

"Kamal Nath is only trying to create doubts and chaos. He should let us all know if he wants to continue as the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh. CAA has been passed by both houses of our parliament. The matter comes under the jurisdiction of the union government.He cannot do away with the constitutional process and defy the oath of upholding the constitution while swearing in as a Chief Minister. He is obliged to follow the constitutional norms." Chauhan stated.
