Introspection required: PM Modi slams protesters for damaging public property in UP during anti-CAA protests

PM Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights 'What has happened to those common people and policemen who got injured' 'They should understand that rights and duties go hand in hand' Calling Article 370 an "old disease" PM Modi said the issue was resolved peacefully

Lucknow: Prime Minister Narendra Modi slammed protesters for damaging public property during protests in Uttar Pradesh against the amended citizenship law, telling them to introspect if what they did was right.

He further said that they should understand that rights and duties go hand in hand.

"They (the vandals) should ask themselves was it right. Whatever was torched, was it not of their child's use? What has happened to those common people and policemen who got injured?" Modi asked.

Modi gave this statement while addressing a gathering after unveiling a statue of former prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee at Lucknow’s Lok Bhawan. He also laid the foundation stone for the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Medical University in the state capital.

Calling Article 370 AN “old disease” the PM said that the issue was resolved peacefully.

"How old a disease was Article 370? How difficult it appeared. But it was our responsibility as to how to face such difficult challenges. And, it was done easily. Everyone's 'dhaarna' (perception) was smashed (choor choor ho gaya)," ANI quoted PM Modi as saying.

The PM also expressed happiness that the Ram Janmabhoomi issue was also resolved peacefully.

On the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, PM Modi said giving citizenship to the persecuted people who came to India from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan fleeing persecution and to "save the dignity of their daughters", was another problem whose solution was found by 130 crore Indians.

With this self-confidence, Hindustanis are entering a new decade, said the PM adding that whatever is left to be done, all Indians will find a solution for it.

Meanwhile, Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) supremo Mayawati asked the Uttar Pradesh government to conduct a thorough probe into the deaths during anti-citizenship law protests and help the innocent victims.

So far, seventeen people have reportedly died in Uttar Pradesh during the protests against the new citizenship law.
