From Nirbhaya gang-rape to BJP’s 2014 poll victory: Moments that left profound impact on India in last decade

People protest at India Gate against the Nirbhaya gang-rape | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: There is no denying that India has changed remarkably in the past 10 years and it is also undeniably true that several incidents, be it political, social or economical, have played a major role in changing the dynamics of the country in the last decade.

From the 2012 Nirbhaya gang-rape incident to the BJP’s thumping victory in 2014 Lok Sabha elections, India has come across several events in these 10 years that not only left a lasting memory and profound impact on the country and its people but drew the attention of the rest of the world too.

Here are some significant moments that changed the country in the last decade:

Demonetisation drive

The entire country was left perplexed and shocked at the same time on November 8, 2016, when the Narendra Modi-led Central government, in one stunning move, announced the immediate withdrawal of two high-value currency notes – Rs 500 and Rs 1000.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced the unprecedented policy move in an unscheduled live national televised address at 20:15, sending the entire country into a state of shock. He also announced the issuance of new Rs 500 and Rs 2,000 banknotes in exchange for the demonetised banknotes.

The objective of the contentious move was to curb black money and fight corruption, however, its success is still being debated. The decision made one thing clear that the Modi government, which was elected on an anti-corruption manifesto would not hesitate in tearing up the rulebook in order to drive home its agenda.

2012 Nirbhaya gang-rape

The incident that shook the country to the core and made people’s blood boil was the 2012 Delhi gang-rape case. On the night of December 16, 2012, a 23-year-old woman was gang-raped and brutally tortured by six men in a private bus in which she was travelling with her friend. The woman succumbed to her injuries while undergoing treatment at a hospital in Singapore. The gruesome incident had triggered a nationwide outrage also raised questions about the safety of women in the country.

BJP’s emphatic victory in 2014

The unpredictable and historic victory of the Bharatiya Janata Party in the 2014 general elections had completely changed the power arithmetic of the Indian political history with the saffron party shattering Congress's grip on India and Narendra Modi emerging as a strong and powerful leader of the country.

The 2014 Lok Sabha elections saw Narendra Modi scripting history as the BJP crossed the 272-mark comfortably on its own, without allies, winning 282 seats out of 543. The 2014 election feat not only helped the BJP cement its position as the central pole of the Indian polity but also boost Narendra Modi’s image.

2016 surgical strike and Balakot airstrike

The 2016 surgical strike attack and February’s Balakot airstrike are the two major events that demonstrated the country's political and military will to respond to the menace of terrorism.

The two brave moves were a befitting response to the 2016 Uri terror attack and the Pulwama terror attack - the two dastardly terror attacks that changed the country’s approach to terrorism and also strengthen its resolve to fight terrorism.

On the intervening night of September 28-29, the Indian Army, in a well-calibrated operation, carried out surgical strike across the LoC targetting the terror launch pads of Pakistan-based terror outfit Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT). The strike was conducted in response to the Uri terror attack that took place on September 18, 2016, when four armed terrorists of Pakistan-based terrorist organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) attacked an army base near the town of Uri, killing at least 19 Army personnel.

The Balakot airstrike was conducted by the India Air Force on February 26 to target JeM terror launch pads in Pakistan’s Balakot, days after a JeM suicide bomber rammed an explosives-laden car into an army convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district, killing 40 CRPF personnel.

2011 Anna movement

Anna Hazare, an 82-year-old anti-corruption activist, had in 2011 started a campaign against perceived endemic political corruption, drawing the attention of the entire country.

The 2011 Indian anti-corruption movement was a series of demonstrations and protests across India that aimed at curbing corruption in the Indian government through the introduction of strong legislation, the Jan Lokpal Bill.

The movement, which was listed among the "Top 10 News Stories of 2011" by Time magazine, had gained momentum when Hazare began a hunger strike at the Jantar Mantar in Delhi with many people all over the country joining him in his fight.

Emergence of AAP

Born out of the Anna Hazare-led Indian anti-corruption movement, the Aam Admi Party emerged as a strong political force over the years. The political existence of the AAP echoed across the country when it won the 2015 Delhi Assembly polls with a comfortable majority.

The AAP made deep inroads in the national capital in the 2015 Delhi elections when the Arvind Kejriwal-led secured an absolute majority in the Assembly by winning 67 of the 70 seats in the national capital. The BJP bagged only three seats.

Citizenship Amendment Act

The passage of the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act, which paved the way for granting Indian citizenship to non-Muslim migrants who fled Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan due to religious persecution and came to India till December 2014, is the latest event that hogged the headlines and also sparked massive unrest across the country.

The amended law that will give Indian citizenship to Hindus, Parsis, Jains, Christians, Buddhists from the three neighbouring countries did not go down well with a large number of people across the country with some terming it a “religious biased” Act.

Several parts of the country, including the national capital, also saw large-scale violent protests with some places witnessing agitators clashing with security forces and torching and damaging public properties.
