Aatankwadi wapis jao: BJP MP Pragya Thakur heckled in Bhopal’s Makhanlal Chaturvedi University [VIDEO]

Pragya Thakur | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights NSUI protesters raised slogans saying "Aatankwadi wapis jao, wapis jao wapis jao" BJP MP Pragya Thakur was heckled in Bhopal's Makhanlal Chaturvedi University Thakur was there to meet the students who were suspended

New Delhi: BJP MP Pragya Thakur was heckled in Bhopal with angry protesters from NSUI raising slogans against her when she visited Makhanalal Chaturvedi University to meet protesting students.

Around twenty-three students, who had staged a protest against controversial tweets of two visiting professors at the university, were expelled from the university recently and Pragya was there to meet the lady students.

NSUI protesters raised slogans saying “Aatankwadi wapis jao, wapis jao wapis jao.”

Dilip Mandal and Mukesh Kumar – the two visiting professors at MCU – had tweeted controversial posts about the media a few days ago which angered a section of the students after which they carried out a demonstration in the university campus.

Later, the students were taken out from the campus by the police and the university administration lodged an FIR against some students.

Thakur was in news recently when she complained against a private airline's crew over allotment of a seat in the flight and claimed she was mistreated. However, later, a video clip of her allegedly arguing with several passengers on the Delhi-Bhopal flight went viral. She had also lodged a complaint with the Raja Bhoj Airport Director against the airline.

Many users flayed the controversial leader for her behaviour with one user saying: “Finally, someone told #PragyaSinghThakur that the plane doesn't run on communal votes -- it runs on hard-earned money, which doesn't grow with street nuisance.”

Talking to the media after reaching Bhopal the 49-year old MP said: “I have told the authorities. Spice Jet flight staff does not behave properly with the passengers. Their conduct was not proper earlier too. I had the same complaint today...They did not give me the allotted seat. I asked them to show the rules. I called the director and lodged the complaint with him.”

Known for her controversial statements, Thakur sparked a row last month when she called Nathuram Godse a patriot.
