No anti-Constitution law will be implemented in state under Cong: Kamal Nath

BHOPAL: Madhya Pradesh chief minister Kamal Nath on Wednesday clarified that under Congress rule, CAA-NRC will not be implemented in the state.He was speaking to the media after leading the state Congress’ “Shanti March” – a peaceful demonstration held after direction from the AICC to protest the Centre’s CAA-NRC (Citizenship Amendment Act – National Register of Citizens).“So long as Congress is running the government in Madhya Pradesh, no anti-Constitution, anti-people and anti-religion law will be implemented here,” chief minister Kamal Nath told reporters.Led by CM Nath, state Congress on Wednesday held a demonstration against the Centre’s enactment of CAA. Chief minister Nath addressed a large gathering of state Congress leaders and workers including cabinet ministers. “Our country’s identity is our culture to unite in diversity,” Nath said.“The attack today is not just on our Constitution but on the rights of every citizen. Our patriarchs like Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar framed the Constitution to unite the diversity and multiplicity of our nation under one flag. Today, that has been attacked,” he said. “The kind of law that has been passed endangers our rights and the future. Let us all raise our voices to protest it.”Flanked by former Union minister Suresh Pachauri, cabinet ministers PC Sharma, Arif Aqueel, Jaivardhan Singh , Jeetu Patwari, MLAs and state PCC office-bearers the chief minister marched with hundreds of party workers for nearly two kilometers till Minto Hall.Speaking to reporters, he said, “Through the Shanti March, we want to attract the country’s attention and want citizens of this nation to realise how the Constitution is being played around with. India’s tradition is to unite with people, build relations and that is also the Congress party’s tradition.”Speaking on the CAA-NRC, the chief minister said that in his 40 years as MP in Parliament, he never came across such an anti-Constitutional law. “I have been in Parliament for 40 years. I did not see such a law that attacks our Constitution. Question is not what the Prime Minister and the Union home minister are saying because one speaks something and the other speaks something very different,” he argued. “Question is not what is written in the law, question is what is not written. Question is not the utility of the law, rather the misuse of it,” he said.The chief minister said that CAA-NRC should not be the concern of political parties alone but should be an alarm for every citizen. “There is so much unemployment, economic slowdown, no investment, farm crisis and farmers are crying that their product is not fairly priced. But there is no discussion on these issues in Parliament. Instead, people’s attention is being diverted by the BJP which has been indulging in such politics for several years,” the chief minister said.He explained that the Congress’ march was not for the state alone but for the entire country. “Madhya Pradesh is the heart of India and from this heart, we want to send a message to the citizens of the nation and make them aware of how the Centre is jeopardising our future,” Kamal Nath said. Asked if CAA-NRC will be implemented in the state, he said no such anti-Constitution, anti-people and anti-religion law will be implemented under Congress government.
