CAA protests: Internet services snapped in Ghaziabad for 24 hours

Army chief's statement unconstitutional, should apologise: Sitaram Yechury

Sitaram Yechury has condemned Army chief General Bipin Rawat's statement on the nationwide protests against the CAA and said, "The Army Chief’s statement underlines as to how the situation has degenerated under the Modi government where the highest officer in uniform can so brazenly breach the limits of his institutional role."

"It is, therefore, necessary to raise the question as to whether we are going the Pakistan way of politicizing the military. Such obnoxious interference in matters of democratic struggles from top-ranking military professionals is unheard of in the history of independent India. We urge that the General apologizes to the nation for his indiscretion which has extremely adverse ramifications for the Constitutional arrangement in the country. We also demand that the government takes note of such a breach and censures the General," Sitaram Yechury said.

It is, therefore, necessary to raise the question as to whether we are going the Pakistan way of politicizing the military. Such obnoxious interference in matters of democratic struggles from top ranking military professionals is unheard of in history of independent India (2/n) Sitaram Yechury (@SitaramYechury) December 26, 2019





CPIM on Thursday condemned General Bipin Rawat’s "unconstitutional outburst" on the nationwide protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). The Polit Bureau of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) has unequivocally condemned the statement made by the Army Chief, Gen. Bipin Rawat.

"The General has directly indulged in condemning the student protestors who have been opposing the Citizenship Amendment Act and the move towards creating the National Register for Citizens across the country. The Army chief’s statement underlines as to how the situation has degenerated under the Modi government where the highest officer in uniform can so brazenly breach the limits of his institutional role. It is, therefore, necessary to raise the question as to whether we are going the Pakistan way of politicizing the military," CPIM said in a statement.
