Anti-CAA Stir:UP Govt Demands Rs14L From 28 People For Damaging Property

Anti-CAA Stir:UP Govt Demands Rs14L From 28 People For Damaging Property

LUCKNOW - Over two dozens people in Uttar Pradesh’s Rampur have been sent notices by the state administration, seeking recovery for the damage caused in the violence during protests against Citizenship law.

Nearly 28 people have received notices, seeking a recovery of Rs 14.86 lakh for the damage caused to public property. The administration has also asked the people to pay for the police helmets, batons and pellets that were damaged during the violence.

These notices came after Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said: "All properties of those involved in damaging public assets will be seized and auctioned to compensate for the losses. They have been captured in video and CCTV footage. We will take badla.”

Last Saturday, Rampur was among the Uttar Pradesh towns where violence broke out. Thirty-one people have been arrested so far and over 150 others identified for their alleged role in the protests.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, seeks to grant citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Parsis, Buddhists and Christians fleeing religious persecution from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh and came to India on or before December 31, 2014.

PM Modi Terms CAA A Legacy Issue

Condemning widespread protests over the new citizenship law, Prime Minister NarendraModi on Wednesday said the problem over the Citizenship Amendment Act was one of "legacy issues", asserting that "we will challenge the challengers".

More than a dozen people have died across Uttar Pradesh in protests against the law. The damage to public property is estimated around Rs 100 crore in seven districts of the state.

Addressing a gathering in the state capital after inaugurating the 25-ft tall bronze statue of former PM AtalBihari Vajpayee at LokBhawan, the state secretariat, Modi said the legacy problems included Article 370, Ram temple issue and Citizenship Amendment Act.

"We have solved some of the problems that we got as legacy...We will challenge the challengers," he said, adding the way to give citizenship to refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan has been cleared.

On the occasion, the Prime Minister also said that a government should work for future generations.

"So far, we have focused on our rights. But now, we should focus on our duties. A government should not work only for five years but also for five generations," he said, adding those who damage public properties should question themselves. People should not believe in rumours and misinformation," said the Prime Minister.

PM Modi also praised Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath for development works he has undertaken in the state.

"Good governance is possible only when one takes an inclusive view. And, I am glad that YodiAdityanath is following this," he said.

Modi also laid the foundation of Atal Medical University in Lucknow and underlined the importance of preventive healthcare. He said programmes such as Swachch Bharat, Yoga and Fit India are a part of this.

"Preventive healthcare for animals is good for human health too," Modi said.

The Prime Minister said the priority of his government is "affordability of healthcare" and Ayushman Bharat is the biggest such scheme in the world.

He also said as an MP, Vajpayee had given a new identity to Lucknow and now (Union Defence Minister) Rajnath Singh is carrying forward the the good work.

Be Part of Quality Journalism Quality journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce and despite all the hardships we still do it. Our reporters and editors are working overtime in Kashmir and beyond to cover what you care about, break big stories, and expose injustices that can change lives. Today more people are reading Kashmir Observer than ever, but only a handful are paying while advertising revenues are falling fast. ACT NOW

CLICK FOR DETAILS

Related
