CAA Protest in Mumbai: Why these young Mumbaikars took to streets to protest CAA

Anti-CAA protest at August Kranti Maidan on December 19



‘I hoped to get unbiased info’

It was the quest for answers that brought Bandra-based engineering student Murtaza Hathiyari (21) to August Kranti Maidan on December 19. “I wasn’t clear about NRC’s implications. I wanted to know why protests had turned violent in various places,” says Hathiyari, who hoped to find unbiased information at the anti-CAA protest. To some extent, he did succeed, he says. While alighting at Grant Road station on December 19, he was happy to find streets leading to August Kranti were packed. The fact that people were clear about what they were protesting and the care to ensure there was no antiparty sloganeering or slurs reassured him about the peaceful nature of the protest. “My mother was concerned about my participation and had asked me to leave the venue if it turned violent,” says the student who now plans to join the December 27 protest.

‘I was an armchair activist until now’

Thane’s Sonali Shah (32), founder of a startup, says she was an “armchair activist” until now. “The current bullying by the government has alarmed me, and this is the first time that I have participated in a protest. I attended Sunday’s protest (December 22) in Thane, which was against both CAA and NRC. CAA is unconstitutional. When combined with NRC, it is discriminatory. India cannot grant citizenship on the basis of religion. It’s not farfetched to say that India is right now on its way to becoming a full-fledged fascist state. There is zero clarity on what papers will be needed to prove ancestry. The financial burden of this futile NRC exercise is also not something India can afford to bear.”

‘Mumbaikars are against Act’

Ulwe resident Aakash Deep (21), a mass media student, says, “After the brutal action by Delhi police on Jamia students, it is clear that under this government if you protest about anything, you could be brutally beaten. I decided to be a part of the protest to voice a clear message to the government that Mumbaikars are against the unconstitutional law of CAA and will not accept NRC that has wreaked havoc in our Assam. My reason for not supporting this Act is that citizenship must not be based on religion.”

‘NRC fears for transgenders’

Andheri resident Doel Rakshit (27), who works as a copywriter in digital marketing, says CAA is unconstitutional. “It violates Article 14, which promises equality before law within the territories of India, by unequally deciding the fate of immigrants based on their religion. It also violates the preamble of the Constitution which mentions that India is a secular country,” says Rakshit, adding it attempts to erase the struggles of the people from north-eastern regions who have been protesting against CAB since 2016. “They have suffered the pressure of unregulated inflow of immigrants for decades. I see CAA as the first step to systematically oppress a particular group of religious minorities in our country.” Rakshit says she is a transgender woman and fears that NRC would affect her community the way it did in Assam. “A lot of transgender people were not registered as citizens due to lack of documents when NRC was implemented in Assam,” she says.

(Inputs by Radhika Nair & Sharmila Ganesan Ram)


