Hymns & songs take over: Celebrations low-key in Assam, rest of region bustles

SHILLONG/GUWAHATI/KOHIMA: The banners made way for props, slogans were replaced by hymns, angry faces disappeared for the day, and protests made way for celebrations as the whole of northeast, like in other parts of the world, welcomed Christmas The celebrations were muted in Assam, which has seen violent protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, but the festive fervour was more visible in the other states in the region. The festive fervour, however, was not the same as in other years.A large number of people congragated in churches in Shillong, where Christmas is the biggest festival. Various ethnic groups in Meghalaya celebrated in their traditional ways, blending indigenous culture, heritage, cuisine and flavour.“In the Garo Hills, hymns were sung and prayers were offered in the local language. A large number of people, especially women, came to the churches in their ethnic outfits,” says a priest from a church in the Garo Hills.Other tribal communities, including Khasi, Jaintia and other smaller tribal groups in the state, also took part in the festivities like every year.Midnight masses were organised on Tuesday at all illuminated churches across the state to celebrate the birth of baby Jesus. People from various communities and religions thronged the churches in the city, as people dressed as Santa Claus led carol processions through the city thoroughfares. The usual rituals were followed at the Ramakrishna Mission in Shillong where monks offered flowers and sweets to the ‘Saviour of mankind’ amid Vedic chants.The number of tourists to Pine City, however, was fewer this year. “There are very few visitors this time, as compared to other years when hotels are booked well in advance,” the manager of a hotel in uptown Police Bazar (Khyndailad) told TOI.In Assam, however, Christmas celebrations were largely muted. Midnight prayers for peace and happiness were organised across the state on Tuesday night. “The holy birth of our Lord Jesus Christ has to be celebrated. But this time we are celebrating the occasion with mere decorations, such as the Christmas tree and the nativity scene only,” Father Thomas of a church in Guwahati said, adding that no lights have been put up for decorating the church. Residents of various places across the state, during midnight mass on Tuesday, prayed for peace and calm, said a priest in Dibrugarh.People have been restrained regarding decoration of churches, private homes, hotels and other public places, with shops selling Christmas decorations and party items hardly did any business this year.In Christian-dominated Nagaland, people chose to forget the tension surrounding the CAA and soak in the Yuletide spirit. Special masses and feasts were organised at churches across the state, with large number of people joining in the celebrations.After the midnight mass which was preceded by singing of carols, believers, dressed in new colorful dresses, were seen attending special prayer services in various churches across the Christian majority state. This was followed by mass feasts as in other years. K Elu Ndang, general secretary of Naga Hoho, the apex body of tribal organizations in the state, said, “We condemn the enactment of the CAA, which is posing a grave danger to the indigenous people of the region. But it has nothing to do with Christmas.”
