CAA Protests Reach Singapore As Police Begins Probe Against Indian For Alleged Protest

Amid nationwide protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, Singapore police are investigating an Indian national for allegedly being involved in a public protest against the controversial citizenship law moved by Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led BJP government.



Unauthorized public assemblies and protests over political situations in other countries are banned in Singapore.

Hundreds of thousands of people have taken to Indian streets to protest the citizenship law enacted by Modi government that provides non-Muslim minorities from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan who moved there before 2015 a pathway to Indian citizenship.

AFP

Singapore police said following a report on December 24 they were investigating a 32-year-old male Indian national for participating in "a public assembly without a police permit" at the Marina Bay waterfront financial and tourist district.



"He allegedly carried out the activity in Marina Bay, to show his opposition to India's Citizenship Amendment Bill," police said in a statement late Wednesday that was cited by news agency Reuters.

The statement did not give any more details of the assembly. Local media reported the man posted a picture of himself on social media with a placard "to express his unhappiness.”

The police said organizing or participating in a public assembly without a police permit in Singapore is illegal and that they would not grant any permit for assemblies that advocate political causes of other countries.

The protests against the controversial legislation first surfaced in the north eastern regions of India but over the past two weeks, they have spiralled across the country. Thousands of protesters have hit the streets after the police clamped down upon the protesters in a central university firing tear gas shells and leaving many injured, apparently with bullet injuries.

Twitter

In New Delhi, protests and demonstrations have become a norm now and major spots such as the Jantar Mantar and India Gate see huge crowds with placards and slogans that are vehemently critical of the ruling dispensation.



At least six states have outrightly dismissed the law and have asserted that they will not allow it to be implemented in their states. Prime Minister Modi and members of his government have blamed the Opposition and sepratist elements for fuelling violence and unrest in the country whereas critics of the legislation have slammed the government over what they call divisive and bigoted legislation.

Leading universities of the world such as Oxford and Harvard have also seen demonstrations against India’s new citizenship law, apart from the protests that have been held outside Indian embassies in many countries.
