Musician Vishal Dadlani lashes out at Kangana Ranaut over questionable remarks

Kangana Ranaut on #CitizenshipAct: When you protest, the first thing that's imp is that you don't turn violent. In our population, only 3-4% ppl pay tax, others are actually dependent on them. So, who gives you the right to burn buses, trains & to create ruckus in the country? pic.twitter.com/NOUgiHGWhT — ANI (@ANI) December 23, 2019

How ignorant can one be? This is the voice of privilege, trying to show how much better than the common man she is.



FYI, EVERY indian pays tax, either directly or indirectly. GST is levied on each transaction! The rich need to stop thinking they are special! https://t.co/5zkRvvi4Xa — VISHAL DADLANI (@VishalDadlani) December 24, 2019

And irrespective of how much tax anyone pays or doesn't...nobody has the right to destroy property, whether public or private. Nor does any authority have the right to violently attack or detain peaceful protesters. https://t.co/5Li5wvFpbj — VISHAL DADLANI (@VishalDadlani) December 24, 2019

Kangana Ranaut, who has evolved into quite the magnet for controversy over the years, has landed in yet another firestorm. This time, it's music composer Vishal Dadlani who has called her out.The Queen actor drew criticism for her divisive take on the current anti-CAA protests in India that have claimed 20+ lives. Ranaut went on a tirade against the protestors, accusing them of damaging public property in spite of the fact that only ‘3-4% of people pay tax in India’.Indian news agency ANI quoted her as saying, “When you protest, the first thing that’s important is that you don’t turn violent. In our population, only 3-4% people pay tax, others are actually dependent on them. So, who gives you the right to burn buses, trains & to create ruckus in the country?”In response to her debatable comments, Dadlani took to his Twitter to slam her views. “How ignorant can one be? This is the voice of privilege, trying to show how much better than the common man she is. FYI, every Indian pays tax, either directly or indirectly. GST is levied on each transaction! The rich need to stop thinking they are special!” he tweeted.He went on with his lesson in ethics, also addressing police brutality against the protestors which Ranaut had ignored. “Irrespective of how much tax anyone pays or doesn’t, nobody has the right to destroy property, whether public or private. Nor does any authority have the right to violently attack or detain peaceful protesters,” he said.Ranaut, along with her sister Rangoli Chandel has a long history of perturbing fellow actors and industry colleagues. Earlier this year, she went after Alia Bhatt and her performance in Gully Boy after a website carried a poll comparing the two.Have something to add to the story? Share it in the comments below
