They want civil war: Rahul Gandhi, Cong and 'tukde-tukde gang' want to divide India, says BJP’s Giriraj Singh

Giriraj Singh | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights "They want to divide India. They want a civil war in India" "They want to do what even the Mughals and the Britishers could not do" Amit Shah today targeted the Opposition for creating confusion over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act

New Delhi: In a blistering attack on the Congress, Union Minister Giriraj Singh accused Rahul Gandhi, "tukde-tukde gang" and AIMIM’s Asaduddin Owaisi of trying to divide India. The firebrand BJP leader further said that the gang wants to do what even the Mughals and Britishers could not do when they were ruling India.

“They want to divide India. They want a civil war in India,” he said.

Singh’s attack comes after Home Minister Amit Shah today targeted the Opposition for creating confusion over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and spoiling the atmosphere in Delhi by misleading the people.

In an apparent reference to the left-leaning intellectuals who are against the CAA, Shah said it was time to defeat the “tukde tukde” gang.

Earlier, Union minister Dharmendra Pradhan came down heavily on the Grand Old Party, accusing it of misleading and provoking people against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019.

"Congress has been instigating people for creating an anarchic situation in the country. The opposition party has become intolerant after being repeatedly rejected by the people," said Pradhan.

The minister further assured that the CAA has been brought to accord citizenship to persecuted communities and not snatch it from anyone.

Defending the Act he said that former PM Indira Gandhi had also provided citizenship to refugees fleeing East Pakistan during the 1971 war.

To counter the negative narrative weaved around the CAA, the BJP will soon launch a massive awareness drive to reach out to three crore households in the country and inform them about the Act.

Massive protests were witnessed in different parts of the country over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and many of these protests turned violent leading to the deaths of 25 people across India.

Meanwhile, human rights activists today alleged that there was a “reign of terror” in Uttar Pradesh with the police framing false charges against people to crack down on protests against the CAA and the NRC.
