Jaffrabad anti-CAA violence: Former Congress MLA, AAP leader named in FIR; had provoked protesters

Police personnel at the site where agitators pelted stones during their protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) 2019 in North East Delhi's Seelampur area on Dec 17 | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Former Congress MLA from Seelampur Mateen Ahmed defied police order and took out bike rally During clashes, bricks stones and petrol bombs were thrown at the police Stones were also pelted at a school bus and one head constable risked his life to rescue all the kids who were trapped inside

New Delhi: The Delhi Police has named former MLA and Congress leader Mateen Ahmed and East Delhi MCD councillor and AAP leader Abdul Rehman for instigating the crowd leading to violent clashes between the Delhi Police and protesters on the 17th of December in Delhi’s Seelampur.

The police, during the investigation, found that both these leaders had played an important role in the protests and subsequent clashes between cops and protesters.

As per the FIR, Congress’ Mateen Ahmed had sought permission for a bike rally which was denied. He was specifically told not to take this rally inside Seelampur Maujpur and Jaffrabad but defying police orders he went ahead with his plan and even raised slogans against the Act at Seelampur T-Point leading to massive violence on the streets.

During clashes, bricks, stones and petrol bombs were thrown at the police. The incident started at 2:30 pm and the FIR gives a blow by blow account as to what happened.

Stones were also pelted at a school bus and one head constable risked his life to rescue all the kids who were trapped inside when the pelting was happening.

So far, 21 people have been arrested in this case and all have been charged with arson, rioting and assault. The FIR also says that the way the situation unfolded it was evident that everything was planned in advance.

The Delhi Police's Special Branch in a secret report has revealed that several men who indulged in stone-pelting and arson were illegal Bangladeshi Muslim migrants.

The report further said that an organised group of Bangladeshi infiltrators, worst hit by the CAA, was behind the violence in the Seelampur area. Several such Bangladeshis with criminal past were instrumental in initiating violence, the report said.

Apart from Seelampur and Jaffrabad, illegal immigrants from Bangladesh live in shanties and slums in Sarita Vihar, Shaheen Bagh, Zakir Nagar, Kalyanpuri, Trilokpuri, Shastri Park, Gazipur Mandi area, Khoda, Delhi and Ghaziabad.
