Some opposition, communal parties creating disturbances: Ram Madhav

SRINAGAR: BJP national general secretary Ram Madhav on Thursday claimed that the Uttar Pradesh Police committed no atrocities while dealing with anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protesters. He asserted that “some opposition and communal parties are creating disturbances across the country”.“Some opposition and communal parties are creating disturbances across the country, nobody should come under their influence and people should read the amended Citizenship Act. It is not against any community or religion… Also, National Population Register ( NPR ) is not related to citizenship and is just an extension of national census,” Madhav said at a press meet in Srinagar.On the National Register of Citizens () in Assam, Madhav said the exercise was carried out on the instructions of the Supreme Court and it was premature to discuss its impact on the rest of the country when it was yet to be implemented nationally.“Prime Minister Narendra Modi has clarified that no discussion about NRC has taken place in the Cabinet or within the government. So it will be premature to discuss about it now… CAA or NPR have nothing to do with NRC,” Madhav said.The BJP leader said the protests happening across the country were being instigated to defame the Modi-led BJP government.“Those protesting are working against the interest of the country. Just because they don’t have courage to talk on real issues, they are spreading propaganda,” said Madhav. He referred to famous Pakistan-born singer Adnan Sami, who was given Indian citizenship after living here for several years. “The propaganda that this law is against Muslims is simple falsehood. It was not brought in to target any community… Anybody who fulfills certain criteria can get citizenship,” he said.On UP Police action against the protesters, Madhav claimed: “There has been no high handedness on behalf of the UP police. They were facing very tough situation and violence... It’s unfortunate that the policemen were specifically targeted. Police committed no atrocities in UP. It is a propaganda and conspiracy against the UP Police.”
