Assam school teacher rusticated for her anti-CAA stand

As the protests against Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019, continues to stir the nation, a teacher of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalya (JNV) in Assam's Jorhat district has lost her job owing to her position against the legislation.

The teacher was given a termination order from the principal of school which falls under the jurisdiction of central government.The lady teacher, Bandita Borah worked in the school as Faculty-cum-System Administrator (FCSA).

According to reports, the students of this school had organised a protest meeting against the amended Citizenship Act after it was passed by the parliament.

"Soon after protest marred streets of Assam against the law, we as students and residents of Assam also opposed the new law using protest mediums such as wearing anti- CAA badges, reciting poems, and delivering speeches. This is when another teacher of the school referred to those protesting in Assam as illiterates. We described this to Bandita Ma'am who firmly stood by us. This is precisely why she was terminated," a student told India Today on conditions of anonymity.

Now the same students are also protesting the termination of the lady teacher.

Talking to India Today, Bandita Borah, said, " Some girl students went very emotional when they saw the anti-CAA protests across the state. They had also staged protest against the new citizenship act inside the school premise. But unfortunately, one my colleague teacher laughed on them and said that, the Assamese people are illiterate who are protesting against the act. For this, the girl students protested against the teacher remark and demanded apology from him. I was also standing with the girl students and said that, the teacher should apologise if he made such a remark."

Termination letter of Ms. Bandita Borah

" I was served a show cause notice by the school to which I responded but on December, 24, they gave me another order stating that the administration was not satisfied with my reply, and therefore for the welfare of the Vidyalaya and students my services were terminated with effect from 24/12/2019, " she added.

However, when India Today reached out to the school principal for comments, he said, "we have nothing to do with it. We can't understand such sentiments. No one has the right to go against a Law even if we disagree with it. "
