Violence during anti-CAA protests pre-planned, outsiders instigated clashes in Kanpur: UP Police probe reveals

Director General of Police Om Prakash Singh | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Violence in Kanpur was pre-planned and outsiders were involved Popular Front of India (PFI) played a major role in anti-CAA violent protests in UP 19 people lost their lives in violence over the issue while 288 policemen were injured

Lucknow: After Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Dinesh Sharma, UP Police in its preliminary probe of the anti-CAA violence in Kanpur has said that it was pre-planned and outsiders were involved.

This comes after the UP Police in its latest intelligence report shared with the Central agencies said accused the Popular Front of India, an extremist Islamic fundamentalist organization, for playing a major role in anti-CAA violent protests in the state as well as other places.

The organization which started in Kerala in 2006 as a successor to the National Development Front, has also spread its base in Uttar Pradesh and was active in Shamli, Muzaffarnagar, Meerut, Bijnor, Barabanki, Gonda, Bahraich, Varanasi, Azamgarh and Sitapur areas during anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protests in the state.

The report also said that PFI has been spreading its base in Uttar Pradesh for the last "two years".

So far, 1,113 people have been arrested from different parts of the state in connection with the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests which turned violent in Uttar Pradesh.

A total of 327 FIRs were lodged in connection with the protests.

19 people had lost their lives in violence over the issue while 288 policemen were injured, and 61 personnel receiving bullet injuries in the violence which broke out between angry protesters and the police.

Around 35 country-made pistols, 69 live rounds and 647 shells were also seized from locations where protests took place.

The cops also took strong action against individuals who posted “inciting content” on social media during the protests and arrested 124 for posting objectionable content on social media.

The Yogi Adityanath-led BJP government has also initiated the process of sealing the properties of those protesters who were found to have been involved in rioting and arson during the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests across the state.

Meanwhile, the Congress is planning to take on the Uttar Pradesh government over police brutality against anti-Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) protestors.
