Nagpur hospital attack today: After mob attack in Nagpur hospital, doctors seek gun licences

NAGPUR: The state level committee of Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) has written to medical education minister Girish Mahajan seeking licensed guns for self protection if the government fails to provide security to doctors.The letter was in support of striking resident doctors from Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGMCH), also known as Mayo, who faced the fury of a huge mob on Tuesday night following an altercation with a patient’s kin over entry inside a ward.The group accompanying the patient refused to comply with rules limiting visitors. According to doctors who witnessed this, a few agitated relatives first attacked a security guard and then turned their ire on doctors.Dr Vijay Rathod, president of MARD (IGMCH) said, “I was pushed down and women doctors were threatened with dire consequences. This was around 10.30pm and within half an hour a mob of over a hundred had gathered. Many of them were armed with choppers and swords.”Another resident doctor Saylee Pathak said the risk for women was very high. “This is the second incident within a month. In wards like gynaecology, there are more women doctors yet people just barge in,” said she Pathak.The indefinite strike by IGMCH resident doctors is a result of what they term is ‘failure’ of administration to fulfil their earlier demands.Dr Anchlesh Tekam, general secretary of MARD IGMCH said they had met the dean last month and were promised improved security measures in a phased manner, starting from first week of February. Dr Tekam said, “The most important thing we need is a police chowki inside hospital campus. Also, an alarm system should be installed in the hospital. Security personnel should also be armed to provide a secured environment here.” He added that there are around 70 security guards though they need at least 110.Dr Govind Chandarkar said, “Our strike will continue till they provide us a safe environment to do our job.”Though resident doctors seem determined to stick to their stand, the college administration is confident of soothing ruffled feathers. Dr Ajay Keoliya, dean of IGMCH, said all promises made to resident doctors will be fulfilled.“We have already started the paperwork to fulfil their demands. Our seniors at Mantralaya are moving things forward at great speed and we are also coordinating with the police department to start the chowki. I am confident that doctors will resume their duties soon,” said Dr Keoliya.
