Section 144 imposed in Ghaziabad, parts of western UP

Section 144 imposed in Ghaziabad, parts of western UP

LUCKNOW, Dec 26(Agencies): In the wake of violent protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act in Uttar Pradesh, the UP Police said that Section 144 will be imposed in Ghaziabad and several other parts of Western UP from 10 PM Thursday night till 10 PM Friday night.

The statement released by the police also added that mobile internet will be suspended for 24 hours in the given period of time.

On the other hand, Congress on Thursday accused BJP government of bringing the NRC in the garb of the National Population Register (NPR) and claimed that questions related to NRC will be asked in the pre-test forms for the NPR.

Party spokesperson Ajay Maken said, “the BJP government is trying to bring the NRC in the garb of the NPR. The BJP government wants to polarise the society,” he said. He added that the questions asked in the NPR pre-test questionnaire are not required for the exercise.

Meanwhile, Union Home Minister Amit Shah Thursday accused the Opposition of creating confusion over the amended Citizenship Act and blamed them for the violence in Delhi.

“Congress party ke netritva me tukde-tukde gang jo Dilli ke ashanti ke liye zimmedar hai, isko dand dene ka samay aa gya hai. Dilli ki janata ne dand dena chahiye (The Congress-led tukde-tukde gang is responsible for spoiling the peaceful atmosphere in Delhi. The time has come to punish them. Delhi people should do it).”, he said.

Amid allegations that those agitating against the new Citizenship Act, the National Population Register (NPR), and National Register of Citizens (NRC) were being allowed to protest and those wanting to celebrate the same were being denied permission by the Hyderabad police, Commissioner Anjani Kumar Thursday said it was untrue. “We will not allow anyone to come on to the streets to protest,” said Anjani Kumar, adding that the All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen had held its public meeting at the party headquarters itself and not on the streets.
