Norwegian ‘questioned’ for taking part in Kochi rally

KOCHI/LUCKNOW: It’s Janne-Mette Johansson’s fifth visit to India, but on Thursday morning immigration officials visited the 71-yearold Norwegian citizen at her hotel in Fort Kochi She was ordered to appear at Kochi international airport, 20km away, for “questioning” because she had participated in a peaceful anti-CAA protest rally in Ernakulam on December 23.On the same day that Janne took part in the protests, a German student who had taken part in a protest in Chennai had been ordered to leave India.Janne said she was kept waiting at Kochi airport for hours before and after she met officials of the Foreigners Regional Registration Office (FRRO) and had to go through a “bad and belittling interrogation” session which she termed “very depressing”.She was eventually let off with a warning and told that she could remain in Kochi pending a “decision” on whether she could stay on in India or not. Her visa expires only in March. Immigration officials refused to specify under what section Janne was questioned, saying only that visa regulations “generally prohibit” a tourist from taking part in such protests.“I went to the December 23 march alone where we walked 12km from Gandhi Circle in Ernakulam to Vasco da Gama Square in Fort Kochi. As a precaution, I had even asked the local police station if I as a foreigner could take part in the protest and I was given a verbal assurance that I could,” Janne said.She told TOI that she was asked questions about her visits to Delhi and Lucknow. “I was asked to give out details of my friends and extended Indian family in Delhi and Lucknow but I refused to do so right away. I was asked to write a statement about my participation,” Janne said.FRRO officials said they have initiated an inquiry into Janne’s participation in the protest. “She is here on atourist visa. There is a possibility of foreign nationals posing for pictures alongside such protests. Unlike the German student who was deported for his participation in the protests, this woman doesn’t seem to be actively involved in the campaign against the CAA. We are in the initial process and it is too early for us to comment any further. Moreover, considering her age, we cannot initiate any action against her just like that. Anyway, we will be keeping track of her,” said a FRRO official.Janne said the official who first confronted her at the hotel on Thursday kept asking her why she took part in the march and how she had come to know of it.“He made me uncomfortable. He was very vocal on how he had gone through my social media and had all details about my activities from it,” Janne said.
