Who is Akhil Gogoi?

NIA searches Akhil Gogoi's house, seizes documents



The National Investigation Agency (NIA) on Thursday conducted searches at the Guwahati residence of activist Akhil Gogoi and seized several documents, including bank passbook, and a laptop. Gogoi was arrested on December 12 from Jorhat during the protests against the citizenship act in Assam; an NIA court sent him to 10-day custody on December 17. On Thursday, the special NIA remanded him in judicial custody for another 14 days.



Charges against Akhil

He had been booked under the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act and other sections of the Indian Penal Code , including Section 120 B (punishment of criminal conspiracy), 124 A (sedition), 153 A (unlawful association) and 153 B (imputations, assertions prejudicial to national-integration). The FIR lodged by the NIA alleged that Gogoi and several others, "through their visible representation and spoken words... have abetted, incited hatred and caused disaffection towards the government," reports the Northeast Now.

RTI activist and peasant leader

Gogoi is the founder-leader of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS), a peasant rights organisation functioning in Assam. Gogoi has also been dubbed an "RTI activist" as he has often made use of the Right to Information Act to obtain documents pertaining to the cause. KMSS was formed in 2005 amidst a forest rights movement in the Doiang-Tengani area of Golaghat district, Assam. KMSS campaigns to protect the lives and livelihoods of peasants, including those from indigenous Adivasi communities, by "securing land and forest rights, exposing corruption and opposing the construction of big dams that could forcibly displace peasants," says Amnesty International .

Not for the first time

This is not the first time Gogoi has been arrested or charged under stringent laws. In 2017, the BJP government of Assam had arrested and charged him under the National Security Act, 1980. The NSA allows authorities to detain a person up to 12 months. But nearly four months after his arrest, the Guwahati High Court ordered his immediate release, saying his detention violated his fundamental rights under Article 22 (5). According to Amnesty, around 100 criminal cases have been registered against Gogoi till date.

RTI activist and peasant leader Akhil Gogoi , who was arrested under the stringent UA(P)A amidst the largescale protests in Assam over the amended Citizenship Act, was on Thursday sent to judicial custody for 14 days by a special NIA court. The court turned down the plea of the National Investigation Agency(NIA) seeking his custody for 10 more days, Gogoi's counsel Santanu Borthakur told PTI.
