Sacked Jalgaon cop arrested in jewellery store robbery case

Crime branch picks up duo, including dismissed constable, for looting Kothrud showroom of Pethe Jewellers at gunpoint, stealing goods worth over Rs 10 lakh



The crime branch unit-3 of Pune police has cracked the Pethe Jewellers robbery case, arresting two persons, including a sacked police constable of Jalgaon.



The duo has been identified as Sushil Magre (32), a resident of Jalgaon, and Amit alias Nitesh Chaudhari (20). They were taken to custody from Jalgaon central Jail on Wednesday night.



On Thursday, they were produced in the Pune court of judicial magistrate first class (JMFC), who remanded them in four days of police custody. Magre used to work with Jalgaon police, but he was dismissed for the last two years. Magre has been booked by Jamner, Jalgaon and Pahur police for several offences of theft, robbery and house break-ins.



On November 24, two gun-wielding dacoits looted Pethe Jewellers in Kothrud’s Anand Nagar. The duo looted gold ornaments worth over Rs 10 lakh from the jewellery shop and while fleeing, the gang opened fire in the air, sending shockwaves in the locality. The entire incident was recorded on the closed-circuit television (CCTV) camera of the jewellery shop where the dacoits are clearly spotted looting the shop at gunpoint.



The officers of crime branch unit-3 were investigating the case. They had received a tip-off about the accused. When the cops reached Jalgaon police, they came to know the duo was in jail. The officers took them in custody through production warrant and arrested them in the Pethe Jewellers robbery case.



Police sub-inspector Kiran Adagale, attached with crime branch unit-3, submitted that the duo was staying in Delhi, Kolkata, Ajmer, Punjab, Jabalpur and other towns of Madhya Pradesh. It is suspected that they might have sold the stolen jewellery in all these places. PSI Adagale further submitted that the accused used an armed weapon while committing the robbery. It is necessary to investigate that from whether they had bought the gun and if they used the same while committing same kind of offences, he submitted. “Magre would work with police therefore he has used multiple SIM cards and mobile handsets, which need to be seized. In order to investigate the offence in details and to seize the weapon and recover stolen property, their 14-day police custody is required,” the officer submitted to the court.


