PFI resting modules taking care of Nepal edge

The inputs from the Popular Front of India (PFI) segments to trigger in the Nepal border happen received by cleverness companies following the revelation associated with group which supplied monetary help the terrorists through Nepal. According to cleverness resources, a gathering of PFI happened in Nepal two-and-a-half months ago for which lots of people from Lakhimpur Kheri additionally went to.

According to resources, protection alert is increased over the edge after getting cleverness feedback. Border protection agencies became aware. However, officials of protection companies are preventing saying such a thing in this matter. It is well known that Nighasana authorities station and UPATS Lucknow had disclosed the Terror capital instance on Nepal edge.

In this situation, 11 men and women come in prison. The ATS is examining the problem. ATS research disclosed 100 sleeping modules through the Nepal edge of Pilibhit to Lakhimpur, Bahraich to Maharajganj in the Terror capital instance. 30 of the segments had been additionally identified by ATS.

Sources say that the participation of Popular Front of India and Student Islamic Movement (SIMI) was subjected when you look at the assault when you look at the condition recently up against the Citizenship Amendment Act and NRC. Due for this, the cleverness system is notified once the PFI is triggered.

SP Poonam stated that law enforcement and protection companies happen to be totally aware in the Nepal edge. If any feedback of activation of resting segments of PFI is obtained it will likely be prepared.

Source : OBC News

150 members of radical Islamist outfit PFI entered Delhi, hid in Jamia area 2 days before anti-CAA riots: Police on Jamia Millia Islamia riots

The country has seen widespread violent “protests” against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) that seeks to give citizenship to persecuted minorities from neighbouring Islamic nations. Muslim mobs have gone on a rampage, indulging in stone-pelting, violence and vandalism. The Delhi police are now, along with Intelligence Agencies investigating the reasons behind anti-CAA riots that broke out in Jamia Millia Islamia University and the finger firmly points towards the radical Islamist outfit Popular Front of India (PFI).

Pointing to the violent protests in the area of Shaheen Bagh, the police have said that there is a reason behind that area being so volatile and the reasons will be revealed in time.

The Delhi Police point finger to the location of the Popular Front of India’s (PFI) headquarters in the vicinity of Shaheen Bagh, Okhla, Jamia Nagar, Batla House.

Read more at : OpIndia

UP Police arrest 3 PFI members for masterminding violence during Anti-CAA protests

The Lucknow police have arrested three members of the Popular Front of India (PFI) and claimed that the organisation was the mastermind behind Thursday’s (19 December) violence that erupted during the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests in the state capital.

The anti-CAA protests on Thursday (19 December) had left one dead and 50 injured.

Those arrested have been identified as Waseem Ahmad, president of PFI, Nadeem, treasurer, and Ashfaq, divisional president.

Senior superintendent of police (SSP), Lucknow, Kalanidhi Naithani told reporters on Monday (23 December) night that PFI members held several meetings across the city. He said that the police had found conclusive evidence of this through electronic surveillance and eyewitness accounts.

There have been violent protests against Citizenship Amendment Act all over the country. Common man is therefore, naturally wondering as to why there should be so much violence and that too in systematic manner, for the Bill that has been passed in Parliament and who are behind such violence. Answers to these questions are slowly coming forth. Intelligence Department has submitted a report to Home Ministry about involvement of banned fanatics’ organization viz. ‘Islamic Students’ Movement of India (SIMI)’ and ‘Popular Front of India (PFI)’ which is active in southern parts of India. Union Home Ministry needs to impose ban on PFI, considering its involvement in anti-national activities !

“The PFI also distributed pamphlets, placards and other offensive material on the Citizenship Act and National Register of Citizens (NRC) to people in various colonies and also on the social media,” the SSP said.

He also added that mass mobilisation was done by the PFI activists in the city along with other outfits, including the Rihai Manch. Robin Verma, an activist of the Rihai Manch is already in jail.

Source : Swarajya
