Mahtab criticises Centre over agrarian crisis

New Delhi: Biju Janata Dal (BJD) Tuesday criticized the Union government for not taking prominent steps to address the agrarian crisis in the country and also pick holes in the government’s claims on various schemes.

While speaking on behalf of the party on the motion of thanks on the President’s address, BJD Parliamentary party leader in the Lower House Bhartruhari Mahtab said the PM Kishan scheme is a welcoming step but not a permanent solution to the agrarian crisis.

“The permanent solution is to hike the minimum support price (MSP) as per the cost of production. The farmers issue can be resolved with a proper MSP calculation. Today’s calculation is faulty,” Mahtab said.

He said that the Odisha Assembly cutting across the party lines passed resolution to enhance the MSP of paddy to Rs 2930 per quintal.

“We held a protest in Delhi for the hike in MSP of paddy January 8 and also met President in that evening. We expected something fruitful will happen now but what we have got is an incentive of Rs 6000 per year per family,” said Mahtab adding that there is no mention of revisiting the MSP calculation in President’s address.

The BJD MP also pick holes in the government’s claims on various schemes. He rejected Centre’s claim that 80 per cent of Ujjwala beneficiaries are buying LPG refills and said the numbers don’t match. He said that in Ayushman Bharat also Union government’s claim are questionable. The Centre had claimed that over 10 lakh people availed the benefits under Ayushman Bharat scheme.

“The Ayushman Bharat scheme is handicapped without proper secondary and tertiary health care infrastructure. For India Universal healthcare is the answer,” Mahtab said.

Bhartruhari Mahtab also reacted strongly on controversial statements made by certain ministers.

“On the eve of the Republic Day, the President spoke about pluralism and inclusion. Some ministers asked some people to go to Pakistan. Shouldn’t the President’s address include a line about pluralism,” Mahtab asked.

He said while celebrating the birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, the government should stand for the equality, pluralism and non-violence preached by Gandhi.

“Thirty-five years ago, Squadron Leader Rakesh Sharma from the space said ‘Sare Jahan sey Acha’ about India. This year is also the 35th anniversary of Operation Blue Star also leading to the assassination of Indira Gandhi followed by the anti-Sikh riots. Will India in 2019 look Sare Jahan sey Acha,” Mahtab wonders.

BJD MP said India must be free from fear in 2019.
