Anti-CAA stir | Hundreds gather at Delhi’s Jama Masjid; protesters detained outside UP Bhawan

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: Hundreds of people on Friday gathered at Delhi’s Jama Masjid to protests against the amended Citizenship Act, which seeks to grant Indian citizenship to minority communities from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, after the Friday prayers.

Several Congress leaders, including Alka Lamba and former MLA Shoaib Iqbal, were also present at demonstration.

Lamba, who recently joined Congress again, attacked the Central government over the Citizenship Act saying that "unemployment is the real issue in the country and the government is trying to queue the people for the NRC."

"It is very essential to raise the voice of democracy for the country and for the Constitution. A central government cannot become dictatorial and impose it agenda on people," she said.

Meanwhile, several protesters were detained by the police outside the Uttar Pradesh Bhawan and were taken to the Mandir Marg police station. The protesters were staging a demonstration against alleged Delhi Police atrocities in the national capital. The protests were called by the Jamia Coordination Committee.

Police detains protesters from outside Uttar Pradesh Bhawan.

Senior police officers, including Joint Commissioner of Police (New Delhi) Anand Mohan, Deputy Commissioner of Police (New Delhi) Eish Singhal, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police (New Delhi) Deepak Yadav and Deputy Commissioner of Police (Southwest) Devender Arya, were also present at the spot.

Earlier on Thursday, the police had detained as many as 213 people from outside the Uttar Pradesh Bhawan.

The police also stopped hundreds of protesters who were marching towards PM Modi's residence with their hands tied up. They were demanding the release of Bhim Army chief Chandra Shekhar Aazad.

The protesters had started their march from Dargah Shah-e-Mardan in Jor Bagh but were stopped by the police at a barricade en route the PM's residence at Lok Kalyan Marg. However, they had appealed the police personnel to allow them to continue their march.

Additional DCP Delhi South Parvinder Singh -- quoted by news agency ANI -- said that the Jor Bagh is peaceful and the police has requested the agitators to disperse from the place.

"Situation is peaceful here, there is gathering of 50-60 people only. They have been requested to disperse from here. So far they are adhering to the instructions given," he said.

The entry and exit at Lok Kalyan Marg were also closed. "Entry and exit gates of Lok Kalyan Marg are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station," the DMRC said.

The protesters were raising slogans of 'Tanashahi nahi chalegi' and were carrying the posters of Bhim Army chief Chandra Shekhar Aazad. "We have tied our hands and are protesting so tomorrow they do not attack us and lie that we were not protesting peacefully," one of the protester, quoted by PTI, said.

People staged a protest in Jor Bagh today demanding release of Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad.

The Delhi Police had earlier additional security and had imposed Section-144 CrCP at several places to maintain order and security in the national capital. The police were also using drones to keep a close watch on the protesters.

Violent protests erupted across the country over the amended Citizenship Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC). The Citizenship (Amendment) Act seeks to grant Indian citizenship to minority communities from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan.

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
