Fact check: Pic of woman breastfeeding baby across fence is not from detention camp in India

After Prime Minister Narendra Modi denied that there are detention camps in India, a touching image of a woman breastfeeding a baby across a fence as a man holds the kid is going viral on social media. The post claims that the image is from a detention camp in India.

Facebook user Chotu Khan posted the image with "No More Concentration camps!" superimposed on it. The claim in Bengali translates to, "Both husband and wife are Bangladeshis. Wife is a Muslim and so she is spending her days in a detention camp due to NRC. Husband is a Hindu and therefore spared due to CAB. But the parents are ensuring that the baby gets milk in time. End of a short story. In the coming days, more such examples of Modi's achhe din will be seen."

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found that the image is not from India. It was taken somewhere in Argentina.

Till the filing of this story, the post was shared more than 200 times. The archived version can be seen here.

We reverse-searched the image to find out its origin. We found that the photo was taken in Argentina and has been circulating on various social media platforms over the last six years.

The image was uploaded on a blog named "controappuntoblog.org" on January 13, 2013. In rudimentary English, the blog post said that somewhere in Argentina, police had barred people from entering their neighbourhood due to some problem. It does not mention the exact name of the place. The blog post writes, "The young mother is not brought back and the father and child are not brought out of the perimeter."

With the article, the blog also uploaded a video clip in which some people can be seen speaking in Portugese. In the video, a banner can be seen with a slogan in Portugese. We Google translated the text and found that it says, "This is our reality."

A "Pinterest" user uploaded the same image referring to the blog post.

The image was also uploaded by a website called "IndymediaArgentina" on March 11, 2013. The date on the image indicates that it was taken on January 12, 2013 in Argentina.

The image was again uploaded five years ago by a "Reddit" user who wrote that the Argentine government had built a housing complex for low-income group people, but they occupied the buildings before they were completed. The Reddit user also wrote that while construction was on, people from the nearby slums took over the area and started living there illegally. Thereafter, police had sealed and fenced the neighbourhood.

With multiple sources confirming that the image is from Argentina and not taken in recent times, it can be concluded that the photo has nothing to do with any detention camp in India. If we get any update on where exactly the photo was taken, we will update the article.

ALSO READ: Fact Check: Are Muslims wearing turbans in protests to show that Sikhs are against CAA?A

ALSO WATCH: Fact Check: Are policemen protesting against CAA, NRC?

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Woman breastfeeding her baby from inside a fence in a detention centre in India. Conclusion The image is from Argentina. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
