West Bengal BJP President Dilip Ghosh: Centre's immediate focus is CAA implementation; will set up camps to help refugees

West Bengal

Dilip Ghosh

NRC

Citizenship Amendment Act

CAA

BJP

Census

Mamata Banerjee

BJP Presidentin a candid interview with Mirror spoke on issues ranging from National Register of Citizens(),) and National Population Register (NPR) to the upcoming Assembly elections in the state in 2021.Ghosh said that NRC is a matter of future unless Court asks to implement it. He also said that the Centre's immediate focus will be CAA.Ghosh had played an important role behind the party’s huge victory in 2019 Lok Sabha elections. He won from the Midnapore Lok Sabha Constituency.NRC will not be the immediate focus of the government at the Centre. It is CAA which will be implemented now as the law is already in place. NRC will be implemented later, or whenever the Court says, as it was the case in Assam. However, Assam NRC was a goof up andhas also protested against it. Names of 19 lakh people were omitted from the list, many despite submitting their documents.NPR is Census, it has no connection with NRC. When there was no NRC,was always in place. There is a lot of confusion over the matter and we need to clear it. But Census was done in the past by other governments and we are also doing it.With the ongoing confusion prevailing over amended Citizenship law, BJP will start campaigning about CAA. We will be setting up camps in various parts of the districts to help refugees get their citizenship process correct. We will also train our party workers about the amended Act, so that they can help people while submitting relevant documents for the CAA.Our workers will go to meet people at their residences on behalf of our organization, set up camps and tell them about the Act. We may do online registration as well. We will see to it, that not a single rightful person is left out as citizenship is concerned. I knowwill oppose the process but we will work hard to ensure people get the benefits of the Act.The reason of the protest was mainly on the accusation of divisiveness. The law is not applicable to the people of our country. It is meant for foreigners. The foreigners have no Constitutional rights in India. India has the right to select whom to give citizenship. This is applicable for three countries where minorities have faced atrocities. So people, who have come to India as refugees, should get citizenship. We are not alone but our predecessors have also said this for years.The Citizenship law had been amended for at least four times in the past and it can be amended in future as well.Politics has been used as an instrument during the violence in last few days. After getting defeated in 2014 and 2019, a particular political party, whose identity is at stake, got engaged in disruptive politics in various parts of the country. Some students or people of a community came out against the CAA in UP and Delhi.In Bengal, CM Mamata Banerjee is leading the protest to keep the minority by her side. Eyeing 2021 polls, Mamata Banerjee is organizing protests across Bengal for vote bank politics. She wants to get the 27-28 percent share of Muslim votes in Bengal to retain her political identity. CPI-M had also earlier made them their vote bank.But we think common people are supporting us. We know minority is not with us. We do not target them also. We do not target any community or group.The refugees from Bangladesh who were forced to come to West Bengal, including the Matua community, have been residing in Nadia’s Ranaghat, Barackpore, Bongaon and North Bengal. They have voted for us for the first time in 2019 Lok Sabha elections. They used to vote for CPI-M and TMC previously. We are duty-bound to offer them citizenship. They are happy and have congratulated us after the passing of CAA and we want to reassure them that we are working for them and for their safety and security.There is a huge surge in number of party members. We are a national party and we are a cadre based party. We work throughout the year, not only during polls. During the membership drive, Bengal stood first in new membership drive in the country. The total membership has gone up from 42 lakh in 2015 to 90 lakh in 2019. Votes in Bengal has also increased. Registration and making the new members active is part of preparation.We have brought BJP National Working President JP Nadda to lead a rally in Bengal. The rally was huge and people participated spontaneously. TMC has only one leader- Mamata Banerjee but we have several leaders to take issues forward.We generally do not declare our CM candidates ahead. It is always decided later after the election.There was so much protests in Assam because the people became insecure about their future. “Bangali khadao” sentiment already prevails in Bengal. Now with the new amended law, they were scared that people will take their share of resources. But our government in Assam has managed to make people understand about the reality.
