No detention centre in West Bengal till I am alive: Mamata Banerjee’s fresh salvo at Centre over CAA, NRC

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights 'As long as I am alive there will not be any detention center in Bengal' She had earlier announced the compensation of Rs 5 lakh each to the families of those who lost their lives in Mangaluru during anti-CAA protests Kailash Vijayvargiya slammed Mamata saying she had lost her mental balance

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee fired a fresh salvo against the Centre over Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 and the National Register of Citizens (NRC), saying as long as she is alive there will not be any detention centre in Bengal.

The CM's statement comes after she said that peaceful protests will continue till CAA is revoked. She further advised students to continue their protests against the CAA and NRC.

She had earlier announced the compensation of Rs 5 lakh each to the families of those who lost their lives in Mangaluru during anti-CAA protests. Reacting to this Karnataka Minister S Suresh Kumar said that Mamata's generosity was conditional.

“She didn't find necessary to pay compensation to those murdered in West Bengal especially by Trinamool Congress cadre,” he said.

She also attacked the Karnataka government for putting on hold compensation to families of police firing victims saying BJP does not keep promises.

BJP national general secretary Kailash Vijayvargiya slammed Mamata saying she had lost her mental balance.

"I think that Mamata Banerjee has lost her mental balance. After CAA, infiltrators will be identified and her vote bank (infiltrators) will get affected. She is losing her ground that's why she has lost her mental balance and doing unrestrained acts... She needs to be medically examined," ANI quoted Vijayvargiya as saying.

Speaking at a public rally in Kolkata yesterday, Banerjee had announced compensation for the family of Mangaluru firing victims and said that she would tell all the students to continue their protest against the CAA and NRC in a democratic manner.

Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa announced on Wednesday that the compensation has been put on hold till the investigation is complete into last week’s violence.

Backing the CM, BJP MP Shobha Karandlaje said that criminals are not compensated anywhere in the world so there is no question of government money being paid unless the investigation is concluded.

The state government’s decision was met with criticism with former CM and Congress leader Siddaramaiah tweeting that an elected government should never be so cruel and inhuman.

As expected, the Chief Minister pronounced his verdict even before the inquiry, he said.

India witnessed a series of protests against the CAA and the NRC with students from across the country taking part in protests. However, protests were not peaceful in many places leading to violent clashes between the cops and protesters.
