When NPR, Aadhaar caused a rift within UPA 8 years ago

NEW DELHI: The controversy over National Population Register (NPR) refuses to cease. While opposition parties including Congress are opposing the Narendra Modi government's decision to implement it, the country had witnessed sharp differences within the Congress-led UPA government over the issue about eight years ago .On Friday, former Congress president Rahul Gandhi registered a strong protest against NPR calling it an attack on the poor people. Speaking in Raipur, he said, "Whether NPR or NRC (National Register of Citizens), it is a tax on poor people of the country… Poor people will have to go to officers and show their documents and give bribe. They will have to give bribe if there is a slight mistake in their names. Crores of rupees will be pulled out of the pockets of the poor and will be given to the same 15 (rich) people. This is the truth. It is an attack on the people," he said.However, NPR was launched during the UPA rule in the wake of the Mumbai terror attacks on November 26, 2008. The resident identity card programme was initially meant for the nine coastal states. However, under the then home minister P Chidambaram in 2010, the scheme was sought to be extended to the rest of the country.The home ministry sought Rs 6,700 crore to fund the programme, which was supposed to distribute cards using data-carrying chips, photographs and fingerprints of the holder.However, the then Planning Commission deputy chairperson Montek Singh Ahluwalia and Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) chief Nandan Nilekani objected to the resident identity card scheme. UIDAI was in the process of collecting data for the government's Aadhaar project The two government departments were fighting over the use of biometrics and the issue of duplication of data.The home ministry maintained that the Registrar General of India (RGI) under it was mandated to collect data through the NPR. UIDAI claimed that it had also been authorised to do the same.Chidambaram sought clarity from then Prime Minister Manmohan Singh whether RGI or UIDAI would collect biometric data. The home ministry doubted the security of the data collected by UIDAI as it was not verified by a government servant.UIDAI had hired private agencies to collect data which was objected to by the home ministry.In a bid to resolve the issues, Manmohan Singh convened two meetings of senior cabinet colleagues. The first one was held on January 25, 2012. Besides Ahluwalia, the meeting was attended by the then finance minister Pranab Mukherjee, Chidambaram, Nilekani and the then National Security Advisor (NSA) Shivshankar Menon.Two days later, a cabinet meeting was held to resolve the issues. It was agreed in the meetings that the purposes of home ministry-led NPR and UIDAI were different and, therefore, both would continue simultaneously.It was also decided that the two agencies would use the biometric data collected by each other. But in case of discrepancies or duplication, the data collected by NPR would prevail.But slowly and gradually while Aadhaar project got a major push, NPR was rendered to a secondary status.While the government approved Rs 6,649.05 crore for creation of NPR, it allocated Rs 8,962.06 crore for the Aadhaar project.Moreover, Pranab Mukherjee, as finance minister, wrote to the chief ministers of states and Union territories to speed up the roll-out of Aadhaar-enabled payments for various government schemes.The arrangement between UIDAI and NPR was explained by the then Union minister of state for home RPN Singh in the Lok Sabha on December 11, 2012.In a written reply, Singh said the UPA government had decided that enrolment for NPR would continue as envisaged. But, if in the course of enrolment, a person indicated that she or he was already enrolled for Aadhaar, the biometric data would not be captured by NPR. Instead the Aadhaar number would be recorded in NPR and the biometric data would be sourced from the UIDAI, he said.Singh further said, "The demographic data for creation of NPR was collected in a separate schedule along with the first phase of Census 2011 ie, Houselisting and Housing Census 2010. Further, as per Indian Census Act , 1948 data collected under census is confidential and can be used only for statistical purposes."NPR was a bone of contention between UPA ministers eight years ago and it is in the midst of raging controversy along with Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and NRC.
