Who's in power in Bengal? No detention camp here till I'm alive: Mamata Banerjee

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said on Friday that no detention camp would be constructed in the state. Addressing an event in Naihati, North 24 Parganas, Mamata Banerjee asserted that the Citizenship Amendment Act will not be implemented in West Bengal as long as she is alive.

While speaking at an event in Naihati, North 24 Pargana district, Mamata Banerjee said, "Don't fall for rumours. They are saying detention camps will be set up here [West Bengal]. But who is in power here? I am ready to give my life but I will not allow BJP to set up detention camps in Bengal, never! Even if I have to die for it, I won't allow."

"We are in power here and this is the domain of the state government. They did it in Assam because they are in power in the state," Mamata Banerjee, who has spoken against the citizenship law since it was passed in Parliament, said. She added none can snatch away the rights of the people of the country, like citizenship.

Supporting the students' protest across the country against the contentious CAA, she wondered why they can vote to elect a government on turning 18 but not have the right to protest.

"No one has to leave the country or the state. There won't be any detention center in Bengal," Mamata Banerjee said, adding, "Why can't students protest against a draconian law? The Centre is taking action against protesting students and is rusticating them from universities."

With West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankar terming her opposition to the Citizenship Amendment Act as "unconstitutional", Mamata Banerjee retorted back and said, "Do not show the law to me. I have been a seven-time MP. I have been in charge of several ministries in Delhi. I know the law very well. I understand the Constitution so no use misinterpreting its provisions," she said.

"Just as they are an elected government in Delhi we are also an elected government. You exercise your rights in Delhi, I shall do so in Bengal," Mamata Banerjee said, reiterating that neither CAA nor NRC will not be implemented in West Bengal.

Mamata Banerjee had earlier asserted that peaceful protests will continue as long as the new citizenship law is not withdrawn and warned the BJP against "playing with fire".

The West Bengal chief minister asked students to carry on with their protests. She also told them that she will always be by their side. "Do not fear anybody. I warn the BJP not to play with fire," Mamata Banerjee said.
