Parties against CAA should keep academic institutions away from politics, appeals union HRD min

BHOPAL: Union HRD minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank on Friday appealed the political parties protesting against the the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019, to keep academic institutions away from their politics. He said those opposing the Act should also reply why the number of minority people is decreasing in Pakistan and Bangladesh against a 5% rise in India."I appeal to political parties who are giving a political colour to their protest against CAA, to keep academic institutions aloof from their political activities. They should abstain from hate politics at least in the interest of the country and the coming generation," Pokhriyal told reporters on the sidelines of a BJP-RSS seminar here.Claiming a decline in the minority population in Pakistan and Bangledesh since Independence in 1947, Pokhariyal said, "After partition in 1947, the population of minority Hindus in Pakisan was 23% which has declined to 1% today. Similarly, in Bangladesh, which was East Pakistan at the time of partition, the population of Hindus and other minorities has declined to 7.8% in 2011 from 22%."The Union minister also quoted census reports in India and said that during partition in 1947, Muslim population in India was above 9% which has gone up to more than 14% till the day. He said there was a bilateral treaty between India and Pakistan where refugees were allowed to return to dispose of their property."Will Congress and other parties defy The Liaquat-Nehru Pact? Will the Congress party protesting against the CAA will deny what Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi did for the minority refugees. It was all about to protest the minorities, he said."Some people are involved in malicious propaganda (which) is totally wrong. This is frustration of these political parties because the Act is for protection and not against any Indian."The Act is in the interest of all those who have suffered years of torture. An Indian citizen cannot be hurt by this Act. Those suffering in other countries come to India seeking protection. I do not think that there is a reason for the state's not to implement the Act in their region," said Pokhariyal.
