Kagaz nahi dikhayenge echoes through anti-CAA, NRC protest in Mumbai's Azad Maidan

Mumbai witnessed a huge turnout of protestors shouting slogans against the Central government over the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). Most of the people who came to the protest ground were either students or professionals from different fields. A few people associated with different organisations had also come to register their protest against the citizenship law.

TISS students Kartik Kamal, Aditi and Upasna said the government was hurting the very ethos of the country. They said even though the government has said it will not implement the National Register of Citizens (NRC), it was hard to believe that it would not be brought into force.

Vivek, a professional who originally hails from Kerala and had studied at IIT Bombay, said there was a need for a sustained protest to make the government realise that what it was doing was not right.

Asha Verma, a housewife, said she was not on the ground as a protestor but wanted to show her support to the people who have been demonstrating against the citizenship law. Farrukh Seyer, a dialogue writer, said, "The government does not recognise us as citizens. We no longer recognise them as the government."

On the other hand, the stage of the protest rally saw the likes of Umar Khalid, Swara Bhaskar and Varun Grover who spoke at length and were listened to by the large gathering.

Social activist and former JNU student Umar Khalid said, "This government loves changing names. Allahabad is now Prayagraj. Similarly, NRC is now the National Population Register (NPR)." Umar Khalid also requested the people not to resort to violence and concluded his speech, asking the people in Mumbai to continue protesting against the CAA.

National award-winning lyricist and comedian Varun Grover said, "Dictators think they are thrashing the people but they will themselves one day get thrashed." He then read out his poem "Tanashah aakar jayenge hum kagaz nahi dikhayenge [Dictators will come and go but we will not show our documents]".
