Indian cardinal says religion should never be basis for citizenship

Demonstrators in Delhi, India, protest a new citizenship law Dec. 27, 2019. Opponents say new law targets Muslim refugees, unlike people of other faiths. (CNS/Reuters/Anushree Fadnavis)

Thrissur, India — As India continued to experience violent protests against a controversial citizenship law, Cardinal Oswald Gracias of Mumbai said citizenship should never be based on a person's religion.

"The ongoing controversy and demonstrations and counterdemonstrations concerning the Citizenship Amendment Act (are) a cause of great anxiety for all citizens and could harm the country," Gracias, president of the Catholic Bishops' Conference of India, said in a statement emailed to Catholic News Service Dec. 27.

At least 24 people have died throughout India since Dec. 4 in protests against the act, which has since been signed into law. The law permits Hindus, Christians and other religious minorities who are in the country illegally to become citizens if they can show they were persecuted because of their religion in Muslim-majority Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan. It does not apply to Muslims.

The law had been pushed by Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who has espoused staunch nationalist views, and the pro-Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party, which runs the government.

Gracias, a member of Pope Francis' Council of Cardinals, cautioned that "there is a danger that there could be a polarization of our peoples along religious lines, which is very harmful for the country."

"There is no harm in backtracking, changing course if this is necessary for the good of the country and our people," the cardinal added. "The time of Christmas is a time for peace, justice and unity. These values which our Lord brought to humankind in Bethlehem should be paramount in our hearts and minds at this time."

Gracias urged the government to meet with opponents of the law to reach an agreement "about the way forward with justice, equity and fairness."

As dozens of Christians were among those arrested for joining street protests nationwide, regional bishops' councils, individual bishops and priests delivering Christmas homilies also spoke against the law.

"The discrimination on the basis of religion envisaged in the Citizenship Act and National Register of Citizens is against secularism and democratic values," the Kerala Catholic Bishops' Council said Dec. 18.

Latin-rite Archbishop Maria Soosa Pakiam of Trivandrum, India, said in a statement the legislation has "created fear among the people," adding that it "would break the secular and democratic credentials of the country."

He said it would be unfair for India to create exclusions in "a democratic and secular country like ours ... as everyone deserves to be considered as equals."
