CAA protests: Cops in tizzy as rumour flood social media, WhatsApp to incite violence in Delhi

A photo of a cop stomping on a student An image of a protester killed in police firing A clip showing stone-pelters targeting schoolkids A photo of a civilian allowed to be with cops and thrash agitators A video of policemen burning buses And a clip of an ACP asking students to leave the Capital

The above are some of the fake posts that have flooded social media and WhatsApp groups to add fuel to the fire, after the passage of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) on December 11 triggered a wave of protests and violence in Delhi.

Clearly, maintaining law and order on the ground isn't the only challenge facing the cops as rumours gangs have struck chaos and tried to incite violence in the National Capital.

A rattled Delhi Police have taken the threat "very seriously" and formed, for the first time, a crack cyber team that is registering cases under the IT Act and reaching those creating and spreading these instigating contents.

South-East DCP Chinmoy Biswal told Mail Today, "The emerging rumour machinery aided by information technology has become a big challenge in maintaining law and order. Rumors are always fueled for vested interests. Those who don't want peace or want communal tension become hyperactive and misuse the situation."

This time, the Delhi Police will not leave any such rumour mongers and will take action against each one of them, said the officer, who is leading a team handling protests in Jamia and other areas.

He mentioned an image of a man in jeans, t-shirt and protective gear, wielding a stick on anti-CAA protesters in Delhi that went viral on Facebook and Twitter with the claim that he is RSS-ABVP member Bharat Sharma.

The fact is the man is Delhi Police constable Arvind. He was deployed near New Friends Colony on that day to control Jamia protesters.

"Our clarification on traditional and social media has not reached every victim of misinformation. Two days after the clarification, a Jamia student came to me and questioned why ABVP guys are included in the force against protesters. I then clarified to him," Biswal said, adding that in a prejudiced environment, rumors acts as fuel to the fire.

"We have formed a team that is searching key words on social media. But it is very time consuming. Still, we need to take action so that in future no harm is caused. People behind these posts have an agenda," he said.

"Post-incident handling is a bigger challenge Now everyone has the Internet. It is so easy for people to create fake accounts and post anything. It becomes challenging to filter facts from fiction. The counter-reach is limited as compared to the afwah terrorism. By the time, we control one thing, another rumour crops up," he said.

DCP (Central) and Delhi Police Spokesperson MS Randhawa said social media's reach, speed and lack of accountability have posed a major challenge.

"We have to counter every rumour with truth. At times, we are unaware of many rumours. The Delhi Police are busy managing the ground situation, actually caused by these rumours themselves. By the time, the cyber unit checks facts, the damage is already done," he said.

Randhawa said a probe has been initiated to find out the source of these rumours. "We are collecting data regarding WhatsApp groups and their members who would be questioned about the origin of these rumours," he said.

"Using latest tech, our team will reach the creators of these contents," said an official. "Whenever a video is shared or sent on WhatsApp, it leaves a digital trail that can be traced to where it originated from," he said.

BJP spokesperson Tajinder Pal Singh Bagga said rumours spread during violence or sensitive incidents are agenda based. "They are driven by particular ideologies and want to create unrest or take advantage of the situation." Political analyst Gaurav Pandhi said when memes or edited videos on personalities are shared, it is propaganda. "Such content is generated against a particular cost," he said.
