Over 1,000 youngsters launch protest march from Jantar Mantar against looming unemployment

In their speeches, the students asked for the eradication of rules that create gender disparity and for freedom of expression (Photo Courtesy @rohitshabd) | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: Thousands of students thronged to the streets to show their disapproval of the employment facilities in the country. The agitated youth took to the streets to demand employment opportunities from the government. The protesters comprised of student leaders and members from universities across the country.

The protest came in response to 4000 students applying for 14 sweeper jobs in the State Assembly Secretariat, Chennai. Protesters marched from Red Fort to the Parliament Street. The protesters are demanding the government to start filling up all vacant positions in order to eradicate the employment vacuum created in the country.

Also Read: Massive win for menstrual health awareness! Soon, you will be able to use 'periods' emoji

According to a report by Mirror Now, the condition of unemployment in the country has deteriorated so much so that post-graduates and graduates had applied for jobs of the sweeper position. The protest which terminated at Jantar Mantar, comprised of around 1,000 people when it started and more people kept joining the march. The protest march started at around 11:30 am from the Red Fort and ended at Jantar Mantar. From student union members to Presidents, a lot of people participated in the protest. Jignesh Mewani and Kanhaiya Kumar were among the prominent names who joined the protest.

The energy is wonderful! #YoungIndiaAdhikarMarch full of the marching beat and fighting heat reaches Jantar Mantar. Proud to be amongst them. pic.twitter.com/dRhjKMZNzV — Kavita Krishnan (@kavita_krishnan) February 7, 2019

In the speeches, the protesters pointed out that there are a plethora of job opportunities available with the government but the government is not willing to hire students as yet. The march was first stopped by the police but on reassuring them that there would be no disturbance or menace created, the police allowed them to continue. From putting an end to gender discriminatory rules to ensuring freedom of expression in their colleges, the students marched for their better job opportunities in the country.
