CAA can’t annul citizenship: Shah

Pratibha Chauhan

Tribune News Service

Shimla, December 27

Amidst nationwide protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA), Home Minister Amit Shah today dared “Rahul baba” and the entire Opposition to place before the public the provision for cancellation of citizenship of minorities in the Act rather than mislead the nation on the sensitive issue.

Mere oppn propaganda I assure the nation and especially the minorities that nobody will lose their citizenship as all this is mere propaganda by the Congress and company to create unrest. Amit Shah, Union Home Minister

“I assure the nation and especially the minorities that nobody will lose their citizenship as this is mere propaganda by the Congress and company to create unrest,” said Shah while addressing a rally to mark the completion of two years of the BJP government here today. He said the complete details of the Act were on the government website and there was provision only to give and not take citizenship.

NPR, NRC akin to demo Whether NPR or NRC, it is a tax on poor. It’s like demonestisation…. Poor will have to go to officers, show their documents and give bribe.Rahul Gandhi, Cong

Shah urged the Opposition to desist from indulging in false propaganda to shatter peace in the country. “Lakhs of refugees facing religious persecution in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh had been asking us to give them citizenship as promised by Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru and other leaders after the Partition in 1950 and we strongly felt it was our constitutional duty to do so,” he said.

The Home Minister said India duly honoured the agreement of ensuring the safety of all minorities but Pakistan and Bangladesh had failed to do so.

“The population of minorities dipped from 30 per cent to a mere 3 per cent in Pakistan and Bangladesh as they were living in hell with no citizenship, houses, jobs or access to health and education facilities. Now the CAA will ensure that they get citizenship in India to lead a life of dignity and honour,” he remarked.

Shah said several historic decisions had been taken by PM Narendra Modi in the last three months which the Congress could not take in the last 50 years.

“It pained us to see that within one nation there were two constitutions and two laws but on August 5, Modi abrogated Article 370, making Kashmir an inseparable part of India,” he said.

Decks have been cleared for the construction of Ram Mandir in Ayodhya and we intend to make India a $5 trillion economy, he remarked. He said the Congress rule was marked by scams of over 12 lakh crore and in the last six years there had not been a single allegation of corruption against the Modi regime.

Protesters with hands tied march to pm house

New Delhi: Hundreds of people with hands tied marched towards PM Modi’s residence to demand release of Bhim Army chief Chandra Shekhar Aazad and to protest against CAA, but were stopped on way by police.

Modi approved Rs46 cr for detention centre: Gogoi

New Delhi: Assam ex-CM and Congress leader Tarun Gogoi on Friday called PM Modi a “liar”, claiming the Centre had sanctioned Rs46 crore for a detention centre in Assam’s Goalpara district.

Friday prayers pass off peacefully across UP

Lucknow: Friday prayers passed off peacefully in Uttar Pradesh amid tight security arrangements put in place after last week's violence by anti-citizenship law protesters. pti
