On road Mass Movement Against CAB' 16 by MANPAC hits Manipur

Imphal: Protests against the controversial Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2016 continues in Manipur as protestors in large number took to the streets of Imphal for second consecutive days, demanding complete withdrawal of the CAB' 16.

Several Womenfolk, students and youth turned out by responding to the call given by Manipur People Against Citizenship Amendment Bill (MANPAC).

Following the on-road movement, Traffic jams were witnessed at various roads across Imphal for the second consecutive day. The similar traffic situation is imminent in the days to come, as MANPAC announced the continuation of a similar protest until CAB is completely withdrawn.

It may be mentioned that earlier, the Manipur People Against Citizenship Amendment Bill (MANPAC) had announced to boycott of Hindi language, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh and all symbols of the Indian Union with immediate effect in protest against the Centre’s effort to pass the contentious bill.

MANPAC also alleged that the bill openly embraces foreign immigrants and tends to treat the indigenous people as second class citizens. The conglomerate of 72 civil society organizations alleged that despite the unabated protest across the northeastern region, the Centre is working to pass the citizenship bill as supplementary bill either on February 6 or February 7.

Vinay Biswam, CPI national secretary and Rajya Sabha MP alleged that the Bill was anti-national, anti-people and unconstitutional and said that the bill should be thrown in the dustbin. he also said that the CPI was well aware of the pulse of the people of Manipur and the Northeastern states and stated that it would take an active role in blocking the bill from being passed in the Rajya Sabha.

Moreover, the protest against the said bill continued in various parts of the state of Manipur.

On the move to call the boycott of the Hindi language, eminent Filmmaker of Manipur Aribam Syam Sharma had also joined the protest and said that he would return the Padma Shri award which has been conferred to him in 2006 by the Government of India in the field of cinema if the citizenship bill will be passed in the Rajya Sabha.
