Anti-CAA protest: Ajmer Dargah deewan's effigy burnt after he supports citizenship law

Protesters carry an effigy of Ajmer Dargah's deewan during demonstration | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The Ajmer Dargah deewan had supported the contentious citizenship law and lauded PM Modi-led Central govt for it Angry at his endorsement of the CAA, hundreds of protesters carried out a protest march against him and burnt his effigies

Ajmer: Ajmer Dargah's deewan Zainul Abedin Ali Khan on Friday drew the wrath khadims (servitors) of the dargah after he supported the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). The khadims along with hundred others took out a protest march in Ajmer against the CAA and Zainul Abedin and burnt his effigies.

Earlier, the Ajmer Dargah's deewan had welcomed the citizenship law brought by PM Modi-led Central government. Zainul Abedin Ali Khan said that the newly-amended law will do good to the persecuted minorities in the neighbouring countries and also asserted that Indian minorities need not fear the CAA as it will not touch them.

His comments, however, caused anger among Ajmer Dargah's khadims. Along with other protesters, they gathered in huge numbers in Ajmer and carried out demonstrations against the CAA and the deewan.

The protesters burnt the effigy of Zainul Abedin Ali Khan accusing him of misleading the Muslims about the citizenship law. The protest march concluded at the Collectorate after passing through Dargah bazaar.

While speaking to media, one of the protesting khadims, Sarwar Chisti said, "The Act should be repealed as it attacks the preamble of the Indian Constitution."

The passing of the contentious law in Parliament this month has triggered massive protests across the country with protesters demanding the CAA to be revoked. The protesters allege that the CAA is communal nature as it grants citizenship to refugees on the basis of their religion.

Major cities across the country, especially in Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Delhi, Assam, are witnessing vehement protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act. In order to curb violence during protests, police have imposed internet restrictions and section 144 in several districts of the country.
