CAA protests in UP: 'Anger was spontaneous but violence organised,' says report

Police baton charges protesters to disperse them during a demonstration against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) 2019 in Lucknow | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights At least 21 people lost their lives and more than 400 left injured in Uttar Pradesh during the anti-CAA protests In the "wild west" of Uttar Pradesh, 318 persons have been taken into custody on the charges of firing, arson, and damaging state property Police are probing the PFI’s role in engineering a riot-like situation in western UP

New Delhi: In Uttar Pradesh, the "anger was spontaneous but the violence was predominantly organised", reveals the state intelligence's assessment report on violent protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

At least 21 people lost their lives and more than 400 left injured in Uttar Pradesh during the anti-CAA protests.

The report further exposes the role played by the Popular Front of India (PFI) in provoking the crowd and inciting incidents of firing, arson, and hurling bombs in some areas of the state.

In the "wild west" of Uttar Pradesh, 318 persons have been taken into custody on the charges of firing, arson, and damaging state property.

"There is evidence against PFI leaders in several incidents. Over 20 PFI members have been arrested including Noor Hasan, state president of the Social Democratic Party of India (the political wing of PFI). The hot spot of violence was in Meerut, Muzaffarnagar and Bulandshahr," said Prashant Kumar, Additional Director General of Police, Meerut zone. The ADG commands more than 10 districts around Meerut.

According to Kumar, they are probing the PFI’s role in engineering a riot-like situation in western UP.

In fact, the violence which took place in UP's densely-populated Rohilkhand region, which is around 140 km away from Meerut, also had the marks of rioters, who had stirred large-scale violence in Muslim-dominated areas of western UP. The worst-hit areas here were Sambhal, Bijnor, and Rampur.

"We suspect that violence, primarily arson on state property, was organised," Superintendent of Police, Rampur, Ajay Pal Sharma told news agency IANS.

The IPS officer added: "It was surprising to note that where protesters gathered in large numbers, the place was comparatively peaceful than those areas where the number of protesters was very less, but violence was seen on a large scale. For example, at Idgah, I and the DM were monitoring a large crowd of 15,000 protesters (who were peaceful), but a few hundred yards away at Hathikhana, a small number of protesters had indulged in arson, opening fire on police and hurling country-made bombs. It was clear that a small group of rioters, operating at a different place, had a totally different agenda."

Rampur shares a boundary with Sambhal, which further has a border with Aligarh. Notably, Aligarh is one of the most volatile districts where violence surfaced during protests against the CAA.

The intelligence reports claim that the Aligarh Muslim University is the new hub of the PFI's activities. The AMU campus had turned into a battlefield on December 15 when police and students had clashed throughout the day. The AMU has been shut till January 5 as a precautionary measure.
