CAA Protests Highlights: Priyanka claims UP cops ‘manhandled’ her while visiting arrested activist’s house

Police conduct security checks a day before Friday prayers at Meenakshi Chowk in Muzaffarnagar on Thursday. (Express photo by Praveen Khanna)

The new law grants citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Christians, Jains and Parsis who entered the country from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan until December 31, 2014. It has become controversial largely because it excludes Muslims.

Uttar Pradesh is the worst-affected state by the protests with violence erupting mainly in 12 districts, including Firozabad, Rampur, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Bulandshahr and Bahraich. Nineteen people have been killed so far and 1,246 people have been arrested in connection with 372 FIRs lodged so far. This is the biggest police crackdown in Uttar Pradesh since the 2013 Muzaffarnagar riots when 1,480 people were arrested in 567 cases.

To tighten the security, the Uttar Pradesh Police Friday used drones to snuff out any fresh protest. Security drones kept watch on groups of people moving on roads and senior officers led police patrols. In Lucknow, roads wore deserted looks with heavy police bandobast in areas of the old city which was rocked by violence on December 19. People were not allowed to assemble at any place for long after the Friday prayers.

Meerut too was limping back to normalcy after the violence last week left four persons dead. Police and administration officials exchanged “aman ke phool” (flowers of peace) with Muslim leaders and ate “aman ki khichdi” (khichdi of peace) as a mark of the improved relationship in the past week.

Amid the protests, the Delhi Police has used a facial recognition software to screen the crowd. The software that was used for during PM Modi's rally on Sunday to filter “law and order suspects” at the event. Sources said Delhi Police has so far created a photo dataset of over 1.5 lakh “history-sheeters” for routine crime investigation. Another dataset meant for monitoring sensitive public events has over 2000 images of terror suspects and — the latest addition — alleged “rabble-rousers and miscreants”. The use of AFRS by police assumes significance given ongoing protests across the city against the new citizenship law and the National Register of Citizens — events where police were seen videotaping proceedings.
