On Meerut SP's 'Go To Pak' rants to protesters raising pro-Pakistan slogans, his senior defends him by saying 'officer showed restraint'

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: Amid the raging protests against the controversial Citizenship Act which has till now claimed lives of 20 people across the nation, 15 alone in Uttar Pradesh, a video of a senior police officer has emerged on the social media from the sensitive town of Meerut, in which he can be purpotedly seen making communal statements in a Muslim locality last Friday. Meerut had witnessed violent protests last Friday after the Friday prayers.

Also Read: 'Why should I go to vandals' place?': UP Minister skips meeting families of 2 Muslims killed in violence during CAA protests

The video featured Akhilesh Narayan Singh, the Superintendent of Police (City) of Meerut, who is virtually the police head of the district’s urban area. In the clip, reportedly shot in Lisari Gate, the police officer can be seen walking in a narrow lane wearing his riot gears, accompanied by other policemen.

After walking a few metres, Akhilesh Singh stops at a place where a few Muslim men wearing skull caps are standing, and purportedly told the two men standing, "Where will you go? I will set this lane right now that you have given me this chance. (Kahan jaoge? Is gali ko main theek karoonga)."

(Dainik Jagran does not independently verify the veracity of the video)

When one of them replied, "We were just offering our Namaz", Akhilesh was quick to respond and said, "That's fine. But these black and blue badges you people are wearing, tell them to go to Pakistan. (Nahin woh to theek hai jo kaali patti aur neeli patti baandh rahe ho unko keh do Pakistan chale jaayein)."

He continued his rant and said, "Desh main agar nahin rehne ka man hai to chale jao bhaiya. Aaoge yahan aur gaoge kahin aur ka. (If you do not want to live here then go away. You come here but you sing praises about somewhere else?)," the police officer said in the video.

After his rants, SP City Akhilesh along with his police officers, then proceed to move ahead, but returned to the same men and said, "I will throw every man from every house in jail. (Ek ek ghar ke ek ek aadmi ko jail main bhar doonga main)." He then signs off by saying, "I will destroy everyone."

While it is not clear about what circumstances led to the communal rants by a senior rank policeman. However, Akhilesh Narayan Singh justified his action and as quoted by Indian Express said, “The context is that anti-social elements were making pro-Pakistan statements. We had come here to see who all were making pro-Pakistan statements. When we arrived with force, they had run away. We found out that there were 3-4 such people who wanted to create an issue. We had discussions with locals”, the SP said.

"Some people saw us and shouted pro-Pakistan slogans. This made it clear they were up to some mischief. They ran inside the lane. We found some other people and we scolded them. But we spoke to them about the boys. They had come from the same lane. When they shouted pro-Pakistan slogans, we retaliated," Akhilesh Narayan Singh said today as reported by ANI, after the video emerged.

Akhilesh Narayan Singh,Meerut SP on his viral video: Some boys after seeing us raised Pakistan zindabad slogans and started running. I told them if you raise Pakistan zindabad slogans and hate India so much that you pelt stones then go to Pakistan. We are trying to identify them. pic.twitter.com/qoxqzSj6gs — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 28, 2019

Also Read: Anti-CAA stir | Yogi Adityanath justifies police’s crackdown on protesters, says ‘it shocked the rioters’

Reacting to his communal rants, Akhilesh Singh’s senior, Prashant Kumar, Additional Director General of Police Meerut Zone, as quoted by ANI, said that the crowd can be purpotedly heard chanting pro-Pakistan slogans.

“Singh's choice of words could have been better under regular circumstances. There were anti-India slogans being raised. Some people were distributing objectionable pamphlets. He went there and said, You can go wherever you want but don't cause destruction," ANI quoted Kumar as saying.

Prashant Kumar,ADG Meerut: Yes if situation was normal then choice of words could have been better, but that day the situation was extremely volatile,our officers showed a lot of restraint,there was no firing by Police. (2/2) https://t.co/B4HLcj6q6M — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 28, 2019

Kumar further added, “the situation was sensitive on December 20. In normal circumstances, the choice of words could have been better. But our officers showed restraint and did not misbehave with everyone. Those who are running the video now are trying to vitiate the atmosphere."

The violent protests in Meerut last Friday claimed six lives, highest in the entire Uttar Pradesh, during the protests against the Citizenship Act. While most of the dead have gunshot injuries, Meerut Police has not owned up to firing and has released videos from a different location showing masked protesters firing from illegal weapons at cops.

Posted By: Talib Khan
