Frequent transfers, apathetic personnel: How UP Police's laxity made CAA protests spin out of control

The Uttar Pradesh Police failed to read the pulse of Lucknow because of the frequent transfer of officials. (Photo: PTI)

More than ten days of anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests in Uttar Pradesh and the state has turned into a battleground with the state police chasing protesters and detaining then in large numbers. Over 1,000 people have been arrested since last week for their alleged involvement in violence. 350 cases have been registered against the rioters. In Lucknow alone, 42 people have been given notices for the recovery of damages worth Rs 4 crore. Why has the Uttar Pradesh Police failed to control protests in the state?

Police inaction

Sources reveal that the Uttar Pradesh Police was aware that some NGOs would assemble at Parivartan Chowk in Lucknow on December 19 to protests against the Citizenship Act. The police then beefed up the security in the area following the information. The District Collector, SSP, DIG, IG Zone, and other senior exuded confidence in the police department and claimed: Everything is under control.

However, the situation on the ground seemed contrary to what the police had said. Not a single barricade at Parivartan Chowk was placed. No arrangements were made to stop the crowd from proceeding and the officers who were stationed in the possible conflict zones were busy sunbathing to combat the cold weather.

UP Govt's LIU at fault

The laxity by the state government's Local Intelligence Unit (LIU) was another factor which led to violence amid protests in Lucknow. What this UP police department does is: passport verification, checking of character certificates and keep patrolling areas aimlessly under the pretext of collecting information.

The UP Police was unable to gather sufficient information and it was due to this failure that thousands of people from Khadra, Madayganj, Makkagaz, Old Bansmandi, Deendayalnagar, Old Rumi Gate area of Old Lucknow, Satkhanda, Imambara, Chowk, Thakurganj area gathered on streets to protests against the CAA and the NRC. By the time the news reached the police, the situation had escalated and gone beyond control.

Frequent transfer of policemen

Another reason behind the UP Police failing to read the pulse of Lucknow is the frequent transfer of officials. SSP Kalanidhi Naithani has ordered multiple transfers in the most sensitive stations of Lucknow in the last one year.

Usually, before deciding on any transfer of policemen stationed in any police station of old Lucknow, the SP West is consulted. But, in the last one year, Nathani changed three to four police heads in Thakurganj and Chowk police stations.

Station in-charges of Madanganj, Satkhanda, Hussainabad and Old Lucknow were replaced five to six times. The transfers were made to SO Thakurganj, SO Chowk and the outposts under them in the past one month. As a result, the new policemen were not aware of the area.

The situation in Lucknow became tense after protests broke out in Nadwa. The students of Nadwa College were out on streets to protest against the CAA and NRC when they were brutally beaten up by the policemen. Several vehicles were also set afire during the protests.

Where the UP govt went wrong

The UP government reiterated the statement made by Home Minister Amit Shah in Parliament where he said that the CAA will not snatch away the citizenship of any Indian and that it will benefit everyone in the country.

Rather than merely repeating Amit Shah's statement, the government should have explained the law to the villagers, street vendors, small shopkeepers and uneducated people involved in the violence in a simpler language. The government should have repeatedly explained through newspapers, radio, TV and press conferences what the bill is.

What UP Police claims

The UP police and administration are now blaming social media for their failures. The internet has remained snapped in the state for over a week now. According to an estimate, online business in the entire state has lost more than Rs 1,000 crore in revenue due to internet shutdown.

Police investigation revealed that some NGOs and political parties added fuel to the fire which eventually resulted in violence.

On Friday, Uttar Pradesh Director-General of Police Om Prakash Singh said only one person has died in the police firing in the state. He also said the 19 people who have lost their lives during the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in Uttar Pradesh, that turned violent, could have died by the illegal weapons they were carrying.

"We have confirmed that there was once incident in Bijnor where a constable fired upon a group of agitators in a right to private defence. He was fired upon by one of the agitators. He got shot in his stomach. Then he fired back in self-defence. Apart from that, 19 people have died. Till then, we had not ordered any firing," he said.
