For Congress, India always comes first: Party tweets on 135th foundation day

On Congress's 135th foundation day, party interim chief Sonia Gandhi hoisted the party's flag at its headquarters in New Delhi. (Photo: Twitter/@INCIndia)

The Congress on its 135th foundation day on Saturday said that India has always come first for it through the ages and sacrifice for the nation stands above all else for the party.

On the occasion, Congress interim chief Sonia Gandhi hoisted the party's flag at its headquarters here at 24, Akbar Road.

"Sacrifice for the nation stands above all else for the Congress party. From the time of our foundation, through the Indian independence movement and for all the days to come, India comes first," the party said on its official Twitter handle.

Sacrifice for the nation stands above all else for the Congress party. From the time of our foundation, through the Indian independence movement & for all the days to come, India comes first.#CongressFoundationDay pic.twitter.com/jiw5DPOWoE Congress (@INCIndia) December 28, 2019



"135 years of Unity, 135 years of justice, 135 years of equality, 135 years of ahimsa, 135 years of freedom. Today we celebrate 135 years of Indian National Congress," it said.

135 years of Unity, 135 years of justice, 135 years of equality, 135 years of ahimsa, 135 years of freedom. Today we celebrate 135 years of Indian National Congress. #CongressFoundationDay pic.twitter.com/lXEqzSwFUG Congress (@INCIndia) December 28, 2019



Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, Congress leaders AK Antony, Motilal Vohra and Anand Sharma among others attended the event.

Sonia Gandhi and Manmohan Singh also distributed sweets among children present at the ceremony.

Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi, in a tweet, acknowledged the selfless contribution of millions of Congress workers through the ages.

Today is the 135th #CongressFoundationDay.

I will attend the flag hoisting ceremony at the AICC this morning & later a public rally in Guwahati, Assam.



On our foundation day, let us acknowledge the selfless contribution of millions of Congress men & women through the ages. pic.twitter.com/EmtvImZrJr Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) December 28, 2019

Amid raging protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA), the Congress will take out marches across the country to take its "Save Constitution-Save India" message to the people.

Rahul Gandhi will address a rally in Assam's Guwahati, where he will take on the Narendra Modi government over the contentious new citizenship law, among other issues.

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra will address party workers at Lucknow at a meeting of the Uttar Pradesh Pradesh Congress Committee (UPPCC).
