Governor faces protest at History Congress venue in Kannur University

Kannur: The protest against Governor Arif Mohammed Khan at the inauguration of the 80th Indian History Congress at Kannur University on Saturday witnessed minor trouble. The protest was staged while the governor was delivering the speech.

The governor started the speech saying it is a stage to speak about history and not politics. However, he indirectly opposed the protests against Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and this resulted in the audience going wild.

Two girls from Jamia Millia University stood up holding placards. Later, more people stood up in protest. Meanwhile, the governor said amid the speech not to interrupt the protesters and also said they have the right to protest.

"You have every right to protest. But you cannot shout me down", Khan said repeatedly as some of the delegates, sitting in front, protested inside the auditorium. He also said, "when you shut the door for debate and discussion, you are promoting violence."

As the number of protesters increased, the police intervened in the issue. Following this, the protesters shouted slogans against the police also. Students from JNU, Aligarh and Kamia Milia Universities staged the protest. Four people were taken into custody in connection with the incident and were later released.

A delegate being pushed away while protesting against Governor Arif Mohammed Khan at Indian History Congress in Kannur. Photo: C. Sunil Kumar

Expressing concern over the incident, Indian History Congress Secretary said, "some the delegates were peacefully standing and holding placards. They were roughed up by police".

Some delegates shouted "Kerala Governor shame shame" as Khan concluded his speech. A woman delegate, who was taken away in a police jeep alleged the personnel were pushing them. This is not right, she said.

According to Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities, who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014, and facing religious persecution there, would not be treated as illegal immigrants but given Indian citizenship.

The Act said refugees of the six communities would be given Indian citizenship after residing in India for five years, instead of 11 earlier.

(With inputs from PTI)
