‘Go to Pakistan’, Meerut SP heard telling protesters

Go to Pak, did Meerut SP tell anti-CAA protesters in viral video?

MEERUT: A video showing Meerut SP (city) shouting at the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protesters, surfaced on Friday in which he is purportedly telling a group of agitators to leave the country and go to Pakistan . Meerut range inspector general (IG) Alok Singh told TOI on Friday that it was a “natural reaction of the officers to the “pro-Pakistan slogans” that were allegedly raised by some protesters in the area.In the two-minute-long video, which was purportedly recorded on December 20 in Lisari gate where the violent clashes broke out, SP (City) Akhilesh Narayan Singh, while speaking to protesters there, was heard saying, “The ones (protesters) wearing those black or yellow armbands, tell them to go to Pakistan .”He added, “If they don’t want to live in this country, ask them to leave. They eat of this country and praise the other. If anything happens in this lane, everyone will pay for this.”In the same video, Meerut additional district magistrate (ADM), city, Ajay Tiwari, who was seen accompanying the SP, was also heard saying, “It will barely take seconds to destroy their future. In seconds, not only their armband, but their entire life will turn black.”“These two officers had gone to the area after they received information that some members of PFI are involved in the anti-CAA protests that were happening on December 20. When they reached the spot, the police officers heard three boys raising ‘Pakistan Zindabad’ slogans,” the IG said.“The way these police officers reacted was very natural. It seems that these boys have some sort of sympathy or connection across the border,” the IG added.Meanwhile, Meerut SP Akhilesh Narayan Singh told news agency ANI on Saturday, "Some boys after seeing us raised Pakistan zindabad slogans and started running. I told them if you raise Pakistan zindabad slogans and hate India so much that you pelt stones then go to Pakistan. We are trying to identify them".Soon after the incident, violent clashes had erupted in Meerut with police and protesters taking each other head-on. Stone pelting continued for several hours and the heavy contingent of law-enforcing machinery, including police and para-military, was put to use before the clashes were contained hours after it started in the afternoon on December 20.In Meerut, six people, who had sustained bullet injuries during clashes, succumbed to it. Several members of the police and para-military and Rapid Action Force were also and were rushed to a local hospital for medical aide.
