55 years vs 55 months: PM Modi tears into Congress, highlights country's progress under his govt

While the Congress' rule of 55 years was about "satta- bhog" (enjoying power), his government was all about "sewa bhav" (sense of service), Modi said, adding that the opposition party's main grouse against him was that he had challenged its "sultanate" and shaken it up despite coming from a poor family and being from outside Delhi. Slams Congress for questioning and defaming country's institutions The Prime Minister said, in a poll year leaders have compulsions to make charges but lamented that while slamming Modi and BJP, some people "start attacking India". He alleged that the opposition's ability to listen to the truth has diminished. The Congress, he said, questioned the Election Commission and Electronic Voting Machines, but is accusing him of destroying institutions. "Congress bullies the judiciary but Modi is destroying institutions. Congress calls Planning Commission a bunch of jokers... but Modi is destroying institutions," Modi said. Hitting out at the Congress, Modi said for some BC stands for 'before Congress' and AD for 'after dynasty'. Returns Rahul Gandhi's Rafale fire Modi returned Congress President Rahul Gandhi's fire over the Rafale jet deal, saying the opposition party does not want the Air Force to be strong and questioned whether it was bidding for a company. He also accused the Congress of rendering the Army handicapped due to which it was not in a position to launch surgical strikes. "I am levelling a serious allegation," he said. "I want to say it on the floor of Parliament that the Indian National Congress doesn't want our armed forces to be strong. They don't want our security apparatus to be strong. Which companies are they bidding for that they are acting so shamefully," he said. Modi wondered why advanced jets were not procured for 30 years when India's neighbours were equipping themselves with latest weaponry. Taking a swipe at the Congress, he said, "They are surprised that there is a defence deal without kickbacks... they assume that a defence deal cannot happen without commission." Not a grand alliance but a 'maha-milawat' He also took a dig at the recent opposition rally in Kolkata organised by the Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee. "People do not want a 'mahamilavat' (adulterated) government of those who assembled in Kolkata," he said. "A government has to work for the people of India, a government has to be sensitive to the people's aspirations. There is no room for corruption. "We speak the truth, be it in country or outside, in Parliament or outside but your ability to listen to truth has diminished," he said, targeting the opposition.

NEW DELHI: Asserting that his government had kept a tight lid on corruption, Prime Minister Narendra Modi in his motion of thanks speech in the Lok Sabha on Thursday said those who have looted the nation would continue to be scared of him. In a 100-minute speech in Lok Sabha, he launched a stinging attack on the Congress, accusing its successive governments of indulging in corruption and harbouring the corrupt. Modi also highlighted the development schemes of his government. In a hard-hitting reply to the motion of thanks to the President's address, Modi compared the work under his "55-month" rule to the Congress' record of "55 years" in power, while making a re-election pitch in what was likely his last speech in the House before the general election.
