Daryaganj violence against CAA: Hearing on bail plea of 15 accused postponed till Jan 7

Daryaganj violence | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The Tis Hazari court will hear the matter on January 7 The 15 accused were arrested following a violent protest against the CAA in Old Delhi's Daryaganj area last week The Additional Public Persecutor, during the hearing, blamed the accused for plotting a "criminal conspiracy"

New Delhi: A Delhi court on Saturday postponed the hearing of bail petitions of 15 people, who were arrested for the violence during a protest march against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in Old Delhi's Daryaganj area.

The Tis Hazari court will hear the matter on January 7.

The 15 accused were arrested following a violent protest against the newly-amended citizenship law in Old Delhi's Daryaganj area last week.

Earlier in the day, the Additional Public Persecutor (APP), during the hearing on the bail plea in the Tis Hazari court, had blamed the accused of plotting a "criminal conspiracy" and added that in its pursuance, a car was set ablaze, barricades were broken, stones were thrown, and police officers were thrashed.

"A car was put to fire outside the office of Deputy Commissioner of Police. Also, video footages have surfaced which are being analysed minutely," the persecutor said in the court.

However, advocate Siddharth Agrawal countered the APP's argument, saying that there was no case under Section 436 of the Indian Penal Code, which pertains to the "mischief done with an intent to destroy", against his clients.

The Delhi Police had on Thursday opposed the bail petitions moved by nine accused. The counsel for the arrested had alleged that the police had taken many people into detention but arrested 15, who have no prior antecedents.

The prosecutor, during the hearing, had said that the Delhi Police have 19 witnesses to back its case.

A magisterial court in Delhi had on December 23 denied bail to the 15 accused, who later knocked on the doors of the sessions court for relief.

On December 20, the Delhi Police had arrested 15 people and detained 40 others after a clash broke out between cops and protestors. All the 15 accused were then sent to 14-day judicial custody.

Notably, protesters were marching towards Jantar Mantar from Jama Masjid when they were asked to stop by the police and paramilitary personnel near Delhi Gate. Following this, the protest had turned violent.

Bhim Army chief Chandrasekhar Azad has also been arrested in connection with the violence in Daryaganj.
