5-km-long rally showcases youth ‘show of strength’

Over 50 organisations take part in event

More than 50 youth organisations from across the country, voicing a wide range of issues took part in the massive ‘Young India Adhikar March’, which ran 5 km from the ramparts of the Red fort to Parliament Street on Thursday.

A multitude of chants and slogans denouncing the Central government’s policies rang across the length of the caravan that held an air of festive protest.

The demands of the marchers included improvement in the employment situation in the country, increase in expenditure on education, cessation of gender discriminatory rules such as hostel curfews, implementation of anti-sexual harassment cells, no saffronisation of education and constitutionally mandated reservations.

Individual demands

Various groups also put forward their individual demands. Students from Assam, while raising slogans “chowkidar chor hai” said they were demanding autonomous status for Karbi Anglong district in their State.

Railway apprentices, who had studied at the industrial training institutes, complained about disruption of their employment. One protester claimed he had graduated four years ago but was still unemployed despite going through all the requisite entrance processes.

Govind Nisad, a post-graduate in history from Allahabad University, said he was taking part in the protests because none of the promises that the government had made before the elections were fulfilled in the last five years. “Look at the NSSO data that came out. Unemployment is at its highest in the last 40 years. And we know this only because the report was leaked,” he said.

Mohit, a post-graduate student from Delhi University, said reservations should not be taken back and contested the 13-point roster system introduced in universities.

Placards displayed at the march ranged from “resist Brahmanical fascism”, “we want jobs not communal mobs”, to those denouncing the institute of eminence tag given to “Jio University” and the one which combined several different issues and read, “I’ve got 99 problems and they’re all to do with Modi”.
