Challenges galore amid religious fervour

Sanjeev Singh Bariana

While the Centre is standing firm on the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), Punjab Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh has said that it would not be implemented in Punjab. The Punjab Government, he said, would explore all legal and legislative options to oppose the law. The CM had also spoken up against the manner in which Article 370 was abrogated and the special status of Jammu and Kashmir was revoked. In the absence of a consensus, he said, the Centre’s decision was not correct.

Punjab continues to remain high on drugs. Despite the state police going all out under its new chief, Dinkar Gupta, to curb the problem, it continues to be a major issue. As many as 9,936 cases were registered and 13,397 peddlers arrested till October 31. The illegal sale of the de-addiction drug, Buprenorphine/Naloxone, worth over

Rs5 crore, by private centres came as a huge shocker. The busting of an international gang of smugglers that had sent more than 550 kg drugs across the Wagah Border was the biggest success of the police.

Economic pangs

Except for the Investor’s Business Summit 2019, wherein a fresh investment of Rs 3,600 crore was promised for the state, and an expected World Bank aid worth Rs 2,130 crore, the cash-starved state doesn’t have much to feel happy about on the economic front. The border state has been reeling under a severe financial crunch, largely because of the economic meltdown and the Centre’s inability to release its GST dues. So bad is the situation that the state has been struggling to pay salaries to its employees.

Agrarian crisis

The burning of paddy stubble continued unabated but a slight ray of hope emerged with a significant number of farmers shifting to cotton and maize cultivation to break the wheat-rice cycle. Unfortunately, farmers continued to commit suicide. The loan waivers by the government failed to yield desired results. Besides, the problem of stray cattle remained unresolved, resulting in the loss of crops and road accidents. Frustrated, farmers unloaded hundreds of stray cattle and dogs in Mohali. People across the state organised protests against the menace.

Dalit unrest

The Dalit community took to streets in Phagwara in April to protest the dilution of the SC/ST Act. In August, there was again unrest in the community over the demolition of the Guru Ravidass temple in New Delhi. And last month, 37-year-old Dalit was mercilessly beaten up and forced to drink urine in Sangrur’s Changaliwala village. The man later succumbed to his injuries.

Political theatre

On the political front, Sukhbir Badal was elected SAD president for the third time. However, senior SAD leader Sukhdev Dhindsa raised a banner of revolt, demanding party’s resurrection without the Badals. Senior SAD leaders, including Ranjit Singh Brahmpura, Sewa Singh Sekhwan and Rattan Singh Ajnala, who had parted ways last year as the SAD (Taksali), continued working on ways to “revive the party and its lost ideals”.

In the Congress, the most striking event was the fall of fast-rising Navjot Singh Sidhu after he cast aspersions on the leadership of Capt Amarinder Singh. The CM proved his might by helping the party win eight out of the 13 Lok Sabha seats. His steady ship, though, ran into rough waters when some Congress MLAs recently expressed their displeasure over the functioning of government machinery, and raised issues like drugs and corruption. Shutrana MLA Nirmal Singh went to the extent of saying that a tehsildar demanded money even from him to get the work done. Despite a major cash crunch, six Congress MLAs were appointed advisers to the CM and many others are waiting. After a round of political appointment in different boards and corporations earlier, cash-strapped Punjab is appointing at least 80 more.

The highs

Kartarpur corridor

The opening of the Kartarpur corridor catapulted the sleepy border town of Dera Baba Nanak to international fame on November 9. The 4.6-km track allowed the Sikh pilgrims reach the shrine in Pakistan, where the first Sikh Guru, Guru Nanak Dev, spent the last 18 years of his life.

Hero returns

On March 1, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman crossed into India from Pakistan via the Attari-Wagah Border.

Abhinandan’s MiG-21 was shot down and he had to eject after bringing down Pakistan’s F-16 fighter during a dogfight.

Subsequently, he was held captive by the Pakistan army.

Punjabis and global politics

As many as 19 Punjabi-origin politicians made it to the Canadian Parliament, House of Commons, in the general elections held in October. Likewise, five Punjab-origin leaders, including four from Jalandhar, made it to the House of Commons in the UK.

The lows

In deep waters

As many as 40,000 acre of farmland and over 20 villages of Lohian in Jalandhar district remained inundated in floodwaters for at least three weeks this year.

Owing to the release of water from Bhakhra Dam, Sutlej developed breaches at several points, including in Phillaur.

Fire kills 23

Twenty-three persons were killed and 27 injured when a series of blasts rocked a firecracker manufacturing unit, located on Jalandhar road, on September 4. The majority of the victims were the workers of the unit. The CM ordered a probe by ADC (general), who placed three lower-level clerks under suspension.

Police-inmates clash

In Ludhiana’s Central jail, a violent clash broke out between prisoners and the police following the death of an inmate at a Patiala hospital. The clash left one inmate dead and several injured, including policemen.
