CAA will hit denotified tribes most: Activists

protests

Citizenship Act

activists

Jawaharlal Nehru

Mallikarjun Kharge

Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad

Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act continued in Mumbai on Saturday – two weeks after it was enacted into law. Hundreds of residents gathered in Mahim to raise slogans and criticise the government. In Sion members of denotified tribes held a meeting, while the Congress marked its 135th foundation day with a rally in south Mumbai.Around 2,000 people came together in Mahim to register their protest. Irfan Machhiwala, a member of the Mahim Ekta Group, said he was not against giving citizenship to persecuted minorities, but condemned the fact that Muslims were excluded from the list. Tribals and poor people also do not have documents, he said. “The government is talking about constructing detention centres and allotting funds for that purpose.”The CAA will have the biggest impact on scheduled and denotified tribes, the Bharatiya Bhatke Vimukta Youth Front claimed at a meeting in Sion. Its leader, Dr Kailash Gaud, said he would meet Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray and request him not to implement the Act. “There are 66 lakh members of denotified and scheduled tribes in Maharashtra who do not have any documents. They took part in the independence struggle, so the British branded them criminals and sent them to jails,” he said.“Former prime ministerfreed them on August 31, 1952. Many of them have no birth certificates. We fear these people will be sent to detention camps.”Denotified tribes were listed originally under the Criminal Tribes Act of 1871, as ‘Criminal Tribes’. Once a tribe became “notified” as criminal, all its members were required to register with the local magistrate, failing which they would be charged with a “crime”. The Criminal Tribes Act of 1952 repealed the notification. Meanwhile, Congress leadersaid Modi and Shah were “misleading” the country over the CAA and NRC. Kharge was speaking after hoisting the national flag at Gokuldas Tejpal Hall on the 135th foundation day of his party. The Indian National Congress was founded at Gokuldas Tejpal Hall in 1885. The government’s decision to implement the CAA, NRC and National Population Register (NPR) were intended to create “religious divide and anarchy” in the country, he said.“Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar gave us the constitution. The Constitution offers equal rights to all the citizens, but the BJP government, which is being run by the RSS, is trying to change it,” he said. He and other Congress leaders later paid tributes at the Gandhi Smruti Stambh at August Kranti Maidan before flagging off a‘Save Bharat, Save Constitution’ protest march, which culminated in a public meeting near Wilson College.The student wing of the Sangh Parivar, the(ABVP), is leading an “awareness campaign” to dispel “myths” around the CAA and NRC.ABVP was the first to organise a rally in support of the CAA and NRC outside CST station on December 19. Since then it has organised several rallies in institutions such as IIT-Bombay and Mumbai University. Milind Marathe, former president of ABVP and member of its executive committee, said, “There are more than 900 universities across the country. Protests against the CAA and NRC took place in only 22. However, the media created an atmosphere… that the entire student community is up in arms against the CAA.”In fact, there were marches, meetings and awareness campaigns in around 330 universities, he said.
