Robbers kill two for mobile phones

SURAT: Three murders were reported from different areas of the city on Wednesday. Two victims were suspected to have been killed by robbers to loot their mobile phones while the reason behind the killing of the third person is not yet clear.An unidentified man’s body was found on Soma Kanji Estate II Road under Khatodara police station limits on Wednesday. The deceased had been stabbed to death by an unidentified person. The victim was later identified as Shamsuddin Shaikh, 42. Police found his phone and cash had been looted from him by the assailant. They suspect that the purse of the deceased along with his identity papers was looted. Police recovered a bicycle from near the body.A 27-year-old man was stabbed to death on Ganesh Nagar to Vadod Road in Pandesara at around 8.15pm to loot his mobile phone. Umesh Rai, a resident of Ghanshya Nagar in Vadod, was going home after work when he was attacked by two men.“The robbers tried to snatch phone of Rai and when he resisted he was stabbed in stomach. Rai suffered serious injuries in intestine,” said a police officer at Pandesara police station.Rai walked up to his house and informed his roommate that he was stabbed by two men to loot his mobile phone. He was shifted to New Civil Hospital and was operated upon for his injuries. However, he succumbed to his injuries on Thursday.Some unidentified persons on a motorcycle stabbed 40-year-old diamond artisan Dinesh Vala at Matawadi in Varachha at around 8.30pm. The attackers stabbed Vala 18 times which led to heavy blood loss and his death by the time he was rushed to a hospital. His nephew Jayanti, a diamond polisher, lodged the police complaint.Dinesh and Jayanti were going home on foot when the attackers arrived and started stabbing Dinesh. When Jayanti tried to save his uncle, the assailants tried to stab him as well.“We are yet to find out the reason behind Vala’s murder in full public view. Attempts are on to identify the attackers,” said a police officer at Varachha police station.
