Priyanka likely to hold maiden rally in Nandurbar

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra

Congress

Lok Sabha

AICC general secretary

This will be her first rally as AICC’s general secy; leaders want her to hold a joint rally with Rahul Gandhi.The AICC’s newly-appointed General Secretary,is likely to hold her maiden political rally in Nandurbar in early March. The late former prime minister Indira Gandhi had also embarked on her political expedition with a rally in this tribal district. UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi has also held several rallies here, with her first public meeting held in 1998. Incidentally, in 2010, the village of Temphali in Nandurbar was where the Aadhar project was inaugurated and a resident received the country’s first Aadhar card.Even as seniorleaders said that the district was lucky for the party, some party functionaries want Priyanka Gandhi to hold a joint rally with Congress President Rahul Gandhi. “If Rahulji and Priyankaji hold a joint rally, it will have a big impact and give the party a boost in the state,” said a senior state Congress functionary, adding that leaders have written to the high command pointing out that a rally in Nandurbar can help revive Congress’s waning popularity.Once known as Congress bastion, the Nandurbarseat was represented by former minister Manikrao Gavit since 1984. The district, however, blew an ill wind for the party in 2014 when BJP candidate Heena Gavit defeated Manikrao. Until then, Congress had never lost elections from here. Party sources said that the Gandhi family had skipped the district while launching the party campaign in the last polls. “A BJP leader once said that when the BJP wins Nandurbar, that day the party will be in majority in the country. And that’s what happened in 2014. This time we will win back Nandurbar,” the functionary said. “Priyankaji’s rally here will be in continuation of the family tradition. It will also send a message to the farmers that she is with them,” the functionary added.It was, in fact, KC Padvi, Congress legislator from the town of Akkalkuwa in Nandurbar, and Manikrao Gavit’s son Bharat who requested Priyanka Gandhi to hold her first rally in Nandurbar. When contacted, Padvi did not respond to calls and text messages.For now, Priyanka Gandhi is getting ready for her Uttar Pradesh tour beginning from Lucknow on February 11, when she will address a meeting of UP Congress Committee office-bearers. Party sources said that Rahul Gandhi will accompany her and Jyotiraditya Scindia on her first trip since taking charge as. With party leaders already indicating that she won’t confine herself to UP and will campaign in other parts of the country as well, requests are already pouring in from state Congress units asking her to undertake road shows.
