Change has come, for better and worse

AT the turn of the second decade of the millennium, India was on the springboard ready to take a leap into a great future. The poor and the marginalised were experiencing some tangible benefits with MNREGA transforming the concept of a welfare state. As for the rest, a booming economy opened the world to them.

Amid this buoyant backdrop in the summer of 2009, the Manmohan Singh government won another term and fortified itself through a progressive law like the Right to Education and humane National Food Security Act. Just as the UPA ship began to cruise, it encountered turbulence in the form of serious charges of unbridled corruption. Coupled with ‘policy paralysis’, the drift began.

If a civil society upsurge over the shocking Nirbhaya episode stirred people’s conscience, forcing the government to enact a stringent law, street protests by India Against Corruption, coupled with Rahul Gandhi’s tearing of an ordinance to protect disqualified lawmakers, shook the UPA 2.0 regime’s foundation.

Feeling let down, citizens began the search for an alternative from among a fractured Opposition to end the misery heaped on aspiring Indians. Shredding the prevailing mood of pessimism, Narendra Modi stepped in, offering a panacea — ‘achhe din’ and ‘Congress-mukt Bharat’.

Writing a sub-script of the protest against corruption, the nascent Aam Aadmi Party announced its arrival, striking a bounty in the national capital but barring Punjab coming a cropper against the Modi tsunami in 2014.

After an initial burst of reforms on land and labour encountered stiff resistance, Modi 1.0 embarked on benevolent measures for the poor and the marginalised, riding on the back of a flourishing economy.

The youth, meanwhile, patiently wait, hoping the government would still come good on its promise of job creation, just as the regime explained its less than enthusiastic delivery as a new normal in the age of disruptions.

Activities by overzealous Hindutva proponents — cow vigilante groups and lynchings — created holes in the delicate social fabric of the country, as did the violent agitation for affirmative action by various sections among the majority community.

While the jury is still out on demonetisation, the exercise, coupled with pushing with vigour digital transactions, lulled the masses into believing it is beginning of the end of corrupt practices and hoping ‘achhe din’ does not turn into an elusive search for the proverbial pot of gold at the end of a rainbow.

As the decisive decade entered the home stretch and at the start of Modi 2.0, the youth were back on the streets, raising banners of protest against an Act perceived to be against a minority community. The fight against corruption appeared gradually turning to protect the ‘others’.

— KV Prasad

After an unlikely return to power in 2009, Manmohan Singh began on a firm footing till things started falling apart in the first year of the new decade itself. The downslide was quick and relentless. Congress’ Mr Clean bore the brunt as UPA-II dealt with corruption scam after scam, and an image of policy paralysis stuck. Swept aside in the BJP tsunami, the outgoing PM hoped history would be kinder to him. It has certainly been less harsh over the past few years

Narendra Modi built his reputation around the Gujarat model. The shadow of 2002 riots loomed large, but the hope of ‘achhe din’ ensured a historic win for the BJP’s 2014 PM candidate. Always on the move, always communicating, without a single press conference, Modi has ensured he remains the topic of conversations. Despite fiascos like DeMo, the economic slowdown and unabashed Hindutva push, 2019 was a reaffirmation, if any was needed, of his popularity. It belonged to Modi, the decade that was...

Modi 1.0 was the ‘power of one’ , Modi 2.0 is the ‘power of two’ , and all with the PM’s blessings. From being BJP’s ‘core’ commander to the new face of the government, Amit Shah has been quick to assume the mantle his boss of decades has reserved for him. The Home Minister’s tough image is not for the cameras, Shah like Modi likes the rough game. Shah like Modi does not believe in half measures. It’s a jugalbandi that keeps on giving, no matter the recent reverses in state elections

The Congress finds it hard to do without him, the BJP is convinced he makes its job easier, the electorate has not once but twice been crystal clear about where it sees his place. Rahul Gandhi is a prime ministerial hopeful forever, and though there is no endgame in politics, hope can only go so far. Sonia Gandhi meant the 2010s to be Rahul’s coming-of-age decade, it has been anything but, and so the veteran of comebacks had to force herself to come back. The son can still shine, such is the clamour of leaders who’ve grown up stuck to the Gandhi glue, but then there is Shehan Shah Modi, and all grand plans can effortlessly come unstuck
