‘Shame On You And Your Might’: Mamata Banerjee Attacks Centre Over CAA In A Strong-Worded Poem

New Delhi:

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has written a strong-worded poem a day after saying the amended Citizenship Act will not be implemented in West Bengal as long as she is alive. Titled "Adhikar" in Bengali and "Our Right" in English, the poem expresses grief at the current state of affairs in the country. "Who has given you the right to trample upon my rights? Shame on you and your might," reads the poem.

In the poem, Mamata calls the new citizenship law as "instruments of hate". In a veiled dig at demonetisation, the TMC leader questioned why should poor people stand in queues again.

On Saturday, Mamata lent her support to students' protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and criticised government's action on them. "Why can't students protest against a draconian law? The Centre is taking action against protesting students and is rusticating them from universities."

Banerjee, who has held five anti-CAA rallies in Kolkata in past 11 days, said, As long as I am alive, the CAA will not be implemented in Bengal. No one has to leave the country or the state. There will not be any detention centre in Bengal.

Hitting out at a proposed nationwide implementation of National Register of Citizens, she questioned why people need to prove their citizenship once again.

Citizenship means having your name in the voters list. It means having documents like driving licence and bank accounts. Then, why will people have to submit fresh proof of their citizenship once more?

Referring to her government's decision to put on hold the updation of National Population Register, Banerjee said, We did not realise their (BJP's) intent initially. But, when we got to know that it is linked to singling out bona fide citizens of the country, we stopped the exercise in Bengal. We will not do anything which will be against people.

Continuing her tirade, the TMC supremo said it was ironical that people vote as citizens and then have to submit fresh proof of their citizenship.

You (The BJP-led government at the Centre) will ask them to stand in queue again! What about proving your (BJP) own citizenship?

BJP workers are seeking money from people to help them get documents to prove their citizenship. I would call upon the masses not to fall into their trap, she said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
