Pregnant woman dies at Madurai hospital, relatives allege medical negligence

Keerthika was admitted to the hospital on Friday after she experienced contractions (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights A pregnant woman and her foetus died at a government hospital in Madurai Allegedly, the woman developed an allergic reaction after a medicine was administered to her The woman's family and relatives said that the woman died due to medical negligence

Madurai: A pregnant woman allegedly died of an allergic reaction after she was admitted to the Ramanathapuram government hospital in Madurai. The doctors at the government hospital were administering a medicine to the woman for inducing labour pain when the incident took place.

While on one side, the doctors of the hospital claimed that the allergic reaction was unexpected, the family members of the deceased alleged that she died of medical negligence.

The deceased has been identified as Keerthika. Keerthika was admitted to the hospital on Friday after she experienced contractions. A team of doctors comprising a physician, gynaecologist and anesthesiologist were present when a drug was administered to the woman to induce labour pain.

The woman allegedly developed an allergic reaction. According to The Times of India's report, the doctors were able to control the allergic reaction. However, after some time, the woman's lips swelled and she experienced laryngeal edema. The doctors tried to save the woman and her foetus but the situation went out of control.

According to a source from the health department, the woman died of anaphylaxis. After the woman's death, her family members staged a protest outside the hospital as they accused the doctors of medical negligence. An inquiry was also initiated into the case by the health department. Beela Rajesh, the health secretary said, "A three-member team from Chennai, an obstetrician, anaesthetist and a paediatrician, will reach Ramanathapuram tomorrow and an inquiry will be conducted. Based on the report, necessary action will be taken."

Dr S Nischintha, a gynaecologist said that allergic reactions are rare. "Some anaesthetic drugs, especially if given in a slightly higher dose, may also cause an allergic reaction." A senior official working with the hospital also said that the necessary action will be taken after the inquiry is completed.
