Tamil Nadu: 8 detained for holding anti-CAA ‘rangoli’ protests in Chennai

People in Chennai's Besant Nagar area drew kolams against CAA, NRC and NPR | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Group of eight protesters demonstrated against CAA, NRC and NPR in South Chennai’s Besant Nagar locality by drawing ‘kolams’ (rangolis) The police briefly detained them citing that they were protesting without permission and causing inconvenience to other people in the locality The protesters alleged that the police manhandled them and also snatched their mobile phones

Chennai: Amid continuing protests against the amended Citizenship law, eight people, including five women, were detained briefly by the police when they were demonstrating against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) by drawing ‘kolam’ (rangoli).

A senior police official said, “They were picked up for holding the protest without permission and causing inconvenience to others.” He added, “They were later let off.”

On Sunday, in the Besant Nagar locality of South Chennai, a group of eight people staged a protest against the CAA. They painted ‘kolams’ to air their dissent over the CAA, the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and the National Population Register (NPR) and shouted slogans "No to NRC" and "No to NPR" before they were taken into police custody.

"We warned them and later let them off," the police official added.

The demonstrators, who were detained, levelled allegations against the police saying that they were manhandled and the police confiscated their mobile phones.

On Saturday, a massive protest march against the CAA and the NRC was organised by the Tamil Nadu Thowheed Jamath (TNTJ), a non-political Islamic organisation. The protesters marched by carrying an extended national flag over their heads, from Alandur towards the Raj Bhavan in Chennai.

Protests against CAA have flared up in several parts of Tamil Nadu during the past several days. Political leaders, civil society members and activists have staged several demonstrations across the state citing the law to be biased, unconstitutional and being targeted against one specific community.

The CAA seeks to grants citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Parsis, Christians, and Buddhists who have fled because of religious persecution from three neighbouring countries – Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan and arrived in India before January 2015. The Act stemmed from Bharatiya Janata Party’s 2014 general election’s electoral promise to grant citizenship to Hindus persecuted in neighbouring Islamic countries.
