Indian police bully Muslim women & arrest minors to quell anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protests

-

AURANGABAD, India: In a bid to quell the unabated wave of Countrywide protests against the discriminatory Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), the Indian police have resorted to even inhuman practices and are registering FIRs against minors.

So far around 20 demonstrators have been shot or tortured to death and thousands having been detained in India by the police following the eruption of protests sparked earlier in December by the CAA.

Not only the anti-CAA protests are turning violent and garnering the support of Opposition Parties i.e. Indian National Congress but several Indian States have utterly refused to implement CAA and National Register of Citizens (NRC) such as the West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has said that as long as she is alive, discriminatory law will not be implemented in her State.

Amid the worsening protests, the Indian police have begun barging into the Muslims’ houses and bullying women in an attempt to terrify them with warnings of not holding anti-government protests and apprehend the protesters.

However as the protests don’t seem to be subsiding, the police have now begun nabbing even minors but altering their ages in the FIRs to show them as adults.

One of such incidents took place in Aurangabad Town of Indian northeastern Bihar State wherein the police earlier intruded into a Muslim house to take the alleged protesters into custody but in their absence vandalized the property and mistreated the women.

In this regard, the Indian online news outlet “Firstpost” published a story filed by Parth MN, which narrated the aforementioned incident in detail, and also how the reporter approached the victims and the Police Officials to seek their views on it.

The “Firstpost” story stated that after the police were forced to leave the house in Aurangabad empty-handed, they picked up three kids from the neighbourhood and later registered fake FIRs against them by forging their ages to prove the captives as adults. But the reporter brought forward their School Certificates which show that the apprehended teens were in fact juvenile.

The story further stated that how the police brutally subjected a 30-year-old owner of a jewelry store to torture and detained him along with other people.
