CPI-M protests against Jamia student Ayesha Renna, demands apology for using CM’s name

CPI-M activists protests against Jamia student Ayesha Renna | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The activists of CPI-M protested against Jamia student Ayesha Renna and asked her to tender an apology for naming CM Pinarayi Vijayan during her speech in Malappuram Renna said that a lot of Jamia Millia Islamia students have been arrested by the Pinarayi Vijayan government and his police and she demanded their immediate release Ayesha became the face of Jamia protests against CAA after she intervened and protected a male protester from baton charging by the police

Malappuram: The activists of the Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) staged a protest in Malappuram against a student of Jamia Millia Islamia, Ayesha Renna, and demanded her to tender an apology for using the name of Pinarayi Vijayan, the chief minister of Kerala, in her demand seeking release of students who have been detained during anti-Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) protests in the state.

Ayesha Renna while addressing a gathering in Malappuram said, "In the last two weeks, a number of students from Jamia Millia Islamia have been arrested and jailed by the Pinarayi Vijayan government and his police. We demand their immediate release.”

#WATCH Kerala: Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) activists hold protest in Malappuram against Jamia Millia Islamia student Aysha Renna, demanding her apology for using the name of Pinarayi Vijayan, the Chief Minister of Kerala. (28.12.2019) pic.twitter.com/rC4vuQdjyT — ANI (@ANI) December 29, 2019

Further, according to news agency ANI, Renna asserted that in the coming time there will be the emergence of a minority or "Muslim Bahujan" politics. She also demanded an immediate release of Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad.

Azad has been sent to 14-day judicial custody on December 21 on the orders of a Delhi court in connection with the violence that erupted in Old Delhi’s Daryaganj area during protests against the amended Citizenship legislation.

Azad has been accused of instigating the crowd at Jama Masjid in Old Delhi and provoked violence in the Dariyaganj area. Azad filed a bail plea stating that there was no evidence against him. However, his plea faced opposition from the Delhi Police. The Delhi Police cited that Azad might threaten the witnesses, therefore, his judicial remand is critical for the sake of law and order. The court, subsequently, sent him for 14-day judicial custody after dismissing his bail plea.

Ayesha Renna is a 22-year-old history student at Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi and hails from a small town in Kerala’s Malappuram district. She shot to fame after she intervened when a male protester was being lathi-charged by the cops during anti-CAA protests. Ayesha Renna along with her friend Ladeeda Farzana formed a shield over the male protester and saved him from brutal baton charging by the security personnel. The video went viral on social media and garnered a lot of praise for the women’s courage.
