BJP leader beaten up in UP’s Amroha while explaining benefits of CAA, NRC

BJP leader thrashed in UP's Amroha [ Representational image] | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights While educating the people about the CAA and NRC, Murtaza Agha Qazmi, a BJP leader, was heckled and thrashed by the locals and had to flee from the spot The SP of Amroha confirmed that a case has been filed against the accused and he has been arrested BJP’s minority wing is organising programmes and events in order to inform people about the CAA and NRC and urging them to refrain from participating in protests

Amroha: A Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) leader named Murtaza Agha Qazmi, was thrashed by the locals while he was trying to explain the benefits of the amended Citizenship legislation and National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Amroha district of Uttar Pradesh. Qazmi had to flee from the spot to save himself.

Reportedly, on Friday, Qazmi, the district general secretary of the BJP's minority wing, was allegedly beaten and heckled at Lakada Mohalla in UP’s Amroha.

The party’s minority wing has been holding discussions and events in an attempt to educate people that the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) and the NRC will not affect the rights and citizenship of the Indian Muslims and appealing to them to refrain from participating in protests against the Act.

Qazmi told reporters, "I went to a shop at Lakada Mohalla of Amroha on Friday and was trying to spread awareness among Muslims about CAA and NRC. During the session, one Raza Ali suddenly attacked me. He tried to strangle me and I somehow managed to escape.”

An FIR has been filed against Raza Ali. Vipin Tada, superintendent of police (SP), Amroha, confirmed that a case has been filed against the accused and he has been arrested.

Owing to last week’s violent protest, the police in Amroha are on high alert.

Mega protests have rocked the country ever since the contentious CAA was passed by Parliament on December 11. The protests took a violent turn and several people lost their lives across the country. The CAA seeks to grant citizenship to the members of six communities namely Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian who fled to India till December 31, 2014, from three neighbouring countries namely Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh fearing religious persecution.

Many opposition parties, civil society activists and students have regarded the legislation to be biased and unconstitutional, saying that it is against the principles of secularism and equality enshrined in the Indian constitution. They allege that the Act is aimed at targeting members of one specific community.

The BJP has accused the opposing parties of spreading misinformation and creating an atmosphere of fear in the country. In a bid to counter this, the BJP has also held rallies in support of the CAA. Recently, the BJP’s working president JP Nadda held a march in support of the law in West Bengal. He was accompanied by a few senior party leaders like the state’s BJP chief Dilip Ghosh and BJP’s national general secretary Kailash Vijayvargiya, along with other local political leaders.
