Govt insensitive, allegations against Sadaf baseless: Priyanka Gandhi after meeting party worker's family

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Sunday met the family of party worker and social activist Sadaf Zafar who was arrested while protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

After meeting Sadaf's children and other family members in Lucknow, Priyanka Gandhi took to Twitter and hit out at the Uttar Pradesh government saying that it is "insensitive" and has separated mothers and old men from their children.

"Both of Sadaf's kids are eagerly waiting for the release of their mother. This insensitive government has separated children from their mothers, old men from their children," the Congress leader said in a tweet in Hindi.





, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) December 29, 2019

Priyanka Gandhi was referring to retired IPS officer SR Darapuri who was arrested in connection with the recent anti-CAA protests.

She met Darapuri's family in Lucknow on Saturday after virtually giving cops a slip who allegedly tried to stop her and also manhandled her.

Priyanka Gandhi claimed she was surrounded by cops, held by the throat by a woman cop and pushed by another as she was walking towards Darapuri's residence in Indiranagar's sector 18.

In another tweet, Priyanka Gandhi said the UP government has crossed all limits of inhumanity by "levelling baseless allegations" against Sadaf.

"The UP government has crossed all limits of inhumanity. Congress activist Sadaf Zafar was clearly telling the police to arrest those who spread violence in the video. The police have put Sadaf in jail by levelling baseless allegations," she said.

A Lucknow court on Monday rejected the social activist's bail plea saying she is not entitled to bail as the offences under which she has been booked are serious in nature. The bail application moved on Sadaf's behalf had claimed that she had not committed any crime.

Sadaf, who is also a Congress spokesperson, was arrested on December 19 while she was on Facebook Live from the spot where the protests had gone violent.

In the Facebook videos widely shared on social media, Sadaf was heard saying, "Why are you not stopping them? When there is violence, you are standing and watching the show. What is the use of the helmet? Why aren't you doing anything?"

In another video, in which her face is not visible but her voice can be heard, she is heard saying, "Why are you arresting me? Why didn't you arrest the people who were pelting stones?"

(With PTI inputs)
