Non-stop duty, cancelled leaves: How CAA stir has taken a toll on cops

Delhi, like many other parts of the country, has been rocked by a wave of protests and violence that started four days after Parliament cleared the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) on December 11.

Buses have been burnt and private cars smashed. Cops have used batons, teargas and water cannons. Scores of people from both sides have been hurt. Dozens of Metro stations, and some schools, have had to temporarily shut. The Delhi Police have been panned in some sections for their handling of the situation. What made matters worse was the December 19 shutdowns - from arterial roads to mobile Internet - that brought Delhi to a standstill.

But this fortnight of mayhem has also taken a heavy toll on the cops. It's been a non-stop duty across ranks. All leaves remain cancelled. Personnel have been told to log out of social media. Six reserved companies, each comprising 80-150 cops, have been pressed into service.

Even some non-field personnel from the police lines have been roped in as the force has been stretched to the limit. The Delhi Police have 85,000 cops in police stations and police lines.

"After the Jamia violence, I have been working for more than 16-20 hours a day. The entire force is on its toes to avert untoward incidents," said a constable posted in South Delhi.

On December 15, a protest called by Jamia students turned violent as mobs pelted stones, torched four DTC buses and smashed a dozen private cars in South Delhi. The police wielded batons and fired teargas shells. About 60 people from both sides were hurt, 13 Metro stations and some schools shut as the stir also moved to the police headquarters at ITO.

"Senior officials are also with us. They do foot patrolling and stand with us for hours. This gesture encourages us," said a cop posted in Daryaganj.

On December 20, 18 Metro stations had to shut as protests erupted across the city. There was a massive stand-off between protesters and police at Jama Masjid. A mob torched a cop's car in Daryaganj as police used lathis and water cannons. About 50 were injured.

"We had to cancel leaves, except those needed for medical emergencies. We have sourced additional companies (five to six) of reserved police force to take control of the situation. Also reserved forces from the police lines have been told to stay on standby", said Chinmoy Biswal, DCP, South-East. This additional work load comes at a time the police have to work extra to ensure that New Year and Republic Day celebrations pass off peacefully. "We are prepared to handle the ongoing anti-ACC protests, New Year and Republic Day celebrations, all together. Teams are prepared to act swiftly in case of any emergency. Areas such as Jantar Mantar, Mandi House, UP Bhawan and India Gate have become vulnerable sites keeping in mind threats during New Year Day and Republic Day celebrations," said Eish Singhal, DCP (New Delhi).

Photo by: QAMAR SIBTAIN

NEW METHODS

Over 3000 police and the Rapid Action Force (RAF)?personnel posted during an anti-CAA protest in Northeast Delhi's Seelampur on Friday were equipped with electric shock shields, a hitech anti-riot gear used to temporarily immobilise violent protesters.

This was one of the measures adopted by the police to avoid a rerun of violent protests on December 17 when 21 people, including 12 cops, were injured during violence in the area that saw a school bus being damaged and a police booth burnt.

On Friday, protests passed off peacefully amid a heavy deployment of security personnel and under drone surveillance in Jama Masjid and Jor Bagh areas were police rounded up and detained those taking part in demonstrations.

The Delhi Police are also using the Automated Facial Recognition System (AFRS), a software it acquired in 2018 to screen alleged "rabble-rousers and miscreants". This includes those who have been protesting against the CAA and the National Register of Citizens (NRC).

'COPS ARE BEING LOOKED AFTER'

And protests have happened in several areas like Jamia Millia Islamia University, Jama Masjid, Daryaganj, Seelampur, Jantar Mantar, India Gate, Mandi House and UP Bhavan. MS Randhawa, Delhi Police Spokesperson and DCP (Central), said, "We are providing food packets to cops as they usually reach protest hotspots at 7-8 am and leave around mid-night."

Devesh Chandra Srivastava, Joint Commissioner of Police (South Eastern Range), also said since the entire force is working non-stop, it's being taken care of. "Our job is to ensure safety of citizens and maintain law and order situation in all circumstances," he said.

Cops had a boost when Prime Minister Narendra Modi backed them big time. "About 33,000 police personnel have sacrificed their lives for peace and security in the country since Independence. Today, you are brutally thrashing them. When any problem arises, police don't ask your religion or caste, whatever the weather or time they are there to help you," PM Modi said addressing a public rally in Delhi on December 22.
