Priyanka Gandhi’s shock-and-awe tactics leave Akhilesh and Mayawati play catch-up

NEW DELHI: Short on organisational strength as well as reach in Uttar Pradesh , the Congress party under Priyanka Gandhi Vadra is adopting shock-and-awe tactics to steal the march over the Samajwadi Party and the Bahujan Samaj Party in taking on the Yogi government in the state.Vadra’s act of defying police orders and marching for kilometres to the house of an arrested ex-IPS officer in Lucknow on Saturday, shortly after she told party workers that Congress could alone fight the 2022 elections in UP, left the SP and BSP to play catch-up. Akhilesh Yadav and Mayawati are still to visit any of the families of over 20 people killed in the state during the CAA-NRC protests though they deputed their state party chiefs to do so. Gandhi has already visited two families in Bijnor.This apparently led Yadav to cancel his proposed visit to Ranchi on Sunday to attend the oath-taking ceremony of Hemant Soren. He instead held a press conference in Lucknow where he announced that he and SP workers would not fill up the National Population Register ( NPR ) form. Yadav also said his party will give compensation to families who have lost their kin during these protests. “NPR-NRC is against every poor, every minority and every Muslim. Yogi Adityanath is responsible for the deaths,” Yadav said.Mayawati on her part on Sunday demanded action against the Meerut SP who was seen telling Muslims in a video to tell certain protestors to “Go to Pakistan”. Mayawati said Muslims living in India for years were Indians and not Pakistanis. The BSP supremo however has been found wanting in her public outreach on this issue as well as on the sensitive issue of rising crimes against women. All that Mayawati has done on the latter was to pay a visit to UP Governor Anandiben Patel in Raj Bhavan to lodge a protest.A senior Congress leader in the state told ET that Vadra’s strategy was leading to position her as a woman up against the “authoritarian” Yogi regime that is not able to stop crimes against women and is busy putting hurdles in Vadra’s path of visiting victim families. The UP government’s step earlier this year to stop Vadra from visiting the village in Sonbhadra where tribals were killed in a land-clash had also boomeranged with Vadra choosing to camp there for two days till she was allowed to meet locals.
