Delhi temperature dips to 2.6 degrees Celsius; flights, trains delayed

30 Dec 2019, 12:28 PM

Finance ministry ropes in CBI to calm bankers; says will protect bonafide decisions by banks

The Finance Ministry has roped in the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to allay the concerns of the banking industry about investigating agencies impacting the bonafide decisions taken by the banks. CBI Director RK Shukla will hold regular meetings with top bank officials to assure them that prudent commercial decision-making would be protected and ensure them (banks) no uncalled for badgering by the probe agencies.

India Inc garners Rs 8.7 lakh crore from domestic, overseas markets in 2019

Marking a major upswing in fundraising activities, Indian companies garnered Rs 8.7 trillion from domestic and overseas markets in 2019 -- up 20 per cent from the previous year -- with debt instruments remaining the most preferred route for financing business needs. Fundraising scenario in 2020 will depend mainly on the state of the market, economic growth, US-China trade war and the Union budget , said V K Vijaykumar, Chief Investment Strategist at Geojit Financial Services.

India likely to surpass Germany to become world's fourth-largest economy in 2026, says report

India is expected to overtake Germany to become the fourth-largest economy in 2026 and Japan to become third-largest in 2034, according to a recent report by the UK-based Centre for Economics and Business Research (CEBR). It further said India is also set to reach a gross domestic product (GDP) of $5 trillion by 2026, 2 years later than the government's target.

Tourists stay away from Taj Mahal, other attractions due to protests in country

India's tourism industry has been hit by a wave of violent anti-government protests against a new citizenship law that have rocked several cities this month, with at least seven countries issuing travel warnings. Officials estimate about 200,000 domestic and international tourists cancelled or postponed their trip to the Taj Mahal in the past two weeks.

IRCTC to launch Tejas train from Ahmedabad to Mumbai on January 17

The second privately operated IRCTC's premium Tejas train, which will ply between Ahmedabad and Mumbai, will be launched on January 17. Like in the first Tejas, which runs on the Delhi-Lucknow route, the railways will compensate passengers if the new train gets delayed. First commercial run of the Tejas train will be on January 19.

Delhi temperature: 2.6 degree celsius temp recorded; flights, trains delayed due to fog

Delhi temperature: Delhi witnessed extreme dense fog on Monday morning with the minimum temperature recorded at 4 degrees Celsius at 7 am in the morning. According to the Meteorological department, light rain is expected in Delhi-NCR from January 1 to January 3, and hailstorm is expected on January 2, 2020.
