From CAA to NRC, BJP cornered by allies and voices of concern within

Despite assurances from Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah, protests over the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and proposed pan-India NRC continue at several places. The protests have seen 10 of 13 BJP allies rejecting pan-India NRC. (Photo: PTI file)

The triple dose of passing of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), the ongoing National Population Register (NPR) update exercise and the proposed pan-India National Register of Citizenship (NRC) has become an albatross around the BJP's neck.

Protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act have encompassed all three policy decisions of the Narendra Modi government. Protests have been particularly aggressive and relentless in states ruled by the BJP with the exception of West Bengal where Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has taken it onto herself to lead the campaign against the CAA, NPR and NRC, taking aim at the BJP and its top leadership of PM Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah.

Crackdowns on protesters have been severe in BJP-ruled states with Uttar Pradesh reporting the maximum number of violent clashes and deaths. UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath talked of "badla" (revenge/retribution) against those leading the protests in cases where loss of public property was reported.

VOICE OF DISSENT

The Yogi Adityanath government has received maximum flak as well for police action, which was said to be disproportionate in its crackdown on protesters. Now, voices of dissent have started coming from within the BJP, particularly after a senior police officer was caught on camera threatening protesters, accusing them of "singing praise for Pakistan" and telling them to leave the country.

The first prominent BJP voice against the manner in which Uttar Pradesh Police dealt with protesters came from Union minister and senior BJP leader Mukhtar Aabbas Naqvi. The minority affairs minister demanded immediate action against the police officer who was heard asking protesters to leave the country.

Naqvi said, "Police and administration should also keep in mind that innocents should be not subjected to violence and brutality."

This comes against the backdrop of a growing clamour against the CAA and the way the UP government has handled protests in the state, and also against UP Deputy Chief Minister Keshav Prasad Maurya's apparent defence of the police officer who told protesters to go to Pakistan.

This voice of dissent from within the BJP has yet another setting. That comes from growing strength of those opposing the CAA, the NPR exercise and proposed pan-India NRC. Initially, there were some groups - mostly remaining leaderless - which hit the streets against the CAA. Then came the Opposition parties that had opposed the CAB in Parliament.

CRACKS IN ALLIANCE

Now, even the allies of the BJP and those who voted in favour of the CAB in Parliament have joined the opposition bandwagon. At least 10 of 13 allies of the BJP in the ruling NDA have changed their stance - most of them have openly rejected pan-India NRC, while some have even reversed their stand on the CAA.

The Janata Dal (United) - politically significant even if not so strong with numbers - of Nitish Kumar, the Bihar chief minister has categorically ruled out supporting a pan-India NRC at the moment. It has also sought clarification from the Modi government on NPR and its connection with the NRC. The party had supported CAB in Parliament.

Another Bihar-based BJP ally, the Lok Janshakti Party of Ram Vilas Paswan, the Union minister, has distanced itself from the proposed NRC. It wants concerns of the Muslims addressed by the Modi government. The LJP had voted for CAB in Parliament.

Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) - now the oldest ally of the BJP - has made it clear that it will not support the pan-India NRC. Interestingly, soon after voting for the CAB in Parliament, SAD leadership demanded that Muslim illegal immigrants should be included in the CAA, as the protests broke out over the new law.

TO EACH HER OWN

The case of Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) of Prafulla Kumar Mahanta is the most curious of them all. The AGP voted for the CAB in Parliament and after protests began over CAA, it moved the Supreme Court challenging the Citizenship Amendment Act. The AGP is demanding a stricter NRC in Assam but has said it will not support a pan-India NRC.

The AIADMK and the All Jharkhand Students Union (AJSU) Party voted for the CAB in Parliament. Now, both are against pan-India NRC. The story is no different for the Naga People's Front (NPF), the Mizo National Front (MNF), the Bodoland People's Front (BPF) and the Sikkim Krantikari Morcha (SKM).

In the case of NPF, it issued notices to party MPs who voted for CAB in Parliament. Its Rajya Sabha MP, KG Keyne had to resign after protests in the Northeast over CAA. The other three - the MNF, the BPF and the SKM - are against CAA as well.

NON-ALLY SUPPORTERS RETHINK

The BJP had secured support of non-NDA parties such as the Biju Janata Dal (BJD) of Naveen Patnaik, the Odisha chief minister and the YSR Congress Party of YSR Jaganmohan Reddy, the Andhra chief minister. Now, both are against NRC.

Only three NDA allies - the Republic Party of India (RPI), Pattali Makkal Katchi (PMK) and Apna Dal -- have not taken a public stand on pan-India NRC. However, RPI leader and Union minister Ramdas Athawale recently said there was no plan for pan-India NRC.

The categorical stand on NRC -- which many BJP leaders including Amit Shah earlier appeared to suggest as part of the same package comprising CAA, NPR and pan-India NRC - taken by the allies and growing discomfort within the BJP over severity of police crackdown on anti-CAA protesters has put the ruling party in a spot of bother.
