TDP calls for protest ahead of PM Modi's Andhra Pradesh visit on Sunday

Political tensions are intensifying in Andhra Pradesh, where assembly elections will be held along with the general elections. Prime Minister Narendra Modi is scheduled to visit Andhra Pradesh and hold a mega rally in Guntur on Sunday (February 10).

Ahead of the PM's visit, Telegu Desam Party (TDP) president and Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu has called for a protest against the Modi-led central government on Monday (February 11).

While addressing the rally, PM Modi is expected to clarify the Bharatiya Janata Party's stand on the demand of special category status and other promises made in the reorganisation act during the bifurcation of the state in 2014.

PM Modi will visit the state again on February 27 and address a rally in the coastal town of Visakhapatnam. The BJP said PM Modi will counter the propaganda of the TDP during his visit.

Speaking to India Today TV, BJP state unit president Kanna Laxminarayana said, "The BJP government has provided 39 central institutions to the state and funds were also provided to Andhra Pradesh. CM Chandrababu has misused the central funds and is spreading false propaganda. He is a liar, cheater and corrupt."

It's not only PM Modi but BJP president Amit Shah has also shifted his focus to Andhra Pradesh to woo the voters ahead of elections.

Earlier, Amit Shah also visited Andhra Pradesh on February 4. Shah launched the Praja Chaitanya bus yatra, which will cover 85 constituencies in 15 days from Srikakulam. Shah will also address meetings of Shakti Kendra Pramukhs in Rajamahendravaram and Ongole parliamentary constituencies on February 21 and 26.

The TDP has called for a statewide protest against PM Modi's visit on February 10. CM Chandrababu Naidu has already asked his party men to protest and show black flags during the PM's visit.

CM Chandrababu Naidu, who is at the forefront of weaving an alliance of opposition parties against the BJP, has also got support from the CPI and the CPI (M), as both the parties will hold protests against PM Modi's Guntur visit.

"People of Andhra Pradesh are angry at Modi. He has betrayed the people by not fulfilling promises made during the time of the division of the state. Modi himself promised to provide special category state to Andhra Pradesh during the 2014 general election rallies in Tirupati and Visakhapatnam. Modi is also trying to destabilise the TDP government and not only the party, but the people will protest against his visit," said TDP spokesperson Yamini.

The TDP has also alleged that the Centre failed to provide enough funds for the Polavaram project instead of it being a national project, and took back Rs 350 crore allocated for the development of the backward districts of Uttarandhra and Rayalaseema. The party also questioned the denial of Kadapa steel plant and Visakhapatnam railway zone as promised in state reorganisation act.
