Hyderabad man who died at Goa fest had two ribs broken, bled internally: Doctors

VISAKHAPATNAM/HYDERABAD: Mystery shrouds the deaths of techie M Sai Prasad (32) from Hyderabad and businessman Saragadam Chinni Venkat (31) from Old Pendurthi in Visakhapatnam . Their family members have demanded an investigation into the circumstances that led to their deaths while they were standing in a queue to attend electronic dance music (EDM) fest in Goa.Chinni Venkat, a realtor, and his friend, Sai Prasad, fainted and died on December 27.Family members of Venkat are clueless about what caused his death, and they said “he was healthy”. They, however, suspect that a stampede near the entry gate may have led to the death of Venkat and Sai Prasad. Goa police are waiting for the viscera test to ascertain the exact reason for the death.“When we spoke to the police and a few others in Goa after the incident, we came to know that Venkat and Sai Prasad died in a stampede at the beach, near the entrance gate of the EDM festival close to the parking area,” said Venkat’s uncle S Mohan. Doctors who treated Venkat said that two of his ribs were broken and there was internal bleedingVenkat’s parents, Satyanarayana and Lakshmi, wife Swetha, and his friends and relatives are still in a shock. Venkat’s cousin, S Tulasai Bhaskar, who went to Goa after hearing the news of his death, told TOI that Venkat never consumed any kind of drugs. Even the Goa police didn’t find any drugs in the hotel room where the duo stayed.Family members of Sai Prasad, too, said that he was in good health and there was no way that he could have suddenly fainted while standing in a queue.As the news of Prasad’s death reached his family, residing at the multi-storey Revathi Towers in Kothapet, people from around the apartment and nearby colonies crowded their home. “We heard that the Goa police have said that Sai and his friend suffered cardiac arrest. But how is it possible that both of them suffered a cardiac arrest at the same time?” said a neighbour.However, the police in Hyderabad and Visakhapatnam have no clue whatsoever.Venkat was emerging as a builder and realtor in Visakhapatnam. About two years ago, he married Swetha.The couple were blessed with a boy some four months ago and they had planned to name the boy Reyansh.Venkat’s uncle Mohan suspects that a few miscreants might have been involved in the stampede to loot cash and gold ornaments from Venkat, because whatever cash he was carrying and ornaments he was wearing were missing after the incident. Venkat’s body arrived in Visakhapatnam on Sunday morning.
