Ground Report: Why The Latest Communal Clash In Agra’s Mantola Could Further Drive Hindus Out

A year before the protest, a local Bajrang Dal leader was gunned down, causing communal tension. Arun Mahor was a Dalit Hindu who had shifted out of this locality some years earlier. After the gruesome killing, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad and Bajrang Dal handed a list to the police of families who they claimed had migrated out of fear of Muslim community.

“Violence is a strategy to drive us out. Else why would they open fire over such a petty issue?" asked Pramesh. "It's because they want to take over this entire locality,” he said.

The residents have expressed this fear before, and now they are expressing it again.

Poonam Devi, a resident, said that two of his three sons have left the colony after repeated violence. She said that residents of Mulla Pada insult them using casteist slurs and harass girls who pass by their colony to reach school. “They are rich and we are poor. So they easily dominate us,” another woman said.

"The Hindu families have been continuously leaving since Basheer kaand," Chowdhary said.

In October 2003, Mantola saw one of its bloodiest clashes involving local politician Choudhry Basheer. After he deflected from Bahujan Samaj Party to Samajwadi party, supporters of both sides clashed and Mantola burnt for several days. Hindus found themselves to be at the receiving end of the indiscriminate stone-pelting and firing.

Residents said most victim families have moved out. A woman told Swarajya that her son was fired at when he was at home and even after so many years, he has not fully recovered.

Clashes also occurred in 2015 after pieces of meat were thrown at a Ganpati procession, and in 2017 when a Muslim man named Nasir beat up a Hindu man named Dheeraj.

Hindus say they live in fear. In 2014, when an alleged 'ghar wapsi' of around 60 Muslims was reported from an Agra slum, Muslims leaders gathered in Mantola and delivered inflammatory speeches, threatening large-scale violence.
