Youngster should not get carried away!

In the backdrop of violent protests in some of the states wherein the protests were seemingly participated by the youth belonging to a particular section of society, the Prime Minister Narendra Modi said the youth of India doesn’t like anarchy, instability and nepotism during his monthly radio programme Mann Ki Baat. The youth in India likes to follow the system. ”They question the system when it does not work and don’t like anarchy as they question the loopholes in the system. What today’s youth dislikes is instability, chaos, nepotism,” he said.

Strangely, his remarks came at a time when a section of students, seemingly mislead by the cheap politicians, have been protesting against the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). He rightly said that the new generation was an embodiment of a new system and new order which will elevate the country to greater heights. The protests against the CAA that began with a group of students taking out rallies and demonstrations in Jamia Milia Islamia, New Delhi, soon spread to various parts of the country projecting the youth in poor light..

Modi has rightly observed that this generation is extremely talented. He said,”It thrives on the dream to do something new, something different. Remember with the environment perceptibly deteriorating due to decades of man-made abuse, heaping health and livelihood costs on the current generation, young people increasingly feel they have been dealt a raw deal by leaders today and past. Unfortunately, despite the Prime Minister having such a deep understanding of the youth of this country, yet they have been most exploited and disappointed class and in a way is a failure of the collective leadership of the country to reassure them of due recognition of their talent and merit. Swedish teenaged activist Greta Thunberg articulated this sentiment powerfully in 2019, sparking global climate protests by youngsters”.

Youngsters should also understand that their potentials and skill only will help them to grow in such a hostile environment and they need not to be carried away with parochial agendas of corrupt politicians and ideologue as they only were responsible for their plight. However, youngsters independently use their might to voice for all causes that affects humans in general and youth in particular. .
