Delhi Congress To Stage Hunger Strike On December 31 Against BJP-led Central Government

The Delhi Congress has planned a 12-hour long hunger strike on December 31- the evening of New Year's

Eve against the BJP-led central government at Connaught Place. According to a Congress leader, Jitendra Kochar, the hunger strike will start at 6 pm. He added that the strike is against the "authoritarian" central government that "doesn't want to listen to the people."

Further reports stated that the Congress' Senior party leaders are expected to join the hunger strike. However, the Delhi police is yet to give the party a clearance to hold the strike.

Protests against CAA, NRC, NPR

Several violent protests have been erupting across Assam, West Bengal, Delhi, and Uttar Pradesh against the newly amended Citizenship Act, following the violence at Jamia Millia Islamia University in Delhi where over 50 students were detained by police during the protests. Along with it, students across the country have staged protests in solidarity.

The anti-CAA movement has spread to more places like Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Pondicherry, Patna, and so on. Along with it, protests against the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and the National Population Register (NPR) have also been erupting across the nation.

Read: Delhi Police writes to HC to appoint claims commissioner to estimate damage during anti-CAA protests

Read: Amit Shah likely to be a part of a pro-CAA rally in Jodhpur, Rajasthan

What is CAA?

The Citizenship Act was passed in the Lok Sabha on December 9 and then by the Rajya Sabha on December 11. The Act seeks to grant Indian citizenship to non-Muslim refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan.

Through this bill, Indian citizenship will be provided to the members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi, and Christian communities, who have come from the three countries to India till December 31, 2014, and put an end to them being treated as illegal immigrants in the country.

Read: Police have detained Samajwadi Party's Richa Singh during her hunger strike

Read: Delhi govt decides to extend power subsidy to residents of Delhi Cantt

(WITH AGENCY INPUTS)
