Ex-student neta held for protesting outside hostel

Police take former AUSU president Richa Singh away in Allahabad on Sunday

Allahabad: Former Allahabad University Students’ Union (AUSU) president Richa Singh was arrested on Sunday for defying prohibitory orders and continuing to sit on a dharna outside the gate of the varsity’s Women’s Hostel (WH) to protest against the alleged lapses in the inmates’ security. Singh had been protesting since the last 16 days.

The Samajwadi Party leader was taken to Mahila Thana on Sunday evening.

The arrest comes weeks after Singh had written to the National Commission for Women (NCW) about the lax security arrangements at the women’s hostels of AU. A five-member NCW team had also visited the varsity to assess the security set-up and even interacted with the inmates.

The panel had expressed its dissatisfaction with the way cases of sexual harassment were being handled by the AU administration and had later summoned AU VC RL Hangloo to submit an explanation.

While being taken away by the police, Singh told reporters, “My supporters and I were staging a sit-in at the WH gate, when a group of police officials dragged us into a vehicle. I was taken into police custody as I raised my voice against the AU vice-chancellor.”

“Instead of implementing the orders of NCW, the district administration is trying to protect the VC. I was protesting peacefully since the past 16 days and had only raised the issue of security of inmates of girls hostels,” she alleged.

SSP (Allahabad) Satyarth Anirudh Pankaj said the police had already served a notice to Singh urging her to call off the stir as section 144 of CrPc had been imposed in the state in wake of the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). The SSP said that women police officials had also told her about the implementation of section 144 of CrPc, but the SP leader refused to listen to them.

On Sunday evening, a team of Colonelganj police and Mahila Thana arrested Singh and her two supporters, while she was demonstrating near the WH gate.

More policemen were deployed after Singh’s arrest. She would later be produced in the court regarding the violation of section 144 of the CrPc. Singh, who had contested the 2017 assembly polls from Allahabad West on a SP ticket, had been protesting in support of her eight-pointer charter of demands.

Slamming the Yogi Adityanath-led state government for spreading fear among the public, SP district spokesperson Daan Bahadur Singh said that the district police had crossed all limits and was trying to suppress the voice of students, but his party would not tolerate it.

“Singh had been protesting peacefully in support of AU’s hostel inmates,” he added. On December 18, AU officials too had asked her to call off the protest, but she had refused.


