Himachal snowfall block 1000 roads: Shimla weather: Snowfall blocks 1093 roads in Himachal; CM reviews situation

SHIMLA: Snowfall has blocked about 1093 roads for traffic in Himachal Pradesh out of which 204 roads are likely to be restored by Friday evening. Across the state, 415 water supply schemes have been affected due to the snow. Those which have been adversely affected include 120 water supply schemes in the Mandi district, 60 in Kinnaur district, 89 in Chamba district, five in Kangra, 43 in Kullu and 25 in Rohru circle.Chief minister Jai Ram Thakur chaired a meeting with the senior officers to review the situation arisen due to heavy snowfall. He said that the state government has released Rs 35.17 crore for ensuring restoration of essential services.Jai Ram Thakur directed the officers to ensure that all the essential services are restored immediately. He directed the officers to ensure that all the remaining roads should be restored by Saturday evening. He said that adequate men and machinery be deployed to ensure that the roads were responded at the earliest.He said that the PWD department must ensure that all the roads leading to essential services such as hospitals be given priority so that the patients don't face any hardship. He said that as many as 25 roads had been adversely affected in the state.He said that most of the water supply schemes would be restored by Friday evening and the remaining would be restored within a day. He said that power supply was also badly affected in several parts of the state. He said that the same would be restored in all district headquarters and efforts would be made to restore power supply in others parts by evening.He directed the state electricity board authorities to ensure that the power supply in other parts of the state was restored within a day. He also directed the BSNL authorities to ensure that BSNL services be restored at the earliest so that the people didn't face any inconvenience in communication. He said that 15 satellite phones would be provided soon at all district headquarters and three tribal sub-divisions of the state. This would ensure effective communication facilities at the time of natural calamities, he added.Chief secretary BK Agarwal suggested that three snow cutters should be procured for important points in the first phase and plan be prepared by the PWD department in this regard after assessing ground situation.Additional chief secretary (Revenue and PWD) Manisha Nanda said that best possible efforts would be made to ensure restoration of essentials services in the state. She said that all the departments have been asked to ensure effective coordination at various levels for fast restoration of essential services.
