Won’t let BJP take away freedom: Mamata

Mamata said the BJP was going to get increasingly cornered, despite its brute majority in the Lok Sabha

“BJP -k eka korey din Bharotborsheyr bukey (Isolate the BJP in India),” said Mamata to cheers from thousands gathered at Purulia’s Victoria School crossing ahead of her sixth mass march against the Centre’s citizenship thrusts.

Mamata Banerjee on Monday urged people to set aside all differences to unite forces and isolate the BJP in India, a day after attending the national Opposition’s show of unity at Jharkhand chief minister Hemant Soren’s swearing-in in Ranchi.

“They want to take away our hard-earned Independence. We will not let that happen,” she said in her 15-minute address before leading a 6km mass march.

Mamata had come to Purulia on Sunday night after attending JMM leader Soren’s swearing-in which was turned into a show of anti-BJP unity by a slew of Opposition leaders from across the nation.

The Bengal chief minister said the BJP was going to get increasingly cornered — despite its brute majority in the Lok Sabha — as one state after another would defeat the party in the Assembly elections.

“In our nation, there are 130 crore citizens, who elected Prime Minister after Prime Minister…. As soon as he (Modi) won, he says everybody must leave the nation? Well, the people of Jharkhand made them leave. As soon as they got an opportunity, Maharashtra too… whenever there is an opportunity, the people will make them leave states,” said Mamata.

“Today, in the name of the NRC (National Register of Citizens) a vile conspiracy is afoot to throw out the people of India. Against this conspiracy, I urge everyone… lawyers, educators, mothers and sisters, farmers, adivasis, Hindus, Muslims, everyone… come, get prepared. Isolate the BJP in India,” she added.

The Trinamul supremo once again lauded the student community for spearheading the movement against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and the NRC and urged them not to let the momentum flag, as the bulk of the nation was with students and all those who were protesting.

“Remember, this movement is for the people, for democracy, for your addresses, for your homes, for your rights. For the future of this nation…. This movement is a fight to the finish,” she said.
