Sadhvi Niranjan Jyoti hits out at Priyanka Gandhi, says Cong leader should change name to 'Feroze Priyanka'

File picture: Union Minister Sadhvi Niranjan Jyoti | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights A "fake Gandhi" cannot understand saffron, said Union Minister Sadhvi Niranjan Jyoti "Priyanka Gandhi has issues with the Yogi government because it deals with criminals with an iron hand," said Jyoti The Union minister advised Priyanka Gandhi to study more about 'saffron'

New Delhi: Union Minister Sadhvi Niranjan Jyoti on Tuesday lashed out at Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra for targeting Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath over ‘saffron’ remark.

A "fake Gandhi" cannot understand saffron, said Jyoti while suggesting that the Congress leader should change her name to "Feroze Priyanka".

"Priyanka Gandhi cannot understand saffron because she is a fake Gandhi. She should remove Gandhi from her name and change it to Feroze Priyanka," said the Fatehpur MP.

She further alleged that Priyanka has issues with the Yogi government because it deals with criminals with an iron hand.

"Priyanka has a problem with Adityanth as he is taking action against criminals in Uttar Pradesh. She should come and make it clear if she is behind the rioters," said the Union Minister.

Jyoti further advised the Congress general secretary to study more about 'saffron'. "The way she has criticised Yogi shows that those who use fake name see everything like that. Bhagwa is a sign of knowledge and affinity."

She further asked Priyanka Gandhi whether those who had thrashed innocents and thrown stones at police shall be punished or not.

"It seems that you (Priyanka) have instigated them and asked them (anti-CAA protestors) to come on roads," she claimed.

The Congress general secretary had yesterday sought a judicial probe into the action taken by the UP Police against those who protested over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

While addressing a press conference, Gandhi had demanded that the process of sealing and confiscation of properties of the protesters should stop. She had further demanded that cases must not be filed against "innocent students".

She had also claimed that it was Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's "badla (revenge)" remark that had instigated police to behave in an illegal manner.

"The Chief Minister should know that saffron is a religion that is marked by love compassion and peace. This is the land of Krishna and Ram who were the epitome of compassion and love," she had said.

Notably, the UP CM had ordered the seizure of the properties of people, who were involved in arson during anti-CAA protests.

"Property of all those involved in this violence will be confiscated and damage done to the public property would be recovered from them. Their faces are captured in videos and CCTV footage. We will confiscate their property and will take its revenge from them," he had said.
