Uttar Pradesh deputy chief minister Keshav Prasad Maurya accuses PFI of fanning protests against CAA

Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Keshav Prasad Maurya | Photo Credit: ANI

Lucknow: Uttar Pradesh deputy chief minister Keshav Prasad Maurya, on Tuesday, accused the Popular Front of India (PFI) of fanning protests against the against Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) in the state. He, while speaking to the media about the same, said, "Disguised as Students' Islamic Movement of India (SIMI), the Popular Front of India (PFI) fanned protests in the state. Pursuant to the probe, the truth has come to the fore.”

He, in an attempt to back the amended Citizenship Act, said that no anti-national in the state and country would be tolerated. He also added that if SIMI comes out in a different form, it will be crushed. His comments came after a letter was written by Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police (DGP) OP Singh to the ministry of home affairs seeking a ban on PFI for its involvement in the violent protests against the CAA and National Register of Citizens (NRC) that took place on December 19.

The PFI, which was founded on November 22, 2006, is based in Delhi. The protests against CAA have been going on in various parts of the country. The national capital was affected massively after there were clashes between the police and students of amia Milia Islamia after the police entered the university campus on December 15.

After the incident, students from various educational institutes from several parts of the country took to the streets to protests against the Act that aims at granting fast track citizenship to the non-Muslim refugees of Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. Various police personnel and protesters clashed during the agitation. Owing to the tense situation in various places, the government suspended internet services at several places to curb untoward incidents. During the protests, the Uttar Pradesh Police had arrested three members of PFI including its state president Waseem Ahmad.






