After Kerala, Congress calls for anti-CAA resolution in Maharashtra

Maharashtra Congress leader Arif Naseem Khan | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The Maharashtra Congress leader said that anti-CAA resolution should be brought in every state Assembly of the country His comments came after Kerala Assembly passed a resolution demanding withdrawal of the contentious citizenship law

Mumbai: Maharashtra Congress on Tuesday welcomed the Kerala Assembly's decision to pass a resolution demanding the withdrawal of the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA). The grand old party also called upon all the states, including Maharashtra, to convene an Assembly session asking the Centre to revoke the contentious citizenship law.

Commenting on the passing of the anti-CAA resolution by Kerala Assembly, Maharashtra Congress leader Arif Naseem Khan said, "We welcome this decision by Kerala government. All state governments, including the Thackeray government in Maharashtra, should call a session of Assembly, asking the central government to withdraw the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Maharashtra Congress leader, Arif Naseem Khan: We welcome this decision by Kerala government, all state governments, including the Thackeray government in Maharashtra should call a session of assembly, asking the central government to withdraw Citizenship Amendment Act. https://t.co/ZP3gnQINsw pic.twitter.com/RWawgjZyU5 — ANI (@ANI) December 31, 2019

Uddhav Thackeray-led Shiv Sena might not have taken part in anti-CAA protests but the party has slammed the BJP-led Centre time and again over its handling of protests. In its mouthpiece this month, Shiv Sena trained guns at the Central government for "suppressing dissent with brute force and letting the issue go out of its hands".

Another Maha Vikas Aghadi alliance partner Nationalist Congress Party (NCP), Shiv Sena and Congress being the other two, has also attacked the Citizenship Act calling it divisive and communal. NCP chief Sharad Pawar on Tuesday extended his support to like-minded parties in their protest against the NRC and CAA and pledged his support to them.

Earlier in the day, the anti-CAA resolution was passed by CPI(M)-led Kerala government after receiving support from Congress-led United Democratic Front (UDF). BJP's lone MLA and former union minister O Rajagopal was the only dissenting voice in the Assembly today.

During the special session in the Assembly, Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan stressed that the CAA has maligned the image of India in front of the international community. He also assured the people that no detention centres will be set up in Kerala.

However, O Rajagopal opposed the resolution and accused the ruling party in Kerala of having a "narrow political mindset". The BJP MLA argued that how can they bring a resolution against an Act that has already been passed by both the Houses of Parliament.
