Order judicial probe into 'unlawful conduct' of UP Police: Cong

Order judicial probe into 'unlawful conduct' of UP Police: Cong

NEW DELHI, Dec 30 (Agencies): The Congress party on Monday demanded a judicial enquiry into the "unlawful conduct" of Uttar Pradesh police during the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and National Register of Citizens (NRC) in the state.

The 14-page memorandum to Governor Anandiben Patel was signed by Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and party state president Ajay Kumar Lallu.

The Congress noted the conduct of the police had been observed and reported to be patently unlawful, destructive of the rule of law and repressive of honest citizens.

"This is unbefitting of a force that is dutybound to safeguard and protect the rights of every citizen," said the memorandum handed over to the governor by Lallu and some other senior leaders.

Furthermore, it called for: An impartial assessment of all cases filed on "peaceful protestors"; suspension for notices issued for the confiscation of property, sealing of such properties and other similar punitive actions till the establishment of due process or the completion of appropriate authorities.

It also demanded that the students participating in peaceful protests be assured that they will not face academic or legal repercussions and their fundamental right to free expression as enshrined in the constitution will be protected and upheld by law and state.

Later, addressing a press conference, Priyanka hit out at UP police for arresting activists, protesters and former civil servants. Listing out the names, she added that at least 48 people had been unjustifiably charged with serious offences under the Indian Penal Code.

She also said that there is enough photographic evidence of police brutality on its own people. Lambasting Yogi Adityanath for his "revenge" comment, she alleged the administration and police, it's clear, following the former's instructions.

Priyanka Gandhi, who is present in Lucknow, was, however, not part of the delegation that went to the Raj Bhawan.
