Left leads ‘Save Constitution’ rally to protest against CAA

RANCHI: Left parties, social activists and students’ unions on Monday organised a ‘ Save Constitution ’ march here against Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the proposed National Register of Citizens (NRC). The protests were kept in abeyance in the wake of polls in the state. As the model code of conduct was in force, the local administration had earlier refused permission for holding mass protests.The protesters had planned to hold a march on foot from Zila School ground in Main Road to Raj Bhavan but the administration refused permission and asked them to hold the meeting within the school ground. Hundreds of protesters comprising representatives of CPI, CPM, Marxist Coordination Committee, trade unions, students organisations and civil rights groups participated in the demonstration. Senior Congressman and former Union minister Subodh Kant Sahay, newly elected CPI(ML) MLA Vinod Singh and former MCC MLA Arup Chatterjee were also present on the occasion.A delegation of Left leaders under CPI(ML) MLA Singh later met chief minister Hemant Soren and handed over a memorandum requesting the government not to implement NRC in the state.Earlier addressing the gathering, Singh said that the CAA was not introduced with the pious intent of giving citizenship to deprived people but it has links with the hidden agenda of RSS. “The BJP is trying to mislead people. The President in his address in Lok Sabha had clearly stated that NRC would be implemented in the entire country,” Singh added that NPR was also linked to the same agenda. Sahay said, “People in general have no objection to giving citizenship to people from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh, but it cannot be considered on the basis of religion.” Describing BJP as the chief of ‘tukdetukde gang’, Sahay asked the people to remain cautious about the decisions being forced by the Centre.Former MCC MLA Arup Chatterjee said that when the country is faced with economic slowdown and unemployment crisis, the Centre is disrupting peace in society. The students protested in a unique way by singing rap songs.
