Rahul Gandhi is ‘biggest fool’; Congress misled the country over CAA: BJP MP Nayab Singh

BJP MP Nayab Singh termed Rahul Gandhi the 'biggest fool' who does not know what CAA is. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Nayab Singh, BJP MP from Kurukshetra hits out at the former Congress president for opposing the CAA and termed him the “biggest fool” who has no clue about the law He also accused the Congress party of misinforming the people of the country about the amended Citizenship legislation The recently enacted Citizenship law, CAA, grants citizenship to the Hindu, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists, Christians and Paris who fled to India before January 2015, from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh fearing religious persecution

Kaithal: Lashing out at Congress leader Rahul Gandhi for opposing the recently enacted Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MP from Kurukshetra, Nayab Singh called him the “biggest fool” and said that the former Congress president has no clue about the CAA.

While addressing the media, Singh accused the Congress party of misleading the county with regard to the amended Citizenship legislation.

The MP said, “Agar hum kahein ki murkhon mein sabse bada agar murkh koi hai to mujhe lagta hai ki Rahul Gandhi hain, kyuni Rahul Gandhi ko yahi maloom nahi ki CAA hai kya, kiske liye hai (if there exists a ‘biggest fool among fools, then I feel it is Rahul Gandhi as he is unaware of what the CAA is and who it is meant for).”

The recently amended Citizenship legislations grants citizenship to the members of non-Muslim communities including Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians who fled to India on or before December 31, 2014, from three neighbouring Islamic nations namely Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Pakistan fearing religious persecution in their home country.

The idea for the enactment of the legislation streamed from BJP’s electoral promise during 2014 general elections where the saffron party promised to grant citizenship to Hindu immigrants from Pakistan.

The opposing parties, activists and students who have fared up in massive protests against the CAA across the country have regarded the law to be biased and discriminatory. They have termed it to be unconstitutional and said that it violates the principles of equality and secularism enshrined in the Indian constitution. Further, they have denounced the law citing that it is targeted against the members of one particular community.

Several leaders of the ruling NDA government have accused the opposing parties of fear-mongering and misinforming the public about the Act. The BJP leaders have been staunchly supporting the Act by assuring the people that the Act only grants citizenship to non-Muslim immigrants who faced religious persecution and does not take away anybody’s citizenship.

Amid widespread massive protests against the CAA, the leaders of BJP have been conducting programmes, events, and marches in support of the Act. Recently, BJP’s working president JP Nadda along with other senior BJP leaders such as Dilip Ghosh held a march in Kolkata in support of the CAA. On Monday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, on Twitter, lauded the spiritual leader Sadhguru Jaggi Vasudev for his remarks supporting the Act and kickstarted the ‘India Supports CAA’ campaign.
