For hope and courage in the new year

Can we blithely wish anyone a happy new year, when a pall of menace hangs over us without any sign of remission? Grim, the situation undoubtedly is, for those who wish to live in a democracy and see themselves and others as integral parts of humanity, beyond the ascribed or self-styled identities that swaddle people and hide their essence. Yet, it would be irresponsible to let the menace cow us down and settle for unrelenting gloom. We must act to drive away the menace and there can be no action without hope. So, let us wish everyone a happy new year, so that we can work to lift the gloom and not merely wait for happiness to materialise out of thin air, perchance.

There is solid ground for optimism, albeit it is a little slippery with the blood spilt by the police in their crackdown on those protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act and its evil twin, the National Register of Citizens. Repression of the protesters has been far more violent than the protests themselves. Yet, people continue to protest, out of conviction rather than loyalty to party leader or as paid labour of the kind that turns up to make political rallies massive.

The youth of India have been politicised as they have not been for generations. Independent India has seen popular uprisings before the current one triggered by CAA-NRC. There were massive agitations against corruption and joblessness in the early 1970s, in the run-up to the Emergency. When Indira Gandhi announced elections and lifted the Emergency, again, there was popular ferment.

The movement launched by the Sangh Parivar to demolish the Babri mosque at Ayodhya also saw massive mobilisation of people. So did the agitations against reservations for Other Backward Castes. Revulsion against the ravaging and savaging of the person of a young girl, who came to be known as Nirbhaya, mobilised people around the country. Soon followed the anti-corruption agitations against the UPA government, with Anna Hazare in front.

These were all instances of mass mobilisation but they did not enrich democracy in the manner in which the protests against CAA-NRC has. The movement to demolish the mosque entailed communal killings and polarisation, and weakened, rather than reinforced democracy. It is a useful reminder that just because a lot of passionate people are out there on the streets, it does not mean democracy is at work.

The mass protests leading up to the Emergency and activism in its wake did strengthen democracy. But the issue at stake was straightforward: basic civil liberties and the right to hold elections to choose your government. The outrage against rape and corruption in 2013 again were limited in their scope, analytically and in its objective.

Today’s protests are different. These are based on complex questions of identity, citizenship, faith, discrimination, the state, fundamental rights, sensitivity of the state to popular sentiment and their intertwined relationships. These are core questions of democracy. CAA-NRC also bring up questions of migration, the characteristic feature of the human species that has helped it to populate, after originating in a part of Africa, every continent and most islands on the planet. Indians find US and Canadian allergy to immigrants objectionable, given that the US and Canada, each with a land mass that is more than three times India’s, house populations as large as that of one or two Indian states: Kerala, in Canada’s case, and UP and Bihar combined, in that of the US. When it comes to the urge to emigrate, Indians tend to see the world as humanity’s collective commons, but turn all possessive, prickly and hostile, when it comes to immigration into India itself.

The New Year will see further tests of democracy. Can powerful communication suffice to strip blatant lies of their falsehood that not just misinforms but also disrespects the hearer? Will the Supreme Court ignore brazen statements on the projected chronology that intimately links CAA and NRC and evaluate CAA purely on its own terms, without reference to its purported use to restore citizenship to the non-Muslims among the subaltern multitude who would prove incapable of proving their citizenship in an NRC exercise, while leaving less well-off Muslims to stew in the heat of statelessness? Will the Court, while evaluating the CAA on its own terms, ignore the arbitrariness in the classification of countries and religious communities specified in CAA, besides the derogation of equal status implicit in the exclusion of Muslim refugees? Or will the government nudge the Court to issue a stay on the working of the law while a larger Constitution bench decides on the matter, in due course?

Will the voters of Delhi and Bihar vote in a manner that would be interpreted as support for the Hindutva agenda?

Will the economy reverse the slowdown that is choking it, killing jobs and incomes and sending unemployed, frustrated youths as ready volunteers in political movements for and against democracy?

Will President Trump get his come-uppance or will that favour be reserved for America’s liberals? Will Boris Johnson get his Brexit done without sending Scotland and Ireland on the path of rebellion against England? Will President Macron of France be able to prove the viability of trouncing sectarian irrationality among temperamental voters using sustained dialogue and unrelenting logic? Will Italy and Spain find political stability while rejecting xenophobia and separatism? Will Amazonian fires and listless economic growth scorch the popularity of Brazilian strongman Jair Bolsonaro? Will spring buds in January in Moscow and bushfires that burn up prime ministerial holidays force Russia and Australia to see climate change as a tangible threat on which action has to be taken? Will COP 26 finally fix the carbon trading regime that COP 25 failed to at Madrid weeks ago? Will the appeal of India’s emerging economy help rich world statesmen and businessmen overcome their distaste for majoritarian state policy?

We can only hope. And let that hope spur us to action, to strengthen democracy in the New Year. A Happy New Year, dear reader!

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
