Sec 144 in Guwahati after PM faces anti-Citizenship Bill protests

GUWAHATI: Prohibitory orders were imposed in the entire Guwahati city for an indefinite period as Prime Minister Narendra Modi faced angry protests from anti-Citizenship Bill agitators when he arrived here on a two-day visit of the north-east on Friday evening.Security was further tightened after All Assam Students’ Union (Aasu) and Krishak Mukti Sangram Samity announced that they would burn the PM’s effigies and hoist black flags across the state on Saturday when Modi addresses a public rally at Changsari on Guwahati’s outskirts. Tai Ahom studnets have called a 12-hour Assam bandh on Saturday while Tripura Students’ Federation has given a call for boycotting Modi when he visits Agartala on Saturday.Despite a light drizzle, groups of Aasu activists waved black flags and shouted anti-Modi slogans as the PM’s convoy passed by their office to reach the Raj Bhavan. In a swift action, police locked the gates of the Aasu office and confined the demonstrators within its premises. They also barricaded the Aasu office with bamboos. Just across the street opposite the Aasu office, BJP activists, mostly women, had gathered with party flags to welcome the PM.Police had banned movement of people and vehicles along the stretch between the Aasu office and the Raj Bhavan, essentially a residential area, that runs alongside the Brahmaputra.“This is PM’s first visit to Assam after the (Citizenship) Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha. We just wanted to register our protest against it in a befitting manner. We will not allow the Centre to impose any such Act on us,” Aasu adviser Samujjal Bhattacharya said. Before Modi’s arrival, Aasu activists had burnt copies of the bill across Assam.Looking unruffled, Modi smiled and waved to the protesting students from inside his car. Chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal, who has been facing such angry demonstrations for the last few weeks, was following the PM in a separate car.Elsewhere in the city, Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) workers, led by their president Atul Bora, staged a march with torches but were stopped by police as they came closer to the PM’s route.On Saturday morning, the PM will go to Itanagar where he will lay the foundations for a greenfield airport at Hollongi, a tunnel at Sela and a permanent campus of Film and Television Institute of India at Jote. He will dedicate the 110-MW Pare Hydroelectric Plant to the nation. The PM will inaugurate the upgraded Tezu airport and 50 health and wellness centres and will declare 100% household electrification in Arunachal Pradesh under the Saubhagya scheme.From there he will come to Changsari in Assam’s Kamrup district to lay the foundations of Guwahati-North Guwahati Bridge over Brahmaputra, North East Gas Grid (NEGG), Numaligarh RefineryLimited (NRL)’s bio-refinery, a 729-km gas pipeline from Barauni to Guwahati and City Gas Distribution Networks in Kamrup, Cachar, Hailakandi & Karimganj districts. Modi will also inaugurate a Hollong Modular Gas Processing plant in Tinsukia. The PM will also do the bhumi puja of an AIIMS centre at Changsari, where he will also address a public meeting.The last leg of the PM’s visit will be in Agartala on Saturday itself. He will dedicate the Garjee-Belonia railway line to the nation by unveiling a plaque at Swami Vivekananda Stadium in Agartala. The PM will also inaugurate a new complex of Tripura Institute of Technology at Narsingarh. Modi will also unveil a statue of Maharaja Bir Bikram Kishore Manikya Bahadur at Maharaja Bir Bikram Airport in Agartala.
