Priyanka Gandhi to receive grand welcome during her first visit to Lucknow

We have planned to welcome them at 30 places from Lucknow airport to the party office: UP Congress spokesperson Zeeshan Haider

The newly appointed general secretary and in-charge of the UP East Priyanka Gandhi will hold a roadshow on February 11 during her first visit to Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh after entering politics.

The arrangements have been made to welcome her at 30 places from the airport to party office.

She would also be accompanied by Congress president Rahul Gandhi, general secretary and UP West in-charge Jyotiraditya Scindia.

The Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee (UPCC) chief Raj Babbar held a meeting with party leaders and workers ahead of her visit on February 11.

Addressing the state unit at party office in Lucknow, Babbar said, "We all should work tirelessly together to give our leaders a grand welcome. On February 11 we will celebrate both Diwali and Eid. Workers from across the state need to gather in Lucknow to show our strength ahead of the elections."

Speaking to India Today TV, UP Congress spokesperson Zeeshan Haider said, "It's going to a historic day for us when our party president Rahul along with Priyanka and Scindia will be arriving in Lucknow to kick-start the election campaign. We have planned to welcome them at 30 places from Lucknow airport to the party office. There will be a huge gathering in the roadshow."

"Our leaders are also going to visit statues of eminent personalities to pay respect to them during the roadshow. The workers are very enthusiastic about Priyanka's entry into politics. The UPCC [Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee] leaders and workers have been given the responsibility of welcoming her and other leaders at all the locations which we have fixed for the roadshow route," Haider said.

According to the information provided by the Congress, Rahul Gandhi will return to Delhi on Monday (February 11) evening after the roadshow followed by meeting with party leaders at the state headquarters.

However, Priyanka and Scindia will stay back in Lucknow till February 14 to hold meetings with party leader and workers in order to challenge out strategy for the upcoming Lok Sabha polls.

Sources in the party said both the leaders may also meet probable candidates belonging to different constituencies for the general elections.

The roadshow will begin from outside airport.

Rahul, Priyanka and Scindia will reach party office after visiting prominent locations in Lucknow like Kanpur road, Shahid Path intersection, Krishna Nagar, Alambagh intersection, Mawaiya, Bapu Bhawan, Vidhan Sabha, Gandhi statue and Capitol intersection.
