Kolkata Police Commissioner Questioned For 8 Hours In Shillong As Political Row Simmers

Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar has been asked to come for questioning tomorrow as well

Highlights Rajeev Kumar will be questioned over his alleged role in the Saradha scam

He faces accusations of destroying evidence in the chit fund scam

West Bengal government has called CBI probe an attempt to undermine it

Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar was questioned in Shillong by the CBI today for eight hours over his alleged role in destroying evidence related to the Saradha chit fund scam. The Supreme Court had fixed the Meghalaya capital as the venue for his interrogation, saying that its "neutral" status will prevent unnecessary controversy. Mr Kumar has been asked to appear for questioning tomorrow as well.

Mr Kumar's questioning began at the agency's offices in Shillong around 11 am, and went on until 7.30 pm. The CBI has not released details of the interrogation yet.

Former Trinamool parliamentarian Kunal Ghosh has also been asked to appear in person at the CBI office for questioning in connection with the Saradha chit fund scam, news agency PTI quoted officials as saying.

Accompanied by three high-ranking officers of the Kolkata Police, Mr Kumar has been lodged at a top hotel in the city. A CBI team from Delhi arrived in Shillong to question him. They were not allowed to stay in the the same room during the interrogation.

There was heavy security outside the CBI headquarters in Shillong. Mr Kumar's counsel, Biswajit Deb, told PTI that he is "cooperating and complying" with the CBI. "My client has come here on the orders of the Supreme Court. He has complied earlier and he is complying now as per orders," Mr Deb -- also the Trinamool coordinator for Meghalaya -- said.

On Tuesday, the Supreme Court had directed the Kolkata Police Commissioner to appear before the CBI and "faithfully" cooperate with the probe into cases related to the Saradha chit fund scam. It had, however, stated in no certain terms that Mr Kumar was not to be arrested.

The CBI has alleged in the Supreme Court that Mr Kumar, who led the probe by a special investigation team into the Saradha chit fund scam, tampered with electronic evidence and handed over documents to the agency -- some of which had been "doctored".

A major controversy had broken out on Sunday, when a team of CBI officers went to Mr Kumar's residence to question him but faced stiff resistance from the Kolkata police. Following this, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee staged a three-day protest to "save the Constitution".
