White car women gang strikes again

Ludhiana: The white car women gang is on the prowl again. It targeted a 70-year-old woman in Urban Estate, Dugri, Phase II, and robbed her of a gold bangle on Friday.Karamjeet Kaur said in her police complaint, “I was sitting outside my house when a white Maruti Suzuki Swift car stopped near me around 11.30am. A man was driving the car and three women were on the rear seat. All three women alighted and came to me to ask an address. Before I could understand anything, one of them held my hand and the other took out my gold bangle. Within no time, they rushed to their car and sped away.”Karamjeet told her family about it and they called up the police.Bhupinder Singh Bhatia, son of Karamjeet, said, “I was getting ready for office when I heard my mother’s cries. Thinking that she had slipped, I rushed out to her. She then told me that three women had fled with her 50gm gold bangle. I could not give them a chase as by then the car had made good its escape.”Karamjeet was in Dugri to visit her son.“My mother lives with my brother in Himmat Singh Nagar. She had come to my house on the death anniversary of my father a week ago. As it was a sunny day, she went out to sit,” Bhupinder added.Dugri police station assistant sub-inspector Anwar Masih said, “The CCTV cameras installed in the area have captured the car, but not its registration number. Before targeting Karamjeet, the gang had tried to loot another woman — Inderjit Kaur — of the same locality. Had that woman sounded the police, the gang could have been arrested.”Inderjit, 60, a retired banker and resident of Dugri, said, “I was standing outside my house when a car pulled over. Three women were sitting on the rear seat and a man in cap was driving it. One of the women called me. Asking me to come near the car, they said they knew me as we had met at a function. I, however, told them that I neither knew them nor wanted to meet them. The car then moved on.”A case has been registered under Section 379-B (snatching) of the IPC.ITS MODUS OPERANDIThe gang usually targets women either on main roads or in residential areas. In residential areas, the women gang approaches victims on the pretext of inquiring about an address. And on main roads, it offers women, especially the elderly ones, a lift. After engaging their target in a conversation, the gang escapes with their gold jewellery.ON THE PROWLApril 21, 2018: The gang robbed a woman of four gold bangles while inquiring about an address in Rishi NagarJuly 9, 2018: The gang robbed 85-year-old Kamala Malhana of Shaheed Udham Singh Nagar of two gold bangles near Tagore NagarJuly 16, 2018: Three women and a man abducted a 65-year-old woman and robbed her of gold bangles near the house of MLA Surinder Dawar in Ghumar Mandi
