Gujjar agitation: All eyes on community leader Kirori Singh Bainsla's meeting with three ministers

Representational Image | Photo Credit: ANI

Jaipur: A ministerial panel, headed by Rajasthan Tourism Minister Vishvendra Singh will be meeting Gujjar leader Kirori Singh Bainsla on Saturday afternoon, who has been agitating on railway tracks in Sawai Madhopur district, demanding reservation.

The three-member committee, comprising Health Minister Raghu Sharma and Social Justice and Empowerment Bhanwar Lal Meghwal will visit the rail tracks. The team will also be assisted by IAS Neeraj K Pawan.

On Friday, Gujjar leader Bainsla, along with his supporters started an agitation on the railway tracks, demanding five per cent reservation to Gujjars, Raika-Rebari, Gadia Luhar, Banjara and Gadaria communities in government jobs and educational institutions.

The ongoing agitation has affected the train movement with 14 trains being cancelled and four trains being diverted between Sawai Madhopur to Bayana section-Nimoda to Malarna block section in Kota Division of Western Central Railway.

Meanwhile, the protestors also blocked the Hindaun-Karauli road and disrupted the bus services, causing inconvenience to the commuters.

On Friday, four trains were cancelled, and seven others diverted following the reservation movement between Sawai Madhopur and Bayana railway stations, as per CPRO West Central Railway. The protest also affected the train movement on the Delhi-Mumbai line.

Meanwhile, a support booth with helpline number 220-1043 has been set up at Jaipur station for information about diversion and cancellation of trains.

In December, Gujjar leader Bainsla had given a 20-day "ultimatum" to the Rajasthan government to make its stand clear on quota to the five communities, failing which he threatened of beginning the quota stir.

Since the deadline lapsed on Friday and the Rajasthan government did not make any announcement, Bainsla staged the protest along with his supporters.

"Things are changing fast. I have not come here but the crowd has brought me on the railway tracks. People cannot be fooled all the time. It is a fight to do or die. State government should stand on its promise. It will be a peaceful protest. I will lead the protest and the youths will support," Bainsla told the media.

"We want five per cent for our community, the way the Centre has given 10 per cent to the Economically Backward Classes. The government did not respond to our demand, neither did anyone come to talk to us, so we were forced to take this step, he added.

At present, all the five communities are getting one per cent separate reservation as part of the legal limit of 50 per cent.
