Modi inaugurates developmental projects in Arunachal

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday inaugurated several developmental projects during his one-day visit to Arunachal Pradesh, including two airports, a tunnel and a film institute.

Following his arrival, Modi laid the foundation stones for the construction of the greenfield airport at Hollongi, the Sela Tunnel and a permanent campus of the Film and Television Institute of India (FTII).

He also launched a new dedicated Doordarshan Channel for Arunachal Pradesh - DD Arun Prabha - and inaugurated a 110 MW Pare Hydroelectric Plant along with the upgraded Tezu Airport and 50 health and wellness centres in the hill state.

Modi addressed a huge public rally at the IG Park here, urging people to see what the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led government at the Centre has done in the Northeast in the last four-and-a-half years compared to the last 55 years.

"Our government after coming to power, have taken up developmental works. I believe that we can build a strong and better India only when we develop the northeastern region," said Modi.

He said that the Centre has already sanctioned Rs 44,000 crore to Arunachal Pradesh.

"I am happy to inaugurate the two airports today. Never before in the history of Arunachal Pradesh, two airports were inaugurated in a single day.

"The two airpors will help bring more tourists to the state and help the youths with employment opportunities.

"In absence of airports, people from Arunachal Pradesh had to go to Guwahati by road. These airports will provide direct flight connectivity to the people of the state," the Prime Minister said, adding that his government has also sanctioned seven surveys for railway line extension, out of which three have been completed.

Modi said that Centre also approved projects to produce 850 MW of power which will benefit the region.

Modi arrived in Guwahati on Friday evening. On his way to the Raj Bhavan from the airport, protesters demonstrating against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill waved black flags.

While leaving from the Raj Bhavan on Saturday morning to depart for Arunachal Pradesh, a group of students again waved black flags at the Prime Minister.

--IANS

ah/ksk/ab

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
