PM Modi defends Citizenship Bill, says citizenship to migrants will be given after investigation

File Image of Prime Minister Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: ANI

Changsari: Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who has been facing the wrath of people of northeastern states over the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016, on Saturday said that the Indian citizenship will be granted to the migrants only after necessary investigation and recommendation of the state government.

The Bill which was passed in the Lok Sabha on January 8, seeks to amend the Citizenship Act 1955 to grant Indian citizenship to Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Parsis who fled religious persecution in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh and came to India before December 31, 2014.

“Only after necessary investigation and recommendation of the state government can the decision of giving someone citizenship be taken. My government is fully committed to the interests of Assam,” the Prime Minister said while addressing a rally in Assam’s Changsari.

The Prime Minister further said that there is need to differentiate between the people who infiltrate India with the intention of capturing its resources and those who come here due to atrocities meted out to them in their respective countries.

“The subject of the citizenship amendment is not just linked to Assam or North East, but there are many people in different parts of the country who have faith in India and who love Mother India. They come here to save their lives... whether they came from Pakistan, Afghanistan or Bangladesh,” he said.

He further said that it is the obligation of India to protect the minorities who flee their countries following persecution on the ground of religious belief.

Prime Minister Modi arrived in Assam on Friday evening amid protests against the proposed Bill. As the PM's convoy passed from Lokapriya Gopinath Bordoloi International Airport to Raj Bhavan in Guwahati, various agitating organisations waved black flags. Some of the people also shouted 'Go Back, Go Back' slogans.

The legislation, which is pending in the Parliament has led to several protests across the northeastern states. On February 1, Assam Students’ Union (AASU) held a candlelight protest in Assam against the Bill. Several organisations including Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS) also staged a protest in the state against the Bill in January.

Last month, Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) snapped its ties with the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in Assam over the Bill.
