Transfer of five nuns withheld

Bishop Agnelo issues orders in this regard to MJ congregation

Bishop Agnelo Rufino Gracias of the Jalandhar diocese has directed the Missionaries of Jesus (MJ) congregation to withhold the transfer orders of five nuns who had been part of the public protest against Bishop Franco Mulakkal, accused of raping a nun, till the case is over.

In a letter addressed to the five nuns, Anupama Kelamangalathuveliyil, Nina Rose, Ancitta Urumbil, Alphy Pallasseril and Josephine Villoonnickal, the Bishop expressed his dismay over the move and said he was giving a directive to the Superior General of the MJ congregation not to issue any letter to the five nuns without his permission.

‘‘This will be an order from me as apostolic administrator in charge of the congregation,’’ the letter said.

It further sought to reassure the nuns that there would be no move from the Diocese of Jalandhar to oust them from the Kuravilangad convent as long as they were needed for the court case. ‘‘The truth will emerge when all evidences are presented. I am sure the Church will want the truth to emerge,’’ it said.

The Bishop apologised for the delay and said he was busy taking lectures for theologians in Mumbai. In separate communiqué issued to the nuns early last month, the Superior General had sought to enforce the transfer orders.

While Sister Anupama was directed to join the Chamiyari community in Punjab, Sister Ancitta was asked to join the Pariyaram community, Kannur. Sister Alphy was directed to join the Pakartala community in Bihar and Sister Josephine was appointmented as Superior at the Lalmatia community in Jharkhand. Sister Nina was asked to appear before the authorities in Jalandhar to submit a defence of her actions.

Following this, the nuns wrote to Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan seeking his intervention to stay the transfer orders.

Meanwhile, the Save Our Sisters (SOS) action committee, which spearheads a campaign against Bishop Franco, held a public convention here on Saturday against the alleged attempts to put pressure on the nuns.

Speaking on the occasion, theologian Valsan Thampu called upon the laity to liberate themselves from religious slavery. Recalling the words of Pope Francis on clerical abuse and treatment of nuns as sex slaves, he thanked the nuns for showing the courage to challenge the authority.

Sister Anupama thanked everyone for their support in bringing the issue of their transfer to the notice of the authorities concerned.

Meanwhile, the programme venue witnessed some chaotic scenes when a few members under the banner of the Catholic Federation staged a protest. Though the police intervened, they picked up an argument with the SOS members. When tension further escalated, the police whisked away the protesters.
