Time to give Rahul a chance

In a 100-minute speech in Lok Sabha Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched a stinging attack on the Congress, accusing its successive governments of indulging in corruption and harbouring the corrupt. When we dig in to the past of the country, it can be seen that there were many leaders in the Congress party, who vied to loot the country. It is all history now.

Now enough is enough. But the political milieu has changed and so has the political leaders. Rahul Gandhi, a wannabe PM seems to have grown to be a true lover of this country and it is hoped that he would rise to the people’s expectations. Let us give Rahul Gandhi a chance to see whether he is capable of leading the country without harbouring prejudice against him.

- T K Nandanan, Kochi

Modi’s address, an election campaign

This refers to "People don't want 'mahamilavat'' govt: PM (THI 8 Feb). After listening to PM's reply to motion of thanks to President's address of joint session of Parliament, I was wondering whether he was speaking inside the Parliament or using it to address an election rally in UP.

Ever since Congress was dethroned Modi and his party have been saying Congress has no takers including opposition parties who are forming grand alliance. It is unclear why took more time to attack Congress and in particular Nehru-Gandhi family. The kind action and language used by PM was not only worst but damaged high office held by him. It does not mean that what Rahul is speaking outside is good and justified.

As for as his comment that people don't want 'mahamilavat' , his own party is no better in serving "milavati Kheer". He must understand people very much know that politics is nothing but adulteration of people with vested interest. As for as BC and AD jibe, what he has to say if someone comes out AM means Autocrat Modi and PM means Pracharak Modi.

PM Modi talks that he represents poor is nothing but height of hypocrisy and nothing to get sympathy of his background. PM Modi has lost a golden opportunity to use the last Parliament to showcase his government's achievements and future plans for the development of our great nation.

- N Nagarajan, Hyderabad
