Chandrababu Naidu "Senior" In Backstabbing NTR, Switching Sides: PM Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Guntur; he is campaigning Andhra Pradesh today

Highlights PM's first visit to Andhra after TDP broke out of an alliance with BJP

Hoardings against the Prime Minister, BJP files police complaint

TDP, Congress, Left parties held protests in various districts

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on his first visit to Andhra Pradesh, after the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) broke out of an alliance with the BJP last year, launched a string of attacks on Chief Minister and political rival Chandrababu Naidu. "Why does he (Chandrababu Naidu) often claim that he is senior to me? Yes, he is senior to me in switching sides, forming new alliances and "backstabbing" his seniors - just the way he deceived his father-in-law (NT Rama Rao)," said PM Modi. Mr Naidu is losing popularity in his state, alleged PM Modi.

PM Modi accused the TDP chief of misusing public money for his several campaign trips and programmes. Turning to the state BJP chief, Kanna Lakshminarayana, he asked, "who is footing the bill for today's event...BJP workers always pay for their own campaigns but he (Chandrababu Naidu) uses money from people's pocket for his campaigns?", said PM Modi and added that the public must hold Mr Naidu accountable.

The man who had promised "sunrise" for Andhra Pradesh is working to promote his son, N Lokesh, PM Modi charged. "The Chief Minister promised the development of Amaravati but is now engaged in his own development," alleged PM Modi.

Earlier, PM Modi landed in Vijaywada's Gannavaram airport, where he was received by the Governor. Breaking protocol, no one from Chandrababu Naidu's cabinet was present at the airport. Only the state Chief Secretary and the police chief were there. After a rally in Guntur, PM Modi visited Tiruppur and Raichur later in the day.

TDP, Congress and Left parties are protesting PM Modi's visit to the state and large posters of "No more Modi"and "Modi never again" were seen on the roads. TDP protesters waved black flags and balloons, when a BJP convoy was on its way to the rally spot in Guntur. In some places, protesters burnt tyres and PM's effigies.

TDP protesters burnt tyres on the road, protesting PM Modi's visit to Andhra Pradesh

"The Prime Minister came here to scold me. It is easy to criticise and run away...He did not do us any justice...Will we forgive him...They separated the state...The wound of separation has not yet healed and now they are making it worse," Mr Naidu lashed out today. He is upset with the Narendra Modi government and accused PM Modi of not keeping his promise of giving special category status to the state.

"It is a dark day...He is weakening the states and constitutional institutions. PMO's intervention in Rafael is disrespect to the nation," the Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister, one of PM Modi's strongest critics said on Saturday.

The TDP chief also alleged that the YSR Congress is hand-in-glove with the BJP and helping them organise the "crowd". "That is why Jaganmohan Reddy is not uttering a word against PM Modi's betrayal of Andhra Pradesh," he told party workers in a video conference.

Chandrababu Naidu in black shirt as PM Modi campaigns in Andhra Pradesh

Left party leader R Ramakrishna of the Communist Party of India (CPI) and P Madhu of the Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) said that PM Modi has no "moral right" to visit the state. Mr Madhu recalled how the PM had come during the foundation stone laying ceremony of Amaravati, the new capital, carrying a pot of soil and water and promised all help to the state. "He has gone back on every promise he made," Mr Madhu said.

Andhra Pradesh Congress chief Raghuveera Reddy said that his party organised protests with black flags across the state.

After addressing a public rally called ''Praja Chaitanya Sabha'' at Guntur, PM Modi laid the foundation-stone through remote control for the construction of a coastal terminal of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited at Krishnapatnam in Nellore. He also inaugurated the Visakhapatnam Strategic Petroleum Reserve facility.
