‘Institutional and Non-Institutional Pillars of Democracy: Powers Behind Strength and Resurrection on India’ Part – 7

Dr Abhishek Singhvi is a third term senior MP, eminent jurist and national spokesperson of the Congress party. He is also a senior advocate in the Supreme Court; former additional solicitor general (ASG) of India; former Vice President, Supreme Court Bar Association (SCBA) as well as former Vice-Chairman, Media Department of Congress. Dr Singhvi has written regular columns in several newspapers and portals such as the Times of India, Hindustan Times, Pioneer & indya.com. Two of his collections have been published as books, namely "Candid Corner" & "Straight Talk". LESS ... MORE

Election Commission: Must Guard Against Politicization

A constitutionally created institution with no notable heritage and lineage which has emerged as a scintillating pillar of a vibrant democracy in India is the Election Commission. It has outstripped and outshone the grandest conception of its creators. Since the 2009 general elections, all counting is done by EVMs. In addition to national elections, the Election Commission conducts approximately 3-4 state elections every year. Such provincial elections, by themselves, may exceed the logistics of an election for Europe as a whole.

The Election Commission is merely a three-member Commission, but it is allowed to requisition an army of civil servants and security personnel under temporarily granted overriding power for a limited period, before and after the election. They keep a hawk’s eye on electoral malpractice and, especially over the last few years, have struck a sense of fear among candidates choosing to play close to the line. The Election Commission combines large measures of administrative duties along with quasi-judicial functions under which they hear and decide cases of a specified category involving electoral malpractice by candidates. So high is the regard for its competence and expertise that there is a huge demand for the Commission’s services globally. If they had the time and inclination, the Commission could earn a huge revenue by hiring out their services to innumerable countries who are waiting anxiously in a queue to utilize their services for elections in those countries.

Since free and fair elections are the essence of democracy (and since both are a basic and fundamental part of the basic structure of the Indian Constitution), there can hardly be a more vital institutional pillar of democracy than the Election Commission of India.

However, electoral reforms are frequently delayed by delayed decision-making and lack of political consensus.

Firstly, as summarized earlier, there is a pressing urgency to define a clear test of criminality on which criterion a candidate may be disqualified — an issue on which the Election Commission has unsuccessfully been demanding legislation for a considerable period. I have already suggested framing of charges in a small select list of grave and heinous crimes as the correct test.

Secondly, the Election Commission of India needs a far larger staff, more research personnel and support systems to deal with the emerging scourge of ‘paid news’. Paid news involves the use of press space (both print and visual) to promote and project candidates during elections. Since each parliamentary candidate cannot exceed more than Rs 40 lakh as expenditure incurred for his election and since a State Assembly candidate cannot exceed Rs 16 lakh, a convenient methodology has been devised, obviously in collusion with the press, whereby a large volume of publications about the candidate appear in the media, masquerading as news items whereas, in fact, they are the result of media space purchased illegally by paying media barons in unaccounted monies. This is more rampant in regional than the national press.

Thirdly, a proposal for state funding of elections has had frequent currency and reiteration but has rightly been deferred since it requires far greater analysis and tailoring to Indian conditions before being efficaciously capable of delivering the results that it is intended to achieve. The core dilemma is as to whether, on the one hand, state funding adds to the available resources of the candidates, legal and illegal, while putting ordinary taxpayers under additional strain and, on the other hand, does not in any manner diminish the use of unaccounted money through the parallel economy for funding elections. If the state funding of elections could substitute illegal expenditure on elections through the use of unaccounted monies, it would be a radical and highly desirable reform but if the former were to be merely an additional stream of funding, it would amount to rewarding illegality.

Fourthly, Electoral reforms are something which is at the very heart of the Indian liberal democratic system. It is also something which is not that difficult or insuperable provided you have a reasonable degree of will power. Take, for example, the adjudication of election petitions. The term of any elected person is normally five years. There is a statutory provision that you must decide an election petition in six months. This was enacted because if you decide beyond five years, then the person whose election you are attacking has completed his term and enjoyed the fruits of his office. There are very few election petitions, possibly none in the country, which finish in this time frame. Appeals from preliminary objections consume most of the time. One solution could be to have a special fast track court (FTC) only for election matters separate from the normal judiciary. That has now been done for the trial of certain criminal cases against the political class but that is still work in progress and does not address election petitions at all.

Another is to amend election law which is hyper-technical and allows interim challenges up to the Supreme Court on every preliminary objection, rendering final trial virtually impossible

Fifthly, simple loopholes need to be plugged. Despite stringent expenditure limits for individual MP & MLA contests, there is strangely no limit on how much one political party can spend in an election. Obscene levels of expenditure in, for example, UP and Karnataka, ensure a non-level playing field and render a mockery of candidates’ expenditure limits. Recently, we have represented to the EC to make changes in this regard.

Sixthly, although it might sound a bit drastic in the Indian context and most political parties will not agree, we should progressively empower the Election Commission to recognise or not to recognise a party according to: (a) the periodicity and the regularity of its intra party elections and (b) according to the filing of a certain requisite format of returns with suitable declarations. It will also enable the cutting down of over 55 parties at last count, many of whom are non serious names on paper and wholly beyond the pale of accountability.

Seventhly, several other smaller and easier reforms should be undertaken. To strengthen the independence of the EC, its expenditure should be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, as is true of the CAG, the UPSC and the SC. It should have an independent secretariat and service cadre, as do the two Houses of Parliament & the higher judiciary. Electoral rolls must be seriously and ruthlessly corrected and updated, without political partisanship, because duplications, deletions & false entries undermine the foundations of our democracy. I did three cases of MP, Rajasthan and Telengana in the SC where 24 lacs of duplications have been admitted by the EC in respect of MP while the petitioners allege 35 lacs more. The same name and identity has sometimes been found 101 times, spread over innumerable assembly constituencies. This is really the EC’s failure and it has to shed all institutional ego to rectify such failures. It is also a good suggestion that common electoral rolls should govern not only national and state but also municipal and eventually Panchayat elections. While postal ballots are acceptable, proxy voting or email voting by NRIs is not, in view of the serious doubts regarding its credibility.

Eightly, the issue of EVMs is a vexed one. One realizes that there cannot be a wholescale reversion to physical balloting, though that is the ideal many parties aspire for. But if so much doubt and distrust surround them, the least the EC should do is 100% cross-checking and verification with the paper trail now mandated with each machine. All that such 100% verification will mean is a little delay of 2 or 3 days in the declaration of result. That is a small price to pay. Also, it must not be forgotten that the number of nations using EVMs is hardly 2 or 3 and none anywhere resembles the scale and use in India.

Several countries have abandoned EVMs as untrustworthy after years of trying, including the USA, Holland, Germany etc. Since this cuts at the base of democracy, the EC should announce 100% verification with immediate effect, including for the 2019 elections.

Public Participation : An Over Romanticised Potentially Dangerous Notion

Some exciting paradigms and experiments of public participation in 2009 in India involving the Lokpal movement, raise important questions not only regarding strengthening democracy but regarding the violation of age old, established constitutional principles and precepts. Public participation is the essence of democracy itself but representative democracy works through elected representatives. Issues of corruption and alleged misgovernance had, from 2009 onwards, led to different kinds of peoples’ movements which had turned the traditional notion of representative governance on its head. The campaign by a group of civil society activists had successfully insisted that they be part of legislative drafting, an activity always assumed to be the sole prerogative of the concerned ministry in a parliamentary form of governance. The so called Joint Drafting Committee of the Government of India and civil society activists on the Lokpal Bill led to frequent eruptions of dissent since civil society activists asserted a moral right to design the legislation perceived by them to promote the public good.

The natural constitutional question arises: Once the Joint Drafting Committee sends the Bill to the Cabinet, to what extent can the latter alter the proposal as received? Normally, such a question would be quaint, indeed, laughable, since the Cabinet’s discretion and plenary power to finalize legislation is unquestionable and cannot be subjected to any veto right by an external civil society activists’ body. But so strong and vocal is the activists’ stand that we are in grave danger of establishing yet another wrong constitutional precedent.

What happens if the aforesaid two hurdles of the Joint Drafting Committee and the Cabinet are successfully crossed, but the Houses of Parliament decide to modify the Bill? Again, parliamentary sovereignty in this regard is unquestionable, but if the civil society activists take to the streets because of what they perceive to be an unauthorized amendment or dilution by Parliament of the rights of the people, a peculiar and unprecedented constitutional crisis would arise.

The dilemma of such issues raised is ironic since many believe that actions in the name of representative democracy are eroding representative democracy itself. They are bypassing the elected representatives of the people. Such public participation presupposes a high degree of uniformity amidst civil society regarding both content and consequence as also mode and methodology of public participation. It also presupposes a fairly high degree of awareness and education and the ability to sustain mass movements of public participation on the basis of legitimately acquired means and resources.

In a nutshell, it is vital that while avenues and modalities of public participation have to be encouraged and enhanced, the government of the day has to stoutly resist all forms of blackmail or transfer of sovereign power to unelected or self-appointed guardians of civil society.

Public participation has been one of the greatest bulwarks of democracy because, in India, it is supported and strengthened by several ancillary support systems, chief among them being the over-active and vibrant Right to Information Act. It has created a mini-revolution in thought, deed and action for the average common man.

‘Institutional and Non-Institutional Pillars of Democracy: Powers Behind Strength and Resurrection on India’ Part – 8

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
