Naidu senior in losing elections, back-biting: Modi

Guntur: Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched Sunday a scathing attack on Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister and TDP supremo Chandrababu Naidu. Addressing a rally here Modi said that Naidu has made a ‘U-turn’ on promises of development to the state and was only replicating the former’s schemes.

Modi lashed out at Naidu for aligning with the Congress, stating that the former chief minister NT Ramarao (NTR) had launched the party to make Andhra Pradesh ‘congress-mukth’ after he was a victim of its ‘arrogance’.

Naidu was indeed a senior to him, but only in losing elections, switching alliances and ditching his father-in-law NTR, Modi said.

“He (Naidu) keeps reminding me he is senior. There is no debate in this. I have never shown any disrespect to you since you are a senior. You are a senior in changing alliances.

A senior at biting the back of your own father-in-law, a senior in losing one election after the other, whereas I am not,” the PM said.

Modi alleged Naidu was taking him on since the Centre had sought details of every paise given to Andhra Pradesh.

Naidu had promised walking in the footsteps of NTR and Modi asked if the Chief Minister had lived by his promises.

“The arrogance of Delhi (during the Congress rule) has always insulted states. And NTR that is why decided to make AP Congress-mukth and floated the TDP. The TDP leader who has to resist the arrogance of the Naamdaars (famous and powerful people) and crush their arrogance is siding with them,” Modi said in an apparent swipe at Naidu joining hands with the Congress.

“This chowkidar (watchman) has disturbed his sleep. I wanted to know the details of every paise given to Andhra Pradesh,” added Modi.

Naidu promised the sunrise of Andhra Pradesh but is fixated with the rise of his own son N Lokesh, Modi charged. The Chief Minister promised the redevelopment of Amaravati but is now engaged in his own development, the Prime Minister alleged.

On providing clean fuel in the country, Modi said while in 60 years, only 12 crore gas connections were given, the NDA government had given 13 crore gas connections in just four years.

Earlier, when Modi arrived at Gannavaram airport in Vijayawada, TDP workers staged protests.

This is Modi’s first visit to the state after the ruling Telugu Desam Party severed ties with the NDA. The Chandrababu Naidu-led party quit the BJP-led alliance protesting the ‘injustice’ done to the state post-bifurcation.

Commenting on the black balloon protests against him by TDP workers, Modi quipped he welcomed it recalling the tradition of smearing black to ward off evil designs.

PTI
