Letters to the Editor - January 5, 2019

Women in Sabarimala

The entry of three women into the Sabarimala temple is as far-reaching a change as the Channar revolt that won Nadar women the right to wear upper-body clothes and the consecration of a Shiva temple at Aruvippuram by Sri Narayana Guru (“Breaking barriers”, Jan. 4). It is clear from the protests that it is not the male Ayyappa devotees who are against the judgment; it is those who are trying to foment unrest in a bid to gain some relevance in Kerala politics. What is shameful is that the Congress in Kerala has become the mirror image of the BJP and is making common cause with the latter to perpetuate a discriminatory custom.

G. David Milton,

Maruthancode

The fact that there were purification rituals after the women entered the temple clearly shows that women are seen as polluting and impure. It is shameful that menstruation is seen as impure when it is a natural occurrence. Archaic practices and beliefs cannot continue in the name of tradition.

Sangeeta Kampani,

New Delhi

By entering the temple, the women have hurt the faith of millions of devotees. If they were true devotees, they would not have done something against a long-standing tradition and in such a furtive manner. Their act shows not devotion but a dogged determination to simply break tradition.

M. Pradyu,

Kannur

If the verdict of the court does not appeal to a group of people, they should take the legal route to question it, not resort to violence. And priests cannot take political decisions and confuse the public; they are not outside of the law.

A.G. Rajmohan,

Anantapur

I wonder what would have happened if Muslims had protested against a court order in the manner that is happening in Kerala. They would have probably been branded as ‘lawless’ and ‘enemies of the state’. The Prime Minister says Sabarimala is about tradition and triple talaq is about gender equality. The government and the courts should either look into the question of gender equality in all religions (in which case laws and judgments should be respected by all) or wait for social reform to unfold on its own.

Z. Rahmani,

Delhi

It is not the temple that needed to be “purified” through rituals; it is our mindset. What a pity that despite having a great Constitution and a Supreme Court, priests decide what is the correct thing to do. This is a country where goddesses are venerated; yet, when women enter a temple, people want to rid it of “impurities”.

Shubham Yadav,

Lucknow

What was the need for the government to implement the court order in such an emotionally charged atmosphere? It could have asked for time. Given that Kerala is recovering from the terrible floods of last year, there was anyway little time to make security arrangements.

Viswanathan P.K.,

Palakkad

Judicial overreach is what has led to the distressing situation in Sabarimala. The matter is one of faith, not of a constitutional right. The court should not have taken up this case. There have been many instances of judicial overreach recently, notable among them being the ban on fireworks last Deepavali. Instead of taking up cases like Sabarimala and the cracker ban, the court should concentrate on resolving the cases already at hand.

S. Kamat,

Santa Cruz

Trump mocks India

It is typical of U.S. President Donald Trump, an anti-intellectual preoccupied with military might as a means of shaping a better world, to mock the building of a library (“Trump’s remarks rejected by India”, Jan. 4). It is in recognition of such a mindset that Nobel Laureate Malala Yousafzai requested world leaders to send books to war-torn countries like Afghanistan instead of guns. The Indian Prime Minister clearly responded to that call. Mr. Trump can’t seem to think outside of the old militaristic paradigm. Hence, his infantile reaction to Mr. Modi’s initiative.

Rajend Naidu,

Sydney
