Gurjar aandolan: Gujjar quota stir turns violent, 4 cops injured

Gujjar quota stir: Clash erupts between cops and protesters in Rajasthan

JAIPUR/ALWAR/KOTA: The ongoing Gujjar agitation for reservation took a violent turn on its third day when protesters armed with sticks clashed with cops on Sunday, prompting the Rajasthan government to impose prohibitory orders in Dholpur, Karauli and Bharatpur districts.Violence was widespread, mainly in Dholpur. Four cops were injured in stone-pelting. As many as 26 trains were diverted and 12 others cancelled due to protests on tracks. The protesters also blocked road traffic at Gudla in Karauli, Asind in Bhilwara, Nainwa in Bundi and on the Jaipur highway in Ajmer.An intelligence alert has been issued for Dausa district too.DGP (law and order) ML Lather told TOI that situation in Dholpur was quickly brought under control by the local police but at least four cops sustained injuries due to stone pelting by agitators. "Some people had tried to block the traffic on Chambal Bridge in Dholpur. When the protesters began to misbehave with passengers in cars and buses, police had to intervene. When the protesters started hurling stones at cops, Dholpur police resorted to firing teargas shells. We have filed three FIRs. Two more cases will be filed as public property and police vehicles have been damaged," he said, adding that old videos from the 2007 Gujjar agitation were being made viral to whip up passions.CM Ashok Gehlot claimed that some miscreants had got involved in the clashes. "Bainsla ji (agitation leader Kirori Singh Bainsla ) had appealed for peace and people should listen to his message. The doors for dialogue are open from our side," he told reporters.Clashes in Dholpur sent nearby Karauli and Bharatpur district administrations into a tizzy. "We have decided to impose Section 144 for the entire Karauli district," said district collector Nanu Mal Pahdia.Meanwhile, the Karauli administration pasted a notice on the house of Kirori Singh Bainsla for violation of court orders. A meeting was called by additional chief secretary (home). "We have told SPs where Gujjars decide to sit on roads, they must find alternative routes to divert traffic," an official said.
