N Chandrababu Naidu backstabbed NTR, switched sides, says PM Narendra Modi

During his first visit to Andhra Pradesh after TDP parted ways with the NDA, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday lashed out at Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu for aligning with the Congress.

The PM said that by switching sides, the TDP supremo had "backstabbed" his father-in-law and his party founder NT Ramarao.

Naidu, an ally of the BJP, had parted ways from the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) on a terse note in March last year accusing PM Modi of breaking promises and landing the state in a big fiscal mess before joining hands with the Congress.

"The arrogance of Delhi during the Congress rule has always insulted states. That was the reason NT Ramarao (NTR) had floated the TDP to make Andhra Pradesh Congress-mukt. But, Chandrababu Naidu who had promised to walk on the footsteps of NTR, has joined hands with the Congress," PM Modi at a massive rally in Guntur.

"The TDP chief, who has to resist the arrogance of the naamdaars and crush their arrogance, is siding with them," PM Modi said.

Stating that Naidu keeps on reminding him that he is senior to him, the Prime Minister said, "Indeed, he is senior to me and there is no dispute about this. You are a senior in changing alliances, backstabbing your father-in-law, losing one election after the other and shattering the dreams of Andhra Pradesh, where as I am not. Furthermore, you are a senior in embracing tomorrow those whom you would abuse today."

PM Modi said Naidu, who promised the sunrise of Andhra Pradesh, is "fixated" with the "rise of his own son" N Lokesh.

The PM further slammed Naidu saying that the Andhra Pradesh CM has made a "U-turn" on his promises of development in the state. "The state government has not initiated any new programme for the development of the state. Rather it is putting stamps on the Centre's development schemes," PM Modi said.

Stating that the Centre has given to AP more than what was mentioned in special status, the PM said, "Naidu acknowledged this package but took a U-turn as they failed to use the funds in the appropriate way."

In a riposte to Naidu, who had said that he is a "wealth creator" and PM Modi has "no idea" about wealth creation, the PM said, "From Amravati to Polavaram, they are busy in creating wealth for themselves and that is why are scared of this chowkidar as the Centre had sought details of every paisa given to the state."

"I want to remind Naidu that our aim is not to create wealth for ourselves but to create wealth for the nation," he added.

Commenting on the black balloon protests against him by TDP workers, Modi quipped he welcomed it recalling the tradition of smearing black to ward off the "evil designs".

BJP sources informed that people were thwarted from reaching the venue of PM Modi's rally. Earlier in day, the TDP workers staged protests when the PM Modi arrived at Gannavaram airport in Vijayawada. Giving the protocol a go-by, none of the state ministers turned up at the Gannavaram airport to formally receive PM Modi.
