With a visit to Rajghat, Chandrababu Naidu begins day-long hunger strike to demand special status for Andhra

TDP president AND Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Monday sat on a day-long hunger strike to demand special status for his state. Before beginning the fast, Naidu offered tributes to Matama Gandhi at Rajghat and to BR Ambedkar at Andhra Pradesh Bhavan.

A number of Opposition party leaders - including Congress president Rahul Gandhi, National Conference president Farooq Abdullah and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal - are expected to extend their support to the TDP chief's fast.

Naidu's 'Dharma Porata Deeksha' (a day-long protest for justice) in the national capital began at 8 am and will continue till 8 pm today. The chief minister will sit on a hunger strike along with his ministers, party MLAs, MLCs, and MPs.

Delhi: Andhra Pradesh CM and Telugu Desam Party chief N Chandrababu Naidu begins his daylong hunger strike at Andhra Pradesh Bhawan. His hunger strike is against the central govt over the issue of special status to Andhra Pradesh. pic.twitter.com/UiLYgdysgl — ANI (@ANI) February 11, 2019

As per an official statement, he will be submitting a memorandum to President Ram Nath Kovind on Tuesday. He is demanding special status for Andhra and fulfilment of commitments made by the Centre under the AP Reorganisation Act, 2014.

Notably, Naidu in October 2013 had staged an indefinite fast at the same venue, demanding that if a separate state is carved out of then unified Andhra Pradesh, both should get equal rights. He, however on the fifth day of his protest was forcibly shifted to Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital.

Also on April 20 2018, on the occasion of his birthday, the TDP chief had observed a fast in Vijayawada demanding special status for the state.

Earlier on Sunday Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched a scathing attack on Naidu, calling him a master in backstabbing and destroying the dreams of people.

The Telugu Desam Party (TDP) had walked out the BJP-led NDA in March last year protesting the "injustice" done to Andhra Pradesh after its bifurcation. The party had also moved a 'no-confidence motion' in the Monsoon session of Parliament in July 2018, which was defeated.

(With agencies)
