TMC backs Naidu's special status demand for Andhra Pradesh

New Delhi [India], Feb 11 (ANI): Trinamool Congress (TMC) on Monday threw its weight behind Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu, who has launched 'Dharma Porata Deeksha' here to press for the demand of special status category for his state.

TMC MP Derek O' Brien said that the no-confidence motion brought by the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) “scared” Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

“Chandrababu Naidu ji, I would like to congratulate TDP. We started this fight four years back but there is a very important date--July 20, 2018--when the TDP brought in 'no-confidence motion' in the Lok Sabha. This scared Modi,” he said at the ‘Dharma Porata Deeksha’ here.

"After that on January 9, 2019, SP-BSP came together. After that, what happened on January 19, 2019--BJP is finished. On that day, senior leaders of 22 political parties came on the same stage. Why am I mentioning these dates? Because after all of these, the BJP got one new ally--CBI," said Derek.

Chief Minister Naidu is observing 'Dharma Porata Deeksha,' a day-long protest for justice, demanding special category status for Andhra and other promises made by the Centre under the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.

As per an official statement, Chief Minister Naidu will be submitting a memorandum to President Ram Nath Kovind on Tuesday.

Several leaders from opposition parties, including Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, former Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh, and Loktantrik Janata Dal chief Sharad Yadav are participating in the dharna.

Addressing the gathering, Chief Minister Naidu, whose party pulled out of the NDA last year, alleged that the Centre is discriminating against Andhra Pradesh and Prime Minister Narendra Modi is “inefficient and unfit to rule the country.”

“The Modi government did not fulfill the assurances given in Parliament. Not even a single assurance given at the time of bifurcation is fulfilled. Even the Centre is showing discrimination, we have no option other than protesting. The funds given for backward states are taken back in the fourth year,” Naidu said.

“Today we came here all the way to protest against the central government. The Prime Minister went to Guntur yesterday. There are 18 acts under the Bifurcation Act which they need to fulfil. Manmohan Singh announced special status. (Vice President) Venkaiah Naidu demanded special to Andhra Pradesh for 10 years,” he added.

Naidu, who has been pressing for special category status for Andhra Pradesh for long, had earlier staged similar protests against the Centre. (ANI)


