Chandrababu Naidu ups the ante against Modi: The politics driving their mutual animosity

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu with NCP leader Farooq Abdullah and Congress president Rahul Gandhi, in Delhi, on Monday. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Taking his tussle with Prime Minister Narendra Modi to the national capital on Monday, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu sat on a day-long fast, seeking special category status for his state and fulfilment of other demands.

Naidu was joined by other opposition leaders including Congress president Rahul Gandhi, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Farooq Abdullah, Trinamool Congress leader Derek O' Brien and, perhaps a tad surprisingly, Samajwadi Party leader Mulayam Singh Yadav.

Attacking the prime minister, the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) leader said that Modi was “unfit” to lead the country. “You think you can avoid us by sitting in Delhi. You're wrong,” he said as reported by The Indian Express. “We will take help of friendly parties and achieve our aim.”

From Kolkata to Delhi via Andhra

Along with West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, Naidu has emerged as the most trenchant critic of Modi amongst the mahagathbandhan leaders. Monday’s opposition protest in Delhi comes days after Banerjee’s own dramatic dharna against the BJP and the central government in Kolkata after CBI officers came knocking on the door of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar.

Naidu had flown to Kolkata to be by Banerjee's side last week.

Banerjee returned the favour on Monday, extending support to her Andhra counterpart. “Our party chief Mamata Banerjee has expressed her support towards Chandrababu Naidu's hunger strike,” a Trinamool leader was quoted as telling news agency PTI. “She asked our party leader Derek O'Brien to visit Naidu at the venue of hunger strike and express solidarity.”

Naidu and Banerjee are prime movers in the anti-BJP front which includes more than 20 political parties. The duo has also been most vocal at hitting out at BJP president Amit Shah.

What’s brewing in Andhra Pradesh?

At a rally in Andhra Pradesh’s Guntur on Sunday, Modi slammed Naidu, saying that he had back-stabbed his own father-in-law for the sake of power, referring to the TDP founder and former chief minister NT Rama Rao.

Naidu almost immediately hit back, saying: “Modi would not understand as he doesn’t value family life. Though he is married, he ignored his wife and did not even give her a divorce.”

The unusually personal attacks by both leaders come as the BJP, which is likely to suffer losses in Uttar Pradesh in the Lok Sabha polls in wake of the SP-BSP tie-up, is looking to expand its reach in the south and east. Andhra Pradesh, which sends 25 MPs to the Lok Sabha, is very much part of these plans.

In the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, the TDP and BJP were allies and won 15 and two seats respectively.

The TDP walked out of the NDA in protest against the “injustice” meted out to Andhra Pradesh following its bifurcation.

While Naidu and Rahul Gandhi are often seen sharing the same public platform, there is no clarity on any Lok Sabha seat-sharing arrangement between the TDP and Congress yet. An alliance between the two parties in neighbouring Telangana appeared to have helped the Telangana Rashtra Samithi, which won the assembly election with an increased seat count.

Meanwhile, Andhra Pradesh’s main opposition party YSRCP (YSR Congress Party), led by Jagan Mohan Reddy, is hoping to unseat Naidu from the chief minister’s chair in the assembly elections and get the better of the TDP in the Lok Sabha elections. Both polls are likely to be held together, and the stakes can’t be higher for Naidu.

There have been persistent rumours of a secret understanding between the BJP and YSRCP, which won eight seats in the last Lok Sabha polls.

A good showing by Naidu in both the state and parliamentary elections, on the other hand, will make him one of the key players in a post-election scenario where no alliance reaches the majority mark.

It’s only going to get uglier from here onwards.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
