Priyanka Gandhi’s roadshow: In Lucknow, Rahul sharpens attack on PM Modi, vows to uproot BJP

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, the newly-appointed Congress general secretary of eastern Uttar Pradesh, took to roads of Lucknow Monday accompanied by brother Rahul Gandhi and senior party leader Jyotiraditya Scindia.

The nearly 25 km-long roadshow was aimed at establishing her presence in the politically crucial state ahead of the Lok Sabha elections, after her official political debut last month. This was her maiden visit to the state capital post her appointment as a Congress functionary. FOLLOW CONGRESS LUCKNOW ROADSHOW HIGHLIGHTS HERE

Priyanka throughout the roadshow was seen waving at supporters, party workers and local onlookers as she stood atop the party bus surrounded by a cordon of security personnel. The show of strength in Lucknow holds significance as the grand old party has decided to venture alone in the state in the upcoming Lok Sabha election after it was snubbed by the combine of SP’s Akhilesh Yadav and BSP’s Mayawati. The two parties announced an alliance without the Congress, however, expressing that they will not place candidates on two Congress held bastions of Rae Bareli and Amethi.

Rahul Gandhi targets centre, vows to uproot BJP

Congress president Rahul Gandhi took the centre stage throughout the course of roadshow addressing the crowd at various stops targetting the Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led central government over issues surrounding corruption, Rafale, employment and farm distress. Following the end of the roadshow, the Congress chief placed the responsibility of reviving Congress in UP on the shoulders of Priyanka and Scindia saying, “The hollowness within Modi ji has been exposed in front of India, its youth, farmers and the common people. Congress has no shortage of issues, fight with them on these issues and see the changes Congress goes through in UP.” He added that Congress respects Mayawati and Akhilesh ji but “we will fight with our best efforts in the state to change the politics in the state and fulfil the dreams of the youth in UP.” READ IN MALAYALAM

Lucknow: Congress President Rahul Gandhi and party General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra receive greetings of the supporters during their road show in Lucknow, Monday, Feb. 11, 2019. (PTI Photo/Atul Yadav) (PTI2_11_2019_000156B) Lucknow: Congress President Rahul Gandhi and party General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra receive greetings of the supporters during their road show in Lucknow, Monday, Feb. 11, 2019. (PTI Photo/Atul Yadav) (PTI2_11_2019_000156B)

Gandhi urged Priyanka and Scinida to work with ground level workers of the party and bring them to forefront ahead of elections as they will get the party victory in the state. He reiterated the issues surrounding the Rafale deal and raised slogans of ‘Chowkidaar chor hai’ (the watchman is a thief), a reference he uses to attack the PM.

“Today people from Air Force and defence ministry say ‘Chowkidaar chor hai’. PM Modi ended the corruption clause to give Rs 30000 crore to Anil Ambani and loot people of India. ‘Chowkidaar chor hai’ is resonating throughout the country,” he added.

Priyanka is accompanied by brother and Congress chief Rahul Gandhi in Lucknow. (Source: Twitter) Priyanka is accompanied by brother and Congress chief Rahul Gandhi in Lucknow. (Source: Twitter)

Priyanka Gandhi to visit Jaipur to meet husband Robert Vadra

Priyanka is set to visit Jaipur late in the evening where her husband Robert Vadra is likely to depose before the Enforcement Directorate. Vadra, who is Congress President Rahul Gandhi’s brother-in-law, is expected to make a fresh appearance before the ED on Tuesday in the city in connection with a probe into an alleged land scam in the Rajasthan’s border town of Bikaner, officials said Monday. Vadra’s mother Maureen is also likely to appear before the central probe agency at about 10 AM at its zonal office on Bhawani Singh Road in Jaipur Tuesday.

PM Modi in Vrindavan, serves meals to underprivileged

While the Congress held a major roadshow in Lucknow, PM Modi was in Vrindavan, where he served meals to underprivileged schoolchildren. During the visit, Modi also unveiled a ceremonial plaque at the event to mark the serving of “3rd billionth meal” by Akshaya Patra Foundation at Vrindavan Chandrodaya Mandir campus in the city.
