Rahul Gandhi shows sister Priyanka the ropes in her first roadshow, says Congress must form govt in UP

Starting her new journey as the Congress party's general secretary in charge of Uttar Pradesh East, not only did Priyanka Gandhi go out on her maiden political roadshow in Uttar Pradesh, she also managed to get over 45,000 followers today when she started her own Twitter account.

The roadshow is being seen as a launch of the party's campaign ahead of the Lok Sabha polls.

Accompanied by Congress president Rahul Gandhi and party leader Jyotiraditya Scindia, Priyanka Gandhi's cavalcade crawled through streets of Lucknow crowded with cheering Congress supporters.

Jyotiraditya Scindia, Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi wave to the crowd in Lucknow. (Photo: Twitter/@INCUttarPradesh)

At the end of the 25-km roadshow from the airport to the state Congress headquarters Nehru Bhavan, Rahul Gandhi said Priyanka and Jyotiraditya will set an example for why Congress should form the government in Uttar Pradesh.

"I have put Priyanka and Jyotiraditya in charge here so we can show you how Congress can form government in Uttar Pradesh," Rahul said.

Lashing out at the Modi government, Rahul said the nation's 'chowkidaar' has failed the country and that Prime Minister Modi's schemes only benefit Anil Ambani.

NATION"S CHOWKIDAAR STOLE FROM STATE: RAHUL

As the Congress cavalcade made its way through the crowd, it seemed Rahul did most of the talking everytime the entourage stopped. It seemed like Rahul was introducing Priyanka Gandhi and Jyotiraditya Scindia as the party's heavyweights in the state.

"UP is the heart of India. I have made Priyanka Gandhi and Jyotiraditya Scindia as general secretaries. 2019 Lok Sabha election is important but our aim is to spread Congress's ideology and form the government in the state," Rahul Gnadhi said as the cavalcade stopped so that he could speak to the people.

"The nation's chowkidaar stole money from Uttar Pradesh, other states, and Air Force. Chowkidaar chor hai! Uttar Pradesh is the heart of the country. We'll play on front-foot. Scindiaji, Priyankaji and I won't rest until a government of the Congress's ideology is formed in the state," Rahul Gandhi said.

RAFALE SCAM ON DISPLAY

Rahul Gandhi was seen holding a cutout of a Rafale aircraft during his roadshow here in Lucknow. Through his own rallies ahead of the Lok Sabha polls, Rahul Gandhi has been extremely vocal about the BJP having a hand in the Rafale scam.

CONGRESS WORKERS WELCOME PRIYANKA

Ahead of the roadshow, posters and billboards in support of the yatra welcomed the three Congress leaders . On some of them, Congress workers have expressed high hopes saying Priyanka Gandhi is a "wind of change". Enthusiastic Congress workers took to the streets to celebrate the arrival of the Gandhis and Scindia with party tricolours.

Lucknow: Latest visuals from Congress office. General Secretary for Uttar Pradesh East Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, General secretary for Uttar Pradesh West Jyotiraditya Scindia and party President Rahul Gandhi are visiting the city today. pic.twitter.com/zwfUn5VJTq ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) February 11, 2019

Since early in the morning, Congress workers were seen keeping busy, giving final touches to the arrangements for the roadshow, distributing food packets, tea and water to passersby. Patriotic songs were played on loudspeakers to perk up the mood.

'START OF NEW POLITICS'

A day before her maiden visit to Uttar Pradesh as Congress general secretary, Priyanka Gandhi said that together with the people of the state she hopes to start a "new kind of politics" in which everyone will be a stakeholder.

The two general secretaries will interact with party workers at the state Congress office in Lucknow on February 12, 13 and 14.

"I am coming tomorrow to Lucknow to meet all of you. I have hope in my heart that together we will start a new kind of politics, a politics in which all of you will be stakeholders -- my young friends, my sisters and even the weakest person, all their voices will be heard," said Gandhi through the Congress's Shakti App.

(Photo: PTI)

WHY PRIYANKA?

Priyanka Gandhi is the Congress's big hope for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections who will be shouldering the responsibility of reviving Congress fortunes, especially in the eastern part of Uttar Pradesh, say party insiders.

Her entry into active politics has been at a time when the party is not only witnessing one of the most difficult times electorally but has also been sidelined by prospective allies for the 'mahagatbandhan' with the Samajwadi Party and BSP totally ignoring it in forming their alliance.

Priyanka Gandhi is pitched as a big draw with her charisma and voter connect, but her 'rescue Congress' mission remains a daunting task in the state where the party has been pushed on the margins with the advent of caste based politics since the last 30 years.

Though she is no stranger to such roadshows with her brother, she is seen campaigning for the first time outside the Gandhi family constituencies of Amethi and Raebareli and her political acumen and connect with the public will be at test for the first time.

(With PTI inputs)
