BJP, Congress accuse AAP of misleading Delhi voters through calls

The BJP and the Congress on Monday hit out at Delhi's Arvind Kejriwal government accusing it of misleading voters, a day after the Election Commission (EC) asked the Delhi Police to probe telephone calls to people claiming their names have been deleted from electoral rolls.

Addressing a press conference here, Delhi BJP president Manoj Tiwari said: "An internal survey by the AAP (Aam Aadmi Party) indicates that they are going to lose all the seats and thus they are indulging in these things to mislead the people."

Tiwari referred to the phone calls being made to the people in the national capital, and claimed over 30 lakh names had been removed from the voter list.

Hitting out at the AAP government in Delhi, the BJP leader said during the last four years Kejriwal and his party have done nothing with which they can seek votes from the people. "Had they done anything, there was no need to indulge in false propaganda," he said.

Tiwari, who represents the Northeast Delhi parliamentary constituency in the Lok Sabha, appealed to the people to remain cautious about the phone calls. "Record it whenever you get one and send it to us. We will keep it confidential and file a complaint with the authority concerned," he said.

Meanwhile, an 11-member delegation of the Delhi Congress led by its chief Sheila Dikshit met Chief Electoral Officer of Delhi Ranbir Singh and registered their protest against the Kejriwal government for misleading voters.

The delegation claimed the AAP has been contacting voters, whose names are already in the final voter list, and propagating that though their names have been struck down from the list, it is getting them restored and as such they should vote for the AAP in the elections.

It urged the Delhi Election Commission to immediately take strict action against those spreading such misinformation. It also pointed out that such irresponsible people were making allegations against an independent body like the Election Commission and questioning its integrity.

--IANS

aks/rtp/pcj

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
