Opposition uses Chandrababu Naidu's daylong fast as platform to attack government

NEW DELHI: Andhra Pradesh chief minister and TDP chief N Chandrababu Naidu's daylong fast demanding special status for his state turned into the latest rallying point for anti-BJP opposition parties.They gathered at Andhra Bhawan, for the second time in a month, after having met at Kolkata to show support to Mamata Banerjee in her agitation against the CBI's alleged misconduct.Before that 22 parties had come together on January 19 at a joint show of strength rally in Kolkata. Banerjee will be in Delhi on Tuesday to hold her protest-dharna on Wednesday.Bringing anti-Centre issues concerning states to the centre stage, a horde of opposition leaders took turns to show solidarity with Naidu, who sat on protest, donning a black shirt.The Congress contingent was the strongest with former PM Manmohan Singh accompanying party chief Rahul Gandhi on Monday morning. Ahmed Patel, Ghulam Nabi Azad, Anand Sharma, Jairam Ramesh, Digvijay Singh and Madhya Pradesh chief minister Kamal Nath shared the stage with Naidu and spoke in support of his cause, against the Modi government declaring that it was in office for only another three months, referring to the Lok Sabha polls coming up.Apart from Congress leaders, TMC's Derek O'Brien, RSP's N K Premachandran, NCP chief Sharad Pawar and his daughter and MP Supriya Sule, Delhi chief minister and AAP leader Arvind Kejriwal, Sharad Yadav, SP leader Mulayam Singh Yadav and his nephew and SP MP Dharmendra Yadav, NC leader Farooq Abdullah, DMK's Thiruchi Siva, former PM HD Deve Gowda were among those who spoke in favour of Naidu's cause on Monday. Former BJP leader Yashwant Sinha and BJP MP Shatrughan Sinha also attended and addressed the gathering.NDA partner and Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut also attended the rally and spoke in favour of Naidu's cause, saying whatever the Modi government has denied the state of Andhra Pradesh was wrong and Sena chief Uddhav Thackaray had asked him to call on the protesting Naidu.Accusing PM Narendra Modi , Congress president Rahul Gandhi said, "The Prime Minister has stolen from the people from Andhra Pradesh and he has given that money to Anil Ambani . That is the fact of the matter. I want to let you know that we are all standing together. We are going to defeat the BJP and Narendra Modi," he said, in an apparent reference to the Rafale deal with France. Ambani's company is offset partner of French firm Dassault Aviation under the deal.Manmohan Singh, who was PM when Andhra Pradesh was bifurcated, said, "This demand had support of all parties when it was discussed in Parliament. I stand in solidarity with Naidu. These demand should be met immediately without any more loss of time."O'Brien recalled Modi's speech in Guntur (AP), on Sunday and said he didn't talk about development or special category status but "started a personal attack." The TMC MP alleged "Those who live in glass houses should not throw stones at others...BC is before chaiwala and AD is after dhoka...Modi has lost all his allies and formed a new ally in CBI."The PM in his rally had remarked that Naidu was a senior, but only in losing elections, switching alliances and ditching his father-in-law, NT Rama Rao.Lashing out at Modi, Abdullah said, "Modi has stooped so low. He's making personal attacks against Naidu," adding that the "The Jammu-Srinagar highway is closed for six days. They cannot clear the 30km road, but they want to rule the country."
