Naidu holds hunger strike against Modi govt, gets support from NDA ally Shiv Sena and several Oppn parties

New Delhi (India), Feb 11 (ANI) Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Monday held a day-long hunger strike in Delhi, venting anger against Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his government, in which he was joined by a host of other parties, including ruling NDA ally Shiv Sena.

Leaders of Congress, Trinamool Congress, NCP, Samajwadi Party, National Conference, DMK, AAP and Shiv Sena joined the TDP chief at his agitation at Andhra Bhavan to express their solidarity for his demand for special status to Andhra Pradesh.

Among those in attendance were Congress President Rahul Gandhi, former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Ghulam Nabi Azad, TMC MP Derek O'Brien, AAP leader and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, former UP Chief Minister Mulayam Singh Yadav, National Conference leader Farooq Abdullah, NCP's Sharad Pawar and Praful Patel, and DMK's T Siva.

Sanjay Raut of Shiv Sena, as well as disgruntled BJP MP Shatrughan Sinha, former BJP leader Yashwant Sinha, also attended.

During the day, Naidu addressed the gathering a number of times, attacking Modi and accusing him of being “vindictive” and “inefficient and unfit” to rule the country.

"Modi is acting shamelessly and egotistically. He is thinking of winning the elections by colluding with some parties. Modi is unfit to rule the country. He is inefficient. Rulers should keep in mind the aspirations of the people,” the Andhra Chief Minister said.

He said he came to Delhi to explain to the nation the "injustice" done by the Centre to Andhra Pradesh.

"Yesterday, Modi went to Guntur and slammed me but did not announce anything for Andhra Pradesh. The BJP will be washed out in Andhra Pradesh forever. The BJP is dividing the nation. We are here for uniting the nation. We are here to explain to the nation the injustice done by the Centre to Andhra Pradesh. We are also part of this country. Our aspiration must be fulfilled. We will take the help of all parties and achieve our target," the Chief Minister said.

Naidu had pulled out of the NDA in March last year on the issue of special status to his state. He had earlier staged similar protests against the Centre.

Attacking Modi on the Rafale deal, Rahul Gandhi alleged that the Prime Minister facilitated “loot” as according to a media report he had removed the anti-corruption clause from the controversial fighter jet contract.

"Every Defence deal has an anti-corruption clause. The Hindu has reported that the Prime Minister removed the anti-corruption clause. It is clear that the Prime Minister facilitated the loot," Rahul told media at the event.

Gandhi alleged that the Prime Minister has got no credibility left.

Backing Naidu, he said: "I stand with the people of Andhra Pradesh. What kind of a Prime Minister is he? He did not fulfil the commitment made to the people of Andhra Pradesh. Modi tells a lie wherever he goes. He has got no credibility left.”

Derek O'Brien said the no-confidence motion brought by the TDP in the Lok Sabha in July last year “scared” Prime Minister Modi.

“After that on Jan 9, 2019, the SP and the BSP came together. On that day, senior leaders of 22 political parties came on the same stage (to show opposition unity)," he said.

He also attacked the BJP alleging that it had got a “new ally – the CBI”.

Meanwhile, the BJP claimed that Naidu was staging the protest without following any protocol for "political purposes".

"He (Naidu) is doing this entire drama for political reasons. Without following any protocol, he has come to Delhi and sat on a dharna. Moreover, he is already very famous for his U-turn on many issues. Whatever he says, the people of both the Telugu states will not believe him because he is famous for lying to people on several occasions. Naidu is a failure and people will give no response on this," BJP leader Ram Chander Rao told ANI.

Naidu is scheduled to meet President Ram Nath Kovind tomorrow and submit a memorandum. West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee is expected to visit Delhi tomorrow to express solidarity with the TDP leader. (ANI)


