Finally, Parliament conducts some business

After several days of work loss, both the Houses of Parliament sprung back into brisk action on Friday. While the Lok Sabha went through an animated debate on Rafale with accusations flying left, right and centre and also took up the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2018, the Rajya Sabha, despite walkouts by AIADMK, DMK and left parties, as an exception, successfully conducted the zero and question hour.



As the AIADMK and DMK walked out of the house registering their protest on Cauvery dam issue and Left parties too followed suit alleging BJP sponsored violence in Kerala, Chairman of the Rajya Sabha M Venkaiah Naidu heaved a sigh of relief and said that their exit was preferable to the commotion they usually cause.



Famous of his witty one-liners, Naidu said, "The members can talk out, walk out but not break out."



With Rafale debate shifting to the lower house, Congress too kept its cool and took part in the debate on Women's Reservation Bill. The Constitution (108th Amendment) Bill, commonly known as the Women's Reservation Bill, was passed by Rajya Sabha in 2010, but is awaiting nod of Lok Sabha. Women members spoke in favour of the legislation after Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu allowed short submissions.



Cutting across party lines, members demanded the BJP-led government to use its majority in Lok Sabha to ensure passage of a legislation providing 33 per cent reservation to women in Parliament and state legislatures.



Samajwadi Party MP Jaya Bachchan said the bill in its present form was "cosmetic" and favours only rich and urban women. However, DMK member, Kanimozhi backed the bill saying that throughout life women have to live with the decisions of men, even in Parliament. She said her party wanted sub-reservation to be provided for dalits.



Reminding the house that former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's had taken the first initiative to provide 33 percent reservation to women in local bodies, Congress member Viplove Thakur made a fervent appeal to pass the Women's Reservation Bill to allow women "stand shoulder to shoulder" with men. The TDP also backed the legislation.



CPM member Jharna Das Baidya blamed BJP for paying only a lip service to the reservation bill. Shanta Chhetri of TMC said her party gave one-third of tickets to women in the 2014 Lok Sabha election and West Bengal has already provided 50 per cent reservation to women in local bodies.



In the Lok Sabha, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley, replying to a question, claimed that the Reserve Bank of India is trying to recover the losses it suffered during the 2008-2014 period. He also asserted that no one will lose their job due to the merger of state-owned banks.



"In the earlier days, banks were being looted, now banks are being saved," he added amid protests from the Opposition.

‘Talk Out, Walk Out But Don’t Break Out’

Chairman of the Rajya Sabha M Venkaiah Naidu was a relieved man on Friday, after walkout of some parties. Famous of his witty one-liners, Naidu said, “The members can talk out, walk out but not break out.
