TMC MLA Satyajit Biswas killing: BJP fomenting trouble, says Trinamool Congress

Those behind MLA’s killing will not be spared, says Abhishek Banerjee

Accusing the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of fomenting trouble in the border areas of the State, Trinamool Congress leader and MP Abhishek Banerjee on Monday said those involved in the killing of his party MLA Satyajit Biswas will not be spared.

“If someone thinks that he can run away to Delhi, hide behind leaders and escape the law, then he can rest assured that we will pull him by his collar and bring him back to Kolkata and put him behind bars,” Mr. Banerjee told journalists after visiting the house of the slain MLA.

Satyajit Biswas, MLA of Krishnaganj was shot dead from point blank range on Saturday evening. The district police arrested two persons, Kartik Mondal and Sujit Mondal, on Sunday in connection with the incident. They were remanded in police custody for 14 days.

The district police registered an FIR naming four persons, including top State BJP leader Mukul Roy. Mr. Roy has denied any link with the killing and has blamed infighting in the Trinamool for the MLA’s murder.

Mr. Banerjee, nephew of Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who also heads the youth wing of the party refuted all reports of infighting. “If there is infighting (in the TMC), the BJP should name the two groups. Why isn’t it naming them,” he asked.

He said the BJP is trying to create trouble in Krishnaganj in Nadia, Dinhata in Cooch Behar, and Balrampur in Purulia for electoral gains.

Railway services were disrupted in Eastern Railway’s Sealdah division on Monday owing to blockade on the tracks by agitators at five places. The blockades, by those protesting the murder were held near Titagarh, Kanchrapara, Dum Dum Cantonment, Bongaon and Dum Dum junction railway stations in the section.

Meanwhile Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee is likely to leave for the national capital on Tuesday to participate in the protest by Opposition parties.

The West Bengal unit of the BJP has sought permission to hold a protest at the Metro Channel where Ms. Banerjee held a dharna from the evening of February 3 to February 5 .
