‘I am the Governor and CM too!’

Secretaries panel formed to see Kargil’s interest

NL Correspondent

Jammu Tawi, Feb 11

Amid ongoing protests by people of Kargil over their demand for rotational divisional headquarters, Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik has said a committee of secretaries has been formed to look into it interest of the district.

Hundreds of Kargil residents, including women and children, took out a rally in the winter capital Jammu Monday and chanted slogans in support of their demand for equal share in the recently created separate division for Ladakh and rotational divisional headquarters.

“The divisional status for Ladakh was a long-standing demand (of the people of the region). We have formed a committee of secretaries which will look into the issue so that Kargil gets justice,” the Governor told reporters on the sidelines of a function in Katra township of Reasi district.

In a major decision on February 8, the Jammu and Kashmir administration sanctioned creation of a separate administrative and revenue division for Ladakh, with its headquarters at Leh.

Cutting across party lines, prominent politicians from Kargil affiliated with the National Conference, the PDP and the Congress came together and threatened mass agitation if the Governor administration did not review its decision to permanently post the divisional commissioner and inspector general of police headquarters in Leh.

On Sunday, thousands of people also staged a rally in Kargil and submitted a memorandum to the deputy commissioner to press for their demand.

Malik replied in negative when asked whether his administration plans to give divisional status to any other region of the state.

The Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) and the National Conference are advocating similar status to Pir Panjal and Chenab valley region.

“It (divisional status) was imperative for both the districts of Leh and Kargil…let those talking about it come to power and do so,” the Governor said.

The Kargil residents including their leaders affiliated with different political parties assembled at Karbala complex in the high-security Wazarat road here Monday morning and took out a rally which ended peacefully at the Press Club, Jammu, after passing through the Residency Road.

Prominent among those who took part in the rally included Legislative Council Chairman Haji Anayat Ali, Chief Executive Councilor of Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council, Kargil, Feroz Khan, former ministers Qamar Ali Akhoon, Asgar Karbalai, Nissar Ali, former MP Hassan Khan.

The leaders also addressed the gathering at the Press Club, vowing to continue the “united struggle” till the “genuine demands” of the people of Kargil are not met.Governor Satya Pal Malik has dismissed the criticism by the PDP and the NC over his “political” statements, saying he was presenting the viewpoint of the “President’s government in New Delhi”.

The Governor’s House is the representative of the President and there is President’s government in New Delhi… I represent that government and I have to put forth its viewpoint,” Malik told reporters on the sidelines of a function in Reasi district’s Katra township on Saturday.”If you abuse the (central) government on a daily basis, somebody has to reply. I am doing only that. I am not only the governor but the chief minister as well,” he said. He alleged the PDP chief’s demand was aimed at gaining public support ahead of the upcoming state assembly elections.

Kargil leaders threaten civil disobedience movement Srinagar, Feb 11

Hundreds of people from Kargil today held massive demonstration in Jammu over the discrimination while granting divisional status to Ladakh.

The protesters while chanting slogans like “Nahi chalegi nahi chalegi, na insaafi nahi chalegi,” said that the injustice with the people of Kargil will not be allowed anymore.

“Keeping all the offices in Leh is discrimination with highly populated Kargil region. We will not allow it to happen. This is sheer discrimination with the people of Kargil,” the protesters told.

The leaders leading the protests said they will take the protests to Delhi until justice is not done with the people of Kargil. They said the decision to keep all the offices in Leh is politically motivated and it will insight regional imbalance in the otherwise peaceful region.

Senior National Conference leader and former minister Qamar Ali Akhoon while talking to Kashmir News Service (KNS) said they will launch civil disobedience movement till the time justice is not given to the people of Kargil. Akhoon was heading protests in Jammu along with other regional leaders of Kargil.

The leaders threatened a massive agitation and pledged they will protest in democratic ways to get justice. “Kargil has always been overlooked and has been very underdeveloped. We will not allow it to happen again. We are as much part of the Ladakh division as is Leh. The distribution of offices or rotational arrangement should be envisaged than only we will call off our movement for justice,” the protesters said. (KNS)
