Modi should prepare for fallout if he pushes citizenship bill through RS: Tripura royal scion

Agartala: Tripura royal scion , Pradyot Kishore Debbarman, on Sunday said if Prime Minister Narendra Modi pushes the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill despite unrelenting protests against the proposed amendment, he should “prepare for the ramifications”.Facing black flag demonstrations and even nude protests, the Prime Minister on Saturday launched a series of projects in Tripura, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh during his whirlwind tour of the region in the run-up to the Lok Sabha election.“The Prime Minister seems to have realized the extent of public anger against his intention to push the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill through the Rajya Sabha given the way protests were organized in Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura during his visit. This, despite the bonanza schemes he announced for the northeast,” Debbarman, who is also working president of the Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee, said. “If he (Modi) is stubborn on the issue even after that, he should prepare for the ramifications,” he added.Referring to the disarray within the BJP-led North East Democratic Alliance (Neda) over the proposed amendment to the Citizenship Act — which seeks citizenship for non-Muslim migrants from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan — Debbarman said, “BJP does not take the MLAs of Neda allies seriously any more. The time has come for them to make it clear with whom they stand — the people or the administration.”A book written by chief minister Biplab Deb about his grandfather was also released by Modi, but no one from the royal family was at the event. Amid speculation over the royal scion being overlooked by the BJP leadership during the unveiling of the statue of his grandfather, Maharaj Bir Bikram Kishore Manikya, Debbarman tweeted: “Yes Rajamata was personally called by Biplab ji and Mevar over phone one night before but she was in Kolkata. If i was invited i would have also come. I know how to seperate politics from personal life. Nevertheless i welcome the installation of the statue.”A close associate of the royal family said it appeared to be a conscious decision by the BJP. “We don’t understand the point of keeping the royal family out of such an event. If they think they can win over the people of Tripura with such gestures, they should be ready for the blowback,” the associate added.Debbarman, a fluent Kokborok speaker, has always connected well with the tribal communities of Tripura. He has been spearheading protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the state — intensified since the police firing on anti-bill protesters the day the Lok Sabha passed the bill. Last week, police charged three tribal leaders with sedition for remarks made at an anti-citizenship bill protest meet at Khumlung, headquarters of the Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council, that Debbarman had organized.
