SC can decide Ayodhya dispute 1n 24 hrs: CM

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has said that the Supreme Court should not take more than 24-25 hours to settle the Ayodhya dispute as the 3-judge bench of the Allahabad High Court has already upheld that the disputed site at Ayodhya was the birthplace of Lord Ram “The Allahabad High Court has already settled the dispute as it has stated in the September 2010 judgement that the place of Ram Lala Virajman is the birthplace of Lord Ram. The dispute is not over the division of the site but the birthplace of Lord Ram and the high court has settled this issue. The judiciary should respect the religious sentiments of the people and it should take not more than 24-25 hours for the adjudication of the dispute,” Yogi Adityanath said on Monday while replying to the debate on the motion of thanks to the Governor’s address to the state legislature on February 5.

The opposition benches were empty when the CM delivered the speech.

“Ayodhya is an ancient town and renowned place for being the birthplace of Lord Ram and not because a foreign invader who attacked, looted and vandalised the Ram temple and the holy town,” the Chief Minister said.

Training his guns at the Samajwadi Party for its attempts to corner the BJP over the construction of Ram temple at Ayodhya, the CM said, “SP has no business to ask when the temple will be constructed at Ayodhya as it was during the SP regime in 2005 that terrorists had attacked the Ram Janmabhoomi temple and the Akhilesh Yadav government had made a futile attempt to withdraw the charges of terror against the accused lodged in jail.”

In a jibe at the SP-BSP alliance, the CM said that both the parties had shared seats for the Lok Sabha polls and hoped that they would also share the cost of the statues of elephants, if directed by the Supreme Court.

“Both Akhilesh Yadav and Mayawati have no dearth of money as they have minted money when in power. Akhilesh Yadav has invested the money in Australia, London and also in India. He earned money from the financial irregularities in Agra-Lucknow expressway and Purvanchal highway and the Gomti Riverfront projects,” Yogi said, adding that against the original estimate of Rs 347 crore, over Rs 1,400 crore were spent on the Gomti Riverfront project.

Slamming the opposition for staging walkout from the House, the CM said, “Opposition has no moral courage to face the truth. The SP, BSP regimes built the corridors of crime, corruption, loot and mafia while the BJP has built the corridor of security, development and ‘astha’.”

He said Prime Minister Narendra Modi would formally lay the foundation of the defence industrial corridor at Jhansi on February 15.

In his 80-minute speech, Yogi Adityanath listed the achievements of his government for the development of the state and particularly for the welfare of farmers, like hike in procurement of wheat, paddy and payment of cane arrears, electricity supply, completion of long-pending irrigation projects.

The CM said by the end of this year, additional irrigation potential of 20 lakh hectare land would be created in the state that it would transform the rural economy.

On the stray cattle menace in rural areas, the CM said the government was committed to protecting the standing crops from cattle. He said the number of ‘destitute’ cows had increased as the government had banned the operation of illegal slaughterhouses. He said arrangements had been made for housing three lakh cattle in cow shelters.
