Rape accused out on bail held for rape-murder of minor girl

Father of accused arrested for helping 21-year-old in crime

A 21-year-old rape accused, who was out on bail, has been arrested for murdering a seven-year-old girl after raping her, the police said on Monday. The accused’s father has also been arrested for helping him in the crime, they added.

Meanwhile, parents and family members of the victim staged a protest outside Nihal Vihar police station demanding action against policemen who failed to trace the child.

On Saturday evening, the seven-year-old girl, was reported missing from Nihal Vihar. She was found murdered in a local park with her limbs tied with a rope on Sunday morning.

The victim had gone to the local market to buy momos with her younger sister around 8 p.m. on February 9, but allegedly disappeared all of a sudden. The younger sister reached home and informed parents about the same, said the police, adding that the younger sister is mute and deaf.

Lured girl with toffee

DCP (New Delhi), Seju P Kuruvilla said that the accused Rajender lives in the same area and was identified after scanning CCTVs in the locality and with the help of local intelligence. He was in the market where he spotted the girl. He lured her by offering her toffee and took her to his home when his parents were away.

“Rajender is a school dropout and stays at home while his father works as a driver with a private firm. He has been previously booked for raping a minor in the neighbourhood. He was chargesheeted in that case and was out on bail,” said Mr. Kuruvilla.

The accused tied the girl with a rope and raped her. Later, he strangulated her with the same rope and bludgeoned her head with a brick. But he was unable to clear the body and got panic, said the police

Mr. Kuruvilla said that based on Rajender’s disclosure, his father Ram Saran, 52, was also arrested for allegedly helping him carry the girl’s body on a scooter and dump it in the park. “We are yet to identify the exact role of the accused’s father ,” Mr. Kuruvilla added.

“Rajender’s father went to the area and analysed the situation at the victim’s home. He came back and made a plan to throw the body in a nearby park during midnight,” said a police officer.

Rajender was arrested in 2016 for raping a minor girl, but he claimed to be a juvenile and got bail. Later, during the probe he was found to be an adult. But he managed to get the bail. “We will seek police custody of the accused to find out if he was involved in more such cases,” said a police officer.

DCW issues notice

Taking suo-motu cognisance of the incident, the Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) issued notice to the Delhi Police seeking reasons for “police inaction on the missing child’s complaint filed by her father.” Further, the women’s commission has sought details of the investigation undertaken by the Delhi Police, including copies of the CCTV footage.

‘Implement ordinance’

Swati Maliwal, chairperson of the DCW appealed to Prime Minister Narendra Modi to implement the ordinance on awarding death penalty to persons accused of raping minors. “The PM should ensure that the law for awarding death penalty to rapists of minor be implemented. Police accountability in such cases be fixed, the required police resources be mobilised and fast track courts be set up,” said Ms. Maliwal.

“An eight-month-old child who was raped last year has failed to get justice till date. When will this seven-year-old girl get justice?” asked Ms. Maliwal.

The DCW has also sought information on the number of children missing from Nihal Vihar since January 2018, including the number of kids who have been rescued.
