Congress, NCP workers attack PMC official over hyacinth tender issue

Additional commissioner Rajendra Nimbalkar allegedly asked protestors what qualification they possessed to ‘pose questions’, which led to a heated argument



Congress and NCP leaders attacked the additional commissioner of Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC), Rajendra Nimbalkar, on Monday evening after an argument broke out between them over the issue of tenders for water hyacinth removal, which was recently exposed by a local newspaper. The opposition leaders were discussing the issue in the Mayor’s cabin and have blamed the officer for his comment that led to the attack.



Pune Municipal Corporation had earlier processed a tender worth Rs 23 crore for the removal of water hyacinth from lakes in the city. The tender was tabled in front of the standing committee for approval, but a local newspaper had reported that none of the three lakes had any presence of hyacinth, raising the question over the allocation of such alarge amount.



Meanwhile, Pune Mayor Mukta Tilak has condemned the act and has said that she would be taking action against responsible people. The PMC’s employee union has also announced a protest against the leaders.



Congress and NCP leaders had started a sit-in protest inside the Mayor’s cabin against the alleged corruption in the tendering process for removing water hyacinth. The leaders had demanded that action should be taken against all the officers responsible.



While the Mayor was discussing the issue with the municipal commissioner over a phone call, Nimbalkar tried to put forth his explanation.



The corporators, however, demanded that Nimbalkar should stop speaking since he is a part of the tendering process. This led to an argument between the corporators and the additional commissioner, during which Nimbalkar allegedly asked them their qualification to question him like this.



Opposition leaders and party workers, who were protesting peacefully till then, attacked Nimbalkar and also started abusing him. While he was rescued by security guards, the opposition leaders continued the protest demanding action against him.



Congress leader Arvind Shinde said, “We had opposed his presence because he was leading the tendering process that we had objected to. Despite this, he not only stayed back in the room but also abused the corporators.”



A leader of the opposition, Dilip Barate, added, “We were questioning the Mayor on the issue while she was talking to the commissioner over a phone call. But Nimbalkar ended up saying ‘tumchi layki ahe ka’ (are you even eligible). That’s when the leaders lost control.”



Condemning the incident, Mayor Mukta Tilak said, “This was a very unfortunate incident and is condemnable. Since this happened in my cabin, I am going to demand action. We will not tolerate this hooliganism.”



PMC employees have also called for a protest against the leaders on Tuesday. Sunil Kadam, secretary of PMC Engineers’ Association, said, “We won’t tolerate such behaviour and have decided to support the additional commissioner. We have called for a strike and a protest at 11 am and have decided to wear black ribbons as a mark of our protest throughout the day.” Nimbalkar has decided to file a police complaint against the leaders.


