Anti-Bill stir locks down Northeast, youths ink protest in blood

Students of Dibrugarh University stage a protest against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, in Dibrugarh on Monday

IMPHAL/ GUWAHATI/ SHILLONG: Normal life came to a grinding halt, business establishments remained closed across Imphal city on Monday in the 36-hour statewide shutdown called by Peoples’ Alliance Manipur (PAM) to protest the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill (CAB). Six women were injured as police fired teargas shells and threw smoke bombs to disperse antibill protesters in Imphal on Sunday evening.

Protests by women vendors at Imphal’s Ima Market continued on Monday. Women vendors across the city have staged a sit-in protest since Saturday. Shantidevi, president of a women’s association at Khwairamband market, said of the Sunday evening violence, that police used force to disperse the agitators, who were protesting peacefully. They tried to destroy tents and pulled down the banners that sought the unconditional revocation of the bill, she said.

“Six women were injured. The situation turned uglier when they tried to take one of the injured women into custody and the agitators had to thwart the attempt,” Shantidevi said. Criticising the use of “excessive force” by police, MANPAC convenor Y Dillipkumar said, “The assault on women vendors indicates the state is acting under the Centre’s command.” He said statements by PM Modi and home minister Rajnath Singh that the bill would not affect Manipur and the other northeastern states are “aimed at pacifying protesters”.

In Guwahati on Monday, police detained over 100 members of the Left-Democratic Manch, a joint forum of 10 parties headed by CPI, CPM and NCP, as agitators went to lay siege to the Assam legislative assembly as part of the anti-CAB agitation. A scuffle broke out between security personnel and protesters, the latter accusing police of high-handedness. Over 100 protesters were detained but released later in the day.

“By staying firm on their stand on the CAB, despite people’s movements against it, BJP-led government has shown how undemocratic it is… Three state governments in northeast have opposed the bill. But the Centre is not ready to listen to them,” said CPM state secretariat member Suprakash Talukdar.

In Assam, students of Dibrugarh University, among the most vocal opponents of CAB used blood drawn from their hands as ink to write slogans against the contentious bill. With a ‘Rokto Hapath (Pledge by Blood)’, a dozen students on campus drew blood from their hands with syringes and blades, with which they wrote anti-bill messages on placards and banners. “We’re ready to give our blood and our life to compel the government to withdraw the controversial bill,” Devid Hazarika, a student leader said.

Meanwhile, netas from the northeast, including Meghalaya CM Conrad Sangma and an AGP delegation led by party chief Atul Bora, were in Delhi in a final attempt to rally forces against CAB, likely to be placed before Rajya Sabha on February 13 as a supplementary bill.

Picture

Students of Dibrugarh University stage a protest against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, in Dibrugarh on Monday


