Row erupts as Ahmedabad college cancels Jignesh Mevani’s talk; Principal, V-P resign in protest

Jignesh Mevani | Photo Credit: BCCL

Ahmedabad: The decision of the management of an Ahmedabad college to cancel the invitation of Vadgam MLA Jignesh Mevani for an annual day event following opposition by a few students has triggered a huge controversy. The principal and vice-principal of HK Arts College, Ahmedabad, have tendered their resignations as a mark of protest against the cancellations of Mevani’s invite, in a first in the college’s history.

Mevani, who is an alumnus of the college, had been invited by principal Hemantkumar Shah to deliver an address on the lives and journeys of Dr. BR Ambdekar and Bhagat Singh. However, members of the college trust, Gujarat Vidyasabha, withdrew their permission for the venue, allegedly after a few BJP-affiliated student leaders raised objections and threatened to create ruckus at the annual event if Mevani attended.

Slamming the college management’s decision, Shah said that by cancelling Mevani’s invitation, the college trustees had “killed their freedom of speech with their own hands.” As per ANI, the former principal of the college said in a letter to the College trustees, “Jignesh Mevani is an alumnus of this college and an MLA so I invited him as chief guest. Students were opposing that he'll speak something controversial and even said if he comes they won’t let the function happen.”

Because of threat calls made by BJP goons, tustees of H.K.Arts college, Ahmedabad I graduated from cancled the annual function where I was invited as chief guest.Was going to talk about life and mission of Baba saheb. Salute to Principal Hemant Shah who resigned on moral ground — Jignesh Mevani (@jigneshmevani80) February 11, 2019

Since @narendramodi became prime minister, many people have become spineless. Trustees of H.k. Arts college where I studied fall in that category, unfortunately. I salute toiling masses who always dare to take on mighty governments unlike many ppl with so called celebrated status — Jignesh Mevani (@jigneshmevani80) February 11, 2019

He further said, “I believe that freedom of speech is important for all including Jignesh Mevani. Instead, the trustees decided to kill their freedom with their own hands under political pressure making it embarrassing, painful and shameful.” Explaining his reasons to quit from his post, Shah added that the college had become a “slave to a political party.”

“When I accepted the post of principal I believed I could do a lot for society and college. I can't stay in that institute which is a slave of a political party and I can't work as a slave. So, I am resigning from this post,” he said.

Shah, who is currently head of the Economics department at HK Arts College, has worked for 15 years. On the other hand, vice- principal-in-charge Mohanbhai Parmar, who also resigned citing similar reasons, has been associated with the college for the last 10 years. Both Shah and Parmar had been appointed as in-charge of their respective posts four months ago.

Meanwhile, Dalit leader Jignesh Mevani also hit out at the College trustees, calling their decision as "spineless." He said in a tweet, “Since Narendra Modi became prime minister, many people have become spineless. Trustees of HK Arts College where I studied fall in that category, unfortunately. I salute toiling masses who always dare to take on mighty governments unlike many people with so-called celebrated status.” Mevani also lauded principal Shah for resigning on “moral ground.”


