Three die as BGB opens fire on Thakurgaon villagers over ‘smuggled cow’

At least 15 more were injured after the border guards opened fire during the scuffle at 12pm Tuesday, said Haripur Police OC Md Amiruzzaman.

The deceased have been identified as Nabab, 30, Sadek Miah, 40 and Joynal, a candidate of the ongoing Secondary School Certificate exams.

The clash started when BGB troopers at Betna camp stopped a man who was headed to the Jadurani village market to sell his cow.

The border guards seized the cow claiming that it was smuggled over the nearby border with India, which led to a clash with locals.

“Police rushed to the spot after hearing the news. They found the bodies lying on the ground. The BGB troopers left after police went to the spot,” said OC Amiruzzaman.

The police saw locals protesting against the BGB troopers, holding them responsible for the deaths, he said. But the BGB said they were trying to stop an the attack by a gang of smugglers.

“These are smuggled cows. These were brought in by an organised gang. A patrol team stopped the traders while they were passing the two-kilometre stretch between the Indian border and the village market,” said Lt Col Md Masud, commander of the 50 BGB Battalion, told bdnews24.com.

“When the cows were being taken to the border outpost, our troopers were attacked by a gang of at least 200 armed smugglers.”

“We first tried to shield ourselves. But that led to damage of our weapons, helmets. Several personnel were injured. We tried to make them understand by bringing in local government representatives. But that didn’t work and we were forced to fire from our weapons to bring the situation under control.”

Deputy Commissioner KM Kamruzzaman Selim went to Baharampur after the clashes.

“The BGB did an operation based on the information that cows have been smuggled over the border. They seized several cows which led to clashes with villagers,” he said.

A probe committee has been formed over the incident. “We will take measures in line with the findings of the committee.”
