Fact Check: Old lathi charge video from Karnataka resurfaces as one from Gorakhpur

The video has been shared more than 35,000 times

Women being ruthlessly thrashed by police for protesting against EVM tampering in Uttar Pradesh's Gorakhpur; this claim together with a video is going viral on social media.

The video shows the women screaming in pain as the policemen lathi charge them one after another.

The archived version of the video can be seen here.

India Today Fact Check found that the claim is totally false, and the video is almost three-and-a-half-year-old. The video is from Belagavi (or Belgaum) city in Karnataka, and not Gorakhpur.

The message with the video reads, "Hathi ka button dabane par vote ja raha hai phool ko, EVM ka virodh karne par laathiya barsaati police, yeh ghatna Gorakhpur ward No 17 ki hai."

ENGLISH TRANSLATION: When the elephant symbol is pressed, vote goes to flower. On protesting against EVM tampering, police lathi-charged the people. This incident is from Gorakhpur ward No 17..

The video has been shared more than 35,000 times and viewed by almost 9,00,000 people at the time of filing this story.

The video was widely circulated in November 2017 too when Facebook page 'Bheem Sena' uploaded it. It has resurfaced and gone viral again.

Screenshot of the video going viral on social media

With the help of InVid tool, we found that the video dates back to September 4, 2015. On the suspicion of indulging in prostitution and other offenses, these women were beaten up by the Belagavi Police when they tried to escape. The video was circulated at that time too after which four policemen were suspended for their action.

The incident was widely covered by regional and national media.

Based on the facts, it is established that neither the video is from Gorakhpur nor these women were beaten up for protesting against EVM tampering.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Women beaten up by police for protesting against EVM tampering in UP's Gorakhpur. Conclusion This is an old video from Belagavi city in Karnataka, and the women were thrashed on the suspicion of indulging in prostitution and other offenses. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
