Mamata Banerjee, Arvind Kejriwal, Naidu to hold rally in Delhi today; BJP’s Shatrughan Sinha to attend

File picture | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The chief ministers of Delhi, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh will on Wednesday hold a rally in the national capital. As per the Aam Aadmi Party, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal along with his West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh counterparts, Mamata Banerjee and N Chandrababu Naidu, respectively, will address the 'Remove Dictatorship, Save Democracy Rally' at Jantar Mantar.

The rally months ahead of 2019 Lok Sabha Elections will also be attended by key leaders of other non-Bharatiya Janata Party parties, including Sharad Pawar, Farooq Abdullah, Sharad Yadav, Yashwant Sinha, Ram Gopal Yadav, Kanimozhi and an RJD representative.

AAP leader Gopal Rai told news agency IANS that rebel BJP MP Shatrughan Sinha too will attend the rally. An invitation has also been sent to Congress president Rahul Gandhi’s office. A Congress representative is likely to join the protest.

"India is currently passing through a decisive phase. The Modi-Shah duo is bent upon destroying the Constitution and democracy, which our country succeeded in achieving due to the sacrifices of millions of freedom fighters," Rai said.

The Delhi, West Bengal and AP CMs will address the rally in order to take forward this struggle, said Rai.

"Elected governments of non-BJP parties have been targeted by the Modi government, which has made a mockery of the federal structure of the Constitution," added the AAP leader.

"The Modi government has crossed all limits through blatant misuse of central agencies to throttle political opponents and it has no respect for the rule of law," he further said.

Notably, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu had on February 11 kept a day-long fast, seeking special status for the state. A number of opposition leaders, including Congress president Rahul Gandhi, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, and Samajwadi Party patriarch Mulayam Singh Yadav visited the venue of the fast and backed the special status demand. They had also hit out at Prime Minister Narendra Modi for subverting India's democracy and federal structure.

Last month, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee had organised an anti-BJP "United India" rally which saw the attendance of most non-NDA parties.
