SP workers go on rampage as Akhilesh Yadav stopped from flying to Prayagraj

Samajwadi Party (SP) workers on Tuesday went on the rampage across numerous parts of Uttar Pradesh after SP supremo Akhilesh Yadav, stopped at Lucknow airport from flying to Prayagraj on grounds of law and order.

The issue rocked the Rajya Sabha as SP and other opposition parties protested over the episode, disrupting the proceedings of the House. Moreover, the matter caused an uproar in both houses of the Uttar Pradesh legislature.

Former Uttar Pradesh chief minister and Samajwadi Party (SP) chief Akhilesh Yadav claimed that he was “detained” at the Lucknow airport after he was stopped by authorities in a bid to prevent him from visiting Prayagraj where he was scheduled to attend a function of the Allahabad University Students’ Union.

“I was prevented from boarding the airplane without any written orders. Currently detained at Lucknow airport. It is clear how frightened the govt is by the oath ceremony of a student leader. The BJP knows that youth of our great country will not tolerate this injustice anymore!” Akhilesh tweeted.

He posted pictures in which he was seen talking to police officers inside the airport.

As soon as SP members came to know about the airport incident, they tried to raise the matter during Question Hour in the assembly.

Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) supremo Mayawati, who formed an alliance with Akhilesh Yadav for the national election, described the episode as “anti-democratic” and “an example of total dictatorship of BJP government”.

West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee condemned the arrogant attitude of BJP leaders who stopped Akhilesh Yadav at the Lucknow airport.

Mamata took to her twitter account and tweeted, “I’ve already spoken to @yadavakhilesh. We all condemn the arrogant attitude of the so-called #BJP ‘leaders’ who didn’t allow Akhilesh to address the students. Even @jigneshmevani80 was not allowed. Where is the democracy in our country? And they are giving lessons to everybody!”

Andhra Pradesh Chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu strongly condemned the behaviour of Lucknow authorities

Naidu said, “Strongly condemn the high-handed behaviour of Lucknow authorities against Samajwadi party leader Sri Akhilesh Yadav. Another instance of BJP’s intolerance against its political opponents. Really democracy is in danger.”
