'If you try to mess with me, you'll be finished': Chandrababu Naidu to BJP workers after they block his convoy

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu was caught on camera allegedly threatening Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) workers after they attempted to block his convoy in Kakinada on Friday.

"If you try to mess with me, you will be finished," Naidu told BJP workers after their attempt to block his convoy. The bus carrying Naidu came to a halt and the Chief Minister stepped out.

Speaking to a BJP worker in a threatening tone, Naidu said, "What do you want? Why are you behaving like this? What do the BJP people want? You have no right to be in the state. Do you have any shame? You should all be ashamed because of what your leader Narendra Modi has done. If you try to mess with me, you will be finished. What has your (Prime Minister) Narendra Modi done for the state?”

When the BJP worker tried to respond, Naidu cut her off, saying, “The public will not leave you if you go out and say his name. Be careful."

Referring to a lathicharge by Delhi Police on leaders of Left parties and Pawan Kalyan's Jana Sena Party when they were protesting for Special Category Status (SCS) of Andhra Pradesh, Naidu said, "Yesterday also, they did a lathicharge. He ruined the state. Do you have any commitment to the state?”

According to a TNM report, the incident took place around noon near the Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University (JNTU) in Kakinada while he was going to attend various programs in the city on Friday.

The BJP leaders blocked Naidu's convoy to protest his comments on PM Modi recently. The police arrested BJP district President Malakondayya for the incident.

Naidu has been criticising Prime Minister Modi and the BJP, accusing them of betraying the people of Andhra Pradesh by not granting special status to the state.

On Tuesday, Naidu had claimed that he bowed down to satisfy the ego of Prime Minister Modi for getting things done for his state, yet the central government did not cooperate in the last four years.
