Anil Ambani negotiated Rafale deal on behalf of Modi: NCP

Party stages protest in city against ‘rising unemployment’, PM’s ‘unfulfilled’ promise of creating two crore jobs per year

The Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) on Tuesday alleged that industrialist Anil Ambani negotiated the Rafale contract on behalf of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and cited an e-mail to drive home its point.

NCP national spokesperson Nawab Malik called the controversial fighter jet deal as “pre-planned loot of the country’s money”.

Mr. Malik also charged Mr. Modi with being the “main person who got everything done” as he referred to media reports of the Centre dropping the anti-corruption clause from the deal.

He cited the e-mail written by an Airbus executive to a French official to allege that Mr. Ambani had met the French defence minister days before the signing of the deal during Mr. Modi’s visit to France in 2015. He alleged that the industrialist was aware of the MoU that India and France signed.

Mr. Malik said, “Now, the Modi government has been completely exposed. The entire deal was negotiated by Anil Ambani on behalf of Mr. Modi and the e-mail has exposed everything. It is a pre-planned loot of the country’s money. Mr. Modi was the main person who has done everything. And Anil Ambani was working on behalf of Mr. Modi.”

However, the government and Mr. Ambani have strongly denied any wrongdoing in the fighter jet agreement.

Meanwhile, the Mumbai unit of the NCP staged a protest in the city on Tuesday against “rising unemployment” in the country and slammed Prime Minister Modi over his “unfulfilled” promise of creating two crore jobs per year.

The Sharad Pawar-led party also attacked the government over the recent National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) report on job data, that has been withheld.

As per reports, the NSSO survey had pegged the current unemployment rate as the highest in the last 45 years. NCP spokesperson Clyde Crasto said, “The Modi government had promised two crore jobs a year, but the promise has not been kept. In fact, the NSSO report has said that the unemployment rate is the highest in 45 years.”

Mr. Crasto said the protesters were stopped by the police from marching towards the office of the Mumbai district collector, but were later allowed to submit a memorandum to the authorities.

The protest was organised by NCP’s Mumbai unit youth wing head Nilesh Bhosale and South Mumbai district president Vijay Wadkar.

The party plans to stage protests across the State.
