Chandrababu Naidu meets President Kovind, presses for special status to AP

New Delhi: A delegation led by Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu on Tuesday submitted a memorandum to President Ram Nath Kovind over the demand for special status for his state.

Earlier, Naidu, along with MPs, MLAs and MLCs of his Telugu Desam Party took out a protest march demanding special status for Andhra Pradesh.

“Yesterday, we held a protest in Delhi. When government ignores the implementation of dharma, then responsible stake holders have to fight and expose that is what we have done yesterday. In the Bifurcation Act, there are some provisions, it is given as a right to us. It is very unfortunate for Andhra Pradesh since Independence we are seeing four capitals. During elections, he promised all this things. He said he will implement everything,” Naidu said after meeting President Kovind here today.

Several leaders from opposition parties, including Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, former prime minister Dr Manmohan Singh, Congress president Rahul Gandhi, National Conference chief Farroq Abdullah and Loktantrik Janata Dal chief Sharad Yadav visited Naidu at the dharna site in Delhi’s Andhra Pradesh Bhavan.

Naidu, whose party pulled out of the NDA last year, also alleged the Centre is discriminating against Andhra Pradesh and Prime Minister Narendra Modi is “inefficient and unfit to rule the country.”

“The NDA government did not fulfill the assurances given in Parliament. Not even a single assurance given at the time of bifurcation is fulfilled,” he said.

“Even the Centre is showing discrimination, we have no option other than protesting. The funds given for backward states are taken back in the fourth year,” Naidu said earlier in the day.

“Today we came here all the way to protest against the central government. Prime Minister Modi was in Guntur yesterday. There are 18 acts under the Bifurcation Act which they need to fulfill. Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh announced special status. (Vice President) Venkaiah Naidu demanded special status to Andhra Pradesh for 10 years,” he said.

[source_without_link]ANI[/source_without_link]
