‘Can’t trust Narendra Modi a second time’: Chandrababu Naidu talks ahead of India elections 2019

New Delhi: What was supposed to be a 12-hour demonstration to demand, from the Centre, a special status for the state of Andhra Pradesh, easily transformed itself into a platform for promoting the ‘mahagathbandhan’ or grand alliance of parties opposed to Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) entities. And holding court at the portico of Andhra Bhavan here in the capital on Monday was none other than Chief Minister Chandra Babu Naidu himself.

Earlier in the day, several stalwarts from across the political spectrum – from Congress president Rahul Gandhi to National Conference veteran Farooq Abdullah -- had come to show their solidarity towards what they claimed to be Andhra Pradesh’s legitimate demand.

Chandrababu Naidu at the Andhra Bhavan in New Delhi on Monday, 11th February 2019, during the protest demonstration. Image Credit: Sanjib Kumar Das/Gulf News

Even as those who had gathered on the podium for the dharna – termed as ‘Dharma Porata Deeksha’, or protest for justice – tried to get as close as possible to Naidu, the Telugu Desam Party leader diligently obliged every single request from the never-ending stream of party workers, supporters and followers to pose for a ‘selfie’or a group photo. Some were simply happy to be able to see him from such close quarters.

We need not look too much into the future. Right now, our priority is to make sure that BJP is removed from power. For that, the non-BJP Opposition parties have joined hands on the basis of a common minimum programme in the larger interest of the nation. - Chandra Babu Naidu, Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh

As Naidu raised the pitch for Andhra Pradesh’s financial demands before the government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, he fielded questions from Gulf News. Following are excerpts from a free-wheeling chat:

TDP supporters during the protest at the Andhra Bhavan in New Delhi on Monday, 11th February 2019. Image Credit: Sanjib Kumar Das/Gulf News

GULF NEWS: Prime Minister Narendra Modi has slighted attempts by non-BJP parties to get together and form an anti-BJP front. He has even gone to the extent of referring to the ‘mahagathbandhan’ as a ‘mahamilawat’ or the grand fraud. Your comments ….

CHANDRABABU NAIDU: Let the honourable prime minister not forget that there are several states in India where the BJP is in power as part of a coalition. Does that mean that all such coalition governments are ‘milawati’ or fraudulent?

This prime minister is only good at oratory. It’s just word play. And he has this bad habit of hitting opposition parties and their leaders below the belt. His ‘milawati’ comment is below the belt. It is unbecoming of a prime minister to stoop so low.

I have always insisted that no one is an automatic choice [for the post of PM]...But yes, if you ask me, Rahul ji is definitely a strong contender for the post. With time, he has evolved and changed. - Chandra Babu Naidu, Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh

N Chandrababu Naidu Image Credit: Agency

Q: Given the fact that the platform for an anti-BJP front for the coming Lok Sabha elections has thrown open opportunities for regional parties to hold sway at the Centre, does it mean that there are too many characters now within the Opposition fold with prime ministerial ambitions? Can this be a sore point in the days ahead?

A: We need not look too much into the future. Right now, our priority is to make sure that BJP is removed from power. For that, the non-BJP Opposition parties have joined hands on the basis of a common minimum programme in the larger interest of the nation. We must make sure that the current government doesn’t get a second term. That is why we have joined hands.

The issue of who will become the next prime minister is only secondary. We will come to a decision on that on the basis of a broad-based consensus between the alliance partners. That’s the next step.

Q: Some Opposition leaders, who are part of this ‘mahagathbandhan’, have cautioned that Congress president Rahul Gandhi isn’t going to be an automatic choice for PM should the Opposition alliance garner enough seats in the next elections … Do you subscribe to this view?

A: I have always insisted that no one is an automatic choice. Even Rahul ji himself has admitted to this view. We will first have to make sure that we win enough seats to defeat the BJP. Only then will we be able to pick the right candidate for prime minister. But yes, if you ask me, Rahul ji is definitely a strong contender for the post. With time, he has evolved and changed.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi and Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu during an election rally in Telangana (File photo) Image Credit: PTI

Q: If the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance just falls short of the simple majority mark and if Modi seeks your support, in lieu of granting special status to Andhra Pradesh, will you reconsider your current anti-Modi stance?

A: The point is that Narendra Modi had made such a promise during his 2014 campaign as well. How can we forget it? He was the one who had said that if BJP comes to power at the Centre, Andhra Pradesh will be granted special status. It’s been four long years since then, but nothing has changed. It is unfortunate that he has lied. So there is no question of trusting him a second time.

Q: What are the real big issues before India today:
