Modi minister tweet exposes inner workings of BJP IT cell. Or does it?

There apparently is a document that controls what is tweeted by accounts associated with the Bharatiya Janata Party

This morning, a minister in the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance government tweeted that the "working for the middle class is LOW on the agenda of Modi govt [emphasis added]". The outright critical tweet left a few people scratching their heads.

Was Pon Radhakrishnan's Twitter account, where this tweet was seen, hacked? Pon Radhakrishnan, in case you weren't aware, is the union minister of state for finance and shipping.

The tweet was soon taken down. But the question persisted -- was a hack to blame? Well, turns out, the answer is murkier.

There is a document -- think of it as a master document -- that is shared among thousands of people, including union ministers, apparently. The document is likely shared over Google Drive.

This document contains a set of prepared tweets that are accompanied by a certain hashtag. And, it turns out that many Twitter accounts associated with the Bharatiya Janata Party -- both covertly and overtly -- tweet the exact updates present in this documents. Word for word.

Union minister Pon Radhakrishnan's embarrassing tweet that was later taking down

And this is what apparently happened this morning, according to Pratik Sinha, the co-founder of fact-checking website AltNews.

Sinha tweeted a short video to prove the presence of this "document" that he says is maintained by the Bharatiya Janata Party's information technology cell.

The video shows a Google Docs document with a set of tweets prepared for a hashtag, '#Modi4NewIndia'.

How do you get a Union Minister to tweet what you want? Well, you go and edit the trending document made by BJP IT cell, and then you control what they tweet. Thread.



Here's the video of this morning when their trending document got automagically updated :-)



1/n pic.twitter.com/6DLwDPg2CV Pratik Sinha (@free_thinker) February 13, 2019

In the video, we see changes being made to the prepared tweets. The additions/changes being made show the Narendra Modi government in a negative, embarrassing light. Here is a sample: "PM Modi took care of the needs of the richest section", "India jumped from 77nd to 142th [sic] ranking in Ease of Doing Business ranking", "Now transportation is expensive".

And this, Pratik Sinha says, is how and why union minister of state Pon Radhakrishnan tweeted this morning that "working for the middle class is low on the agenda" of the Narendra Modi government. A similarly embarassing post, by the way, was also tweeted by the BJP's Assam unit, a screenshot posted by Sinha showed.

You can get a BJP state unit and a Union Minister to tweet that "Modi govt has not made inclusive development as the focal point"



cc @PonnaarrBJP @BJP4Assam



3/n pic.twitter.com/1k1FgMiYoo Pratik Sinha (@free_thinker) February 13, 2019

Similar mischievous editing to this "master document" has apparently gotten Twitter accounts not formally associated with the BJP that the Modi government has destroyed all villages in India. This, along with the hashtag #Modi4NewIndia.

While it might seem like a laughing matter, the purpose here is to demonstrate that a non government entity sitting in BJP's office is controlling what a Union Minister is tweeting.



5/n Pratik Sinha (@free_thinker) February 13, 2019

Now, how was this 'master document' accessed? Sinha hasn't revealed. "Will let the BJP IT cell figure out where all they have bungled and how often have they tweeted out of edited documents," he simply said.
