Ludhiana gangrape: Third accused arrested, court grants 7 days police remand to all held

A Youth Akali Dal leader rushes in to throw shoes at the three gangrape accused at a local court in Ludhiana on Wednesday. (Express photo: Gurmeet Singh)

Ludhiana rural police Wednesday arrested the third accused in the gangrape of a 20-year-old student that took place near Issewal village here late on Saturday.

Ludhiana rural SSP Varinder Singh Brar said that third accused Surmu (24) was arrested near Chak Kalan village. “He is from a nomad (Gujjar) community and hails from Jammu and Kashmir,” said the SSP.

SSP Brar added all three arrested accused have confessed to the crime. “They had assembled at the crime spot with a motive to loot the occupants of the car, but when they saw the woman accompanying her friend who was driving, they committed the heinous crime. The probe till now has established the involvement of six accused,” he said. After interrogation of two accused arrested Tuesday – Sadiq Ali and Jagroop Singh – the police have also identified the sixth accused, a juvenile aged 17 from Kathua of Jammu and Kashmir. He too is from the Gujjar community, said the SSP.

The juvenile, along with two others identified as Ajay Kumar and Saif Ali are absconding.

The three accused were produced in a court Wednesday where they were allegedly manhandled amid sloganeering by protesters. The court of judicial magistrate Ankit Airi remanded them in seven days’ police custody.

Outside the court complex, Youth Akali Dal district president Meetpal Singh Dugri, who had blackened a statue of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi a few days back, attempted to hit the three accused with shoes. Raising slogans, Dugri said that no one can stop him today from “teaching a lesson” to “such people’ as police took away the three accused after hearing. “I was here for some other work, but when I got to know that the gangrape accused are here, I could not control my emotions,” claimed Dugri.

DSP (investigation) Amandeep Singh Brar said that the police have to interrogate the accused about their three accomplices and recover the motorbikes used in the crime and other items that they allegedly stole from the victim and her friend – cash, jewellery etc – for which a 14-day remand was sought.

The 20-year old girl from Ludhiana and her friend were returning from Sarabha Nagar market late on Saturday when their i20 car was allegedly intercepted and she was gangraped near Issewal. The accused allegedly had demanded a ransom of Rs 1 lakh and called up their another friend to bring the money. However, he went to the police. Around 2 am on Sunday, the victims were released and the accused fled from spot.

Police post at Issewal

Four days after the gangrape, the Ludhiana rural police has established a permanent check post near Issewal village on South City road. This road near Sidhwan canal has seen many such loots, robberies and snatching incidents and is prone to crimes. SSP Brar said that five policemen will be on duty.

NCW team meets victim

A two-member team from National Commission for Women (NCW) led by under secretary Priti Kumar met the victim and SSP Brar in Ludhiana Wednesday. “We have responded to all their queries,” claimed the SSP.
