Hundreds of SP workers booked for protesting against Akhilesh Yadav's detention

BJP knows youth of our great country will not tolerate this injustice anymore: Akhilesh wrote on Twitter | Photo from Twitter

Hundreds of Samajwadi Party (SP) workers were booked in different parts of Uttar Pradesh.

They were booked for carrying out a protest against the Yogi Adityanath government for denying permission to Akhilesh Yadav to attend a programme at the Allahabad University and detaining him at the Lucknow airport on Tuesday (February 12).

I was prevented from boarding the airplane without any written orders. Currently detained at Lucknow airport.



It is clear how frightened the govt is by the oath ceremony of a student leader. The BJP knows that youth of our great country will not tolerate this injustice anymore! pic.twitter.com/xtnpNWtQRd Akhilesh Yadav (@yadavakhilesh) February 12, 2019

Cases have also been registered against party MPs Dharmendra Yadav and Nagendra Singh Patel in Prayagraj.

In Deoria district, more than 150 party workers were booked for blocking the road, misbehaving with cops and burning the effigy of UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath.

In various police stations of the Prayagraj district, more than 48 SP workers were booked under the Sections of IPC that include charges of instigating the crowd, damaging public property and arson.

In Muzaffarnagar, an FIR was filed against 14 protesters out of which five have been arrested and sent to jail.

Cases were also registered against workers in Bareilly, Rampur and Gorakhpur.

Meanwhile, a joint delegation of the Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) leaders met UP Governor Ram Naik at Raj Bhawan in Lucknow demanding probe by a sitting judge of the High Court over the issue of former UP CM blocked at Amausi Airport.

Speaking to media, former state cabinet minister and SP MLC Ahmed Hasan said, "We have told the Governor to take cognisance of this incident. False cases have been registered against the party workers and students who were protesting. They were brutally lathi-charged by the police. The atrocities under the BJP [Bharatiya Janata Party] rule are on the rise. We will revolt against this government in Vidhan Sabha and on the streets if cases registered against party workers and students who were protesting are not taken back."

The SP lawmakers carried out protest in both the Houses of UP assembly against the Yogi Adityanath government for stopping the former CM at the Lucknow airport.

Badaun MP Dharmendra Yadav, who sustained head injury in clashes with the police, raised the issue in Lok Sabha and accused the BJP of spreading anarchy.

Responding to the SP protest, UP cabinet minister and BJP leader Srikant Sharma said, "SP chief Akhilesh Yadav is escalating this issue only to gain publicity. He is frustrated after losing ground in the state. The alliance with Mayawati also shows that he cannot fight on his own. His party workers went on a statewide rampage and also manhandled the cops. It's quite unfortunate that the former UP CM is using students for his personal politics."
