VHP condemns raising of anti India slogans, lathicharge on students - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Arrest culprits immediately: Leela Karan

Excelsior Correspondent

JAMMU, Feb 13: Vishav Hindu Parishad (VHP) has strongly condemned the police action on students of GGM Science college who were protesting against raising of anti India slogans by some Kashmiri Muslims who were staying at Madrsa attached with Science College ground.

Talking to reporters here, today along with VHP vice presidents, Rajesh Gupta and Shakti Dutt Sharma, VHP State president, Advocate Leela Karan Sharma demanded immediate arrest of the people raising anti India slogans to spoil the peaceful atmosphere in Jammu.

Sharma urged the administration to defuse the situation by arresting the people who raised anti India slogans. He said the administration should go through the long history of GGM Science College which had led many national movements in Jammu and even some brave students did not hesitate in laying down their lives for the national cause.

He described the 1953 agitation of GGM Science College a remarkable battle when they were prevented from hoisting of National Flag by then Prime Minister, Sheikh Mohammed Abdullah. Later again in the agitation of 1966 number of students from the college attained the martyrdom for the national cause, he added.

Sharma also demanded action against the police men responsible for brutal lathicharge on innocent students of the college. He fully endorsed the demand of the students of the College. He alleged that some anti national elements in the police force and anti national elements from Kashmir are hell bent to spoil the peaceful atmosphere of Jammu under a grave conspiracy and in connivance of some Kashmiri centric politicians who are backing them.

He, while condemning the police lathicharge on peaceful students of the college said three of them are serious including a girl student and they have been hospitalized for treatment. Sharma said that situation has aggravated in the city as the students of all city colleges are on protest for last two days seeking justice for themselves and immediate arrest of culprits.
