India’s Vote-Buying Budget by Shashi Tharoor

A well-written and concise attack upon an administration which has lost its way. Tharoor's mistake is to mention his Party Chief, Rahul Gandhi's minimum income guarantee which is worse than anything the incumbent is doing.



Traditionally, landowners have wanted the Govt. to pay for the subsistence of the landless labourers on whom they depend. They favor a 'Speenhamland system' which is funded not by local rate-payers, but metropolitan tax payers. However the agricultural crisis has pauperized the dominant caste vote banks which made the thing feasible. Now, money has to be given to farmers to farm their own land. The landless will leave in any case. They can't be fooled into staying. Compare Rahul Gandhi's scheme to his cousin, who belongs to the ruling Party. Varun Gandhi has just published a big book on the agricultural crisis where he advocates a more ambitious version of what Modi is now doing. It may not be sound economics but it is sound politics. By contrast, cash transfers to the landless in rural areas reduces the supply of agricultural labor.



India's job crisis has been many decades in the making. We currently have an absurd situation where Left wing English academics who have done field work in Indian manufacturing industry report such counter-intuitive findings as

1) absenteeism declines during a strike (Prof. Jonathon Parry)

2) permanent workers take drugs and gamble while at work. Ill paid young temporary workers are diligent and hardworking. Yet if they are made permanent employees they will stop working properly.

Thus the Indian paradox is that more employment means less Production. A diligent young worker is offered a sub-contracting opportunity- i.e. he becomes self-employed and acts as a gangmaster- and thus Employment will go down so that Output can go up.

Bad work habits and a culture of complacency in Public Sector Enterprises makes privatization difficult under existing Labor laws. In any case, they are a source of patronage for the incumbent administration.



Tharoor says Modi had 'foreign admirers' who thought he'd be a reformer. Actually, it was Manmohan Singh who was considered a reformer. That was his USP.



Modi, by contrast, gained fame as a champion of Hindus. Under the Presidency of Sonia Gandhi, the Congress party had begun to appear anti-Hindu. Sonia was close to people like Romila Thapar, a Khattri, who would launch vicious attacks upon Brahman Hindus. Rahul, by coming out as an orthodox, sacred thread wearing, Brahman has restored the prospects of his party. Tharoor himself has just published a book called 'Why I am a Hindu'. He also now opposes the entry of women into Sabarimala Temple. This is perfectly sensible. Politicians in a Democratic country must pander to the sentiments of the majority community.



Modi was elected on more than just a pro-Hindu platform. He promised to curb corruption, reduce bureaucratic deadlock, and promote on the basis of merit. He has done what he promised and this has secured his own personal reputation and legacy. Like Vajpayee, he has risen above his Party. But, also means that the coming election will show no 'Modi effect'. The fact is, his party has always been ambiguous about reform and young people are turned off by its older idealogues and their deeply provincial beliefs.
