Coimbatore: Students stage protest demanding inquiry after professor harasses students

The accused is a professor of Biotechnology and has a alleged history of behaving on similar lines with other female students (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Coimbatore: In a bid to protest against their assistant professor, students of the Sree Narayana Guru College boycotted their classes and demanded immediate action. The students belonged to the Sree Narayana Guru College situated at KG Chavadi on the outskirts of Coimbatore.

The students boycotted their classes and demanded immediate action against their professor. Allegedly, the professor harassed two students of the college on Saturday. In response to this, the students protested against the professor.

Also Read: FSSAI introduces restriction on eatery owners from using same batch of cooking oil more than thrice

While talking to the Times of India, a student who was a part of the protest said that the accused, who is a professor of Biotechnology, asked the two students to discuss their mini project with him. However, when the students went to his room, he abused them verbally.

According to the general protocol, a teacher guide is appointed to supervise the students taking up the project. In this case, the accused, M Manikanadan was guiding the two aggrieved. Allegedly, the professor has a history of misbehaviour with his female students.

A student of the same college alleged that the accused had a similar approach towards his female students but no complaints were registered against him. The students also stated that the faculty members were trying to brush the issue under the carpet.

In the protest, the students demanded that a transparent inquiry is set up against the accused and that the issue is dealt with properly. They also demanded that there is strict action taken against the professor to avoid similar incidents in the future.

When TOI contacted the principal of the college, M Ilangovan, he stated that an inquiry had been conducted by the college after the complaint was received. He also added that the accused had been dismissed from the college.
