‘It’s like before the First World War’: How US and Russia are battling for Middle East influence at rival summits

Duelling Middle East conferences unfolded in Poland and Russia on Thursday, highlighting the competition for influence and the hardening of geopolitical blocs confronting each other over the volatile region.

In Warsaw, US secretary of state Mike Pompeo, vice president Mike Pence, and president Donald Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner headlined what was billed as a “peace” conference, but amounted to an attempt to pressure sceptical allies into joining a gelling anti-Iran alliance that includes Israel and the Arabian Peninsula monarchies.

“Leaders from across the region agreed that the greatest threat to peace and security of the Middle East is the Islamic Republic of Iran,” said Mr Pence in a speech that cut between condemnation of Isis’ terrorism and Tehran’s Islamist populism.

“They’ve supported terrorist proxies and militias. The Iranian regime is the leading state sponsor of terrorism in the world.”

Meanwhile, leaders of Russia, Iran, and Turkey, accompanied by senior military officials, gathered at the Black Sea resort town of Sochi as part of a Kremlin effort to manage the fallout of the eight-year conflict in Syria, which has become a key regional battleground.

World news in pictures Show all 50 1 /50 World news in pictures World news in pictures 30 September 2020 Pope Francis prays with priests at the end of a limited public audience at the San Damaso courtyard in The Vatican AFP via Getty World news in pictures 29 September 2020 A girl's silhouette is seen from behind a fabric in a tent along a beach by Beit Lahia in the northern Gaza Strip AFP via Getty World news in pictures 28 September 2020 A Chinese woman takes a photo of herself in front of a flower display dedicated to frontline health care workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in Beijing, China. China will celebrate national day marking the founding of the People's Republic of China on October 1st Getty World news in pictures 27 September 2020 The Glass Mountain Inn burns as the Glass Fire moves through the area in St. Helena, California. The fast moving Glass fire has burned over 1,000 acres and has destroyed homes Getty World news in pictures 26 September 2020 A villager along with a child offers prayers next to a carcass of a wild elephant that officials say was electrocuted in Rani Reserve Forest on the outskirts of Guwahati, India AFP via Getty World news in pictures 25 September 2020 The casket of late Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg is seen in Statuary Hall in the US Capitol to lie in state in Washington, DC AFP via Getty World news in pictures 24 September 2020 An anti-government protester holds up an image of a pro-democracy commemorative plaque at a rally outside Thailand's parliament in Bangkok, as activists gathered to demand a new constitution AFP via Getty World news in pictures 23 September 2020 A whale stranded on a beach in Macquarie Harbour on the rugged west coast of Tasmania, as hundreds of pilot whales have died in a mass stranding in southern Australia despite efforts to save them, with rescuers racing to free a few dozen survivors The Mercury/AFP via Getty World news in pictures 22 September 2020 State civil employee candidates wearing face masks and shields take a test in Surabaya AFP via Getty World news in pictures 21 September 2020 A man sweeps at the Taj Mahal monument on the day of its reopening after being closed for more than six months due to the coronavirus pandemic AP World news in pictures 20 September 2020 A deer looks for food in a burnt area, caused by the Bobcat fire, in Pearblossom, California EPA World news in pictures 19 September 2020 Anti-government protesters hold their mobile phones aloft as they take part in a pro-democracy rally in Bangkok. Tens of thousands of pro-democracy protesters massed close to Thailand's royal palace, in a huge rally calling for PM Prayut Chan-O-Cha to step down and demanding reforms to the monarchy AFP via Getty World news in pictures 18 September 2020 Supporters of Iraqi Shi'ite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr maintain social distancing as they attend Friday prayers after the coronavirus disease restrictions were eased, in Kufa mosque, near Najaf, Iraq Reuters World news in pictures 17 September 2020 A protester climbs on The Triumph of the Republic at 'the Place de la Nation' as thousands of protesters take part in a demonstration during a national day strike called by labor unions asking for better salary and against jobs cut in Paris, France EPA World news in pictures 16 September 2020 A fire raging near the Lazzaretto of Ancona in Italy. The huge blaze broke out overnight at the port of Ancona. Firefighters have brought the fire under control but they expected to keep working through the day EPA World news in pictures 15 September 2020 Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny posing for a selfie with his family at Berlin's Charite hospital. In an Instagram post he said he could now breathe independently following his suspected poisoning last month Alexei Navalny/Instagram/AFP World news in pictures 14 September 2020 Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga, former Defense Minister Shigeru Ishiba and former Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida celebrate after Suga was elected as new head of the ruling party at the Liberal Democratic Party's leadership election in Tokyo Reuters World news in pictures 13 September 2020 A man stands behind a burning barricade during the fifth straight day of protests against police brutality in Bogota AFP via Getty World news in pictures 12 September 2020 Police officers block and detain protesters during an opposition rally to protest the official presidential election results in Minsk, Belarus. Daily protests calling for the authoritarian president's resignation are now in their second month AP World news in pictures 11 September 2020 Members of 'Omnium Cultural' celebrate the 20th 'Festa per la llibertat' ('Fiesta for the freedom') to mark the Day of Catalonia in Barcelona. Omnion Cultural fights for the independence of Catalonia EPA World news in pictures 10 September 2020 The Moria refugee camp, two days after Greece's biggest migrant camp, was destroyed by fire. Thousands of asylum seekers on the island of Lesbos are now homeless AFP via Getty World news in pictures 9 September 2020 Pope Francis takes off his face mask as he arrives by car to hold a limited public audience at the San Damaso courtyard in The Vatican AFP via Getty World news in pictures 8 September 2020 A home is engulfed in flames during the "Creek Fire" in the Tollhouse area of California AFP via Getty World news in pictures 7 September 2020 A couple take photos along a sea wall of the waves brought by Typhoon Haishen in the eastern port city of Sokcho AFP via Getty World news in pictures 6 September 2020 Novak Djokovic and a tournament official tends to a linesperson who was struck with a ball by Djokovic during his match against Pablo Carreno Busta at the US Open USA Today Sports/Reuters World news in pictures 5 September 2020 Protesters confront police at the Shrine of Remembrance in Melbourne, Australia, during an anti-lockdown rally AFP via Getty World news in pictures 4 September 2020 A woman looks on from a rooftop as rescue workers dig through the rubble of a damaged building in Beirut. A search began for possible survivors after a scanner detected a pulse one month after the mega-blast at the adjacent port AFP via Getty World news in pictures 3 September 2020 A full moon next to the Virgen del Panecillo statue in Quito, Ecuador EPA World news in pictures 2 September 2020 A Palestinian woman reacts as Israeli forces demolish her animal shed near Hebron in the Israeli-occupied West Bank Reuters World news in pictures 1 September 2020 Students protest against presidential elections results in Minsk TUT.BY/AFP via Getty World news in pictures 31 August 2020 The pack rides during the 3rd stage of the Tour de France between Nice and Sisteron AFP via Getty World news in pictures 30 August 2020 Law enforcement officers block a street during a rally of opposition supporters protesting against presidential election results in Minsk, Belarus Reuters World news in pictures 29 August 2020 A woman holding a placard reading "Stop Censorship - Yes to the Freedom of Expression" shouts in a megaphone during a protest against the mandatory wearing of face masks in Paris. Masks, which were already compulsory on public transport, in enclosed public spaces, and outdoors in Paris in certain high-congestion areas around tourist sites, were made mandatory outdoors citywide on August 28 to fight the rising coronavirus infections AFP via Getty World news in pictures 28 August 2020 Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe bows to the national flag at the start of a press conference at the prime minister official residence in Tokyo. Abe announced he will resign over health problems, in a bombshell development that kicks off a leadership contest in the world's third-largest economy AFP via Getty World news in pictures 27 August 2020 Residents take cover behind a tree trunk from rubber bullets fired by South African Police Service (SAPS) in Eldorado Park, near Johannesburg, during a protest by community members after a 16-year old boy was reported dead AFP via Getty World news in pictures 26 August 2020 People scatter rose petals on a statue of Mother Teresa marking her 110th birth anniversary in Ahmedabad AFP via Getty World news in pictures 25 August 2020 An aerial view shows beach-goers standing on salt formations in the Dead Sea near Ein Bokeq, Israel Reuters World news in pictures 24 August 2020 Health workers use a fingertip pulse oximeter and check the body temperature of a fisherwoman inside the Dharavi slum during a door-to-door Covid-19 coronavirus screening in Mumbai AFP via Getty World news in pictures 23 August 2020 People carry an idol of the Hindu god Ganesh, the deity of prosperity, to immerse it off the coast of the Arabian sea during the Ganesh Chaturthi festival in Mumbai, India Reuters World news in pictures 22 August 2020 Firefighters watch as flames from the LNU Lightning Complex fires approach a home in Napa County, California AP World news in pictures 21 August 2020 Members of the Israeli security forces arrest a Palestinian demonstrator during a rally to protest against Israel's plan to annex parts of the occupied West Bank AFP via Getty World news in pictures 20 August 2020 A man pushes his bicycle through a deserted road after prohibitory orders were imposed by district officials for a week to contain the spread of the Covid-19 in Kathmandu AFP via Getty World news in pictures 19 August 2020 A car burns while parked at a residence in Vacaville, California. Dozens of fires are burning out of control throughout Northern California as fire resources are spread thin AFP via Getty World news in pictures 18 August 2020 Students use their mobile phones as flashlights at an anti-government rally at Mahidol University in Nakhon Pathom. Thailand has seen near-daily protests in recent weeks by students demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Prayut Chan-O-Cha AFP via Getty World news in pictures 17 August 2020 Members of the Kayapo tribe block the BR163 highway during a protest outside Novo Progresso in Para state, Brazil. Indigenous protesters blocked a major transamazonian highway to protest against the lack of governmental support during the COVID-19 novel coronavirus pandemic and illegal deforestation in and around their territories AFP via Getty World news in pictures 16 August 2020 Lightning forks over the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge as a storm passes over Oakland AP World news in pictures 15 August 2020 Belarus opposition supporters gather near the Pushkinskaya metro station where Alexander Taraikovsky, a 34-year-old protester died on August 10, during their protest rally in central Minsk AFP via Getty World news in pictures 14 August 2020 AlphaTauri's driver Daniil Kvyat takes part in the second practice session at the Circuit de Catalunya in Montmelo near Barcelona ahead of the Spanish F1 Grand Prix AFP via Getty World news in pictures 13 August 2020 Soldiers of the Brazilian Armed Forces during a disinfection of the Christ The Redeemer statue at the Corcovado mountain prior to the opening of the touristic attraction in Rio AFP via Getty World news in pictures 12 August 2020 Young elephant bulls tussle playfully on World Elephant Day at the Amboseli National Park in Kenya AFP via Getty

“It’s like before the First World War or Second World War and you had two camps, you had two alliances,” said Robert Czulda, a professor of Middle Eastern Politics at the University of Lodz, Poland.

“Here in Warsaw, it’s not a peace conference. This is about building an alliance. It’s also very important for Russia to show the world that its also the leader of its own camp.”

Brian Hook, a special envoy for Iran policy at the State Department, speaking on the sidelines of the Warsaw conference, dismissed the Sochi conference, and hailed the unity of the US-led meeting. “It is not a parallel process,” he said. “We invited Russia and I think this was a missed opportunity for them.”

Both loose coalitions are riddled with deep disagreements and potentially explosive divisions.

Thursday’s summit in Sochi marks the fourth time the Russia-Iran-Turkey troika meet to discuss the future of Syria, and the first since the US announced its intention to withdraw from the region.

While Russia’s Vladimir Putin, Iran’s Hassan Rouhani, and Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdogan all came to together to discuss Syria’s future, they disagree on all three major topics on the agenda. The US withdrawal has exposed a particular difference of opinion in the troika over the future of Syria’s northeastern territories, currently controlled by Kurdish and US forces.

Here in Warsaw, it’s not a peace conference. This is about building an alliance. It’s also very important for Russia to show the world that its also the leader of its own camp Robert Czulda, Middle East professor

Ankara, which sees Kurdish forces as a security threat, has its own military plans for the region. Earlier this week, Mr Erdogan offered an ultimatum to Kurdish forces to leave within a few weeks. But his position suits neither Moscow nor Tehran.

Speaking last Friday, Russia’s deputy foreign minister Sergei Vershinin urged the need to avoid “destabilisation and chaos” following the US withdrawal.

On Monday, Russia’s defence minister Sergei Shoigu travelled to Ankara hoping to resolve differences, but The Independent understands the visit failed to produce real movement in positions.

Ankara is also fundamentally at odds with Moscow and Tehran over the future of northwest Syria, currently under the control of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, a jihadist group tha once allied with Al-Qaeda.

Turkey also disagrees with Iran over the future leadership in Damascus, with Ankara seeking a transition away from President Bashar al-Assad and Tehran and Moscow standing firmly behind the regime of Bashar al-Assad.

While Russia sees the pending withdrawal of US troops as a cause for consolidating its grip over Damascus, Iran also sees it as a way to push its influence westward, and position weaponry and allied personnel against Israel.

Recommended The last days of the caliphate loom as Isis nears defeat in Syria

If the talks are to claim any progress, it will likely be on membership of the proposed UN-brokered post-war constitutional committee, said Yuri Barmin, an expert at the Russian International Affairs Council.

“Given the difficulties elsewhere, Moscow is keen to get names on paper,” he said.

Regardless of what happens there, Russia will use Sochi to emphasise its role as a regional dealmaker, and the only global power able to contain Iran.

“The Poland summit might provide good media coverage and weird comments from Netanyahu,” said Mr Barmin. “But it is objectively a weak event, given the absence of Turkey and Iran, and the fact that it’s Moscow that’s talking to them.”

The US-led alliance is also riddled with contradictions and conflicting agendas.

“Both conferences seem to be in trouble,” said Aaron Stein, director of the Middle East at the Foreign Policy Research Institute.

“Warsaw is a conference without an agenda. And when you don’t have an agenda it means you don’t have agreement. And when you don’t have agreement you don’t have the diplomatic ‘umph’ to achieve objectives. Sochi has a common agenda to solve the Syrian civil war but there’s disagreement about the agenda items.”

Warsaw is a conference without an agenda. And when you don’t have an agenda it means you don’t have agreement Aaron Stein, director of Middle East at Foreign Policy Research Institute

Poland’s foreign ministry boasted that more than 60 countries sent representatives. But many European countries sent junior diplomats or civil servants who served as the equivalent of note-takers. The conference was shrouded in secrecy, and no list of participants was made available, though the Arabian Peninsula states all sent their foreign ministers.

Mr Pence demanded that European countries abandon the 2015 nuclear deal penned with Iran by former US president Barack Obama and other world powers, and condemned the recent announcement of an EU financial mechanism for continuing trade with the Islamic Republic. But even Polish officials hosting the event, in hopes of securing a permanent US military base, voiced support for the nuclear deal.

While the US keeps saying that Iran is the key to stability and peace in the Middle East, many of Washington’s longtime allies adopt a far more nuanced stance about both Tehran and the region.

But while Mr Pence’s speech contained a number of claims that Iran’s support for the regime in Syria may implicate it morally in the humanitarian disaster that has befallen the country, the facts on the ground show that the humanitarian crises in Iraq and Yemen are largely the result of military operations by the US and its staunchest allies.

The US itself is badly divided on Middle East policy. Just hours before Mr Pence blamed Iran for the crisis in Yemen, US Congress voted to strip American support for the Saudi-led offensive against Iranian-backed Houthi fighters in control of the capital of the Arabian Peninsula nation.

Many scholars and diplomats have also questioned the coherence of US policy. The Trump administration says it wants to confront Iran even as it touts its withdrawals from Syria and Afghanistan. Meanwhile Iranian-backed forces, including well-trained and battle-hardened Lebanese Hezbollah, remain in place.

Though the US is pursuing tightened sanctions on Iran and international companies, Russia, China, and Iraq – key economic access points for Iran – all rejected invitations to the conference.

Though Mr Netanyahu’s meetings with Arab foreign ministers was touted as historic, commentators in Israel described the summit as little more than a photo-op for scandal-ridden prime minister to adorn his campaign posters ahead of general elections in March.

In another perhaps inadvertent sign of criss-crossing agendas, Saudi Arabia reportedly placed an embargo on Poland’s meat exports, just as the summit got underway, sparking an outcry among Poles.
