Karnataka assembly passes budget amid BJP ruckus, adjourned sine die

Bengaluru, Feb 14 : The Karnataka Assembly on Thursday passed the budget for 2019-20 amid ruckus by the opposition BJP over an attack on its legislator's house at Hassan, allegedly by workers of the ruling Janata Dal-Secular (JD-S) on Wednesday.

"Sensing no let-up in the disruption of the proceedings by BJP legislators, Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy moved the finance bill for the approval of the assembly by voice vote on the direction of Speaker K.R. Ramesh Kumar without debate," a senior official told IANS.

Kumaraswamy, who holds the finance portfolio, presented the budget on February 8 amid walkout by the BJP members on the grounds that the ruling JD-S-Congress government had lost "majority" as a few Congress legislators skipped the session last week.

The chief minister on Thursday also got the approval of the house for the Karnataka Appropriation Bill 2019 for vote on account, supplementary estimates and the motion of thanks to the Governor's address, added the official.

The vote-on-account will allow the state government to draw money for expenditure till July 31.

With the budget being passed, the Speaker adjourned the house sine die ahead of its concluding day on Friday, as there was no pending business, the official said.

With the BJP disrupting the session since Monday to protest a Special Investigation Team probe into the audio tape which allegedly revealing an attempt by BJP leader B.S. Yeddyurappa to lure away JD-S legislator Naganagouda Kandkur to his party and the JD-S attack on its legislator Preetham Gowda's house at Hassan, the assembly could not even debate the address by Governor Vajubhai Vala to a joint sitting of the legislature on February 6.

Protesting the budget passage without discussion, about 100 odd BJP members staged a walkout before the Speaker adjourned the session first till 3 p.m. and for the day.

Earlier in the day, a BJP delegation led by Yeddyurappa called on the Governor at Raj Bhavan and submitted a letter against the state government and the ruling JD-S for not acting against its workers who attacked its MLA's house at Hassan.

The JD-S workers were said to be enraged over Preetham Gowda's abusive remarks against their supremo H.D. Deve Gowda and Kumaraswamy that were also recorded in the audio tape. Hassan is the Deve Gowda clan's home district and he is the sitting MP from there.

Yeddyurappa urged the Speaker to hold an inquiry into the attack and Ramesh Kumar has directed the state government to give protection to Preetham Gowda and his family and ensure safety of their house and property.
