Don't know if Left will come with us, we didn't talk: Mamata Banerjee

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said Thursday that she has not spoken to the Left parties about an alliance in Bengal, amid speculations that the CPI(M) and the Congress were heading for a tactical tie-up in the state ahead of the polls.

Banerjee, who has been in Delhi for the past two days, has held a series of meetings with opposition leaders, strategising ways to create an united front to fight the BJP at the national level.

"I do not know whether the Left will come with us or not. We didn't talk," she told reporters here when asked if she would tie up with her arch-rival in the state to thwart the BJP.

She said she was used to fighting an united Congress and Left in Bengal.

CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury has virtually ruled out his party being part of any "mahagathbandhan".

Even at the AAP rally on Wednesday, the Left leaders had vacated the stage upon Banerjee's arrival indicating that they were not keen on any strategic alliance in Bengal with the TMC, which has been its traditional rival in the state.

In an apparent reference to the Left, Banerjee said she respected the decisions of those political parties which have not gone for pre-poll alliances.

"There are political compulsions in states. At the national level we must go for pre- poll alliances so that after elections we can claim to form the government... However, the parties which cannot take a decisions on pre-poll alliances, its okay, I respect that they have political compulsions," she said.

In April 2018, at the CPI(M)'s Party Congress, the party had stated that its "aim would be to maximise the pooling of anti-BJP, anti-TMC votes" during the upcoming elections.

Banerjee, who made a courtesy visit to Rashtrapati Bhavan earlier, also said it was wrong to ask her about being the prime ministerial face of the alliance, adding that all the leaders of opposition parties were qualified to lead the country.

Reacting to a query on the Bengal government denying BJP leaders to hold rallies in the state, Banerjee said they were "liars".

"They are lying about us not allowing them to carry on rallies. He (Amit Shah) had swine flu, discharged himself from hospital and still had a rally. They are liars," she said.

Speaking on the BJP's chances in Bengal, the Trinamool Congress chief said the saffron party now has two seats and after the polls it will go down to "zero".

"BJP won't get even one seat in Bengal...they will get zero. Let both (Modi and Shah) contest elections in Bengal, they will lose," she said.

Banerjee said she will visit Delhi against at the end of this month for another round of parleys with opposition leaders.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
