Sabarimala violence sponsored by Left govt in Kerala, says BJP

GVL Narasimha Rao, BJP spokesperson | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The Bharatiya Janata Party on Saturday blamed the Kerala government for the violence and protests that broke out around the Sabarimala Temple in Kerala. BJP spokesperson GVL Narasimha Rao said that the violence that is taking place in the southern state is sponsored by the Pinarayi Vijayan government.

The saffron party asserted that the violence happening in the state because of the Sabarimala row is backed by the Left Democratic Front (LDF) party in Kerala.

Violent protests have broken out in Kerala after two women of menstruating age were allowed to enter the sanctum sanctorum of Lord Ayyappa's temple at Sabarimala. One person has died while several people have been hurt in the protests.

The BJP said that the Kerala government has not handled the issue sensibly and that the way it has handled, the issue has created a storm of violence and protests which does not appear to calm down any sooner.

"All this has been done by the CPI(M) goons with the full authority and support of the state government. The CPI(M) has a history of unleashing violence against the RSS-BJP cadre, but today, they are not even sparing the devotees," Rao said, as per PTI.

A bomb was thrown at the home of a BJP MP on Friday and a devotee was also killed two days ago in the protests.

Rao further said that devotees were holding peaceful protests to protect the age-old traditions of the Hindu religion and society. He said that the Sabarimala issue is not political in nature but is a religious one.

The Supreme Court had lifted the ban on the entry of women of menstrual age (10-50 years) on September 28 last year. Despite the apex court's ruling, a string of protests took place at the Sabarimala Temple and its surrounding areas in the state, wherein several women attempted to visit the shrine but were stopped by Lord Ayyappa devotees and activists.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
