Pulwama Terror Attack: Pakistan is frustrated, says Satya Pal Malik

New Delhi:

Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik has attacked Pakistan for the terror attack in the Pulwama district. Earlier, Pakistan had denied any role in the attack. “Pakistan is talking nonsense. The terrorists are holding open rallies in Pakistan, saying we will do something and openly threatening India,” Satya Pal Malik said. "Stone pelting has stopped, so it wanted to do something. We have alerted all installations and cantonments as Pakistan may do something else,” he said. At least 42 CRPF personnel were killed on Thursday in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir when a Jaish suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 350 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district that also left many critically wounded.



ALSO READ | Pulwama Terror Attack: 5 questions Modi govt must answer on biggest intelligence disaster

Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh will be arriving in Jammu and Kashmir today. “I will be leaving for the wreath laying ceremony of the martyrs in Kashmir. We will hold a review meeting with top security and intelligence officials. We will find out where the lapses occurred,” Satya Pal Malik said.



Reports suggest that there were nearly 70 vehicles in the convoy in which around 2500 personnel were traveling. "Senior officers at the spot, the investigation is underway. Injured being taken care of. There were 2500 personnel in the convoy," CRPF DG RR Bhatnagar had said.



"The governor has urged all commanders of security forces to enhance surveillance on every front and directed the district and divisional civil and police administration to immediately review the security of all important installations and establishments,” an official spokesman said.



ALSO READ | Pulwama Terror Attack: Know about Jaish-e-Mohammed's chief Maulana Masood Azhar



Malik has expressed sympathy to the families of the soldiers who lost their lives and prayed for the speedy recovery of all the injured persons.



The terror attack has drawn international condemnation. Countries from across the globe condemned the attack with nations such as the US, Russia and France asserting that they stand with India.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
