Thermo Fisher Scientific participates in campaign against 'Hunger in India'

Hyderabad (Telangana) [India], Feb 15 (ANI): Thermo Fisher Scientific, a leader in serving science, participated in a event to demonstrate its commitment to Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) by packing 3,00,000 meals to serve the underprivileged in India in Hyderabad on Wednesday.

The event witnessed the participation of more than 900 employees from Thermo Fisher was organised. Thirteen other NGOs were beneficiaries of this event.

The team members of Thermo Fisher helped in packaging meals. The compressed meal packets incorporated 500 grams of uncooked rice and lentils, enough to feed a family of six. The distribution teams were deployed at Leonia Holistic Destination, Hyderabad and served about 25 tons of rice and lentils in the form of meal packages.

The company engaged with a leading NGO, Rise Against Hunger, an organisation dedicated to eradicating hunger by providing food and aid to the world’s most vulnerable people and creating a global commitment to mobilise necessary resources.

“Thermo Fisher Scientific is committed to contributing to a healthier India by ensuring a nutritious and unadulterated food supply to every Indian. I congratulate the entire team of Thermo Fisher Scientific who participated in this initiative which further demonstrates our core objectives and commitment to benefit society in multiple ways,’’ said Amit Chopra, Managing Director and VP/GM, India and the Middle East, Thermo Fisher Scientific.

Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. is the world leader in serving science, with revenues of more than USD 24 billion and approximately 70,000 employees globally. Their mission is to enable the customers to make the world healthier, cleaner and safer. It provides aid to customers accelerate life sciences research, solves complex analytical challenges, improves patient diagnostics, delivers medicines to market and increases laboratory productivity.

Through their premier brands – Thermo Scientific, Applied Biosystems, Invitrogen, Fisher Scientific and Unity Lab Services – they offer an unmatched combination of innovative technologies, purchasing convenience and comprehensive services.

The Global Hunger Index of the year 2017 puts India at 100 on a list of 110 countries on the basis of following parameters- the prevalence of wasting and stunting in children under 5 years, under 5 child mortality rates, and the proportion of undernourished in the population.

As per the official estimates by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, about 195.9 million people are undernourished in India. This equates to about 14.8 per cent of the population of India is malnourished. (ANI)
