Pulwama terror attack: Martyrs' families cry revenge, protesters reach Pak embassy

Grief and rage has overtaken the martyrs' families in the wake of the Pulwama attack. (Photo: India Today)

As India seethes in anger over the deaths of 40 CRPF jawans in Pulwama district of Kashmir yesterday when explosive-laden SUV rammed into one of the buses out of a 70-vehicle convoy, grief, rage have overtaken martyrs' families.

In the national capital, meanwhile, members of a group that calls itself Swabhiman Desh Ka are protesting outside the Pakistan Embassy, demanding strong action against the neighbouring nation.

Earlier in the day, members of the Hindu United Front who were protesting at Jantar Mantar were taken away from the spot by Delhi police personnel.

Far away from media glare, in Chakkashi Rajbangshipara village of Howrah district of West Bengal, the family of Bablu Santra tries to come to terms with his death in the horrific suicide bombing on Thursday. They demand that the killing be avenged and perpetrators taught a lesson they don't forget.

"We want the killing of 'mama' (maternal uncle) and others who died with him avenged. Those behind the cowardly attack must be taught a lesson they don't forget," the martyred jawan's nephew Raghubir Mondal said on Friday. Raghuvir Modal said his uncle often encouraged to join the force to serve the nation.

He said Santra asked him to prepare for the test to join the central paramilitary force even when he came home on leave a month-and-half back.

Santra is survived by his wife, a four-year-old daughter and mother.

Raghubir Mondal said the family first received a phone call from the CRPF that Santra was injured in the attack that killed 40 of the force's personnel. The 38-year-old jawan succumbed hours later.

Santra had joined the CRPF in 2000 when he was a first year student at Uluberia College, his nephew said.

In Uttar Pradesh's Deoria, the native place of 30-year-old CRPF jawan Vijay Kumar Maurya who was killed in the Pulwama terror attack, a proud father seeks a befitting reply to Pakistan.

Vijay Maurya joined the paramilitary force nine years ago and got married in 2014. He is survived by wife and a one-and-a-half-year-old daughter. He was home on February 2 on vacation and left for Jammu only on February 9.

"I am proud that my son gave up his life for the nation but Government should give a befitting reply to Pakistan as soon as possible. The action should be so strong that Pakistan dare not enter our territory and kill our soldiers ever again, Vijay's father Ramayan Maurya said.

Vijay Maurya's inconsolable wife said, "I lost my husband and my daughter lost her father. Whenever such incidents take place a lot of people express their emotions but after 4-5 days everything becomes normal and Government never does anything.

The family came to know of the attack from Vijay's cousin Rajesh Maurya, who is posted as DSP, CRPF in Jammu and Kashmir, Ramayan Maurya said.

The entire village is angry over the terror attack and is raising slogans against Pakistan. Hundreds of people are gathered outside the martyr's house since early Friday morning.

A huge number of youth of the village with tricolour in hand also demanded that Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath visit the village and family.

As India awaits a strong response to Pulwama attack, all eyes are on Modi government's next move.
