Prayagraj Ardh Kumbh Mela 2019: Important dates, how to reach, where to stay - All you need to know

A saint takes a dip in the holy waters at Kumbh Mela I Photo credit: kumbh.gov.in | Photo Credit: Twitter

Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh: Kumbh Mela which is touted as the largest congregation of humanity in the world and a collective act of faith, will be held in Prayagraj (formerly Allahabad) over a course of 48 days during January 15 to March 4. During the festival, tens of millions of people, primarily Hindus, bathe at the confluence of the Ganga, the Yamuna and Sarasvati.

Hindus believe performing the bathing ritual in the water considered holy will purge them of all sins and release themselves and their ancestors from the cycle of rebirth and attainment of Moksha.

Other than religion, the festival is also famous for providing the revellers with some great spectacles of the grand rituals held by various saints and their disciples as members of various Akharas or religious orders that take part in the ritual of Shahi Snan – also the main highlight of the event. People are allowed to bathe in the waters only after Shahi snan is complete.

Kumbh Mela 2019 Map

Prayagraj Ardh Kumbh Mela 2019: Important dates

Although bathing in sacred waters is considered holy on all days during the Kumbh, however, there are certain days which hold special relevance:

Makar Sankranti on January 15: This day marks the beginning of donations at Kumbh Mela. This day marks the entry of the Sun in its next astronomical position as per the Hindu calendar.

Paush Purnima on 21 January: This day marks the unofficial beginning of Kumbh Mela. It is the 15th day in the month of Shukla Paksh of the Hindu calendar month Paush. Poornima refers to the rise of full moon.

Mauni Amavasya: Maximum Kumbh Mela visitors take the holy dip on this day as on this date the planetary positions are considered to be the most favourable for bathing in the holy river. According to Hindu mythology, Rishabh Dev, considered as the first sage, broke his long vow of silence and bathed in the holy waters at Sangam.

Basant Panchami: As per Mythology, this day marks the arrival of Goddess of Knowledge Saraswati. Many people including Kalpavasis wear yellow colored clothes this day to mark the importance of Basant Panchami.

Maghi Purnima: This day draws a large number of believers to the holy banks owing to the belief that they will be guided to heaven in their heavenly form. The day is marked for the Hindu belief that Hindu god Gandharva travels from the heavens to Sangam.

Mahashivratri: This day holds special significance for the believers of Lord Shankar. The day is symbolic of the last holy bath of the Kalpvasis. As per mythology, this day is awaited in the heavens as well.

How to travel

Air

Meanwhile, the government has made special arrangements to make the journey and stay at the festival hassle-free for believers with the national carrier Air India announcing new flights to Prayagraj from Delhi, Ahmedabad, and Kolkata. The new flights will operate from January 13 to March 30.

Train

Prayagraj is well-connected to all major railway stations in the country. However, major railway stations in and around the city are: Allahabad Chheoki (ACOI), Naini Junction (NYN), Allahabad Junction (ALD), Phaphamau Junction (PFM), Subedarganj (SFG), Allahabad City (ALY), Daraganj (DRGJ), Jhusi (JI), Prayag Ghat (PYG), Prayag Junction (PRG)

Train reservations can be made through IRCTC website and the government has even launched an app (RailKumbh App) to make train reservations to Kumbh Mela 2019.

Accommodation

The government has set up tent cities to accommodate the millions that will travel to Ardh Kumbh Mela 2019. The Kumbh website lists some of cities and here's how you can reserve a spot:

Tent City Name Website Url Phone No Email Kalpa Vriksh www.kalpavriksh.in +91 9415247600 lallooji@gmail.com Kumbh Canvas www.kumbhcanvas.com +91 63889-33340 enquiry@kumbhcanvas.com Vedic Tent City www.kumbhtent.com +91 99099 00776, +91 99099 00778 inquiryvedic@gmail.com

Preparations

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath in Prayagraj on Saturday said he reviewed the security arrangements of Ardh Kumbh Mela 2019, adding, an Integrated Command Centre has been established there to monitor the proceedings.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
