Pulwama terror attack: India mourns its martyrs, PM Modi and Rahul Gandhi pay tribute

PM Modi has asked all his ministers and BJP MPs to attend the funeral of jawans killed in the attack in their respective states.

With his hands folded and head bowed, Prime Minister Narendra Modi walked around 40 coffins draped in tricolour on Friday evening as he led the nation in paying last respects to the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel killed in the Pulwama terror attack.

An operative of the JeM group -- Adil Ahmad Dar -- crashed a car bomb into a convoy of the CRPF in Pulwama district on the Srinagar-Jammu Highway on Thursday, making it the worst ever attack on security forces on any single day since a separatist campaign broke out in Jammu and Kashmir in 1989.

Initial probe revealed that RDX wasn't used in the Pulwama attack. A very fine quality of Urea Ammonium Nitrate was used in the IED blast in Pulwama. The chemical substance is commonly used in stone quarries in Kashmir.

The bodies of the slain troopers reached Delhi's Palam air force area in a special Indian Air Force (IAF) plane in the evening. The bodies were received by Home Minister Rajnath Singh. Decorated with white floral arrangements, 40 coffins wrapped in tricolour were neatly arranged in the hangar, where senior officials of the CRPF laid wreaths one by one in a solemn ceremony.

National Security Advisor Ajit Doval, Congress president Rahul Gandhi, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, the chiefs of the three services -- Army, Air Force and Navy -- and senior cabinet ministers, including Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, also paid their homage to the slain CRPF personnel.

We stand with bereaved families, PM Modi says

"We salute you, brave sons of Mother India. You lived for the nation and served the country with unparalleled valour. We stand in solidarity with the bereaved families," PM Modi tweeted.

PM Modi has also asked all his ministers and BJP MPs to attend the funeral of jawans killed in the attack in their respective states. As per schedule, Rajnath Singh will be present in Uttar Pradesh, Ravi Shankar Prasad in Bihar, Nirmala Sitharaman will visit Tamil Nadu and Kerala, Col Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore in Rajasthan and Harsimrat Kaur Badal in Punjab.

Indo-Pak relations worsen

The attack further damaged the already tense India-Pakistan diplomatic relations, with New Delhi saying it had evidence of Islamabad's involvement in the carnage. It also withdrew the Most Favoured Nation trade status it had granted to Pakistan in 1996 under the World Trade Organisation rules.

However, Pakistan dismissed accusations that it has links with the militants who carried out the attack. "We strongly reject any insinuation by elements in the Indian government and media circles that seek to link the attack to the State of Pakistan without investigations," said the country's Foreign Ministry in a statement.

Govt may withdraw security to Hurriyat leaders

In a veiled reference to separatists, including Hurriyat Conference leaders, Rajnath Singh on Friday told reporters that the security given to people getting funds from Pakistan and its ISI should be reviewed.

"There are elements and forces who take money from Pakistan and the ISI. I have asked the officials concerned to review their security," he said at the end of his day-long visit to Kashmir.

World condemns Kashmir attack

The international community strongly condemned the terror attack, with US President Donald Trump asking Pakistan to "end immediately" the support and safe haven provided to all terrorist groups operating on its soil.

"The US calls on Pakistan to end immediately the support and safe haven provided to all terrorist groups operating on its soil, whose only goal is to sow chaos, violence and terror in the region. This attack only strengthens our resolve to bolster counter-terrorism cooperation and coordination between the US and India," Trump's Press Secretary Sarah Sanders said in a statement.

"We express our deep condolences to the victims' families, the Indian government and the Indian people for the loss of life in this brutal attack," the statement added.

United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo also tweeted to show solidarity with India.

"The U.S. condemns yesterday’s horrific terror attack on Indian security forces. My thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their families. We stand with #India as it confronts terrorism. Pakistan must not provide safe haven for terrorists to threaten international security," he posted.

The U.S. condemns yesterday’s horrific terror attack on Indian security forces. My thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their families. We stand with #India as it confronts terrorism. Pakistan must not provide safe haven for terrorists to threaten international security. Secretary Pompeo (@SecPompeo) February 15, 2019





China's Foreign Ministry also denounced the attack, hoping that "relevant regional countries will cooperate to cope with the threat of terrorism and jointly uphold regional peace and stability".

It added that the "JeM has been included in the UN Security Council terrorism sanctions list and that China will continue to handle the relevant sanctions issue in a constructive and responsible manner".

Afghanistan's President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah stressed the "need for solidarity and closer cooperation of countries in the fight against this common enemy".

"Terrorism is a cancer in the region and it requires collective efforts to root it out," Ghani said.

Russian President Vladimir Putin, in a message to Prime Minister Narendra Modi strongly condemned the "brutal crime" and said that "the perpetrators and sponsors of the attack, undoubtedly, should be duly punished".

Putin reiterated Moscow's "readiness for further strengthening counter-terrorist cooperation with Indian partners".

The European Union in a statement said that "as a strategic partner of India, the EU reaffirms its full solidarity at such a difficult moment".

Saudi Arabia also denounced the "cowardly" attack and said it stands with India against terrorism and extremism.

Canadian Foreign Minister Chrystia Freeland said her country "remains steadfast in its support of the global fight against terrorism," reaffirming a resolve "to prevent radicalization and defeat terrorism in all its forms".

Indonesia and Australia also slammed the strike.

Protests in Delhi, bandh in Jammu

Hundreds of people from all walks of life gathered at India Gate and Jantar Mantar to hold candle light marches to express solidarity with the families of the CRPF jawans.

Some members of the Youth Congress were detained as they attempted to march towards the Pakistan High Commission to protest against the audacious attack in south Kashmir that left at least 40 jawans dead.

From students to politicians, members of social organisations to the common folk, the crowd gathered at the two venues demanded adequate compensation for the families of the dead soldiers and that Pakistan be given a "befitting reply".

There was also a protest outside the Palam technical area where the bodies of the 40 CRPF personnel were flown down from Srinagar to Delhi.

Around 100 Indian Youth Congress (IYC) members assembled at Teen Murti Marg and raised slogans against Pakistan.

At least 15 people who protested outside the Pakistan High Commission here courted arrested but were let off later.

A curfew was imposed and a total shutdown was observed in Jammu city on Friday and the Army conducted flag marches in sensitive areas following massive protests and incidents of stone-pelting and arson over the Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF jawans were killed.

Internet was shutdown in Jammu as a precautionary measure, officials told PTI.

Most of the markets and business establishments remained shut throughout the day in Jammu. The roads wore a deserted look as there was no vehicular movement in many areas.

Defying curfew, angry people took out rallies against the attack and police had to cane charge to disperse the protestors at Residency Road, Kachi Chawani and Dogra hall areas, while a bandh was observed in the city.

(with inputs from agencies)
