Tributes paid to Pulwama martyrs at Golmuri Sahid Shthal

Tributes poured in from across the city following martyrdom of over 40 CRPF jawans in yesterday's militant attack at Pulwama district of Jammu & Kashmir. Police and political outfits as well as social organisations expressed their condolence and grief today.

Deputy superintendent of police (law and order) Alok Ranjan along with 200 policemen condoled the death of the martyr CRPF jawans at Sahid Shthal in Golmuri police line in the city, Seraikela-Kharsawan superintendent of police, Chandan Kumar Sinha condoled the martyred jawan at the CRPF's 107 battalion headquarters in Adityapur at the noon.

The police officials observed two minutes in silence as they condoled the death of the jawans at the Golmuri Sahid Shthal.

On the other hand, BJP activists raised slogans against Pakistan and the Pakistan-sponsored terrorists while marching toward Sackhi roundabout. The agitated BJP activists who were carrying party flag as well as National flag burnt Pakistan and the Islamic militants in effigy. "It is high time tough stand is taken by our country. Jaish-e-Mohammed has carried out this terror attack. The Government must undertake whatever it takes to avenge this,” an activist of BJP.

One of the party workers said, "Very painful and shameful incident. The terrorists are bred by Pakistan. We want Prime Minister Modi to attack Pakistan and teach it a lesson". He went on to add that the residents of Kashmir had been enjoying special package being provided by the India Government and now they should also be subjected to the harsh Saria rule under which a person if convicted for a theft case has to lose a hand. Then only the people of Kashmir will stop giving moral support to the militants.

Members of Muslim community after their Friday prayers staged demonstration. Raising anti-Pakistan slogans, the gathering, comprising mostly youth, asked the neighbouring country to stop supporting terror activities and giving terrorists a safe haven to launch attacks against India.

Candle light marches were also held at different of places. People took to the streets at Sonari and Sakchi and protested against the killings. Raising anti-Pakistan, anti-terrorist slogans, the protestors demanded action against Pakistan for sponsoring terrorism in the Valley.
