Pulwama attack: All-party meeting passes resolution condemning terror act

Pulwama terror attack: As the nation mourns over the loss of as many as 40 CRPF jawans in the deadliest ever terror strike against security forces an all-party meeting today be conducted in Lok Sabha. Earlier, the mortal remains of the brave-hearts were brought down to the national capital on Friday. Jammu and Kashmir Police on Friday detained seven persons in connection with the deadly terror attack. The youths were detained from Pulwama and Awantipora during the night on suspicion of links with the planning of the suicide attack,

With folded hands and head bowed, Prime Minister Narendra Modi walked around 40 coffins draped in tricolour paying last respects to soldiers killed in the Pulwama terror attack. The bodies of the slain troopers reached Delhi's Palam air force area in a special Indian Air Force (IAF) plane in the evening. The bodies were received by Home Minister Rajnath Singh. Not just political leaders but the loss of so many jawans while on duty has left tears in eyes and anger in hearts of people across the country. Prayers and condolences came from across the country for these brave soldiers as their bereaved wept openly.



PM Modi, while expressing grief on this cowardly attack by terrorists, warned those responsible for the Pulwama terror attack would pay a ‘very heavy price’ and had made a ‘big mistake’. With immense rage and anger within, PM Modi today declared that the security forces had been given a free hand to act against the terror attack and give a befitting reply.

As an immediate response, India has also revoked Most Favoured Nation (MNF) status to Pakistan after the killing of 40 CRPF jawans. Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status is given to a trade partner to ensure non-discriminatory trade between the two countries. India granted MFN status to Pakistan in 1996. After the withdrawal of MNF status to Pakistan, both the countries would not have any trade ties. Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), too, have initiated all possible diplomatic steps which are to be taken to ensure complete isolation of Pakistan in the international community. India held a briefing for envoys of 25 countries, including from P5 nations -- US, China, Russia, the UK and France -- to highlight Pakistan's role in using terrorism as an instrument of state policy.
