MG Motor India Opens India HQ In Gurugram

Demonstrating its commitment to the Indian market, carmaker MG (Morris Garages) Motor India today inaugurated its new corporate headquarters in Gurugram. The commercial space for the new India headquarters, acquired by the company at a cost of INR 150 crores, will also house the company’s flagship vehicle showroom and brand store on the ground floor of the same building to show-case its products.

Spread over 46,000 square feet, the new office will be ready in the next two months, to shift the company's Gurgaon employees to the new premises ahead of the Hector’s launch. The flagship showroom on the ground floor will be one of the firsts in the country to showcase its vehicles in the NCR region. The facility, to be operational in Q2 2019, will also exhibit the brand’s rich heritage and also house the latest MG memorabilia & accessories.

Speaking on the occasion, Rajeev Chaba, President and Managing Director – MG Motor India, said, “India is going to be a key market for the MG brand and the new HQ reflects our long-term commitment to be an integral part of the thriving Indian auto market, in addition to our Halol manufacturing facility, which was inaugurated in September 2017. With a strong foundation and best talent from the industry in our team, we are ready to go full throttle for the Hector SUV, our first launch in Q2 2019.”

The strategically chosen location in Gurugram will allow the carmaker access to the policy-makers, as well as tap into the enormous potential of the Delhi-NCR auto market, which accounts for 25% of the entire country’s car sales. The new HQ will act as the command centre for the carmaker’s operations in India and will house functions such as After Sales, Sales, Marketing, Product Planning, Dealer Development, Finance and Corporate Affairs. MG Motor India also has plans to open company-owned showrooms in key metros to underline the brand’s commitment to the Indian market, starting with Mumbai which has since been finalised.




