Mumbai marches as one for martyred soldiers

Hundred of residents and shopkeepers in Bhendi Bazar area in South Mumbai took out a protest march on Friday morning to show their solidarity with the soldiers who attained martyrdom in a terrorist attack in Pulwama district in Jammu and Kashmir.

The demonstrations saw people burning flags of Pakistan and images of its prime minister, Imran Khan.

The protest march commenced after the demonstrators observed a two-minute silence at Imam Ahmed Raza Chowk in Bhendi Bazar.

Shop owners downed theri shutters for some time in support of the peace march.

During the march, people raised their voices against terrorism and sought strict action against Pakistan, which New Delhi has said is behind the attack.

Varis Shaikh, a shopkeeper from the area, said that the residents condemn the attack in the strongest possible terms. "Those responsible for this cowardly act should be given severe punishment and their identity should be abolished permanently."

Protests were also held outside Handiwala Masjid at Saifee Jubilee Street, and near Sunni Bilal Masjid at Chhota Sonapur, South Mumbai.

The protest march had been called by Raza Academy and Ulama-e-Ahlesunnat.

Mohammed Saeed Norri, general secretary of Raza Academy, said, "The blood of soldiers killed in the attack will not go in vain. The perpetrators of this heinous crime should be brought to book at the earliest."

In Sion, around 50 doctors from the civic-run Sion Hospital organised a candle march. Dr Harshal Mahajan, a resident doctor at the faciltiy, said, "The Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors conducted a candle march to show their solidarity with the soldiers who attained martyrdom on Thursday."

"May these candles light the lamps in the hearts of those who have lost their way and provide solace to the families who have lost the light," he prayed.

In Mulund, Manoj Kotal, BJP group leader in the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation, led a protest outside the suburban railway station. Protesters in the area burnt flags of Pakistan and effigies of terror group JeM's chief Masood Azhar. Kotak said that the whole country stood as one against the attack. Hans Yuva Pratisthan in Mulund also took out a candle march and raised slogans against terrorism and Pakistan for perpetrating the attack.

Forty CRPF personnel were killed in Pulwama after a suicide bomber rammed a car laden with explosives into a bus carrying them on Thursday.
