Nation Erupts In Anger Over Pulwama Terror Attack, Pak Flags Burnt In Several Cities

Massive protests and candle march have been ensued in the country against the merciless killing of as many as 40 security personnel on Thursday in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district.

Protesters raised slogans against Pakistan and terrorists, they defied curfew to take out rallies and police had to resort to cane charge at Residency Road, Kachi Chawani and Dogra hall areas in Jammu.

The protestors burnt tyres and placed barricades on several roads. Five vehicles were set afire in Gujjar Nagar area, while there were also reports of stone pelting. Demonstrations were held in Purani Mundi, Rehari, Shaktinagar, Pacca Danga, Janipur, Gandhinagar, Bakshinagar, Muthi, Talal Tilloo and Satwari in Jammu city where Army conducted flag marches in sensitive areas.

Impromptu bandhs were called across shopping enclaves, candle marches held in residential localities, events and celebrations canceled in Mumbai.

In Pune, Murudkar Zendewale, a famous flag-seller, sold over 100 national flags of Pakistan Friday and gave a lighter free with every flag.

In South Mumbai, shops in Bhendi Bazar observed a bandh as the arterial road was filled with protestors shouting "Pakistan Murdabad". Raza Academy and Ulama-e-Ahlesunnat led demonstrations to show solidarity. Members of the Bharat Bachao Andolan assembled at the Hutatma Smarak near Azad Maidan to voice their upset.

On the eastern flank, outside Bhandup railway station Shiv Sena supporters burnt an effigy of Pakistan's prime minister Imran Khan. In Ghatkopar, MLA Ram Kadam led approximately 500 men to set the Pakistani flag afire. "We held the tricolour, not party flags, and called slogans urging prime minister Narendra Modi to launch another surgical strike against that country," Kadam said.

Many protesters converged at India Gate and Jantar Mantar in the national capital to express solidarity with the families of the martyrs. Activists of different political parties, social groups, and trader outfits joined common people during demonstrations in Lucknow and other state capitals.

In UP, demonstrations were held in Bareilly, Azamgarh, Mau, Meerut, Kanpur, Allahabad, Varanasi, and Shahjahanpur, reports reaching here said. In Gorakhpur, Samajwadi party workers burnt a Pakistani flag and an effigy of Prime Minister Imran Khan and raised slogans against the neighboring country.

A large number of youths blocked Chapra- Gorakhpur track in Deoria demanding that Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath visit the family of the local youth martyred in the attack and raised slogans against Pakistan.

Gujarat Congress organized a candle march at Sabarmati Ashram to pay respects to the slain soldiers. The Vishwa Hindu Parishad and Bajrang Dal also held protests in different parts of the states this evening. Protests were also held in Maharashtra. People gathered in Begumpura area in Aurangabad and burnt a Pakistani flag.

Civil society organizations of Arunachal Pradesh on Friday set ablaze a Pakistani flag here to protest the terrorist attack.

On February 14, a Jaish-e-Mohammad militant, Adil Ahmed Dar, drove a car packed with explosives into a convoy of the CRPF passing through Pulwama district in South Kashmir. By evening, the death toll was reported to have touched 40. This makes it the second most deadly attack in the history of the paramilitary force. With Thursday’s attack, the CRPF in Kashmir has lost more men in 2019 than in four years put together.










