Pulwama Attack: Wife Of Martyr Pradeep Singh Heard The Blast While Talking To Him On The Phone

The last phone call which made by CRPF jawan Pradeep Singh Yadav was to his wife Neeraj Devi before he was martyred in the Pulwama terror attack on February 14. He was on the phone and was talking to his wife before the suicide bomber rammed his SUV into the CRPF convoy, claiming 44 lives including him.

"I was talking to my husband on the phone when I heard a deafening sound from the other side, seconds after which there was complete silence and the call got disconnected. Sensing something untoward has happened, I made several attempts to know about his well-being, but everything was over for me," said Neeraj, a native of Ajan Sukhsenpur village in Kannauj district of Uttar Pradesh.

Twitter

Also Read: 44 Coffins Wrapped In Indian Tricolour: India Pays Tribute To Martyrs Of Pulwama Terror Attack

"I later received another phone call, this time from the CRPF control room, informing me about my husband's death in a blast," she added.

Pradeep left behind his wife and two children. His wife and children were at his wife’s mother’s place at Kanpur when they got the news of their father’s death. She rushed to her husband’s native place, Ajan Sukhsenpur, where the mortal remains of the soldier will reach today.

Twitter/Amar Ujala

Pradeep had two daughters, Supriya and Sona, aged 10 and 2 respectively. "He (Pradeep) was very fond of Sona and when he last spoke to me on Thursday, he inquired about her well-being... he spoke about her for nearly 10 minutes," said an inconsolable Neeraj.

Delhi: Visuals from outside Palam airport. The mortal remains of some CRPF jawans are now being taken to their native places. #PulwamaTerrorAttack pic.twitter.com/w7qcIWtaSW — ANI (@ANI) February 15, 2019

"A few minutes after Neeraj spoke to Pradeep, we heard her screams. She broke down after receiving the phone call from CRPF control room, which confirmed the death of Pradeep," said a family member of the deceased soldier.

"Though we are proud of the sacrifice my brother made, deep inside we are angry too," said Sonu, a maternal cousin of Pradeep. Sonu said Pradeep had last visited home earlier this month.

Also Read: Pulwama Attack: Who Will Look After Martyr Rohitash Lamba's 2-Month-Old Daughter Now?

It was for the government to decide what action should be taken against the terrorists, he said, adding, "Now, we want action and not assurances."

J&K: A candlelight march, organised by Ladakh Buddhist Association, was taken out in Leh earlier today in protest against #PulwamaAttack. pic.twitter.com/QvsA04QwA6 — ANI (@ANI) February 15, 2019

Remembering Martyr Pradeep, his school teachers said that he was a really good student and always wanted to serve the nation from a very young age.
