FNB News - Dey appointed director of operations at JW Marriott Kolkata

You can get e-magazine links on WhatsApp. Click here TOP NEWS Dey appointed director of operations at JW Marriott Kolkata Our Bureau, New Delhi Sabrina Pooja Dey has been appointed director of operations, JW Marriott Kolkata. In her current role, she will be seen effectuating strategies to support business growth, revenue generation through up selling of products and services and creation of value through designing new products.



Ensuring strict compliance with quality, safety, environment and health standards, her focus will be on demonstrating creativity in conceptualising and executing unique guest experiences.



In a career spanning over 12 years, Dey has sought to enhance customer satisfaction and maintain the standards of the establishments she has been associated with.



Having graduated from St. Xaviers College, Kolkata in 2005, she went on to complete her Diploma in Hotel Management from The Oberoi Centre for Learning and Development in 2008.



Dey officially kick-started her career with The Oberoi Mumbai as assistant manager, food and beverage, and was a recipient of the FLO GR8 Award for Bravery 2009 for her commitment to guest relations during the 26/11 terror attack at the hotel.



After a one-year stint, she joined The Oberoi Grand Kolkata with the same position. Her core leadership role included revitalising internal groups, building and managing guest relationships, training and mentoring teams to outperform themselves and competition



Following her tenure in Kolkata, Dey moved to Agra at The Oberoi Amarvilas as food and beverage service manager in 2012, where she was managing the restaurant, bar, in-room dining and special dining experiences at the resort.



In 2014, she rejoined The Oberoi Grand Kolkata, where she managed restaurant, bar, in-room dining and banqueting operation for the 209-room property.



Dey also spearheaded the task force in opening the all-day dining restaurant and Bar Threesixtythree° at The Oberoi Grand Kolkata.



Additionally, she won Food and Beverage Manager (East) of the Year 2017 from BW Hotelier.



Dey has gained international exposure in Italy and France for food and wine and in Scotland for whisky, which add to her overall planning of activities.

Sabrina Pooja Dey has been appointed director of operations, JW Marriott Kolkata. In her current role, she will be seen effectuating strategies to support business growth, revenue generation through up selling of products and services and creation of value through designing new products.Ensuring strict compliance with quality, safety, environment and health standards, her focus will be on demonstrating creativity in conceptualising and executing unique guest experiences.In a career spanning over 12 years, Dey has sought to enhance customer satisfaction and maintain the standards of the establishments she has been associated with.Having graduated from St. Xaviers College, Kolkata in 2005, she went on to complete her Diploma in Hotel Management from The Oberoi Centre for Learning and Development in 2008.Dey officially kick-started her career with The Oberoi Mumbai as assistant manager, food and beverage, and was a recipient of the FLO GR8 Award for Bravery 2009 for her commitment to guest relations during the 26/11 terror attack at the hotel.After a one-year stint, she joined The Oberoi Grand Kolkata with the same position. Her core leadership role included revitalising internal groups, building and managing guest relationships, training and mentoring teams to outperform themselves and competitionFollowing her tenure in Kolkata, Dey moved to Agra at The Oberoi Amarvilas as food and beverage service manager in 2012, where she was managing the restaurant, bar, in-room dining and special dining experiences at the resort.In 2014, she rejoined The Oberoi Grand Kolkata, where she managed restaurant, bar, in-room dining and banqueting operation for the 209-room property.Dey also spearheaded the task force in opening the all-day dining restaurant and Bar Threesixtythree° at The Oberoi Grand Kolkata.Additionally, she won Food and Beverage Manager (East) of the Year 2017 from BW Hotelier.Dey has gained international exposure in Italy and France for food and wine and in Scotland for whisky, which add to her overall planning of activities. This page allows you to send the current page to your friend. Your Friends Email ID: Your Email ID:


