Indian drama over Pulwama attack exposed

Indian Police's deputy inspector general (DIG) had revealed his link with Hizbul Mujahideen.

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – Adil Ahmad Dar, who killed 44 paramilitary personnel in Pulwama district of Indian-occupied Kashmir (IOK), had been under the custody of the Indian Army, sources familiar with the matter revealed to Dunya News on Saturday.

Indian Police’s deputy inspector general (DIG) had revealed his link with Hizbul Mujahideen.

According to details, on September 10, 2017, the Indian forces had killed two freedom fighters in Shopian district of IOK, and Adil Dar was detained in the same clash.

The attack is being called ‘gift’ by the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) to the Modi-led government while the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) had to face defeat in the state elections.

In this regard, the attack is being considered vital for the BJP for securing victory in the upcoming general elections in India.

On the other hand, thousands of Muslims, particularly Kashmiri people living in India, have been facing backlash.

Rioters stormed into several shops owned by Kashmiri people and threatened them to leave India.

Yesterday, dozens of vehicles owned by Muslims were set ablaze during Friday prayers.

Kashmiris also held a demonstration against the backlash being faced by them.

Moreover, Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) had claimed responsibility of the attack whereas Pakistan’s Foreign Office (FO) has rejected any link with the organization.

20-year-old Adil Ahmad Dar, hailing from the village of Lethipora, rammed a car full of explosives into the convoy.

A video released by the militant group after the attack showed his son, dressed in military fatigues and carrying an automatic rifle, detailing his plan to carry out the bombing.

His mother, Fahmeeda, corroborated her husband’s account.

“He was beaten by Indian troops a few years back when he was returning from school,” she said. “This led to anger in him against Indian troops.”

Both parents said they were unaware of their son’s plan to attack the convoy.

Dar did not return home from his work as a laborer on March 19 last year, Fahmeeda added. “We searched for him for three months,” she said.

“Finally we gave up efforts to bring him back home.”
