Er Rasheed leads protest in Srinagar against attacks on Kashmiris

Srinagar

Members of Awami Ittihad Party (AIP) carried out a sit-in protest at Press Enclave Srinagar on Saturday against the attacks on Kashmiris and Jammu Muslims in India.

The protestors were holding banners and placards that read “Stop targeting Kashmiri people living in India”, “Give protection to Kashmiri people in Jammu”, “Solve Kashmir issue by self-determination”, “Don’t celebrate killings” and raised slogans against Jammu police and its administration for not taking stern action against the people attacking Kashmiris.

While talking to media, the president of AIP, Er Rasheed appealed the administration of Jammu to discharge its duties towards the masses and take stern action against those who are involved in arsenic and violence against Kashmiri community and damaging their property.

He said they also condemn the Pulwama attack but that doesn’t mean that the people of Jammu and other parts of India will attack innocent Kashmiris in its reaction and try to give it a communal angle.

“It is shameful that the goons and fringe elements are being given free hand and no stern action is being taken to protect life and property of Muslim community in various parts of Jammu and other places,” he said.

Er Rasheed raised questions as to how it was possible for the miscreants to damage huge properties and set ablaze dozens of vehicles when a call for the Bandh was given a day before and the administration was supposed to be prepared to meet any eventuality.

He said, “Through this approach, it is evident that the government of Jammu is working as an extension wing of RSS and Sangh Parivar.”

“Making Pulwama attack on CRPF as an excuse, a section of radical elements wants to implement its nefarious designs against the Muslim community.”

While expressing solidarity with the civil secretariat employees, Er Rasheed said, “The attacks on employees are unacceptable, unethical and un-civilized and government must move beyond words and all those involved in attacks on secretariat employees, stranded Kashmiri passengers, damaging vehicles should be booked under Public Safety Act.”

Er Rasheed appealed PM Narendra Modi not to forget that Kashmiris are worst victims of violence and need peace with dignity more than anyone else but it cannot be achieved without delivering justice and appreciated the statement of JCCI condemning violence but said that the saner voice in Jammu need to come out in open support of communal harmony and isolate the fringe element.

“If the government fails to do justice with the victims of Jammu, the Muslim community will feel further disheartened and isolated which may not be in the interests of the state,” he said.

He demanded full compensation to be announced by the government to all those whose property has been partially or fully damaged the same way it announces for other cases.
