Pulwama attack: Kashmiri students from various parts of India allege harassment, CRPF launches helpline

A shutdown was observed in Lal Chowk city centre and adjoining areas in Srinagar on Saturday as a mark of protest against attacks on Kashmiris in Jammu and outside the state. (Image for representation: Reuters)

Sporadic incidents of violence and alleged harassment against Kashmiri students were reported across India on Saturday in the aftermath of the dastardly Pulwama terror attack.

Forty CRPF personnel were killed and five injured in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir on Thursday by a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber in South Kashmir's Pulwama district.

In view of reports of alleged harassment, the CRPF launched a helpline -- CRPF Madadgaar with the Twitter handle @CRPFmadadgaar.

Students and general public, presently out of Jammu and Kashmir, can contact on 24x7 toll free number 14411 or SMS at 7082814411 for speedy assistance in case they face any harassment.

#Kashmiri students and general public, presently out of #kashmir can contact @CRPFmadadgaar on 24x7 toll free number 14411 or SMS us at 7082814411 for speedy assistance in case they face any difficulties/harrasment. @crpfindia @HMOIndia @JKZONECRPF @jammusector @crpf_srinagar pic.twitter.com/L2Snvk6uC4 CRPF Madadgaar (@CRPFmadadgaar) February 16, 2019

Many Kashmiri youth studying in various parts of India, throughout the day, alleged that they were harassed in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack.

Micro-blogging site Twitter was also witness to the reports as people, common and influential, took to it to complain, decry, seek help, or express solidarity with the Kashmiris.

Students & #Kashmiris living in mumbai can DM me if in case they need any help or feel unsafe. my door is always open. U can stay with me till the time u want. I will protect u guys. #SOSKashmir (@Pooraans) February 16, 2019

#SOSKashmir 15-20 Kashmiri girls trapped in a hostel in Dehradun for hours now, as an angry mob outside demands that they be expelled from the hostels. This is in Dolphin institute. Police is present but unable to disperse the mob.@INCUttarakhand @uttarakhandcops @ukcopsonline Shehla Rashid (@Shehla_Rashid) February 16, 2019

I live in Noida and my home +the homes of many of my friends is open to any kashmiri who isn’t feeling safe in Delhi/NCR. Please dm in case you/anyone you know needs help. Dushyant (@atti_cus) February 16, 2019





The hounding and harassment of #Kashmiris is going to achieve exactly what the actors of the horrific #PulwamaAttack want. And worse. Sankarshan Thakur (@SankarshanT) February 16, 2019

The #Hindus have always been known for accommodating and sheltering the oppressed and targeted. .it's time the Hindus repeat the history and add another chapter by protecting and sheltering #Kashmiris and #KashmiriStudents ENN (@avenger786) February 16, 2019

I live in Delhi. My address is 208-A, Pocket A, Mayur Vihar Phase 2, New Delhi. Any Jammu & Kashmir resident or anyone of any community, who isn’t feeling safe, just walk into at my place. DM me for any help required. One can also DM @IPSMadhurVerma for any help Sumit Kumar Singh (@invincibleidea) February 16, 2019

Our blood boils on Pulwama attack

Those defending us laid down their lives

But why are cowards attacking Kashmiri students and families living in different parts of the country

What is their fault ?? Nagendar Sharma (@sharmanagendar) February 16, 2019

We will NOT allow HATE to win. We will build an inclusive India . And India where we Love #Kashmir & #Kashmiri people. We will reach out and build bridges with the young , aspirational & innocent #Kashmiris who want nothing but peace . We will not late hate divide us Tehseen Poonawalla (@tehseenp) February 16, 2019



OK so #CRPF is helping #Kashmiri Students and general public who may be facing harassment due to protests against the killing of #CRPFJawans by a #Kashmiri suicide bomber.

If that does not put your nationalism in perspective - then nothing will.

Proud of the #CRPF#THISisINDIA https://t.co/CNGJ1Ynd7t Akash Banerjee (@akashbanerjee) February 16, 2019

Want to tell any Kashmiri student out there, if you are being targeted in any manner, feel free to call/DM me. My home and heart is open to you as are that of thousands of right thinking Indians.Let’s fight forces of violence together: you don’t have to bear the cross of terror. February 16, 2019





You have to be nuts to target Kashmiri youth living in India’s heartland. These are fellow countrymen. Seeking a better life, like you and me. Attacking them is exactly what ISI wants. Indian vs Indian. Need to avoid at all cost. Focus on real enemy. Take him down. #HowsTheHosh Rahul Kanwal (@rahulkanwal) February 16, 2019

To this end, former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Omar Abdullah met Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh and sought his intervention to ensure safety of Kashmiri students and traders in various parts of the country.

"I took the opportunity to inform Rajnath Singh Sb of the reports I had received of Kashmiri students & others being threatened/harassed and requested him to appoint a nodal officer in HMO India to ensure the directive issued to states is followed in letter & spirit (sic)," he wrote on Twitter.

Massive protests and candlelight marches were held on Friday in different parts of the country against the attack and curfew was imposed in Jammu city following violence during demonstrations there.

The curfew in Jammu city continued for the second day on Saturday and the Army's presence was stepped up on Saturday.

A shutdown was observed in Lal Chowk city centre and adjoining areas in Srinagar as a mark of protest against attacks on Kashmiris in Jammu and outside the state.

Shopkeepers in Lal Chowk, Maisuma, Residency Road and other adjoining areas downed their shutters at 3 pm in response to a shutdown called by trade bodies of the Valley earlier in the day.

The traders also took out a protest march to condemn the attacks on Kashmiris in Jammu and other parts of the country. They demanded safety of Kashmiri traders and students outside the Valley.

The trade bodies have also called for Kashmir bandh on Sunday. The bandh call was issued by the Kashmir Traders and Manufacturers Forum, Kashmir Economic Alliance and other trade bodies of the Valley.

So far, attacks on Kashmiri students have been reported from Dehradun, Jodhpur, Ambala, Panchkula, Delhi, and Patna among others.

Dehradun

The Dehradun police assured its Jammu and Kashmir counterpart of taking all necessary measures for the safety and security of Kashmiri students studying there amidst allegation of their harassment.

A few Kashmiri youth studying in the Uttarakhand capital had alleged that they were harassed and were asked by their landlords to vacate accommodations fearing attacks on their properties.

"This refers to the circulation of news regarding the harassment of Kashmir-based students in Dehradun. In this regard it is informed that the authorities from Jammu and Kashmir Police have spoken to the authorities concerned in Dehradun Police," a police spokesperson said here.

Meanwhile, a Kashmiri student was booked for allegedly sending WhatsApp messages supporting the Pulwama suicide attack, amid reports that students from the Valley were being harassed in the Uttarakhand capital.

The messages shared by the Kashmiri student on WhatsApp created tension and some right-wing Hindu outfits gheraoed the university, demanding immediate arrest of the student. The student was suspended by a private university in Dehradun on Friday.

In view of the sensitivity of the Pulwama incident, ADG law and order Ashok Kumar has appealed to people to maintain calm and not to take law into their hands.

Ambala

A village panchayat in Ambala asked villagers to evict Kashmiri students living in rented accommodation within 24 hours, according to a video that has surfaced on social media.

Half a dozen Kashmiri students were shifted to the hostel of the MM University after the purported video appeared.

In the video, Mulana village sarpanch Naresh Rana could be heard asking villagers to evict Kashmiri tenants.

The village head alleged that some Kashmiri students were involved in "suspicious activities".

"The villagers have been asked to vacate Kashmiri students from the rented accommodation... In case it is not done the person in whose residence such students are living will be considered as a traitor," the sarpanch is heard saying.

Bengaluru

A Kashmiri youth was booked for allegedly posting derogatory remarks on a social networking site.

Following a complaint by Vishwa Hindu Parishad office bearer Girish Bharadwaj, a case was registered here Friday against Abid Malik under relevant sections of the IPC and the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1967, for a post he wrote on Facebook.

The youth allegedly shared some images posted by a news channel after the attack and captioned it 'The real surgical attack' on his FB page, police said.

Following the complaint, Facebook deleted his account.

(With inputs from agencies)
