Jamiat Ulama-i-Hind condemns Pulwama terror attack

Jamiat President Arshad Madani calls for peaceful protest against it across country

AMN / New Delhi

The Jami at Ulama-i-Hind has condemned in the strongest terms the ‘barbaric attack’ on the CRPF convoy that killed 45 CRPF personnel. It conveyed heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families.

In a statement, Jamiat Ulama-i-Hind president Maulana Syed Arshad Madani described the terror act on para-military personnel in Kashmir’s Pulwama as cowardly act and conveyed heartfelt condolences to the families of the Jawans killed while performing their

duties. He said the attack is not only on the integrity of the country but also on its spirit.

While expressing concern over the prevailing situation in the country, Jamiat President Maulana Arshad Madani appealed to the fellow countrymen to stand united against the enemies of the country irrespective of religious belief, cast and creed. He stressed that no religions of the world permits killing an innocent person. In this hour of grief and sorrow, we are all with families of martyred security personnel and their families; he said and added that JUH also wishes for speedy recovery of those jawans who were injured in the attack.

He also instructed all the JUH units in country to stage peaceful protest against the terror attack and its severe condemnation.

Jamaat-e-Islami denounce Pulwama attack

AMN / New Delhi

Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (JIH) has severely criticized the terrorist attack in Pulwama, Jammu & Kashmir. It has appreciated the government’s move to carry out a thorough investigation into the reasons for the attack.

In a statement to the media the JIH President Maulana Syed Jalaluddin Umari said: “the path of violence and killing can cause death and destruction but will not lead to solution of problems’’.

Maulana Umari continued: ‘It is very painful to hear that 44 CRPF soldiers had to lay down their lives yesterday. Instead of vitiating the atmosphere, efforts should be made to restore peace and security in the area and this is possible only through negotiation and dialogue. This will lead to the solution of the grievances of the Kashmiri people and help create a climate of peace and stability.’’

The Jamaat-e-Islami President said that: “we appreciate the move by the government of India to carry out a thorough investigation into the reasons for the attack. This may uncover the truth behind the incident. We may be able to find the motive behind the attack, whether it was meant to spoil the atmosphere in Kashmir or to wreck the relations between India and Pakistan or whether it was a big conspiracy to damage the climate of peace and coexistence in our country just before the general elections. We express our deepest condolences for the soldiers and pray for the speedy recovery of the injured’’.
