Pulwama terror attack: Protest demonstrations, candle light processions taken out - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Excelsior Correspondent

JAMMU, Feb 16: Protest demonstrations were held and candle light processions taken out at different parts of Jammu region today to register anguish against terror attack on CRPF convoy at Pulwama on February 14 and also for paying respect to the martyrs.

Despite imposition of curfew, J&K High Court Bar Association, Jammu, under the leadership of its president B S Slathia, lodged a strong protest, outside the Court premises, against the dastardly terrorist attack on CRPF Convoy.

A large number of lawyers gathered in front of the main gate and held a peaceful Dharna from 10:00 AM to 03:00 PM. As no one was allowed to enter the Court premises, there could be no work in all Subordinate Courts including Registry of the High Court of Jammu Wing.

The lawyers in one voice expressed their complete solidarity with the security forces and their families and stressed that the martyrdom of Jawans must be an eye opener for the Government to unleash a final and fatal blow to the menace of terrorism in the State of J&K in particular and rest of the country in general. The Lawyers sitting on Dharna also paid floral tributes to the martyrs of CRPF Jawans. The speakers strongly urged the Governor of State of J&K and Administration that all the anti national elements in the State of J&K be dealt with iron hands and weeded-out from the State of J&K.

As per reports, various Bar Associations of Jammu province at District & Tehsil levels also abstained from work and protested against the dastardly attack on CRPF Jawans.

At Reasi, members of the Bar Association, led by president Pawan Dev Singh, staged a day long dharna in front of the court gate and held demonstration against the terror attack. They raised slogans against Pakistan and urged Government of India to give the enemy country a befitting reply.

The locals of Reasi also took out a protest march, which started from the Main Bazar and culminated at Bus stand. The protesting people were carrying banners and shouting slogans against Pakistan.

Panthers Party activists, led by NPP State president Balwant Singh Mankotia, held day-long protests at Udhampur demanding Pakistan to be declared as terrorist country.

A massive Mashal Rally was also organised at Rehmbal for paying tribute to the CRPF martyrs. While addressing the rally, Mankotia stressed that the Government of India should leave no stone unturned to get Pakistan declared as terrorist country at the International level. Condemning the cowardly attack on CRPF convoy and expressing sympathy with the families of the martyrs, Mankotia said that the whole nation was united at this time and standing with Central Govt.

A candle light procession was taken out at Gandhi Nagar Jammu for paying rich tributes to the martyrs of Pulwama. A number of people of different age group took part in the procession, which was convened by Rajinder Jamwal, president of `Mission Modi Again PM’.

Visibly shocked over the martyrdom of CRPF Jawans in the suicidal terror attack, the participants expressed solidarity with the bereaved families and made it clear that entire Nation was with them. The candle light procession was also addressed by some prominent persons, who paid their tributes to the martyrs and stressed that the sacrifices of our brave hearts would l not go in vein and all those behind this distardly act will have to pay heavy price. They pledged whole hearted support to the security forces and the Government of India for completely wiping out terrorism from the country.

The residents of Manorama Vihar also took out a candle light march in support of the brave CRPF soldiers who were martyred in the deadly attack in Pulwama. All the residents took part in the candle light march, which was organized under the banner of Manorama Vihar Welfare Society.

They raised slogans against the cowardly act by Pakistan and urged the Prime Minister and Indian Army to take strict action against the culprits and book them to justice. Residents demanded that Government should not take more time in taking action to avenge the incident.

Reports from Samba said that separate protest demonstrations, led by former Ministers Surjit Singh Slathia and S Manjit Singh, were held today at Vijaypur. The protesting people raised slogans against Pakistan and demanded stern action against Pakistan.

Both Mr Slathia and Manjit Singh also urged people to maintain communal harmony for defeating the nefarious designs of the enemies, who were hell bent to divide people.

Former minister Dr Manohar Lal Sharma led a peaceful protest at Billawar and Dayalachak for condemning the terror attack at Pulwama. Describing the incident as a big loss and unfortunate, Dr Sharma said that entire nation was standing shoulder to shoulder with the Government of India and security forces for wiping out terrorism from the State and the country. He urged the Government that stern action against terrorism and Pakistan is the need of the hour. He also appealed people of the State to maintain communal peace and harmony during this difficult time when whole nation is mourning the martyrdom of brave soldiers.

Activists of Shiv Sena Bala Sahib Thackrey, under the leadership of State president Dimpy Kohli and general secretary Manish Sahni, protested against Pakistan at Sidco Chowk Bari Brahmna, here today.

Raising slogans, the protesting Shiv Sainik also torched Pakistani flag and urged Government of India to avenge martyrdom of the CRPF jawans in a befitting manner, so that enemy country couldn’t dare to abet or support terrorist in future. Sahni appealed to the Prime Minister of India to repeat the history by announcing surgical strikes on Pakistan.

Members of Team Jammu, led by its Chairman Zorawar Singh Jamwal, assembled near Shakti Nagar and held a peaceful demonstration amidst raising of slogans against Pakistan. They also torched a Pakistan’ flag and urged the Government of India to crush terrorism with an iron hand. Earlier, they assembled at the Team Jammu headquarters and observed a two-minute silence for paying rich tributes to the CRPF martyrs and praying for courage to the bereaved families.

Protest demonstration were held at Durga Nagar, Dogra Nagar, Swarn Vihar, Rajinder Nagar and Police Colony where the locals also took out candle light marches to register their anguish against the terror attack on CRPF convoy and pay respect to the martyrs.

The candle light march at Durga Nagar took off from Matador Stand and culminated at Ban Talab after passing through Muthi Morh. The march was led by Roshan Lal Raina and Makhan Lal Bhat. After culmination of the march, a two-minute silence was observed to pray for peace to the martyrs and courage to their family members.

Kashmiri Khatri Hindu Maha Sabha held a protest demonstration near Jewel Chowk and then marched towards Jagti Migrant Camp in the form of a bike rally. The march was led by the Sabha chief Er R C Mahajan.

At Jagti, they paid tributes to the CRPF martyrs and expressed solidarity with the bereaved families. A large number of people of all age groups, including women, took part in the demonstration.

The Jammu West Assembly Movement, led by Sunil Dimple, held a protest demonstration for resenting delay in announcement of concrete action against Pakistan by the Government of India for restoration of peace and normalcy in the State.

Amidst raising of slogans and carrying banners, they torched Pakistani flag and urged Government of India to hand over J&K to the Army for crushing terrorism and restoration of peace in the State. Sunil Dimple urged the prime Minister Modi to eliminate Pakistan by waging a full-fledged war.

A massive protest was held in Ward No 39 Topesherkhan, Patoli Mangotrian by people of the area which was led by Parbhat Singh Jamwal a social activist in which protestors demanded stern action against Pakistan.

They also paid rich tributes to the CRPF martyrs and took out a candle light procession. The speakers said that the supreme sacrifice of CRPF martyrs will not go waste. Two minutes silence was also observed in the memory of martyrs and the mourners expressed their solidarity with the bereaved families.

Pradesh Youth Congress, J&K unit took out a candle light march today to pay tributes to the valiant CRPF soldiers who laid down their lives in the Pulwama terror attack.

A massive protest was held by the residents of Anand Nagar, Bohri, Tumal, Sarwati Vihar, Udaywala against the Pakistan and terrorists.
