Pulwama attack widely condemned

People from various sections express solidarity with the families of the killed and injured

Activists of the Congress, led by All India Congress Committee Secretary Sirivella Prasad, on Saturday burnt an effigy of terrorists in protest against the Pulwama terror attack that left 40 CRPF jawans dead on Friday.

The activists marched in a procession to the Lawyerpet Sai Baba temple centre shouting slogans, demanding the isolation of Pakistan by the international community.

Pradesh Congress Propaganda Secretary K. Vinay Kumar underscored the need for all sections of people to stand by the security forces.

The activists, led by District Congress president Eda Sudhakar Reddy and City Congress president Sripathy Prakasam, observed two minutes of silence at Indira Bhavan as a mark of respect to the deceased jawans and prayed for an early recovery for the injured jawans.

Mourned

The activists of the Bharatiya Janata Party on Saturday paid floral tributes to the slain CRPF jawans at the Martyrs memorial at Sainik Samkshem Bhavan here.

The party leaders observed that at this time of tribulation, the entire population of the country stood by the brave soldiers safeguarding the nation from the most treacherous borders. They condemned the terrorist attack at Pulwama and termed it a cowardly act.

The management of Sainik School at Kalikiri in the district also paid tributes to the slain jawans, with the students and staff of the institutions joining the mourning.

Rally taken out

The faculty, students and management of Osmania College here have strongly condemned the Pulwama terror attack. A rally was taken out on Saturday expressing solidarity with the families of those killed and injured. The rally, which started at the college, concluded at Raj Vihar centre.

College principal Syed Makbul Hussain termed the attack a cowardly act and said that it should be condemned by everyone.

Participants in the rally observed a two-minute silence before the commencement of the rally.
