NIMS varsity suspends 4 Kashmiri students for allegedly celebrating Pulwama attack on WhatsApp

New Delhi:

NIMS, one of largest private universities in Rajasthan, has suspended four students for allegedly hailing the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama. According to the notice from the office of the varsity’s principal, the girls belonging to Kashmir “posted anti-national messages on WhatsApp for celebrating martyrs of Pulwama terror attack.” The suspension notice further stated that, “ NIMS University Rajasthan will not tolerate and strictly condemn such activities. Since the above act of theirs is grave and serious in nature, these students are hereby suspended with immediate effect from college and hostel.” News Nation has learnt that many students chanted slogans against these girls inside the university campus.

Earlier on Saturday, a Kashmiri student was booked for allegedly sending WhatsApp messages supporting the Pulwama suicide attack, amid reports that students from the Valley were being harassed in the Uttarakhand capital. The messages shared by the Kashmiri student on WhatsApp created tension and some right-wing Hindu outfits gheraoed the university, demanding immediate arrest of the student, the Press Trust of India reported. The student was suspended by a private university in Dehradun. “I had taken up the matter with DGP Utrakhand to take care of security of students from Kashmir. DIG Baramulla is also in touch. A helpline is set up at PCR Srinagar and PCR Jammu,” DGP Dilbag Singh said on Twitter.

Meanwhile, a shutdown has been called out by Kashmiri traders as a mark of protest against attacks on Kashmiris in Jammu and outside the state. Shopkeepers in Lal Chowk, Maisuma, Residency Road and other adjoining areas downed their shutters at 3 pm on Saturday in response to a shutdown called by trade bodies of the Valley earlier in the day. The traders also took out a protest march to condemn the attacks on Kashmiris in Jammu and other parts of the country. They demanded safety of Kashmiri traders and students outside the Valley. Various trade bodies and employees' unions also held a protest at Press Colony.

The bandh call was issued by the Kashmir Traders and Manufacturers Forum, Kashmir Economic Alliance and other trade bodies of the Valley.

(With inputs from PTI)

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
