Situation in J&K remains tense, curfew continues amid reports of attacks on Kashmiris | 10 points

The nation has been mourning the loss of 40 CRPF jawans who were killed on February 14 in the deadliest attack on security forces in recent times. (Photo: Reuters)

Three days have passed since a ghastly suicide bomb attack killed at least 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) paramilitary troops in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama, but the situation in the Valley continues to remain tense.

As India continues to mourn the tragic attack on soldiers, massive anti-Pakistan protests were observed in several parts of the country. Incidents of violence were also reported in the Valley, following which a curfew has been imposed in the state. Meanwhile, the government has also withdrawn security provided to separatist leaders.

Here are 10 fresh developments that you need to know:

Intelligence agency is believed to be preparing a dossier on Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) conspiracy in Jammu and Kashmir. Citing intelligence reports, India has informed its diplomats of various countries that ISI has asked JeM to lead "jehadi agenda" and fight Indian forces in Jammu and Kashmir.

Indian communities all over the world have launched protests against the dastardly attacks that claimed the lives of several CRPF jawans. The Indian community on Saturday evening started a massive protest outside Pakistan High commission in London in protest against the Pulwama terror attack.

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said on Saturday that India has formally withdrawn Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status to Pakistan. Upon the withdrawal, basic customs duty on all goods imported from Pakistan to India has been raised to 200 per cent. The two key items imported from Pakistan are fruits and cement, on which the current customs duty is 30-50 per cent and 7.5 per cent. Pakistan, on the other hand, said it is reviewing the withdrawal of the MFN status. However, Pakistan maintained that it has received no official communication on the same from New Delhi.

Meanwhile, the Jammu and Kashmir administration has withdrawn the security support provided to 6 separatist leaders. Security has been withdrawn from separatist leaders including Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, Abdul Ghani Bhat, Bilal Lone, Fazal Haq Qureshi, Hashim Qureshi and Shabir Shah. However, there is no mention of pro-Pakistan separatist Syed Ali Shah Geelani in the order. In its order, the government said all security and vehicles provided to them will be withdrawn.

A delegation of India doctors has also cancelled their visit to Pakistan for 13th SAARC-Association of Anaesthesiologists Congress in Lahore on March 7 in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack. Earlier, veteran lyricist and screenwriter Javed Akhtar and wife Shaban Azmi cancelled their visit to Pakistan for an event organised by Karachi Arts Council.

The situation continues to remain tense in Jammu and Kashmir for the third consecutive day, following reports of violence in the Valley. Internet services also remain blocked in Kashmir in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack. Security forces said the situation has improved and authorities will take a call later in the day on whether it will be relaxed. Earlier, protests took place on Saturday evening in the city's Nai Basti, Bantalab, Domana and Parade ground areas. Furthermore, the Army also remains on high alert in the Valley.

#SOS Kashmir and #Kashmiri students are currently trending on Twitter after scattered reports of harassment of Kashmiri students across the country. Many Kashmiri students have been reportedly harassed in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack, following which the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) launched a helpline for such incidents- CRPF Madadgaar with the Twitter handle @CRPFmadadgaar. Students and the general public, presently out of Jammu and Kashmir, can contact on 24x7 toll-free number 14411 or SMS at 7082814411 for speedy assistance in case they face any harassment.

Some prominent voices on Twitter have reacted strongly to reports of harassment against Kashmiri students. Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Omar Abdullah in a series of tweets said that the Kashmiri people living outside the state need to be protected. He further said that Kashmir was the people who inhabit it and not just a piece of land. Leaders from Congress, Aam Aadmi Party, and many others have also condemned incidents of harassment of Kashmiri students.

A Valley-wide bandh has also been called by trade bodies in the Valley after alleged attacks on Kashmiri students. The bandh was supported by major trade bodies such as Kashmir Economic Alliance and Kashmir Traders and Manufacturers Federation as well as Transporters' Association, reported news agency PTI.

On Thursday, at least 40 CRPF jawans were killed in the deadliest terror attack in three decades of Kashmir's insurgency. Prime Minister Narendra Modi and a host of ministers have decided to give security forces a free hand to avenge the attack. Meanwhile, opposition parties said they stand strong in support of central the government and security forces.

Follow aftermath of Pulwama terror attack

MORE ON PULWAMA TERROR ATTACK:

Pulwama attack: Indian envoy briefs top officials on Pakistan

Govt withdraws security of 5 separatist leaders in Jammu and Kashmir

Enough is enough, says Iran in talks with India after Pak-based terror groups attack both countries

Curfew in Jammu till evening, internet services remain blocked


