Miscreants loot Xiaomi phones worth Rs 1 crore in Andhra Pradesh: Report

The driver of the truck that was carrying the mobile phones was reportedly beaten and found tied to a tree.

Highlights:

Unidentified miscreants steal Xiaomi phone worth Rs 1 crore in Andhra Pradesh

The reportedly beat and tied the truck driver to a tree before flowing away with the truck

Police suspect “company insider” for the “pre-planned robbery”

Four miscreants looted a truck full of Xiaomi phones worth Rs 1 crore near Nellore district in Andhra Pradesh, a media report has said. The Times of India reports that around four people beat the truck driver, tied him to a tree and drove away with the truck with phones. They stopped the vehicle at Gowravaram village and transferred the cell phones to another unidentified truck and fled from the spot, the report said.

“The truck was on its way to Kolkata from Sri City. The incident took place while the truck driver had stopped to rest for a while at a truck lay-by bay,” Kavali rural police were quoted as saying. Locals found the truck driver tied to the tree, rescued him and informed the police. The police swung into action to trace the looted truck, and after initial probe, they found an empty truck at Gowravaram village.

The police believes that the robbery was pre-planned and suspect that a company “insider” could be behind the loot. Reportedly, the phone lot contained devices priced from Rs 6,000 to Rs 14,000 each. A robbery case has been filed and an investigation has been launched into the case. According to market research firm International Data Corporation, Xiaomi captured 28.9 percent market share and shipped a total of 41.1 million devices in the calendar year 2018.

This is not the first case of smartphone robbery. In 2017, a group of robbers stole more than 300 IPhone X phones worth over $370,000 before the devices were put in the store. Three people stole the smartphones from a UPS truck parked outside an Apple Store in San Francisco. Last year, robbers stole Apple products worth over $100,000 from a Best Buy retail store in the US.

The theft took place in Dunwoody city in Georgia where thieves carved out a hole in the roof of a Best Buy store, rappelled down, broke into the storage area where the Apple products were kept and stole them. According to the police, the burglars stole thousands in iPhones, iPads, MacBooks and more.

Related Read:

Redmi Note 7 February 28 India launch: How to buy tickets and attend launch event
