Kashmiri students booked, arrested - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

JAIPUR, Feb 17:

Four female paramedical students of Kashmiri-origin were suspended from a private institute here and later booked for allegedly celebrating the Pulwama terror attack by posting “anti-national” messages on an instant messaging app, officials said today.

The second-year students of the National Institute of Medical Science (NIMS), Talveen Manzoor, Iqra, Zohra Nazir and Uzma Nazir, were suspended for posting on WhatsApp a picture in which they were purportedly seen celebrating the terrorist attack in Kashmir that claimed the lives of 44 CRPF personnel.

The picture soon went viral, prompting the university administration to take action.

In the suspension order, the NIMS registrar said,”You have posted an anti-national message on your WhatsApp for celebrating killing of Pulwama terrorist attack martyrs. The university will not tolerate and strictly condemns such activities. The act is grave and serious in nature.”

Later, a case was registered against the four students following a complaint by the university administration, a police official said.

The students were booked under relevant provisions of the Information Technology (IT) Act. Senior officials are investigating the matter and appropriate action will be taken thereafter, SP (Rural) Harendra Kumar said.

The Aligarh Muslim University has also suspended an undergraduate Kashmiri student for his alleged objectionable tweet in connection with the Pulwama attack.

Another Kashmiri student of a private university in Himachal Pradesh’s Solan district was “rusticated” and later arrested for allegedly making anti-national remarks on social media, police said today.

Tahseen Gul of Jammu and Kashmir’s Srinagar was arrested on Saturday as he had made some “anti-national” remarks on photo-video sharing app Instagram, Baddi Superintendent of Police Rohit Malpani said.

He was studying at the Chitkara University located on Pinjore-Nalagarh National Highway in Baddi tehsil of Solan district.

The Kashmiri student allegedly glorified suicide attacker Adil Ahmad Dar, who was behind the Pulwama terror attack in which 44 CRPF personnel were martyred last Thursday.

A case was registered on the basis of a complaint by the university administration, a police official said.

In the complaint, Dean Administration, Chitkara University, Col AK Chauhan (retired) alleged that Gul posted some anti-national remarks on social media “creating a tense situation” in the campus, the police official added.

The Baddi SP sasid that the Kashmiri student was “rusticated” by the university and was further handed over to the police for legal action.

Subsequently, he was arrested and a First Information Report (FIR) under Section 153 B (Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national-integration) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) was registered against him at Barotiwala police station, he said.

The matter is under investigation, the SP said.

Meanwhile, A 28-year-old Kashmiri man was beaten up by public before being detained on Sunday allegedly for raising “anti-India” slogans during a protest against the Pulwama terror attack at Jantar Mantar here, police said.

The man, identified as Abid Hussain, had come from Kashmir on Saturday, they added.

Hussain was at Jantar Mantar where he was beaten up by public for allegedly raising “anti-India” slogans, police said.

He has been detained and is being interrogated, Madhur Verma, Deputy Commissioner of Police (New Delhi) said.

Hussain was under the influence of alcohol, he said.

Hundreds of people from all walks of life gathered at India Gate and Jantar Mantar on Sunday to hold candle light marches to express solidarity with the families of the CRPF jawans killed in the Pulwama terror attack.

As the protests continued for the third day on Sunday, police enhanced security in the national capital with special deployments in the protest areas.

Students, corporate employees and members of social organisations gathered at the two venues demanding that Pakistan be given a “befitting reply” in the wake of the Pulwama attack. (PTI)
