Jobless youth to contest elections

Since protests and hunger strikes for employment have yielded no results, they have now decided to take part in the upcoming polls for representations



Moving forward from the usual protests and hunger strikes to meet their demands, city youth associated with various organisations have now decided to contest the upcoming elections to collectively solve the problem of unemployment. Eligible candidates from various fields had been protesting on various platforms demanding that the state government should take some measures to tackle unemployment in the state.



Inspired by the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), which gave a platform for political questioning to common folk, students and youth have come together on a united front to contest the elections.



Talks regarding the same have already started among various associations like the Diploma in Teacher Education (DTEd) Association, Bachelor of Education (BEd) Students’ Association, Maharashtra Public Service Commission (MPSC) Students Rights and Engineers Association and are mapping a way to represent themselves in the Lok Sabha.



While the primary discussions are already underway, the youth associations will meet on Monday to decide further course of action.



Santosh Magar, chairman of DTEd Association said, “Beginning with demands, then protests and later hunger strikes, we have done all the things required to bring our problems to the fore and kick start the recruitment drive. However, the state government has been giving us assurances but is not abiding by the promises. It has been over a year that the recruitment drive for school teachers for 24,000 vacant seats has been hanging in limbo. As the state government cannot give us jobs, we have opted to question them by contesting elections.”



Mahesh Bade, from MPSC Students Rights Association, said, “Even if we lose the election it is fine, but now will question the ministers in power by being a part of the system. AAP has already set an example by gathering the common man. We will also come together in a similar fashion. Our major agenda would be unemployment, issues related to education, skill development and issues of farmers.”



The youth also emphasised that as a majority of the students come from rural areas, their major concern is agrarian problems in the state and problems faced by their families engaged in farming.



Swapnil Chaure, a member of Engineers Association, who is also a civil engineer, said, “Although it is challenging to raise funds for contesting elections and giving a fight to seasoned politicians, we have to start somewhere and question the system.”



Mukund Kirdat, chairman of AAP Pune, who has been supporting these youth in issues related to unemployment, said, “After the student elections in colleges and university were stopped, there has been lesser number of youth entering politics. We have seen dynasty politics in the state. While youth have been fighting for their rights by calling strikes and protests, they have always stayed away from any political inclination. Political questioning is the need of the hour and youth coming together and being a part of the system will definitely create better leadership.”


