TN to take action against govt officials who take part in All India strike on Jan 8-9

TN to take action against govt officials who take part in All India strike on Jan 8-9

Girija Vaidyanathan said part-time employees, those on daily wages and on consolidated pay will be liable to be discharged from services.

news Strike

As trade unions in the country are gearing up for a two-day, 48-hour-long nationwide general strike on January 8 and 9, Tamil Nadu Chief Secretary Girija Vaidyanathan has issued a warning to all government officials. In a circular to all government departments, she stated that strict action will be taken against those government staff members found taking part in the strike.

On receiving information about members of an unrecognised service association participating in the All India Strike announced by various Central Trade Unions, the Chief Secretary said, “I am to point out that strike or threat of strike or participation by Government Servants in strike or demonstration or any other form of agitation affecting the normal functioning of the government offices amount to violation of rules 20, 22 and 22 A of the Tamil Nadu Government Servants Conduct Rules, 1973.”

She directed that the government staff should not indulge in the violation of the provision of the Tamil Nadu Government Servants Conduct Rule, “lest disciplinary action will be taken against them”.

“If any of the Government servants have not attended office, consequent of their participation in the proposed All India Strike, their period of absence has to be considered as unauthorised and they are not entited to any pay and allowances on the basis of the principle of No Work - No Pay,” it read.

The circular also states that the part-time employees, those on daily wages and on consolidated pay will be liable to be discharged from services. “The application of Casual Leave or any other leave, other than medical leave, shall not be allowed on the days of the proposed strike,” it added.

The heads of all departments have been further instructed to send a consolidated report on the attendence position of the staff working in the office under their entire administrative control, including Village, Taluk, District levels and Secretariat Administrative Department concerned, by 10.15 am on January 8 and 9.

The Secretariat Department has been asked to send the attendence details of officers, staff in their department and consolidated details, separately by 10.30 am to the Personnel and Administrative Reforms Department.

National Convention of Workers in September had decided to organise a two-day general strike to protest against the anti-worker and anti-trade union policies of the Narendra Modi government. Labour Progressive Federation (LPF), All India Trade Union Congress, Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC), Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) and Self Employed Women's Association are some of the major trade unions taking part in the protest. Employees of banks, Railways and electricity as well as taxi drivers and street vendors, too, are expected to take part in the strike.
