BJYM to launch 'NaMo Yuva connect' to garner youth vote

With an eye on first-time voters, the Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM), the youth wing of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), is set to launch over a dozen programmes, including "NaMo Yuva connect" targeting one of the strongest support bases of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, ahead of the Lok Sabha polls.

Under the leadership of BJYM President Poonam Mahajan, workers would visit every district and look for around 1,000 eminent young members of the society to turn them into BJP supporters.

Under the "NaMo Yuva Connect", the BJYM will seek to understand various aspects of their life, struggle in achieving the goal and how they "benefited" from the Narendra Modi government's initiatives.

"These 1,000 youths would be invited to a Town Hall programme, likely in Delhi next month, where they will share their experiences," BJYM leader Rohit Chahal told IANS.

According to sources, Modi may interact with these youths at the "Town Hall" event.

Chahal said the BJYM has prepared a road map to connect with maximum number of youths and the "NaMo Yuva connect" is one of the 17 programmes under the "Vijay Lakshya 2019 campaign" taken up by Mahajan.

"Under another programme we will visit colleges and make campus ambassadors. We will also hold a conclave of bloggers and writers. We will be holding youth parliament, town hall programmes and bike rallies across the nation."

To attract youth towards the BJP, 17 plans have been undertaken ahead of the polls, he said adding a social media campaign about these programmes would soon be launched.

BJYM Spokesperson Chahal said the aim is to target first-time voters, specially the millennials. "We have launched a massive programme to connect with the first-time voters. We are trying to convince them why they should cast their first vote in favour of Modi," Chahal said.

According to an estimate, over 15 crore first-time voters will use their franchise in this election.

The BJYM President kicked off the Vijay Lakshya 2019 campaign last month via video conference. The BJYM is also running a nationwide social media campaign to popularise Modi's idea under #IAmNewIndia entailing nine pledges for youngsters.

The exercise follows the Prime Minister's call to the BJP to connect with those born in this millennium as they would get voting rights this year only.

--IANS

bns/vsc/pcj

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
