‘Modi appointed L-Gs with a special purpose’

Arvind Kejriwal criticises Kiran Bedi, terms her style of functioning as shocking and against will of the people

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Monday said Prime Minister Narendra Modi has appointed Lieutenant Governors for New Delhi and Puducherry with the “specific purpose to interfere” in the functioning of elected governments.

“If Anil Baijwal and Kiran Bedi (Lt. Governors of New Delhi and Puducherry respectively) stop interfering in the day-to-day affairs of the elected governments in both the UTs, they will be removed immediately,” he said.

The Delhi Chief Minister was speaking to the media after calling on Chief Minister V. Narayanasamy and his Cabinet colleagues who are staging a day and night dharna in front of Raj Nivas to protest against the Ms. Bedi’s “dictatorial” style of functioning.

Ever since Independence, people of both the Union Territories have been denied the rights which people of the States enjoy. Obtaining Statehood would be the only solution to the discrepancy, he added.

Asked whether there would be more synergy in the Lok Sabha polls as he had expressed solidarity with a Congress Chief Minister, “I have not come here as Aam Aadmi Party leader but as Chief Minister of Delhi. I face similar problems with the Lt. Governor in the national capital,” he said

Mr. Kejriwal said Ms Bedi' style of functioning was “shocking” and against the will of the people. Mr. Narayanasamy was an elected Chief Minister and he represented the will of the people. The Chief Minister was accountable to the people, he said.

“Who is Ms. Bedi accountable to? She is not accountable to anyone, except informally to Mr. Modi,” the Delhi Chief Minister said.

Humiliating defeat

Mr. Kejriwal, who had worked closely with Ms. Bedi during Anna Hazare agitation under the banner of India Against Corruption movement, said it was ironical that a person who had faced a humiliating defeat (apparently referring to Ms. Bedi's loss in the Delhi assembly elections) was overruling an elected Chief Minister.

Asked if he had any advice for Ms. Bedi, Mr. Kejriwal said the Anna Hazare movement stood against corruption and to establish democracy. “She should not destroy Constitution and democracy. The Lt Governor’s chair is a small chair. It will come and go,” he added.
