Gaothan residents demand probe panel for SRA projects

Threaten agitation if committee is not formed in a week

The Sion-Koliwada Gaothan Samiti on Monday demanded that a special investigation committee be formed to look into the redevelopment projects of the Slum Rehabilitation Authority (SRA) in Sion-Koliwada.

The Samiti has also stated that the gaothan committees from five districts will launch an agitation in the city if the committee is not formed in seven days.

Sion-Koliwada residents have been protesting against the demolition of their houses in the area for over 10 years and the demolition of 11 houses in the area last week only added fuel to the fire. Residents of gaothans across the city assembled at the Mani Hall in Sion-Koliwada to protest against the demolition on Monday.

Calling the demolitions unjust and unfair, Madhuri Patil, a member of the Samiti, demanded a firm stand for the residents of the gaothans. She said, “We received a letter regarding our gaothans in April 2018, that states that the Koliwada areas under the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation will not be affected till the demarcation process is completed.”

The demarcation report is yet to arrive but a notice dated February 1, 2019, that reached them three days later, said the BMC had issued a notice under certain sections of the SRA, Ms. Patil said. “While the CM later told us there would be no demolition, there was no such remark in his letter.”

In a meeting on February 14 with Mumbai Mayor Vishwanath Mahadeshwar and civic officials, the Samiti presented its documents.

Ms. Patil said, “Assistant Municipal Commissioner (F-North) Keshav Ubale claimed the land belongs to the BMC, but that they were yet to obtain a Property Revenue Card (PRC). And while this meeting was under way, 11 houses were demolished.”

Members from the gaothans too, demanded their houses be preserved and their land not be given out under the name of development. “Gaothans across the city are facing hurdles. Our existence has come to an end. We want our land back, and will develop it ourselves,” said Pramod Shivkar (47), a driver with a private firm, whose family lost their house in 2011.

Ms. Patil said they wanted a special investigation committee under the Urban Development and Revenue Departments to look into the issue. She said, “We will be sending letters regarding our demand to the relevant departments in two days. If nothing is done in seven days, members of gaothans from Mumbai, Thane, Raigad, Palghar, Satpati and Sindhudurg will protest.”

Mr. Ubale said, “Under the Slum act, it is our responsibility to make the place of the non-consenting members available to the SRA for the development work. SRA is the planning authority here. When more than 80% members have vacated their houses in the gaothan, joined the scheme and received the benefit of the rehabilitation, these are a few non-consenting members trying to create hurdles.”

Despite attempts, SRA chief executive officer, Deepak Kapoor remained unavailable for a comment.
