Majithia, Sidhu spar over Pulwama remark

vermaajay1968@gmail.com

Chandigarh: A spat between Cabinet minister Navjot Singh Sidhu and Akali MLA Bikram Majithia marked the beginning of the Question Hour today. As Sidhu got up to answer a question of MLA Gurkirat Kolti, Akali MLAs started raising slogans against him on his recent statement on Pakistan after Pulwama suicide attack. Sidhu hit back at Majithia over drug allegations. Speaker Rana KP Singh managed to control the tempers. He later prodded Minister Charanjit Channi to give a better reply to Opposition’s “genuine” query on the functioning of the ITIs. The Congress faced some embarrassing moments when MLA Rana Gurjit Singh confronted Irrigation Minister Sukhibinder Singh Sarkaria on providing just 7.5 per cent water to Doaba region, which has 16 per cent of state’s land. TNS

Major push for rural areas with allotment of Rs 4,109 cr

Chandigarh: Rural areas got a major push in the Budget with an allotment of Rs 4,109 crore. The Department of Rural Development and Panchayats witnessed an increase of 36.08 per cent than the previous year’s allocations. The increased money will be spent for the improvement of quality of life and economic well-being of the rural population. To reduce the economic gap between villages and cities, an outlay of Rs 2,600 crore has been proposed under the ‘smart village campaign’. The funds will be spent on creating new facilities and strengthening rural infrastructure. Apart from that, the Mahatama Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act scheme got a booster with an allocation of Rs 500 crore, with an increase of Rs 260 crore (92.31 per cent) than the previous year. TNS

Canal water supply to four major cities by 2022

Chandigarh: Amritsar, Ludhiana, Jalandhar and Patiala will have canal-based water supply by 2022, said Finance Minister Manpreet Badal. The World Bank and Asian Development Bank project will cost Rs 4,800 crore. The state government has earmarked Rs 200 crore during the current year for initial mobilisation. The project aims at providing 24X7 surface water supply as part of a plan to shift these cities from tubewell to canal water for quality drinking water.

Manpreet said the state had earmarked Rs 70 crore for developing charger infrastructure for e-vehicles in Amritsar. The Centre has allocated Rs 168.87 crore under Cities Investment to Innovate Integrate and Sustain challenge. A provision of Rs 700 crore has been made for upgrading urban infrastructure in 16 cities having a population of more than one lakh. The government also earmarked Rs 234 crore to provide one lakh houses to the poor. tns

Agro plant upgrade to boost crop diversification

Abohar: With the provision of Rs 19.67 crore, the Punjab Agro Plant here may get a boost. As per the proposal, Punjab Agri Export Corporation will set up here a washing, grading and packing line for carrot, individual quick freezing unit, dehydration unit for fresh fruits and vegetables, carrot harvester and pneumatic planter to increases shelf life of perishable fruit and vegetables. This will help maintain balance in production and marketing circle. Local Congress leader Sandeep Jakhar said the move would promote crop diversification by utilising the capacity of the juice plant. He said the strengthening of the plant would go a long way in promoting horticulture in the region. oc

MLAs to donate month’s salary to CRPF martyrs’ kin

Chandigarh: The Punjab Assembly on Monday resolved to donate one month’s salary of each legislator to the next of kin of CRPF personnel killed in the Pulwama attack. A resolution to give one month salary by each MLA was adopted unanimously by the Punjab Assembly here. The resolution was moved by Congress legislator Parminder Singh Pinki. The Ferozepur MLA has written to UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi and AICC president Rahul Gandhi requesting all party MLAs to follow suit across the country. Not only party MLAs, even alliance partners in other states and MPs should donate their one-month salary, he said. He demanded that the government should set up a martyrs’ family fund. TNS

Industry: Budget offers hope

Chandigarh: The state industry has appreciated the measures announced by the government in this year’s Budget to boost manufacturing and infrastructure development. Saravjit Singh Samra, chairman, Confederation of Indian Industry, Punjab, said: “It is heartening to observe that after several years the state is in primary surplus, and unfunded gap in the Budget will be reduced. Power subsidy to the industry will give it a boost. The government’s focus on infrastructure development will go a long way to boost the industry. TNS
