Surya Kiran squadron: All you need to know about the IAF aerobatic team

The deadly crash of two Surya Kiran jet aircraft in Bengaluru on Tuesday (February 19) has once again brought attention to the unique team of the Indian Air Force. The team holds a special place in the Indian Air Force as it is an aerobatics demonstration teams. That is, it is a team that displays flying maneuvers and is not used for standard air force operations.

The crash in Bengaluru took place when two Surya Kiran aircraft collided while practising for the biennial Aero India show, which takes place in Bengaluru.

The Surya Kiran (meaning rays of the sun) team has continued to be at the centre of attraction in the Indian Air Force with its dazzling and thrilling air formations. The Surya Kiran Aerobatics Team (SKAT) was formed in 1996, with the Kiran MK-II aircraft. The team, which is part of the 52nd Squadron, first took flight in 1998.

The Indian Air Force conceived the Surya Kiran Aerobatics Team as an indigenous aerobatic team to perform at Indian air shows (Getty photo)

It displayed a formation of nine-aircraft during the Independence Day fly-past over the Red Fort in 1998. And it has continued to make everyone's hearts race since then.

135th course of National Defence Academy(NDA) is preparing for the most memorable day of their life -Passing out Parade(POP).



Team SKAT comprising of all Ex-NDA pilots is all set to spread their wings & touch the sky with glory over their Alma Mater.



Indeed a proud moment. pic.twitter.com/jRYixx9Pu3 November 29, 2018

The Surya Kiran Aerobatics Team usually performs with nine aircraft. The SKAT with nine-aircraft formation has performed numerous demonstrations worldwide and is among the most renowned public display aerobatic teams.

From the deepest seas to the highest mountains. We are always the best. We are the #Suryakiran Aerobatic Team. pic.twitter.com/hQVDZnpeJh Suryakiran Aerobatic Team (@Suryakiran_IAF) February 5, 2019

The Indian Air Force conceived the SKAT as an indigenous aerobatic team to perform at Indian air shows. The Surya Kiran team is based out of the Bidar Air Force Station in Karnataka.

Interestingly, the SKAT is also the youngest nine-aircraft aerobatic world in the world.

The Surya Kiran team is based out of the Bidar Air Force Station in Karnataka (IANS photo)

In 2011, the Surya Kiran team had to be grounded. However, the aerobatics team was resurrected in 2017. This time around, the Surya Kiran Aerobatics Team took to the skies with the Hawk MK-132 aircraft, which replaced the old Kiran.

The team consists of 13 pilots but only nine fly at a show.

A thrilling R-day; with the Suryakirans performing for the navy, & blazing glorious trail in Goan skies! Flawless show by Gp Capt Prashant Grover & his team made us proud of our air force & Air Warriors - better than the best. Thank you @IAF_MCC.

BZ @Suryakiran_IAF. pic.twitter.com/HERPq1yC8M Arun Prakash (@arunp2810) January 26, 2019

The duration of the display routine varies from about ten to twenty minutes depending upon the location of the display site. The first half of the routine includes turns, wingovers, loops and barrel rolls in various nine aircraft formations.

During the second half, the formation splits into two groups to carry out a variety of manoeuvres such as splits, level and rolling crosses, inverted runs, the heart loop. Watch this video of them performing some spectacular stunts.

The team, which has been a star performer at air shows around the world, performs roughly 30 times a year.
