Play withdrawn after protests erupt in Jaipur over depiction of Indian Army, Kashmiri stone pelters

The play, titled Eidgah ke Jinnat, was cancelled after protestors stormed the art centre’s premises and demanded that the play be withdrawn. (Photo: PTI)

A play based on stone pelters in Jammu and Kashmir and the role of the Indian Army in the strife-torn region of the state was withdrawn after protests erupted in Jaipur. The play, which was to be played today as a part of Navras festival in Jawahar Kala Kendra (JKK), invited criticism and protests for its interpretation of the interaction between Kashmiri youth, including stone pelters and the Army.

The play, titled Eidgah ke Jinnat, was cancelled after protestors stormed the art centre's premises and demanded that the play be withdrawn. One of the dialogues in the play described the Indian Army as draconian and showed the security forces in bad light.

Questioning the timing of the play, the protestors said that the play suggested excesses committed by the Indian Army in Kashmir.

The play also had an "objectionable and offensive" reference to Lord Hanuman which led to protests at the JKK.

"In such an atmosphere, the government-run Jawahar Kala Kendra has run a play which shows Kashmiri stone pelters as right. Inappropriate and insulting comments have been made about the security forces in the play," a protestor said.

A complaint was filed with the police. Sources said the police advised the JKK to cancel the show given the current situation in Kashmir after the Feb 14 Pulwama terror attack.

The play, Eidgah ke Jinnat, was shown at the JKK at 6:30 pm on Monday and was scheduled to be shown again on Tuesday evening. It was, however, withdrawn after the protest.

"This entire play is about stone pelters in J&K. I have not seen the play but there were some comments which were objected upon. A complaint was registered. We had sent it to the director of JKK. Whatever programme happens (at JKK), they [art centre authorities] get it done. They will guide them about what is to be done," a police officer investigating the matter mentioned.

The play is directed by Abhishek Majumdar and is produced by Jawahar Kala Kendra.

"It was produced by Abhishek Majumdar with the support of JKK. I am not a technical man but it was approved by technical officials earlier," Rajendra Vijay, acting director, Jawahar Kala Kendra, told India Today TV.

The director of the play, however, defended it and said nowhere anyone had objected to its content.
