UPS Advances Global Road Safety With Landmark Public-Private Call to Action at World Economic Forum in Davos

February 19, 2019 /3BL Media/ UPS (NYSE: UPS) announced the company is among a group of global organizations that have been collaborating with the World Economic Forum (WEF) and the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA) to launch The Global Road Safety Initiative, designed to improve global road safety across a broad spectrum of issues, including driver training, pedestrian safety, and two-wheeler helmet use.

The initiative commenced in 2018 with a pilot project to establish a Road Safety Partnership for India (RSPI), where more than 10 percent of the world’s road traffic fatalities take place. It now expands to a global scope, with particular emphasis on low- and middle-income countries.

“With more than 126,000 vehicles on roads all over the world every day, safety is a core value for UPS,” said UPS Chairman and CEO David Abney. “The most important stop our employees make every day is when they go home safely to their families and loved ones. We know that our leadership is important, but that it will take a broad, public-private commitment from a wide array of organizations to affect real change – that is exactly what the Global Road Safety Initiative is poised to accomplish.”

The UPS Foundation has invested in, and led, the development of road safety programs around the globe, and was one of the first private sector companies to join the United Nations Decade of Action on Road Safety, launched in 2011. UPS’s commitment to safe driving is a key area of focus with its drivers, who are then able to share their knowledge in volunteer activities that help train novice drivers. Through the UPS Road Code program, a collaborative effort with the Boys & Girls Clubs of America and with various youth development organizations in Europe, Asia and the Middle East, UPS volunteers have provided safe driving training to more than 48,000 young and novice drivers. Additionally, The UPS Foundation has provided support of the Asia Injury Prevention Foundation, funding the “Helmets for Kids” program in Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam, with more than 35,000 helmets provided for young cyclists.

Together with all other supporters, UPS will advance road safety policies and principles. This global initiative encompasses numerous priorities (with additional priorities in India), including: improved road safety legislation, improved road safety data collection and statistics, safer vehicles, and safer infrastructure, among others.

In addition to The UPS Foundation’s focus on road safety, UPS has also established an intensive driver training program called Integrad, using advanced technologies like virtual reality and ground-breaking, hands-on, commercial delivery driver training modules. That focus on road safety is demonstrated by the fact that more than 10,000 UPS drivers have been inducted into the company’s Circle of Honor, in recognition of 25 or more years without an avoidable accident.

The Global Road Safety Initiative complements all of the other safe driver training and funding programs from UPS and The UPS Foundation, and forms a new cornerstone in the company’s continued leadership in all areas of global road safety.

About UPS

UPS (NYSE: UPS) is a global leader in logistics, offering a broad range of solutions including transporting packages and freight; facilitating international trade, and deploying advanced technology to more efficiently manage the world of business. Headquartered in Atlanta, UPS serves more than 220 countries and territories worldwide. UPS was awarded America’s Best Customer Service company for Shipping and Delivery services by Newsweek magazine; Fortune magazine’s Most Valuable Brand in Transportation; and top rankings on the JUST 100 list for social responsibility, the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index, and the Harris Poll Reputation Quotient, among other prestigious rankings and awards. The company can be found on the web at ups.com or pressroom.ups.com and its corporate blog can be found at longitudes.ups.com. The company’s sustainability eNewsletter, UPS Horizons, can be found at ups.com/sustainabilitynewsletter . To get UPS news direct, follow @UPS_News on Twitter.
