Fishermen fear solar project at Ujani lake will affect livelihood

All set to protest, the community claims fish populace is already low



The decades-old traditional fishermen communities engaged in fresh water fishery at Ujani lake have decided to oppose state’s largest floating solar power projects at the dam reservoir. They have declared a jalsamadhi protest from next week at Bhigwan and Diksal villages near Indapur.



The community has claimed that the 40,000 families that depend on the dam, will be affected because of the project. They have further said that they are already “starving” due to the absence of native fish seeds and illegal encroachment. The fishermen fear that core area will shrink once development commences.



A tender was initiated by the Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Ltd (MSEDCL) for the 1,000 MW floating solar power project in the reservoir of Ujani dam last week. It will be spread over 5,000 hectares of water surface in first phase and then, is expected to augment green power availability and prevent evaporation loss at the dam, thus saving about 1TMC water every year. The 1,000 MW project will be split in 10 different clusters of 100 MW each. The aim is to provide electricity to the local farmers, who are often facing problem of loadshedding during the day.



Talking to Pune Mirror, Bharat Mallav, member of Maharashtra Machhimar Sangharsh Kruti Samiti, said, “The mega project will snatch our livelihood. The equipment and machineries in the lake would damage the ecosystem of the river, which is already marred by the pollution emanating from Pune. Why have we been not taken into confidence while such an important decision was being taken?”



The exploitation of fish in the reservoir has purged communities like Mallav, Bhoi, Bhilla, and Pardhi from Bhigwan and Indapur. “Now, there are over five lakh fishermen who directly or indirectly depend on fresh water fishery. We strongly oppose this project,” he added.



Vice-president of this organisation, Seetaram Nagare, said that the irrigation authorities failed to evict the illegal fishermen who are using the banned purse seine nets. “Illegal fishery has harmed the aquatic population — which has registered a staggering 60 per cent drop. This solar plant will snatch our remaining resources,” he said.



These grievances have been communicated to the state government, according to Dattatrey Bharne, Indapur MLA. He added, “We are expecting some positive steps towards giving relief to these traditional fishermen.”



A senior official from the irrigation department, however, chose to defend the project. He said, “A huge solar project needs lots of land and land acquisition has become costlier. The concept of floating solar panels on dam water is feasible and cost effective. The issues of fishermen will also be addressed through a meeting with water resources minister.”


