Parliament updates: Lok Sabha adjourned for the day; Speaker Sumitra Mahajan suspends AIADMK MPs for 5 sittings-India News , Firstpost

Parliament LIVE updates: Congress MP Sushmita Deb is seen hurling paper airplanes at Arun Jaitley as he rebuts Rahul Gandhi in the Parliament. Interestingly, male MPs can be seen folding pieces of paper into airplanes and handing it to Deb to launch. Sonia Gandhi is seen patting Deb on her back after she flings her first paper plane in the air.

Auto refresh feeds

The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Bill, 2018 is scheduled to come up in the Rajya Sabha today. However, expect a stormy session and repeated disruptions in the upper House today as the Opposition remains adamant on their demand that the draft law be sent to a select committee for scrutiny. Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad has moved a motion in the House for referring the triple talaq bill to a select committee including 11 Opposition members.

Gandhi will initiate the discussion on Rafale. KC Venugopal, who gave notice for the discussion requested the speaker to allow Gandhi to speak first.

Reports said that Congress chief Rahul Gandhi will speak in the Lok Sabha today, leading the Opposition's charge on Rafale issue. Gandhi is expected to make a statement pointing out alleged irregularities in the defence deal, while demanding for an investigation by a Joint Parliamentary Committee.

A person (allegedly Goa health minister Vishwajit Rane) is heard speaking to an unknown person and telling him that how at a state cabinet meeting, ex-defence minister and Goa chief minister Manohar Parrikar let it slip that he holds all files on Rafale deal in his bedroom. "Whether he wants someone to tell this to people in Delhi, I don't know," the person purported to be Rane can be heard saying.

Ahead of the crucial debate on Rafale issue in Lok Saba, Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala said that the party was in possession of an audio recording wherein a Goa state minister can be heard quoting former defence minister Manohar Parrikar talking about holding all files on Rafale deal "in his bedroom".

"With all these importnat things, the country is looking towards us. I am particularly concerned about the loss of the image the House is suffering. Secondly, not to make comparison but the other House is functioning," Naidu said.

Rajya Sabha Chairman Venkaiah Naidu told the Upper House MPs that only four days were remaining before the Winter Session gets over. He said that the Bills that have a larger consensus should be passed in the current session. He said that some important issues are also listed for discussion.

Members continued sloganeering and in the Lower House even as the House reconvened at 12 pm. The Lok Sabha was debation the The Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendmend) Bill, 2018. It wasn't clear which party was disrupting the proceedings, however, earlier in the day, the protests were lead by AIADMK and TDP MPs.

The Vishwa Hindu Parishad indicated today that it was not happy with the prime minister's statement that an ordinance to build the Ram temple will only be brought after the Supreme Court reaches a conclusion. VHP spokesperson Alok Kumar said that the organisation has met over 350 MPs, and have put in requests for appointment with UPA chair Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi to request them to push for the construction of Ram Temple.

Chairman Venkaiah Naidu said that the House was scheduled to discuss a matter relating to Jammu and Kashmir. However, because of the member's demands, I have called the concerned minister to make a statement on the Cauvery issue. However, AIADMK and DMK MPs stormed to the Well and continued shouting slogans.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi initiated the debate on the Rafale issue under Rule 193 in the Parliament. He said that it was a tragedy that the MPs from AIADMK were not letting the House to protect the prime minister.

Rahul Gandhi said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi claimed that nobody was accusing him of wrong doing on Rafale. This is untrue. The entire nation is asking a direct question on Rafale but the prime minister could not answer a straight question even in a one-hour-long 'staged interview.'

Congress president Rahul Gandhi is spearheading the party’s charge against the Modi government on alleged irregularities in the Rafale deal and is expected to demand a joint parliamentary committee probe into the contract signed by the NDA government with Dassault Aviation for procurement of 36 fighter jets after the Supreme Court refused to order a court-monitored probe.

Rahul Gandhi sought Speaker's permission to play an audio clip wherein a Goa minister is allegedly heard quoting Goa chief minister Manohar Parrikar that the latter has Rafale files in his bedroom. However, the Speaker denied him permission after Arun Jaitley stepped in. Rahul then sought to read the transcript of the purported statement.

"Ok I won't read it since you are so afraid of it," Rahul tells the Speaker.

The Speaker has ruled that neither the clip can be played in the House, nor can the Congress chief read out the transcript until he can give it in writing that the clip is verified.

If you are so sure then authenticate this clip in writing and face expulsion from House if you are proved wrong. You are afraid because it is fabricated," Jaitley said.

After Rahul sought to read the transcript of an alleged conversation between Goa minister Vishwajit Rane and an unknown person, Arun Jaitley intervened and said, "This man lies continuously. Earlier, he presented an entirely fabricated conversation between himself and a French politician, now he is lying about this tape."

Rahul Gandhi named Anil Ambani on two previous occasions during his speech, however, the Speaker later said that since the said person is not a member of the House, he cannot be named on the floor of the House. Rahul retirted to this saying, "new rules madam? very well!".

"It is very clear that Prime Minister Narendra Modi does not have the guts to come to Parliament and confront the questions on Rafale. He is hiding in his room and has left the defence minister here to defend a deal she was not even a part of," Rahul said.

PM does not have the guts to come to Parliament and face questions on Rafale, says Rahul Gandhi

"When the Congress party said that they wanted to take up Rafale issue once again, we assumed they would have something substantive to say. But the lead speaker of the Congress has disappointed us," Jaitley said.

"On the last occasion, he (Rahul Gandhi) manufactured a conversation between him and the former French President. Today, he repeats the same. Today, he tried to produce a tap but he is too scared to authenticate it," Jaitley said.

Congress MP Sushmita Deb is seen hurling paper airplanes at Arun Jaitley as he rebuts Rahul Gandhi in the Parliament. Interestingly, male MPs can be seen folding pieces of paper into airplanes and handing it to Deb to launch. Sonia Gandhi is seen patting Deb on her back after she flings her first paper plane in the air.

Jaitley accuses the UPA government of playing with national security. "Rafale was essential for our forces. Defence deal conspirators are making charges," he said. The Finance Minister said that 'the family' only understands the language of money but does not value the matters of national security. Underlining the procedure followed in procuring the Rafale aircraft, Jaitley said, "Defence agreements are of two types, either through tenders or inter-governmental agreements. There were six bidders and ultimately Rafale was shortlisted. UPA postponed Rafale acquisition."

"It is no secret that when UPA government was there, these planes were going to be acquired by the French. What Mr Jaitley did in his argument was something every good lawyer should do: he cherry-picked arguments to suit his side," BJD MP Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo said in Lok Sabha.

"All we seek is information. Nobody wants the deal to be scrapped. However, when the finance minister can state that the deal is 9 percent cheaper than the UPA level, where is the secret in pricing?" Deo said.

"There are questions which arise about the pricing, irrespective of whether Supreme Court went into the pricing issue or not. Qatar has bought the same planes at a much cheaper price than India," BJD MP Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo said in Lok Sabha.

"All the 36 Rafale aircraft will come in 2020. Why should we reduce the number of Rafale aircraft when it is the best?" Sawant said.

"HAL had performed well. The former CMD had said that HAL could manufacture Rafale in India. Why was HAL denied this deal?" Arvind Sawant, Shiv Sena MP, said in the Lok Sabha.

Why was HAL denied the deal despite saying it could manufacture Rafale? says Shiv Sena MP in Lok Sabha

"The Supreme Court judgment never said there should not be a JPC. Why is this government scared of a JPC?" Shiv Sena MP Arvind Sawant said in Lok Sabha.

"A joint select committee should be formed so that the role of the prime minister can be investigated," he further said.

"It is unfortunate that the prime minister is not responding on this issue. The prime minister is not even present in the House," said a TDP MP in Lok Sabha.

"The government is not working for self-reliance. The government is working for self and Reliance," CPM MP said in Lok Sabha.

Govt not working for self-reliance, it is working for self and Reliance: CPM MP

"If this Rafale deal is cheaper, why was the number of aircraft reduced to 36 from 126?" Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik, NCP MP, said in Lok Sabha.

"All of them stand suspended for five consecutive sittings of the House," she added.

"You have come to the Well of the House and are obstructing the functioning of the House," Mahajan said.

As the Lok Sabha session resumed, papers were thrown at Speaker Sumitra Mahajan. She then began reading out the names of people who had disrupted the House session.

Parliament Latest updates: TMC MP Saugata Roy said that former defence minister Manohar Parrikar claimed that he was "in possession of all papers related to Rafale". Ruckus followed in Lok Sabha after this statement.

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley in Lok Sabha said that there can be no JPC on the Rafale issue.

Congress MP Sushmita Deb is seen hurling paper airplanes at Arun Jaitley as he rebuts Rahul Gandhi in the Parliament. Interestingly, male MPs can be seen folding pieces of paper into airplanes and handing it to Deb to launch. Sonia Gandhi is seen patting Deb on her back after she flings her first paper plane in the air.

Arun Jaitley accusing Rahul Gandhi of lying said, "The country is disappointed because every word the Congress lead speaker (Rahul Gandhi) has said is a lie on the word of the Supreme Court. When the apex court speaks on every issue, it is treated as the last word, except for the jurisdiction on certain issues in the Parliament. Rahul Gandhi here says each of the contentions was raised before the court. There are some people who have a natural dislike for truth, from the first to the last word, every word spoken (by Gandhi) is a lie."

Rahul Gandhi named Anil Ambani on two previous occasions during his speech, however, the Speaker later said that since the said person is not a member of the House, he cannot be named on the floor of the House. Rahul retirted to this saying, "new rules madam? very well!".

The Speaker has ruled that neither the clip can be played in the House, nor can the Congress chief read out the transcript until he can give it in writing that the clip is verified. "Ok I won't read it since you are so afraid of it," Rahul tells the Speaker.

Rahul Gandhi sought Speaker's permission to play an audio clip wherein a Goa minister is allegedly heard quoting Goa chief minister Manohar Parrikar that the latter has Rafale files in his bedroom. However, the Speaker denied him permission after Arun Jaitley stepped in. Rahul then sought to read the transcript of the purported statement.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi is spearheading the party’s charge against the Modi government on alleged irregularities in the Rafale deal and is expected to demand a joint parliamentary committee probe into the contract signed by the NDA government with Dassault Aviation for procurement of 36 fighter jets after the Supreme Court refused to order a court-monitored probe.

Rajya Sabha saw repeated adjournments amid sloganeering by AIADMK members and was adjourned to meet again at 2 pm. The AIADMK MPs are protesting against a proposed dam on the Cauvery river in Karnataka. Meanwhile, the Lok Sabha is debating the Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendmend) Bill, 2018 despite heavy sloganeering by AIADMK members in the House.

With Congress claiming that it had proof that ex-defence minister Manohar Parrikar was holding the Modi goverment ransom over the Rafale issue, the party chose its president Rahul Gandhi to lead the attack in Lok Sabha today. Rahul will speak at 2 pm. He is expected to make a statement pointing out alleged irregularities in the defence deal, while demanding for an investigation by a Joint Parliamentary Committee.

Wednesday's Parliament session is headed for a stormy start, with the Lok Sabha scheduled to debate the controversial Rafale deal and the Rajya Sabha expected to take up the triple talaq bill..

On Monday, Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad moved a motion in the House for referring the triple talaq bill to a select committee. The motion is likely to be taken up Wednesday, also the day when the House is scheduled o take up the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Bill, 2018. The bill has already been passed by the Lok Sabha.

In the motion, Azad has also proposed the names of 11 Opposition members to be part of the Select Committee of the House, including Anand Sharma of the Congress, Ram Gopal Yadav of the Samajwadi Party, Sanjay Singh of the Aam Aadmi Party and Manoj Kumar Jha of the Rashtriya Janata Dal.

Opposition MPs have also given notices for amendments in the bill. AAP Rajya Sabha member Sanjay Singh said he had recommended four amendments in the clauses of the bill.

Meanwhile, in the Lok Sabha, a fiery debate can be expected as the Congress has decided to accept Finance Minister Arun Jaitley's 'challenge' to debate on the Rafale issue.

"Jaitley ji has thrown a challenge ... we are ready for a debate on 2 January. Please decide a time," Congress Leader in Lok Sabha Mallikarjun Kharge said. Congress leader KC Venugopal and Sankar Prasad Datta of the Communist Party of India will raise the discussion on the issue under Rule 193.

The Congress has been raising the matter in Parliament since the Winter Session of Parliament began on 11 December. They have been demanding an inquiry by a Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Rafale deal.
