TDP stabbed Telugu pride icon NTR in back by going with Congress, says Narendra Modi

New Delhi:

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday lambasted Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu, accusing the party of stabbing Telugu Desam Party (TDP) founder Nandamuri Taraka Rama Rao, famously known as NTR, in the back by allying with the Congress. Interacting with Andhra Pradesh Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) booth workers via video conferencing, Modi termed NTR “true icon of Telugu Pride” and said that he never forgave the Congress for betraying the interests of Telugu people. “NTR was a true icon of Telugu Pride. It was NTR who led the Congress Mukt Bharat movement with the anti-Congress National Front. Today his own son-in-law has bent his head before the Congress to save his power,” the prime minister said.

Also Read | You will be finished: Andhra CM Chandrababu Naidu fumes at BJP workers for blocking his convoy

The prime minister said that NTR’s dream of "Swarna Andhra Pradesh" would be fulfilled with the development of all and not just one family. "NTR's dream of a Swarna Andhra Pradesh will be realized when every citizen of Andhra Pradesh enjoys the fruits of development and not just one family. Swarna Andhra Pradesh will be scripted by the Youth Power, of All Telugus," Modi said.

NTR was the chief minister of Andhra Pradesh for seven years over three terms. He had founded the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) on March 29, 1982, in Hyderabad to get Andhra Pradesh rid of the Congress rule. He established himself in the national politics by the formation of the anti-Congress alliance - National Front - at the Centre.

The present TDP chief Chandrababu Naidu, who was a part of the BJP-led ruling National Democratic Alliance (NDA) until March 2018. He broke away from the alliance over the issue of special category status for Andhra Pradesh.

Also Read | These 11 parties left PM Narendra Modi since 2014 Lok Sabha elections

Since the break up with the BJP, Naidu has constantly been attacking Modi for allegedly betraying the people of the state by not implementing the provisions of the AP Reorganisation Act, 2014. He had also been accusing the prime minister of trying to create a rift between the two Telugu states - Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.

The prime minister was scheduled to visit Andhra Pradesh on January 6 but his visit was canceled in wake of protests by the people over the issue of special status to the state.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
