Mapping your favourite neta's footfall: What Priyanka Gandhi, Rajinikanth, Narendra Modi were upto last week

Electioneering for the 2019 Lok Sabha polls is gearing up with politicians crisscrossing the country and addressing political rallies. (Collage: IndiaToday)

It's election year in India and the frenzy surrounding the 2019 Lok Sabha election is palpable -- rallies, colours, slogans, claims, promises, accusations and aspirations...you name it, and this months-long extravaganza will showcase it all.

As you navigate the torrent of election news coming your way, you're likely to encounter words like 'exuberant', 'vibrant', 'mega rally', among others. With so many rallies and speeches everyday, it can be difficult to keep track of what our netas are up to. But worry not.

IndiaToday.in presents a weekly series titled 'Mapping Your Favourite Neta's Footfall'. This interactive recap will provide you information on all that happened in the week that went by. You'll be able to relive the key moments -- through photos, speeches and articles, all in one place.

Looking for the best election coverage on the web? Need to stay updated without being overwhelmed by information? Look no further -- our election yatra is getting started, and we want you to hop on.

In Part 1, we bring you a recap of Priyanka Gandhi Vadra's roadshow in Lucknow, Chandrababu Naidu's day-long hunger strike against Prime Minister Narednra Modi in New Delhi, Akhilesh Yadav being detained at Lucknow airport, Rahul Gandhi's rally in Gujarat, Amit Shah's speech on Citizenship Bill in Assam, superstar Rajinikanth's announcement of not contesting the 2019 Lok Sabha election, and much more.

Click HERE to experience this interactive in fullscreen.

ALSO READ | Political funding: Who pays for the party?

ALSO READ | Will the politics of Modinomics work in Lok Sabha elections?

ALSO READ | Priyanka Gandhi takes the plunge, but what exactly her job ahead is

ALSO READ | Warning signs loom: What BJP needs to learn from 3-0 loss in assembly elections

ALSO WATCH | Has PM Modi set the tone for 2019 Lok Sabha polls?
