Oppn. not convinced about outcome of dharna

Calls protest a political drama; cites absence of specific approval for any of Narayanasamy’s schemes

Barely had the dust settled on the unprecedented dharna launched by Chief Minister V. Narayanasamy and his Cabinet colleagues in front of the Raj Nivas to protest against the “authoritarian” functioning of Lieutenant Governor Kiran Bedi than the discussion has shifted to the outcomes of the stir.

Mr. Narayanasamy had announced the temporary suspension of the agitation on Monday night after Ms. Bedi ceded to some of his demands after extended consultations.

Some of them included the Lt. Governor “accepting” the government’s demand to continue with the distribution of free rice through ration shops instead of transferring money to beneficiaries’ accounts and “agreeing” to reconsider her decision to close down the Anglo French Textiles and Swadeshi Bharati Cotton Mills and to overrule the Cabinet approval of a voluntary retirement scheme for employees of the mills.

However, Ms. Bedi steered clear of the details of the outcome while expressing happiness over the Chief Minister and his Cabinet colleagues calling off their agitation.

“The dharna by the Chief Minister outside the Raj Nivas is over. The Chief Minister, Council of Ministers, Chief Secretary and Secretaries met. It helped clarify and consolidate issues. Am happy Puducherry Government will return to work tomorrow morning. So will the road to Raj Nivas be open for visitors...” she said in a message to the media.

Questions raised

Meanwhile, some Opposition parties have come out questioning the outcome.

The Opposition AIADMK on Wednesday said that Mr. Narayanasamy had not scored any success by his dharna because there was no specific approval for any of the schemes projected by him.

AIADMK Legislature party leader A. Anbalagan told presspersons here that the meeting was a failure and the dharna was a political drama staged by Mr. Narayanasamy, his Cabinet colleagues, and MLAs belonging to the Congress and the DMK.

The Chief Minister should have made arrangements for a special session of the Assembly to brief members about the outcome of the talks. But he staged the dharna mainly as a political agitation rather than a protest to highlight the requirements of the Union Territory.

Mr. Anbalagan said the government should have approached the Centre with specific schemes for the development of the U.T. Schemes like tourism development and implementation of flood control in Yanam were cleared by the Centre. But Mr. Narayanasamy did not take any follow-up action to implement the schemes. The dharna was staged only for political gains, particularly when the Lok Sabha election was close at hand, Mr. Anbalagan said.

He blamed Ms. Bedi for taking a negative stand and letting the people suffer by her arbitrary style of functioning.

Another critic was AIADMK MLA Vaiyapuri Manikandan who also dubbed the dharna as a “drama” by the Chief Minister to pull the wool over the eyes of the people to hide the “inefficiency” of his government.

Makkal Needhi Maiyam Puducherry president M.A.S. Subramanian was sceptical about the outcome of the dharna beyond the Lt. Governor agreeing to reconsider, but not accept, the demands put forth by the Chief Minister. The Communist Party of India (M) has reiterated the demand for Statehood for Puducherry and has called upon the people to extend support to agitations in support of Statehood. In a statement, R. Rajangam, secretary of CPI(M), said the day and night agitation called off temporarily by Mr. Narayanasamy and his Cabinet colleagues was a victory for democracy and the people of the Union Territory.

Demand for Statehood

Mr. Rajangam said that the Centre had been using the post of governors as a tool to disrupt the functioning of elected governments in the Opposition-ruled States. He said Lieutenant Governor Kiran Bedi had been trampling upon the principles of cooperative federalism right from day one of assuming office. The only solution to all this was Statehood and there should be no deviation from this stand, he said.
