K’taka audiogate: BS Yeddyurappa approaches HC seeking quashing of FIR against him

K’taka audiogate: BS Yeddyurappa approaches HC seeking quashing of FIR against him

This comes after Yeddyurappa along with his co-accused secured anticipatory bail from a special Bengaluru court on Saturday.

news Crime

Former Karnataka CM BS Yeddyurappa on Wednesday filed a petition in the Kalburgi bench of the Karnataka High Court seeking the quashing of an FIR registered against him in the recent audiogate scandal. The HC has reserved its order in the matter.

This development comes after Yeddyurappa along with his co-accused, secured anticipatory bail from a special Bengaluru court on Saturday in connection with the case.

Yeddyurappa, fellow party MLAs Shivanagouda, Preetham Gowda and Yeddyurappa’s advisor Marakal have been booked by Devdurga Police Station in Raichur district under the Prevention of Corruption Act. The FIR was registered on February 11 based on a complaint by Sharanagouda, son of Gurmitkal MLA Naganagouda Kandkur.

On Wednesday, Raichur police including the SP refused to speak about the case stating the matter is “sub judice”.

A source in the BJP said that the move was made just ahead of the police issuing notices to the accused.

It may be recalled how CM HD Kumaraswamy along with Sharangouda in an explosive press conference called on the morning of February 8, released an audio tape where Yeddyurappa is allegedly heard offering bribes to convince Sharangouda’s father to resign as an MLA as part of a bid to dislodge the coalition government. The alleged conversation took place in Yadgir Circuit House, claimed Sharanagouda. While Yeddyurappa had initially denied even meeting Sharanagouda in the Yadgir Circuit House in the early hours of February 8, he later admitted to being present there but claimed that the audio was doctored.

This case is independent of a Special Investigation Team (SIT) probe ordered by Karnataka Assembly Speaker Ramesh Kumar, which needs to be completed within 15 days. However, the CM is yet to form the SIT.

While the BJP in the state claimed the audio was doctored and sought a judicial probe in the matter, the issue was discussed in the Lok Sabha as well. Congress MPs had staged a protest on February 11 holding placards in front of the Gandhi statue inside the Parliament complex against the alleged political “horse trading”.
