Thousands of tribal farmers in Maharashtra begin protest march from Nashik to Mumbai

Farmers and tribals taking out a protest rally from Thane to Azad Maidan in Mumbai in November of 2018 (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Nashik: Over 20,000 tribal farmers from different parts of Maharashtra are all set to march from Nashik to Mumbai in protest against the state government for failing to meet their demands. A similar march was organised about six months ago following which Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis had agreed to fulfill the demands of the protesting farmers.

However, the tribal farmers who marched from Dindori to Nashik and are set to march all the way to Mumbai claim that none of their demands have been met by the Bharatiya Janata Party-led (BJP) state government. Speaking exclusively to Mirror Now, the agitating farmers said that they want the Maharashtra government to implement the Forest Rights Act (FRA). They are also demanding immediate relief for drought-affected areas.

Around 15 thousand farmers expected to march from Nashik to #Mumbai to protest against the #Maharashtra govt's unfulfilled promises. @Santia_Gora speaks to the farmers pic.twitter.com/EJ51OL7axm — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) February 20, 2019

A ground report from Nashik where farmers from across Maharashtra gathered on Wednesday shows All India Kisan Sabha leaders urging the farmers to carry out a peaceful march to Mumbai city. A majority of the farmers also said that they are in no mood to entertain false promises by the Devendra Fadnavis government. "Such is the situation that several talukas in Nashik do not even have drinking water," said one of the farmers.

#Farmers and Tribals from across the state of #Maharashtra have started long march from #Nashik today. They will head towards Mumbai with different demands ahead of #elections in the state. @KisanSabha is leading the march towards #Mantralaya #Mumbai pic.twitter.com/i9ZiIsveBt — Ali shaikh (@alishaikh3310) February 20, 2019

Maharashtra Irrigation Minister Girish Mahajan was due to visit the farmers in Nashik on Wednesday night. However, no reports of him meeting leaders of the movement have been reported as of yet. Members of 208 farmer organisations are set to cover a distance of 180 kilometres on foot. By the time, they reach Mumbai, the budget session of the Vidhan Sabha will be underway.

Must Read: Gurugram residents approach police, civic body over increasing threats from 'water mafia'
