As Sabarimala protests rage, women enter restricted sanctum sanctorum of Tulja Bhavani temple in Maharashtra

The Tulja Bhavani temple in Osmanabad, Maharashtra. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Osmanabad: While the Sabarimala protests continue to escalate in down south Kerala, another controversy broke out in Maharashtra after some women entered the sanctum sanctorum of Tulja Bhavani temple in Osmanabad and touched the idol.

The women, by touching the idol, have broken a century-old tradition in the western state of India. Built in the 12th century, the temple is dedicated to goddess Bhavani who is an incarnation of Parvati.

According to media reports, the women had recently met the district collector to verify if there is any such law that prohibits women from entering the sanctum sanctorum but were told that no such law exists.

It is also said that former Indian prime minister Indira Gandhi had also visited the temple once but was not allowed to enter the sanctum sanctorum.

Located roughly 50 kilometres from Solapur, the temple is seen as one of 51 ‘shakti peeths’ in India. A ‘shakti peetha’ is a pilgrimage shrine that is dedicated to Hindu goddesses. The district collector is the head of the trust that governs the temple.

Kerala has been witnessing unprecedented violence between the BJP and the CPI(M) workers and both the parties have accused each other of orchestrating violence in the state. The state witnessed widespread violence following hartal called by the right-wing groups over the entry of women in Sabarimala.

The attacks come at a time when the state is facing intense protest over the entry of two women of menstruating age into the Sabarimala, nearly four months after the Supreme Court quashed age-old restrictions.

Two women Kanakadurga, 44, a CPI(ML) activist from Kozhikode district and Bindu, 42, a government employee from Malappuram, became the first women of menstruating age to enter the Sabarimala Temple and offering prayers on Wednesday. The act was denounced by pro-Hindutva outfits which saw it as a breach of their centuries-old tradition.

As many as 1,369 people have been arrested and over 717 detained in hartal-related violence in the state after the two women entered the Lord Ayyappa shrine on January 2.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
