Members of minority communities protest against attacks on Kashmiris

Members of minority communities protest against attacks on Kashmiris

SRINAGAR, Feb 20: Members of minority communities including Sikhs and Hindus today took out solidarity march in support of Kashmiri people facing attacks by “extremist” forces in Jammu and other parts of India.

Demanding stringent actions against “fanatics”, scores of local and non-local Hindus and Sikhs hit streets to protest brutality meted out to the Kashmiri students and businessmen outside state.

Chanting slogans “stop attacking Kashmiris, stop violence” the protesters assembled outside historic Hanuman Mandir at Hari Singh High Street here to lodge their protest.

“We condemn attacks on Kashmiri people in Jammu and other parts of India and appeal the government to book hooligans hell-bent on spoiling peace in the state,” protester said.

They said the mob violence which has put lives and properties of Kashmiri people at risk must be stopped and the elements involved in arson be dealt with iron fist.

Protesters said people of Kashmir are famous for their hospitality and communal brotherhood but some forces enjoying patronage of political parties wants to destroy secular fabric of the state by their paid acts.

“An exemplary punishment should be given to such elements who want to break century’s old unity among different communities in the state. What was the fault of students and businessmen who were attacked? What if non-locals will be treated in same manner in Kashmir,” said Harmeet Singh.

He said the government instead of maintaining silence should swung into action to teach lesson to the communal forces indulging in mob violence in peaceful place like Jammu.

Suresh Kumar a businessmen said Kashmiri's being citizens of India needs to be treated equally. He said the government should compensate the damages Kashmiri's suffered over the past some time.

Protesters appealed all sections of the society to condemn attacks on Kashmiris in voice so that the forces inimical to peace in the region fail in their evil designs.
