WATCH! Mumbai farmers' march ground report: Over 10,000 walk to be heard

The aggrieved farmers hailed from 21 districts and decided to march for their rights (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: In an attempt to stage a protest, over 10,000 farmers assembled at Nashik to protest against the Maharashtra government. The farmers decided to march for 165 kilometres to present their demands to the state government. The farmers who participated in the protest were from 21 districts of Maharashtra.

The farmers stated that the march has come as a result of the negligence of the government towards the demands of the farmers. The farmers stated that last year too, they had participated in a march asking the government to fulfill their demands, but to no effect.

Also Read: Mumbai hit and run case: Victim's sister finds crucial CCTV footage in search for 'closure'

Cabinet minister Girish Mahajan claimed that the government has already met most of the demands of the farmers and that the remaining demands will soon be fulfilled.

Mahajan added that it is only through conversation that they can find a solution to the grievances of the farmers. The General Secretary of the All India Kisan Sabha, Ajit Navale stated that they had submitted a written proposal to the government. He also added that Tribal Rights Act implementation, allotment of temple land and debt relief are some of the major concerns of the farmers.

The aggrieved farmers hailed from 21 districts and decided to march for their rights. The farmers chose the Nashik-Mumbai Highway with two halts. If their demands will not be met, the farmers stated that the were resolute on continuing the march. Girish Mahajan ensured the farmers that they would get a written confirmation from the government to ensure that action would be taken.

Though the police had initially declined the permission of conducting the march, cops still came and led the march with a police van. The police had detained 10,000 farmers yesterday and had caused a day's delay in the march.
