LDF gearing up for another neo-renaissance movement

Aim is to consolidate the momentum gained through women’s wall.

Unmoved by the recent upsurge in protests over the entry of women of all age groups to Sabarimala, the State government and Left Democratic Front (LDF) are gearing up for yet another neo-renaissance movement to consolidate and sustain the momentum gained through the formation of the women’s wall.

All the 174 organisations that were integral to the formation of the wall are understood to have evinced interest in joining the movement that is expected to effectively counter the flak the government drew from the Sangh Parivar and other organisations for its strident stance on the Sabarimala issue. Consultations in this regard would be held soon, sources said.

The Kerala Pulayar Maha Sabha that had been in the forefront of the organisation of the women’s wall has pledged support to the follow-up pursuits. KPMS general secretary Punnala Sreekumar told The Hindu that the sabha could ill-afford to abstain from an endeavour that sought to educate posterity the travails that the unsung heroes bore to create a level playing field for the deprived and the marginalised sections along with the privileged sections. This should not be dubbed as an alliance for transient political or other gains, he said.

“Being a community organisation comprising members of all political hues, we had been fighting and negotiating at times with successive governments to wrest our due. In the present context, we strongly hold that our association with the present government and the LDF is the best and independent option. Unmindful of the criticism of creating communal divide, we will strongly back the neo-social reform drive with other minority sections. Peripheral corrections won’t suffice and the current division created by various forces demands a deep social surgery,” he said.

Kerala Dalit Federation and prominent Congress leader P. Ramabhadran too said that none, including the Congress, had seriously discussed renaissance in post- independent India but now it had regained currency. Even the Congress was forced to revive its campaign and the federation would firmly support all activities of the government in this score. “Despite being a Congress leader, I fully endorse all such initiatives of Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan,’’ he said.

These resolutions are reported to have instilled confidence among the LDF leaders and it is expected to help the front gain fresh ground among such sections that have come close to the front.
