Congress, AP CM Naidu politicising Pulwama attack: Amit Shah

RAJAHMUNDRY: BJP president Amit Shah has come down heavily on the Congress and chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu for allegedly politicising the terror attack in Pulwama . He alleged that Naidu had faith more in Pakistan prime minister Imran Khan than prime minister Narendra Modi Addressing BJP leaders during his whirlwind tour of Rajahmundry on Thursday, Amit Shah said 90 per cent of all the promises made in the AP State Reorganisation Act 2014 were fulfilled by the Centre. He also accused Naidu of misusing the central funds meant for construction of capital city Amaravati and Polavaram dam across the river Godavari.Amit Shah’s visit was marred by protests by Telugu Desam Party activists, who raised slogans asking the BJP leader to go back. There was also a dharna by students. The police took the protesters into custody before Shah landed at the city airport.He said Modi is giving utmost priority to the security of the country. Modi is sustaining zero tolerance with regard to the security and safety of the country. “Prime minister is giving free hand to security forces to curb Pak-sponsored terrorism and retaliate Pulwama attack. Army has the liberty to fix time and attack terrorists,” he said.Shah was in Rajahmundry to open BJP city office and address party leaders from Rajahmundry, Kakinada, Amalapuram, Eluru and Narsapuram Lok Sabha constituencies.He alleged that Congress is politicizing Pulwama terror attack and added that Congress minister Navjot Singh Sidhu is happy to hug Pakistani army chief. He recalled that the Congress had termed “antinational slogans” shouted in JNU as freedom of speech. India’s first prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru is the root cause of the problem in Jammu and Kashmir. If Patel were elected as the first prime minister of the country, Kashmir problem would not have arisen.He also targeted Chandrababu Naidu saying that none has the right to question of the patriotism of the BJP. “Naidu is staging dharnas in various states. If he really wants to protest, he should stage protest in front of his TDP office as the government did nothing for AP in the last five years. By joining hands with Congress Naidu is criticizing that BJP is obstructing development in Andhra Pradesh,” Shah alleged.Of the 14 important assurances made in the AP Reorganization Act, the Centre has already fulfilled 10 promises. The Centre has sanctioned 20 prestigious national institutions to AP.The TDP government is misusing the central funds and corruption is prevailing everywhere in the state. He reminded that most of the beneficiaries under Prime Minister Awas Yojana are from Andhra Pradesh. The Centre has spent Rs 182 crore to develop Rajahmundry airport. He said Rs 55,474 crore has been invested in the coastal region of Andhra Pradesh until now.“Naidu has backstabbed NTR, Vajpayee and now Narendra Modi. If Chandrababu Naidu deserves any award, he should get award for backstabbing”, Modi said.
