Gujarat Congress faces fresh challenges ahead of CWC meet

Even as the preparations for the Congress Working Committee meeting and a public gathering in Gujarat on February 28 have begun, the grand old party is facing a double trouble in the state.

The ruling BJP has begun a state-wide protest against opposition leader Paresh Dhanani for his alleged remarks over Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and the Statue of Unity. Along with this, the website of the Gujarat Congress was hacked.

Dhanani was suspended for a day on Wednesday from the proceedings of the state assembly after his alleged remarks in the house that scrap was used to make the statue of the Iron Man. His remarks led to protests from the BJP which demanded an apology from the Congress leader. Dhanani, however, said that he had only mentioned facts that are also written at the statue's site.

Deputy Chief Minister Nitin Patel said Dhanani's comments would have a negative impact on the Congress party.

Meanwhile, the website of the Gujarat Congress was hacked on Thursday. “The oldest and largest political party in India looted the country for 70 years and it evolved into a natural party of thugs,” read a post put up by the hackers on the website, leaving the Congress in a huge embarrassment. The contents were later taken off.

Congress spokesman Manish Doshi said that the party has lodged a police complaint and expressed hope that the perpetrators would be brought to book. He also said that the protests against Dhanani is BJP's attempt to divert attention from the real issues.

On Thursday, Gujarat Congress in-charge Rajiv Satav chaired a meeting to discuss preparations for the CWC meeting and the public gathering. UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi, Congress president Rahul Gandhi, party general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and a host of other leaders will take part in the CWC meeting.

Rahul Gandhi has already blown party's poll bugle in Gujarat by addressing a public meeting in Dharampur on February 14. The party, however, will try to pitch hard on Prime Minister Narendra Modi's home turf in Rahul Gandhi's second public meeting.
