‘Banning protests in DU undemocratic’

Proctor’s office advisory under criticism

An advisory from the Proctor’s office of Delhi University which says that causing disruption in any manner of the academic functioning of the university system amounts to an act of gross indiscipline as per the Delhi University Act, 1922, has come under criticism from students and various stakeholders.

The Delhi State Committee of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) on Thursday condemned the “undemocratic move” and demanded that the advisory be withdrawn at the earliest. “University administration should resolve the genuine grievances of the student community, instead of hoodwinking them,” said the party in a statement.

It added that the step was nothing but an attempt by the university administration to muzzle every voice of protest against the grievances arising out of the anti-student and anti-education policies. “We have seen similar attempts by other university administrations including that of JNU,” it said.

‘Dictatorial attitude’

The All India Students’ Association also said that they reject the advisory issued and said, “putting ban on protests and dharnas exposes the dictatorial attitude of the Delhi University administration. It is a direct attempt to criminalise student’s dissent and political activities in the university campus.”

The AISA added that the advisory must be seen as part of the ruling BJP government’s larger attempt to suppress the students’ protest in campuses and to gag them in submission when it is destroying academic freedom in campuses and initiating its anti-students policies of seat cut, reservation cut and fund cut.

Right to dissent

“Citing protests and dharnas as an act of indiscipline is laughable as peaceful protests and dharnas are fundamental rights of citizens. The advisory infringes on free speech, expression and liberty of students,” AISA said in a statement asking the student community to reject the advisory and step up to save the right to dissent and protest in campus.

Actions taken

According to ordinance XV Para 3 (i), Delhi University Act, 1922, which is what the Proctor has sited, any student found violating the ordinance can be expelled, rusticated, fined or debarred from taking the examinations.

This advisory follows a similar advisory issued by the university that asks students and teachers to avoid usage of loudspeakers, drums, sound amplifiers, public address system within a 100 metres range of the University’s campus.
