BJP demands Puttaranga Shetty’s resignation after his staff caught with Rs 14 lakh cash

C Puttaranga Shetty is the Social Welfare Minister in the JD(S)-Congress coalition government. (Photo: Twitter@ucpshetty)

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) on Sunday called for Karnataka Congress minister C Puttaranga Shetty’s resignation a day after one of his staffs was caught with Rs 14 lakh of unaccounted cash. Alleging corruption in the coalition government, the party also demanded a full-fledged investigation into the matter.

This is the best example to show the level of corruption in the Vidhana Soudha. The PM had called the Congress government a 10 per cent government, I call this a 20 per cent government. No work goes on without a bribe or a commission being paid. This is the situation in the state today, BJP state president BS Yeddyurappa said.

Also Read | Karnataka minister's staffer caught with Rs 14 lakh cash

Echoing Yeddyurappa, former chief minister Jagadish Shettar told India Today TV, This shows there is rampant corruption in the Vidhana Soudha and this government’s first evidence of corruption has come out.

In Hubli, BJP workers took to the streets to protest and demanded the minister’s resignation. They have also threatened to intensify and conduct a state-wide protest if the coalition government does not take action.

Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy assured a proper investigation into the case. Investigation is underway. The police is looking into the case and will take a decision. I will not interfere in the investigation and will provide the police my complete support, he said.

On Friday (January 4), a staffer of Karnataka Congress minister Puttaranga Shetty was caught with unaccounted Rs 14 lakh in cash at the entrance of the state secretariat in the city centre.

We have detained the minister's staffer, Mohan, and seized the cash (Rs 14 lakh) at the secretariat as he could not explain its source or account for it," city central Deputy Commissioner of Police Devaraj told reporters here.

According to unconfirmed reports, an additional Rs 11.76 lakh was also found with Mohan when the police carried a search on him and his bike.

Also Read | PM Modi does not want farmers to get relief in Karnataka, says KPCC President

Also Read | Deve Gowda hits back at PM Modi over his lollipop company remark
