PM Modi-Amit Shah descend on Purvanchal to counter Priyanka Gandhi effect

PM Narendra Modi and Amit Shah will hold back to back events in the eastern region of Uttar Pradesh in a bid to sustain the BJP wave in the region. (Photo: Reuters)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP chief Amit Shah will focus their attention on Uttar Pradesh's eastern region from February 23-March 3 to devise the party's poll strategy for the upcoming 2019 general elections.

Sources say the BJP is concocting a strategy to reduce Congress general secretary of Uttar Pradesh (east) Priyanka Gandhi's popularity in the region. Priyanka Gandhi, who was made as the Congress general secretarial post for the eastern region of Uttar Pradesh on January this year, is seen as a gamechanger for the Congress.

Narendra Modi and Amit Shah will hold back to back events in the eastern region of Uttar Pradesh in a bid to counter the effect of Priyanka Gandhi and sustain the BJP wave in the region.

Both the BJP leaders will hold key rallies, meetings and will also announce Centre's schemes for farmers in Awadh, Kashi and Purvanchal regions -- in Uttar Pradesh (east) -- in a bid to woo voters in the run-up to the 2019 Lok Sabha polls.

Amit Shah is scheduled to address the 'Sahkari Sammelan' in Lucknow on February 23. On the same day, he will announce Centre's schemes for farmers at the inaugural session of BJP Kisan Morcha's national convention in Gorakhpur.

PM Modi will seek to woo farmers by pointing out the achievements of his government and shortcomings of the Opposition in the Kisan Morcha national convention on February 24. On the same day, PM Modi will transfer the first installment of Rs 2000 to bank accounts of 12 crore farmers in Gorakhpur as per Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi scheme. The Kisan Samman Yojana was announced by the BJP-led government at the Centre in the interim budget this year. It promises to provide Rs 6,000 per year to small and marginal farmers across the country who have cultivable land up to two hectares.

The prime minister will also take a holy dip in Kumbh to display India's cultural heritage as well as signal his religious agenda.

On March 3, PM Modi will hold a rally in Congress president Rahul Gandhi's constituency Amethi and will also inaugurate several projects.

Meanwhile, Amit Shah will light lamps at the house of the beneficiaries of Kamal Jyoti Scheme on February 26.
