Manipal Global Education Services recognized as 'Mobile Learning Company of the Year'

Bengaluru (Karnataka) [India] Feb 22 (ANI): Manipal Global Education Services (MaGE), India’s largest education services group has been awarded the title ‘Mobile Learning Company of the year’, at the EdTech Review Summit 2019 at a recently held event.

“MaGE has successfully amalgamated technology and digital content to deliver optimised learning outcomes for professionals to achieve their true potential. Our state of the art EduNxt app has been designed ground-up to bring a mobile-first immersive learning experience to our customers. We are honoured to have received the award as it is a testimony of our commitment towards technical excellence of our products”, said Balaji Sankaran, Head, Consumer Technology, Manipal Global Education Services.

The award was presented to the company that successfully demonstrated exceptional performance in unleashing the potential of Mobile Learning. MaGE’s EduNxt mobile app is focused on delivering learning outcomes in universities (Kasturba Medical College, School of Management, MAHE Dubai, Sikkim Manipal University Distance Education), academies (Manipal Academy of Banking and Financial Services) and corporates (HDFC Life, State Bank of India) through innovations around gamification (tournaments, challenges), chatbot, social learning (Social sharing, like/dislike, trending content). EduNxt delivers mobile-first learning experience to hundreds of thousands of learners around the globe.

EdTech awards are presented as a part of the EdTech Review Summit, an annual event bringing together all stakeholders in the EdTech space. EdTech Review Summit explores forward-looking themes with a motive to educate the attendees on both the Indian and global educational technology landscape. Sessions and Panel discussions focussing on mapping and meeting future demand for technology in education, the state and growth of EdTech in India, Asia and beyond. This story is provided by NewsVoir. (ANI)
