Hunger strikes today recall earlier ones back to time of Suffragettes

A partial hunger strike said to have been underway since Feb. 15 by some 70 men detained by federal immigration officials at Suffolk County House of Correction made news this week.

Outside organizations in touch with the 70 men say their strike is over abusive and unsanitary conditions and unaddressed questions over how long they can be held there by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

Self-denial as a form of protest is not new - it dates back to the time of the Suffragettes and earlier - and certainly not one mainly confined to the history books.

Hunger strikes are often about highlighting abusive conditions within a prison system as well as part of broader political movements toward equality and recognition of rights.

It has been reported that some 1,400 people have gone on hunger strikes in 18 immigration detention facilities since May 2015.

One current strike that has been drawing global attention involves nine immigrants from India being held in an ICE detention center in El Paso, Texas.

Authorities there stopped forced-feeding the nine after a U.S. district judge Feb. 13 said it had to be stopped on two of the immigrants who had challenged the practice that involves the insertion of nasal tubes while the person is restrained.

The United Nations human rights office had weighed in, saying the force-feeding of immigrant hunger strikers at the facility could violate the U.N. Convention Against Torture.

The fact that the two young men directly involved in the judge's ruling are from India recalls the fact that it was in 1918 that Mahatma Gandhi, who engaged in non-violent protest in fighting for the country's independence from Britain and equality for the country's poorest, undertook 17 hunger strikes dating to 1918, the longest being a 21-day one in 1943 in protest against his detention without any charge by the British authorities.

Suffragette Alice Paul, national chairman of the Women's Party, went on hunger strike during her seven months in jail for picketing the White House for a constitutional amendment giving women the right to vote.

Paul, who began her fast Nov. 16, 1917 and was force fed, had also been on hunger strike in England where Suffragette leaders included the legendary Emmeline Pankurst.

British authorities there had begun the practice of force-feeding hunger strikers after Scottish Suffragette Marion Wallace Dunlop went on hunger strike in 1909 and other arrested suffragettes began to engage in the protest.

Conscientious objectors during World War I in Britain engaged in hunger strikes, and later worked to reform prisons.

The use of hunger strikes in the fight for independence is often associated with the Irish whose early history included the practice of the poor fasting on the doorstep of the powerful to protest an injustice.

Thomas Ashe, the Irish nationalist leader who had his execution commuted by the British government in 1916 for his part in the Easter Rising against British rule, died as a result of being force fed while on prison hunger strike on Sept. 25, 1917.

He is said to be the first Irish republican prisoner to die on hunger strike. One of the most famous is Bobby Sands.

Sands led the strike in the Long Kesh/Maze prison in 1981 in Northern Ireland where he was incarcerated for firearms possession.

He died on the 66th day of his hunger strike at the age of 27 during a strike in which 10 men would die of fasting for the right to be recognize as political prisoners.
