‘Padho Punjab project not contributing to edu system’

Ludhiana: Government teachers under the banner of Adhyapak Sangharash Committee boycotted the state government ‘Padho Punjab, Padhao Punjab’ project. Teachers from almost all 51 schools in Ludhiana block protested agitated against this project.

Under the ‘Padho Punjab, Padhaao Punjab’ project, primary school teachers are to be trained such that they can teach students how to speak and write in Punjabi, along with following a separate syllabus. With the coming of this project, the same set of teachers have now been burdened with the dual responsibility of teaching students as per PSEB syllabus as well as the one according to the project. The protesting teachers claimed that if the results are not up to the mark, they are the ones who are put to blame.

The protesting teachers said, “We have meeting fixed on February 28. The education secretary wants to show that we are not competent enough in working under handling the project. We want they should role back this project and let us teach the students only according to the PSEB syllabus.”

Sukhpal Singh, member of Adhyapak Sangharash Committee, and a government teacher from Barwala village, said, “Many schools do not have adequate number of teachers. Despite that, the authorities have assigned duties to many teachers in the ‘Padho Punjab, Padhao Punjab’ project, which has no contribution in the education system. We have started protesting against the project and for our other demands.”

Swaran Singh, teacher at government primary school, Phoollanwal village, said, “Despite working for many years at meagre salaries, Punjab government continues to refuse regularisation of the teachers’ services services, and that too without giving any valid reason.”

Issue

The prescribed syllabus by PSEB is being ignored and syllabus of Padho Punjab and Padhao Punjab project is being imposed in the schools. Infact, Annual Confidential Reports are made through the result of this project. If results are low, then teachers are marked low accordingly.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
