Mumbai: HSC exam centres disallows cellphones

A day after a few exam centers disallowed students to keep their mobile phones outside classrooms in their bags a few parents have urged the state board to not panic and spread fear among the students.



On Friday at Ruia college three parents of HSC students volunteered to keep phone of around 25 students with them till they completed writing their paper. Some students were seen hiding their phones on the top of the bus stop roof next to the college. The parents duly returned the phones after the exam was over.



One of the good Samaritan, Sonal Medhekar, a mother of one of the HSC students said, "I am not protesting against any college for not allowing students to carry mobile phones inside college premises. They should follow the board's instructions. However, the parents should drop their children to the exam centre to avoid panic. Today we kept all the mobile phones in one bag. "



Another parent of HSC student, Rinku Lamba, who was with Medhekar, said, "To make sure students are taking away their phones only, we asked them to make a call from our phone to theirs." Medhekar and Lamba were also accompanied by another parent Sonali whose son was appearing for board exams.



On Friday three students from Mumbai were denied to appear for their exams for coming late after 11am to the exam center.



Secretary of Mumbai divisional board Sharad Khandagale informed that on the second day of the HSC board exam, three students from Mumbai were denied to appear for their board exams for coming late after 11am to the exam center. There were some stories of grit and gumption too like that of Kashif Faridi, a HSC student with learning disability who made sure he wrote his own board exam rather than taking help of a writer. "If somebody else is writing for you then you don't feel the satisfaction. I took extra time to write my board exam paper," said Faridi.



While many students failed to reach on time to their exam centres due to various circumstances, were denied entry in exam halls. The board officials informed that students have to take board rules seriously. If a student fails to reach an exam center due to any unforeseen circumstances then that student can visit any nearby centre to appear for his/her board exam, said an official.

Lowdown
