Indian troops martyr two youth in IHK

HELD SRINAGAR: In Indian Held Kashmir (IHK), the Indian troops in their fresh act of state terrorism martyred two Kashmiri youth during a cordon and search operation at Warpora in Sopore town on Friday.

People took to the streets in the area and staged forceful demonstrations against the killing of the youth. Indian police and troops fired pellets and teargas shells to disperse the protesters, triggering clashes between the demonstrators and the forces’ personnel. The occupation authorities imposed restrictions and suspended mobile internet service in Sopore.

Meanwhile, the traders of Lal Chowk, Srinagar, and adjoining areas observed shutdown and staged a demonstration against the attacks on Kashmiris in Jammu and in different Indian states.

The Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference Syed Ali Gilani in a statement in Srinagar condemned the brutal killing of a Pakistani prisoner at Central Jail Jaipur, India, by goons from the Hindu community.

The Chairman of Hurriyat forum, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, addressing a gathering at Jamia Masjid in Srinagar today urged India to shun its war rant and resolve all issues with Pakistan through dialogue. He thanked the members of the Sikh community in India for protecting the Kashmiris who faced mob attacks in various parts of India.

The Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front Muhammad Yasin Malik addressing a gathering at Jamia Masjid Aabi Guzar in Srinagar and senior APHC leader Agha Syed Hassan Al-Moosvi Al-Safvi in his statement expressed concern over the continued attacks on Kashmiri students and traders in India.

Indian police arrested Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir People’s League Mukhtar Ahmed Waza in Islamabad town and put him under house arrest. The Uttar Pradesh Anti-Terrorist Squad arrested two Kashmiri youth on false charges from Deoband in Saharanpur district.

On the other hand, leader of Indian Congress and India’s former Minister of State of Defence, Jitendra Singh, in a statement in Alwar city of Indian state of Rajasthan termed the Pulwama incident as a major failure of Indian intelligence agencies. The General Secretary of Communist Party of India Marxist, Sitaram Yechury, in a Facebook post said that the Indian government had tacitly and overtly created a situation in which calls of violence against the Kashmiris were being given and executed.

Media reports said that farmers’ outfit in Uttar Pradesh’s Muzaffarnagar area has warned a sugar mill to throw out Kashmiri workers as soon as possible or face dire consequences.

In Bradford, UK, the Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Self-determination Movement International, Raja Najabat Hussain addressing a press conference hailed the efforts of the British members of European Parliament for effectively raising their voice in favour of the oppressed people of occupied Kashmir in the Sub-Committee of Human Rights of the European Parliament in Brussels. An overwhelming majority of members of the European Parliament recently attending a landmark event on the rights situation in occupied Kashmir had urged India to immediately halt its atrocities and carry out investigations into the incidents of grave human rights abuses in the territory.

Raja Najabat was flanked by his colleagues, Sardar Abdur Rehman Khan, Raja Ghazanfar Khaliq, Muhammad Boota Hery and Muhammad Rasheed Chaudhary.
