SC to states: Prevent assault, boycott, threat to Kashmiris

shalender@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, February 22

Amid allegations of attacks on Kashmiri students in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror strike that claimed the lives of 40 CRPF jawans, the Supreme Court today directed chief secretaries and DGPs of 11 states to take “prompt” measures to prevent incidents of threat, assault and social boycott of Kashmiris.

The order was issued by a Bench headed by Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi. It said police officers — earlier appointed as nodal officers to check incidents of mob lynching — would be responsible to deal with cases of alleged assault on Kashmiris.

“The chief secretaries, the DGPs and the Delhi Police Commissioner are directed to take prompt action to prevent incidents of threat, assault, social boycott, etc, against Kashmiris and other minorities,” it said.

The court asked the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) to give wide publicity to nodal officers so that they can be approached by those in need.

Attorney General KK Venugopal submitted that nodal officers were appointed sometime back and new advisories had been issued by the Centre on the issue. Venugopal said even before the Pulwama terror attack, Kashmiri students were found to be vulnerable and the Centre had found it necessary to extend protection.

“Nodal officers have been appointed in all states and UTs and their names and numbers are available. This list was last updated in 2018... Besides, necessary advisories have been issued. Steps have been taken by the Home Ministry, particularly in respect of students residing outside Jammu and Kashmir. Grievances can be reported on a specific number,” Venugopal said.

Noting that police was a state subject, the AG, however, said, “We are only in a position to issue advisories. We can’t say ‘do this’ or ‘do that’...the DGPs are directly taking steps in this regard.”

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief ministers Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah have welcomed the top court’s directive.

Both Home ministry, ugc issue advisories
