Archbishop holds Vatican summit amid protests

sexual abuse

Cardinal Oswald Gracias

Archbishop

child sex abuse scandal

Roman Catholic Church

At the centre of a controversy for ignoring complaints ofopens second day of ‘sexual abuse’ summit at the Vatican as one of its heads.Amid protests by a section of Catholic community in Mumbai,of Bombay, Cardinal Oswald Gracias, opened the second day of a landmark summit at the Vatican on tackling paedophilia in the clergy. At the centre of controversy himself over ignoring complaints of sexual abuse, Cardinal Gracias acknowledged the global scale of thein theand said that it was “unacceptable” that some Asian and African bishops are refusing to admit ‘clerical paedophilia’ as an issue.“The point is clear. No bishop may say to himself, ‘This problem of abuse in the Church does not concern me, because things are different in my part of the world’,” said Cardinal Gracias, who has been accused of failing to act when kin of victims of sexual abuse approached him in Mumbai. One of the heads of this four-day summit convened by Pope Francis, Cardinal Gracias has also been frequently tipped as a possible contender to be the next pope.According to a BBC investigation, which was followed up by Mumbai Mirror and reported on Friday , the Archbishop was approached by a family in 2015 with the complaint that their son had returned from Mass saying he was raped by a parish priest. Cardinal Gracias, however, had allegedly left for Rome that night without immediately reporting the incident to the police, which is also against the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.This incident was allegedly one of the two cases where families said they were dissatisfied with the Archbishop’s response to allegations. In the other incident, a priest was purportedly allowed to continue offering prayer retreats despite a woman accusing him of sexual abuse. According to Mirror’s Friday report , the Archbishop Cardinal is also accused of supporting the priest legally in court.Cardinal Gracias was forced to admit to the BBC, “You know I’m being honest, I’m not 100 per cent sure… but I must reflect on that. I admit whether immediately, the police should have got involved, sure.” When Mirror contacted the Archbishop on Thursday, he denied all allegations and claimed no one had approached him. Mirror, however, has the copy of the letter written by the first family to Cardinal Gracias.Pope Francis has been under sustained pressure to tackle abuse issues in the beleaguered institution after numerous stories of paedophilia emerged in countries across the world. To combat the malaise within, the Pope opened the first-of-its-kind global summit on Thursday, calling on the 114 top bishops present to forge “concrete measures” to deal with sex abuse cases in the Church, which has further been accused of covering up crimes committed by priests.“Although the experience of abuse seems dramatically present in certain parts of the world, it is not a limited phenomenon,” Gracias said at the summit, adding, “The entire Church must take an honest look, undertake rigorous discernment, and act decisively.”The victims’ groups, however, insisted the centuries-old institution should get on with punishing all abusers and enablers. “We have heard these words before,” survivors’ network SNAP said in a statement. The group also accused the Pope of allowing cardinals and bishops “who have had an active role in covering up” sex abuse to attend the summit, saying it showed they were “able to openly flout the very policies designed to hold them accountable”. Any new measures are not expected to come until after the summit, which winds up on Sunday with Pope’s speech.
