Traders protest amid strike in Lal Chowk against violence

Traders protest amid strike in Lal Chowk against violence

SRINAGAR, Feb 22: Amid complete shutdown in City Centre Lal Chowk and its adjoining areas, traders today again hit streets to protest violence against Kashmiri students, businessmen and employees studying and working in different states of India.

Hundreds of people, on the call of Kashmir Inc, assembled at Lal Chowk here this afternoon to register their protest against continuous harassment of Kashmiri people on different pretexts in parts of India.

Mob violence began in the aftermath of killing of 49 CRPF Jawans in car bomb attack on the Srinagar-Jammu National Highway near Pulwama in south Kashmir on February 14.

Shutdown was also observed in the city’s commercial nerve centre Lal Chowk and its adjoining areas after 3:30 pm as a mark of protest against attacks on Kashmiris in and outside the state.

Shopkeepers pulled down the shutters of their shops while other business establishments in Lal Chowk and other areas including Polo-View Market, Hari Singh High Street, Regal Chowk, Abiguzar, Residency Road Budshah Chowk and Maisuma were also shut.

Pro-freedom slogans reverberated in Lal Chowk with people demanding complete boycott of trade with Jammu.

Members of Kashmir Economic Alliance (KEA) both factions, Kashmir Traders and Manufacturers Federation (KTMF), Kashmir Chamber of Commerce and Industries (KCC&I) and Lal Chowk Shopkeepers Union joined by hundreds others mainly youth assembled at Lal Chowk and held protest against brutality meted out to Kashmiri people.

The protesting traders who had carried banners and placards in their hands which read “stop bloodshed, shame on civilized society dogs are allowed but Kashmiris not allowed” amid slogans warned complete boycott with Jammu incase acts of violence against Kashmiris are not stopped immediately.

They said the joint consultative of all trade factions will be holding an important meeting to chalk out their future course of action.

“Today’s protest is aimed at conveying a strong message to those forces who continue to attack, harass and intimidate Kashmiri students and businessman outside the state. Why don’t these mindless people understand the fallout of this hooliganism,” said Nasir Hameed Khan, senior vice president KCC&I.

He said the government needs to take some firm measures for the safety and security of Kashmiri people.

KEA Chairman, Mohammad Yasin Khan said the students, businessmen and others who are out to study or work purpose continue to face violence by unrestrained mobs.

“We will be holding a meeting in which all trade heads after due consultation on the prevailing situation will chalk out future course of action,” Khan added.
