SPPU plans to curb researcher count

Even as 10 student unions came together on Friday to call a strike at Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU) demanding continuation of the stipend scheme for PhD and MPhil students, the varsity has now asked professors and research guides to curb the number of research students.



While students are demanding the regular stipend, SPPU is in the process of changing the PhD guides' norms to ensure that the number of research students on campus be curbed. According to a senior SPPU official, the academic council meeting has changed the norms for associate guides. While full-time professors of SPPU are allowed to be research guides, another rule allows professors from other colleges to be guides through university departments. Due to this, the number of PhD students is increasing on campus.



As of now, PhD students, whose guides are professors in Ahmednagar, Nasik and Pune region also stay on campus and engage in research. According to the new guidelines, now if a professor is from a college that has a research centre, they cannot enrol their students through any SPPU department. Also if a college does not have a research centre, then a centre would be provided to the professors to enrol the research students within a 50-km radius.



Uttam Chavan, deputy registrar (academics) said, "While we are in the process of announcing the vacant seats for 2019-20 PhD there have been some changes in guidelines for associate guides."



Prafulla Pawar, registrar, SPPU said, "We had a meeting with the protesting students and have given them options for the scholarships. We have also given them option for biometric attendance wherein heads of the department and their guides can give their attendance. We have also given them an option that 2018-19 students will get their stipend."



Satish Gore, MPhil student from the campus said, "Getting stipend is our right and university should continue with the practice. There are many students who come from rural areas and in need of stipend. We have demanded that research students both PhD and MPhil should receive stipend without any cap and new students in 2019-290 should also get it. While we observed our strike today, if the university does not give its clarification we will take action on Monday by continuing our protest."



The strike on campus followed student protests over the last three days along with a hunger strike and discussions with university officials not coming to conclusion. SPPU has announced JRD Tata scholarship for MPhil and PhD students but have stressed on the need to follow norms, complete their assignments on time and share the progress report regularly. The university has also mentioned that biometric attendance is now compulsory.



The protesting students have now boycotted the filling of scholarship application forms.


