A ‘fight’ that lasted a decade

Nearly a decade ago, the traffic department introduced a one-way arrangement at the bustling Luz Corner in Mylapore to ease traffic congestion in the area. Late in 2017, the old two-way system was restored, and this change came about, due to a campaign by residents and traders over the years.

The background

Though the one-way traffic plan forced motorists to drive for more than half-a-kilometre to take a turn, it freed Royapettah High Road of congestion and also reduced waiting time at the Luz signal.

Initially, there wasn’t much of resistance to the one-way traffic arrangement as it has succeeded in easing the congestion. However, the stretch soon became an unauthorised parking lot, which affected motorists and pedestrians. An almost continuous flow of vehicles also meant that pedestrians had to wait for several minutes to cross the road,” recalled Viswanathan K., secretary of Mylapore Residents Welfare Association.

He said that one side of the road became a parking lot for vehicles that came to pick up and drop children from a private school nearby, resulting in traffic chaos, beating the purpose of the one-way plan.

Traders in the area too were unhappy, as they claimed that their businesses were hit with the change in traffic plan.

Residents’ push

When the one-way traffic plan became more of an inconvenience than anything else, residents and traders started calling for the restoration of the two-way arrangement. The traders even staged protests, observed a fast many a time, and shut down their shops to draw the attention of the authorities to the issue.

“Members of resident welfare associations represented to the officials and elected representatives to restore the two-way traffic system. It was a sustained effort that took almost seven to eight years to come to fruition,” says Viswanathan.

Project implementation

Soon after assuming office, the newly-elected MLA for Mylapore, R. Nataraj, announced a host of initiatives for the neighbourhood, and restoring two-way traffic arrangement on Luz Church Road was one of them.

“Arappor Iyakkam, a voluntary organisation that has been drawing attention to civic issues in the city facilitated a meeting between the residents and the MLA, where several residents called for the two-way arrangement to be restored. The MLA too worked towards fulfilling residents’ demands,” said C.R. Balaji, a civic activist from Mandaveli.

In 2017, when Mageshwari C. assumed charge as Deputy Commissioner of Police for traffic (East Chennai), residents and traders met with her and requested for a two-way traffic system at Luz Corner. Soon, the officer chaired a meeting with representatives of traders’ groups, residents’ welfare associations, and traffic police personnel in the Royapettah area to address traffic-related grievances. The feedback was taken constructively and soon, two-way traffic was restored, says Viswanathan.

“When it comes to urban transport planning, it is ideal to adopt a consultative approach and involve all the stakeholders,” he says.
