Arvind Kejriwal Announces Indefinite Fast For Delhi Statehood From March 1

Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Saturday said he will sit on an indefinite hunger strike from March 1 to demand full statehood for Delhi.

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal: From 1 March we will launch the movement to make Delhi a full state and we will not end it till Delhi gets full statehood. pic.twitter.com/48prR6lL4k — ANI (@ANI) February 23, 2019

On Thursday, Kejriwal had stepped up his campaign for the upcoming Lok Sabha elections and had promised full statehood for Delhi in two years if his party won all seven seats.

Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal: Democracy has been implemented in entire nation, but not Delhi. Public votes & selects a government, but the government has no power. So we're starting a movement on March 1 & I'll sit on indefinite fast for the full statehood of Delhi pic.twitter.com/O9BiuBVQHY — ANI (@ANI) February 23, 2019

Speaking in the Delhi Assembly, Kejriwal said that "democracy has been implemented in the entire nation, but not Delhi. Public votes and selects a government, but the government has no power. So we're starting a movement on March 1 and I'll sit on indefinite fast for the full statehood of Delhi.”

“I want to tell the Prime Minister that he should take care of Pakistan and leave the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Delhi Police to us. He has no time for the people of Delhi,” Kejriwal added.

Alleging that the Modi government interferes in every file of Delhi government, the Delhi CM said there is “only one way - that of Andolan (protest)."

ALSO READ: 'Our Fight Is For Kashmir, Not Against Kashmiris,' Says PM Modi In Rajasthan's Tonk

Speaking at a gathering in north Delhi’s Azadpur, Kejriwal had said, “Ten years from the day Delhi is given the status of full statehood, I will give every Delhiite a concrete house to live in. This time do not vote to elect the Prime Minister. Vote to get full statehood for Delhi.”

Earlier, Kejriwal took to his twitter handle to ask PM Modi for Delhi statehood, he had tweeted, “Sir. Delhi is also waiting for its statehood day. U had promised to the people of Delhi that you wud grant full statehood to Delhi. Kindly do it, sir. People of Delhi have faced injustice for 70 years now.”
