Naga students demand political solution, hold rally

New Delhi: Nagas participate in a rally organised by Naga Student Union Delhi (NSUD) to demand "immediate" political solution to the two-decade old Indo-Naga peace talks; in New Delhi, on Feb 23, 2019. (Photo: IANS) Image Source: IANS News

New Delhi: Nagas participate in a rally organised by Naga Student Union Delhi (NSUD) to demand "immediate" political solution to the two-decade old Indo-Naga peace talks; in New Delhi, on Feb 23, 2019. (Photo: IANS) Image Source: IANS News

New Delhi: Nagas participate in a rally organised by Naga Student Union Delhi (NSUD) to demand "immediate" political solution to the two-decade old Indo-Naga peace talks; in New Delhi, on Feb 23, 2019. (Photo: IANS) Image Source: IANS News

New Delhi, Feb 23 : Scores of students belonging to the Naga Students Union Delhi (NSUD) held a protest rally here on Saturday demanding "immediate" political solution to the two-decade-old Naga peace talks. They demanded a logical conclusion, which was "honourable" and "acceptable" to the Naga people.

They held a march from the Nepal Embassy to the Jantar Mantar raising slogans "Naga Solution Before Election", "Respect the Naga's Political Rights".

The protesters said the government should take the issue seriously and find solution within a stipulated time, which will be useful "for peaceful coexistence and development".

They said the peace talks between the government and the National Socialist Council of Nagalim-Isaac-Muivah (NSCN-IM) along with the Working Committee (WC), comprising six Naga National Political Groups (NNPGs), have not brought about "much tangible results" except the Indo-Naga Framework Agreement that was signed in 2015.

Representatives from various Naga organisations, including Naga Hoho, Naga Peoples Movement for Human Rights (NPMHR), NHM, FNR, NTC and other organisations like South Asian Forum for Human Rights (SAFHR), National Alliance of People's Movement (NAPM) and Pakistan India Peoples' Forum for Peace and Democracy (PIPFPD) expressed their support to the rally, as per a statement by the NSUD.

"Solution will be there only if India is willing to recognise our rights. This really has nothing to do with the ensuing election," said Neingulo Krome, Secretary General, NPMHR.

"I am impressed by the presence of youngsters and their devotion to the cause of Naga self-rule. I am sure the movement will continue till it achieves the objective," said Tapan Kumar Bose, former Secretary General of SAFHR.

The NSUD said, "The Naga solution will secure peace for India's eastern frontiers as well as bring tranquillity, progress and honour for the Nagas and the people of Northeast and the country in the international forum."

It said the Atal Bihari Vajpayee government had in 2003 made "a bold move" by recognising the "unique history of the Nagas" and said it hoped that the political solution will be based on "historical facts and political legitimacy."
