Indian forces deployment followed by arrests create uncertainty in parts of Kashmir Valley – KashmirWatch

CNS reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

Srinagar, Feb 23, CNS: The additional deployments of central forces of India and subsequent crackdown on leaders from separatist organizations and Jammat-e-Islami in Kashmir Valley raised many eye-brows while people started believing that India has decided to do away with Article 35A. There were also apprehensions that India may target Pakistan. The netizens spent almost whole night on social media sites discussing the development. “If they claim central forces have been deployed for election purposes then why they were brought here in such a hurry,” wrote a netizen on facebook.

Uncertainty prevailed across Kashmir on Saturday while in major parts life was disrupted. In parts of Srinagar, shops and business establishments remained shut while skeletal movement of traffic was observed on roads. In couple of areas including Parraypora and Karan Nagar there were clashes between Forces and youth. Government Forces used tear-smoke shells to disperse protesters at Karan Nagar.

Clashes were erupted also in Maisuma amid shutdown. All the shops and business establishments remained shut against the detention of JKLF Chief Muhammad Yasin Malik.

It was a day of rumours and uncertainty though police cleared the air when it claimed the crackdown on Jamat-e-Islami and the additional deployment of central armed police forces is “purely” part of an election exercise undertaken to ensure free and fair polls in Jammu and Kashmir.

Violent protests erupted in Lal Chowk area of Anantnag town in south Kashmir as well against the thrashing of a local youth in Chandigarh yesterday.

Eye witnesses said that the youth took to streets in Lal Chowk and staged protests against the attacks on people of Kashmiri origin outside the state following Pulwama attack.

Shouting pro-freedom and anti-India slogans, the youth also displayed photographs of a local who was thrashed in Chandigarh yesterday by a mob.

They said the police tried to pacify the protesters, but they didn’t relent, leading to clashes.

The protesting youth pelted stones on the forces who in turn lobbed tear shells.

Mohammed Vikas Malik, a resident of Anantnag town, who is pursuing Bachelors in Technology (B.Tech) from a college in Mohali was reportedly thrashed by a mob yesterday.

A middle aged man Farooq Ahmed Bhat of Lalan village sustained injuries after he was hit by a stone during these clashes. He was shifted to Srinagar hospital for treatment.

In Bandipora, people observed shutdown after a ‘news’ spread that one of the militants killed in Warpora Sopre hails from the district. Clashes erupted there while Forces fired tear-smoke shells to disperse the protesting youth.

In a massive crackdown, authorities have detained Yain Malik and dozens of Jama’at-e-Islami cadres in the Kashmir Valley, including its top leadership during a mass crackdown.

The nocturnal raids were conducted in south, central and north Kashmir districts to mop up the senior-most members of the political group. (CNS)

Govt playing with fire by unleashing terror on unarmed people: PDP

Srinagar, Feb 23, CNS: Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) on Saturday condemned the fresh wave of arrests in Kashmir Valley, questioning the government strategy to turn the already perturbed situation more chaotic and violent.

In a statement issued here, PDP General Secretary Ghulam Nabi Lone Hanjura said that the uncalled for, unjustified and undemocratic means are being adopted in Kashmir by the government with a sole motive to silence the peoples’ voice.

He added that reign of terror is being unleashed with people as old as 80 years being bundled in jails by the governor administration without any reason.

He also condemned the nocturnal raids launched last night in Kashmir’s different parts and terror reminiscent of Ikhwan period being uncashed upon the people.

“It is nothing but a clear war hysteria being created in Kashmir wherein things were subtly returning to equanimity. People are being unnecessarily harassed and intimated with fear being manufactured across Kashmir. We condemn such a state action and demand immediate rollback of such muscular policies,” said Hanjura.

He also cautioned the central government over fiddling with the state’s special status, saying that protection of Article 35-A is a matter of life and death for the people of the state and they can render immense sacrifices for the protection of their unique identity.

Hanjura said that instead of a confrontational approach, the central government should understand the gravity of the situation and take reconciliatory measures which is not only beneficent for the people of Kashmir alone but for entire south Asia.

Mehbooba, Sajjad Lone question crackdown on Jamaat-e-Islami Kashmir

Srinagar, Feb 23, CNS: Former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti and Peoples Conference (PC) chief Sajjad Lone on Saturday questioned the wisdom behind the detention of dozens of Jamaat-e-Islami cadres.

Reacting to the overnight raids across the valley in which dozens of group’s leaders were detained, Mufti tweeted: “In the past 24 hours, Hurriyat leaders and workers of Jamaat organisation have been arrested.

“Fail to understand such an arbitrary move which will only precipitate matters… Under what legal grounds are their arrests justified? You can imprison a person but not his ideas.”

Lone, former state minister, also questioned: “Government seems to be on an arrest spree. Just a word of caution. Large scale arrests took place in 1990.”

“Leaders were ferried to Jodhpur and many jails across the country. Things worsened. This is a tried tested and failed model. Please desist from it. It won’t work. Things will worsen,” Lone said in his reaction to the detentions.

The raids were carried out during the night in south, central and north Kashmir areas in which dozens of Jamaat leaders, including its chief Abdul Hamid Fayaz, were detained.

Yasin Malik, chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) was also taken into custody and lodged in a police station on Friday.

JRL calls for shutdown on Sunday against mass crackdown and illegal detention



Srinagar, Feb 23, CNS: JRL leaders Syed Ali Geelani and Mirwaiz Umar Farooq said that the arbitrary arrest of JKLF chairman Mohammad Yasin Malik and the mass crackdown and illegal detention of more than 200 Jamat e Islami cadre and leadership including its Ameer Abdul Hamid Fayaz last night in nocturnal raids across the valley looks to be not only part of the continued policy of suppression of pro self determination leadership and narrative, but in the case of hearing of 35A in Indian Supreme Court most likely on Monday, an indication of what may be expected. JRL strongly condemns this dictatorial policy of cracking the whip and arbitrary arrests against Kashmiri’s by those calling the shots in J&K.

JRL Leaders Syed Ali Geelani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and incarcirated Mohammad Yasin Malik said that deployment of additional 12000 paramilitary forces on an urgent basis also indicates that something is cooking in this regard.

Leadership said that challenge to Heredity state subject law is an extremely important issue for the people as it is akin to our very existence as a people and directly linked to the Kashmir dispute.

Leadership said the spontaneous shut down and protests across the valley against even the thought of tempering with the law should leave no doubt in the minds of those who have left no stone unturned to choke and muzzle the voice of Kashmir and are breaking records in repression , that the people of Kashmir will never allow it. JRL said entire people and pro people leadership of J&K are one on this.

Leadership said that arbitrarily arresting and jailing leadership activists and youth across the valley for their political beliefs has been an ongoing process for the last thirty years. Under one pretext or other, government has been following this as a state policy against those associated with the people’s movement to suppress the movement. Thousands of Kashmiri political prisoners are languishing in jails in India, punished for their ideology, an ideology that finds echo in the heart and mind of each Kashmiri. Leadership said that the last 30 years have shown that jailing and intimidating activists and leadership will not deter them from their path nor will it stop people from demanding the resolution of the Kashmir dispute through self determination.

Kulgam family appeals Governor Administration to ensure release of his innocent son

Srinagar, Feb 23, CNS: The family members of one of the youth Nawaz Ahmed, arrested by UP Police staged a protest here in Press Enclave Srinagar on Saturday.

Nawaz, a resident of Noonmai Kulgam along with Pulwama youth Aqib Ahmed were arrested by UP police from Devbandh seminary claiming that some arms and ammunition were recovered from them.

The family members of Nawaz Ahmed assembled at Press Enclave Srinagar and demanded his immediate release. They said Nawaz has no criminal record while UP police should thoroughly probe the matter before labeling him as Jaish militant.

“He is studying ‘Fazliyat’ at Devbandh seminary. He is religious and fond of seeking knowledge about theology. We are sure a thorough probe will ensure his release,” Waqar Ahmed, the brother of Nawaz told news agency CNS.

They appealed Jammu and Kashmir Police and Governor Administration to take up the matter with UP police so that truth may surface. “Nawaz has been implicated in a false case,” the protesting family said. (CNS)

Delhi court defers hearing on Shabir Shah

‘Was barred to meet my husband: Dr Bilques

Srinagar, Feb 23, CNS: Dr Bilques, the better-half of senior separatist leader Shabir Ahmed Shah Saturday said that she was not allowed to meet her incarcerated husband at Tihar Jail.

Shabir Ahmed Shah is languishing at Jail number 8 of Tihar Jail in connection with a militant ‘funding’ case.

Dr Bilques told news agency CNS over phone from New Delhi that she contacted DG Prisons and PRO of Jail number 8 but was not permitted to meet my husband. “I am anxious and worried about his health owing to the the rumours that are ripe in Kashmir over his health. I was shocked when authorities taunted me, saying they are least bothered about Kashmir,” she said.

Dr Bilques said: “authorities barred me from meeting my husband saying it is holiday on Saturday.”

She said she is concerned about her husband as the Delhi court Saturday deferred the hearing on his bail plea till April 2.

Shah’s bail plea came up for hearing before Additional Sessions Judge Satish Kumar Arora.

The court had on February 18 sought response from the Enforcement Directorate on Shah’s bail plea.

The application was moved before the court on the ground of parity after the Delhi High Court recently granted bail to co-accused Muhammad Aslam Wani in the case.

The application submitted that the accused was wrongly and falsely implicated in the case, which was registered in 2007.

Shah was arrested on July 25, 2017 by Special Cell of Delhi Police. (CNS)
