Khadoor Sahib is hotbed of panthic politics and Akali stronghold

Khadoor Sahib Lok Sabha constituency is still in its infancy. One of the 13 parliamentary constituencies in Punjab, it came into being just over a decade, and two elections, back.

It has virtually been an Akali citadel ever since the constituency was formed following the delimitation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies in 2008. Its earlier name was Tarn Taran, but changed during delimitation to Khadoor Sahib — a historic village where second Sikh master Guru Angad Dev lived for 13 years.

The two elections parliamentary elections this segment has witnessed so far, since its christening as Khadoor Sahib, elected Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) candidates. SAD’s Rattan Singh Ajnala bagged the seat in 2009, while SAD’s Ranjit Singh Brahmpura emerged victorious in 2014.

But here’s a catch! Both Ajnala and Brahmpura have now parted ways with the SAD and floated a breakaway faction — SAD (Taksali) — comprising veteran and Taksali (traditional) Akali leaders, only recently. The constituency may actually turn out to be a fort of rebel Akali leaders who have proved their mettle in the state politics.

Brahmpura, the sitting MP, is now heading SAD (Taksali), throwing open challenge to the Badals’ led SAD, which, he claimed, has turned into a company looting people and has digress from its ideals.

Once known as “Majhe da Jarnail”, Brahmpura has already announced not to contest election, but lead the party from the front. In his place, he has announced the name of former Indian Army chief and Arunachal Pradesh’s former Governor General JJ Singh for 2019 polls.

General JJ Singh, who forayed into politics ahead 2017 state assembly polls, had unsuccessfully contested 2017 polls against Capt Amarinder Singh from Patiala urban assembly constituency with finishing third with just 11.10 percent of the total votes polled.

SAD (Taksali) has joined hands with other splinter group, including Sukhpal Khaira’s Punjabi Ekta Party, Bains brothers’ Lok Insaaf Party, Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), and Patiala MP Dr Dharamvir Gandhi’s Punjabi Manch, to form a mahagathbandhan (grand alliance) — Punjab Democratic Alliance (PDA) — to contest the ensuing elections.

The presence of Taksalis would turn the electoral battle four-way making it difficult for the Badals to retain the seat which has stayed with the panthic party since 1977, except 1992 when it boycotted the polls.

The reason behind the success of SAD candidates may not be very hard to comprehend. Khadoor Sahib is an important Sikh holy center and the area has a number of deras, babas and important gurdwaras. No wonder, the voters have preferred panthic or Akali candidates despite the slow pace of development.

This election, all the political parties are all geared up to make the most of panthic issues to take the crown home. While SAD rivals are set to bring into play the 2015 sacrilege and related firing cases against the Badals-led SAD, SAD-BJP combine would take the advantage of Central Government’s decisions regarding opening of Kartarpur corridor, waving GST on langar items, convictions in 1984 anti-Sikh riot cases, among others.

The failure to solve sacrilege cases, and alleged involvement of the Badals in Behbal Kalan firing cases, wherein two innocent protestors died, has cost the Akali Dal to the extent that after ruling the state for a decade, it has been pushed to the distant third place with just 15 seats, besides three of its ally — the BJP.

“Sacrilege issue played a major role in Akalis’ resounding defeat in 2017 state elections. People hold them responsible the series of sacrilege cases, and also for the police firing on the peaceful protestors that killed two...A Sikh may let go a person for killing someone, but would not at all tolerate beadbi of their guru (Guru Granth Sahib),” a state Cabinet Minister said while talking with The Pioneer off the record, adding that Congress would not leave the issue.

Congress made failed attempts to break into the Akali Dal’s citadel in the previous polls. It fielded party’s prominent leader Rana Gurjit Singh in 2009 election but faced defeat at the hands of Ajnala by 32,260 votes.

In 2014, party fielded a member of All India Sikh Students’ Federation (AISSF) Harminder Singh Gill, who had also spent a couple of years in detention in Jodhpur (Rajasthan) after the Operation Bluestar. But even that could not work and Gill was made to bite the dust by a whopping margin of over one lakh votes by Brahmpura.

This time, Congress is struggling to find a suitable winnable candidate. In race are MLA Kulbir Singh Zira’s father Inderjit Singh Zira, MLA Sukhpal Bhullar’s father and former Minister Gurchet Singh Bhullar, besides his brother Anoop Bhullar, former MLA Jasbir Singh Dimpa, and Amritsar’s former district president Inderjit Singh Basarke.

The last time the Congress won this constituency was in 1991 when Surinder Singh Kairon, the son of former Chief Minister Partap Singh Kairon and father of former minister and SAD leader Adesh Partap Singh Kairon, won the seat.

However, the Congress is on a strong footing in the constituency considering that all the nine assembly seats are won by its leaders. “The issue of sacrilege had done a great damage to the SAD’s image, and that’s what gone went against it and in Congress’ favour during assembly elections,” a senior Congress leader said.

Keen on playing its panthic agenda to the hilt, SAD may field its former MLA Virsa Singh Valtoha, who is a known traditional Akali. In fact, SAD has assigned Valtoha a job to keep the party base intact in the segment besides pacify the disgruntled elements exploring prospects in the Taksali faction.

Valtoha, who had lost 2017 assembly elections from Khem Karan to Congress greenhorn Sukhpal Singh Bhullar, has been holding meetings with the party workers and local leaders of the constituency since long.

Besides, the SAD leadership is considering the name of Jagdish Kaur, the prime complainant in 1984 anti-Sikh riot case, who braved all odds to fight for justice against the Congress leader Sajjan Kumar who was convicted by the Delhi High Court only recently.

As Jagdish Kaur has showed sheer reluctance to fight polls, SAD is exploring the names of other persons related with the riot case against Sajjan Kumar. “If someone among them agrees to contest polls, SAD, which has been hit by the exit of Ajnala and Brahmpura, may make a recovery,” a SAD leader maintained.

The Akali Dal is also mulling over fielding the former minister Aadesh Partap Singh Kairon’s wife and party patriarch Parkash Singh Badal’s daughter Parneet Kaur from the seat.

AAP, in the absence of its candidate in 2014 elections Bhai Baldeep Singh, who finished third, is likely to consider its district president Bhupinder Singh Bittu. A renowned exponent of Indian classical music and Gurbani kirtan, Bhai Baldeep Singh had got 1.45 lakh votes in the Akali stronghold. Currently, he has been “under suspension” since April 2015.

Bittu, a former Congressman, had joined AAP in 2016. He had contested 2016 Khadoor Sahib Lok Sabha by-poll as independent securing 17,416 votes, and 2017 state assembly elections as AAP candidate bagging 28,644 votes (19.68 percent in the total votes polled).

Adding another dimension to the contest in the constituency, which is considered as the hub of panthic politics in Punjab, is the entry of Sikh hardliners in the electoral race.

The Bargari Insaaf Morcha, came into being in 2018 to seek justice for the two Sikh youth killed in Behbal Kalan police firing besides punishing the culprits of sacrilege cases, has also thrown its hat in the ring.

The Morcha has announced Sikh outfit United Akali Dal president Mohkam Singh as its candidate from Khadoor Sahib — sending alarm bells ringing to all major political players.

CONSTITUENCY AT A GLANCE

Khadoor Sahib Lok Sabha constituency, that came into existence after delimitation in 2008, comprises nine Vidhan Sabha (legislative assembly) segments. Before delimitation, Kapurthala and Sultanpur Lodhi assembly segments were in Jalandhar, Zira assembly segment was in Firozpur and Jandiala, Patti, Khadoor Sahib and Tarn Taran assembly segments were in Tarn Taran Lok Sabha constituencies. Khem Karan assembly segment was created as a part of delimitation in 2008.

Major part of the Khadoor Sahib constituency was from Tarn Taran parliamentary segment, which no more exist after 2008 delimitation.

A look at the electoral history of the two revealed that this segment has emerged as Akali bastion with the state’s regional party winning six back-to-back elections since 1996. Moreover, out of total 15 elections since 1952, SAD has won eight while Congress has won six.

Demographics:

Khadoor Sahib is primarily a rural, agrarian-based Sikh-dominated seat with religion playing a major role.

LAST ELECTION

In 2014, Akali Dal candidate Ranjit Singh Brahmpura, then known as ‘Majhe da Jarnail’ and second in command after party patriarch Parkash Singh Badal, defeated Congress’s Harminder Singh Gill with a margin of 1,00,569 votes.

Brahmpura was polled 4,67,332 votes (45 percent of the total votes polled) while Gill got 3,66,763 (35 percent). AAP’s Bhai Baldeep Singh finished third with 1,44,521 votes (14 percent) in his share. SAD (Amritsar) president Simarnjeet Singh Mann, who is now with the Bargari Insaaf Morcha, had finished fourth with just 13,990 votes (1.34 percent).

LAST THREE MPs

This constituency did not exist between 1952 and 2008, and came into existence as a part of the implementation of delimitation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies in 2008. Before that, majority part was in Tarn Taran constituency.

2014: Ranjit Singh Brahmpura (SAD)

2009: Rattan Singh Ajnala (SAD)

2004 : Rattan Singh Ajnala (SAD) (Tarn Taran constituency)
