STES faculty members clash over pending salary

While there arose a rift among the teachers at Sinhgad Technical Education Society (STES) who were fighting for their pending salaries, one of the groups has now started a weekly protest outside the Erandwane campus every Saturday. The Sinhgad Samanvay Samiti started their protest on Saturday, and the other group, Sinhgad Kruti Samiti, insisted 8,000 other professors not be dragged in it.



Rajendra Deshmukh, Chairman, Sinhgad Kruti Samiti, said, “By protesting outside the campus, they are defaming the name of the institute, because of which the admissions are affected. While we are demanding our salaries too, we do not believe in protesting; we rather go by the ideology of working for the institute and not losing out on our jobs.”



Sachin Shinde, member from Sinhgad Samanvay Samiti, said, “While they have paid for November and December 2018, the salaries for previous months are still pending. The institute is not paying and exceeding its entire deadline. We are protesting for the entire staff who has not received their salaries. We have started an ongoing protest every Saturday from 11 am to 2 pm and are demanding that they should clear the dues.”



Shinde added, “Few teachers from the campus came to us while we were protesting and threatened us to stop the protest. We have approached the Deccan police station to intervene and have also taken permission from the police authority concerned to continue with our protests before the institute.”



Deshmukh said, “We have also complained to the Deccan police station that the protesting group is defaming the institute. The case is also going on in the Bombay High Court therefore the protesters should wait for the court to give their orders and not protest. The protesters are also giving misleading information regarding the institute and circulating old videos on social media.”



An official from Deccan police station told Mirror, “While the protesting teachers had taken permission from police station to protest at Erandwane campus, a heated argument was seen between other teachers. Teachers who were protesting have also given a letter to police station regarding the incident.”




