The suburbs will be strewn with litter if they stop their work, says PCMC chief

When a bunch of youngsters clearing the streets of Pimpri-Chinchwad of billboards, flexboards and leaflets threatened to halt the service they are rendering if the civic body does not do its bit, Shravan Hardikar, commissioner of Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) actually threw up his hands saying that if the citizens did not continue their good work, the neighbourhoods in his jurisdiction will have to brace for the clutter that is bound to return.



Initiated by four IT professionals — Aniket Prabhu, Rahul Sarvade, Anil Ghodekar and Nilesh Pingale, all residents of the twin cities, Thergaon Social Foundation (TSF), has burgeoned into an army of 60 in the 43 weeks of its existence.



Working on Sundays, the group has been picking away encroachments from bus stops of Pune Mahanagar Parivahan Mahamandal Limited (PMPML), bridges, trees and bylanes. Though the group has made a mark with its drives, capturing the imagination of the citizens, a frustration has set in with the absence of any support from the authorities.



“We dedicated six weeks to removing all illegal posters at Dange bridge. But it did not take long for the situation to revert to the old. For a city to be made smart, it has to be rid of such filth. But we are pained at the absolute lack of support from the corporation and its failure to take action to stall people from generating the mess,” pointed out Prabhu. He underscored the work done by TSF over the past nine months, before they got embroiled in the current exercise of clearing out the illegal billboards and leaflets.



His fellow founder, Sarvade interjected, “So far we’ve received good response from the citizens in the PCMC area. They’ve been eager to get involved with our activities and today we have so many school and college students working with us.” For their part, citizens enthusiastically vouch for the group and many housing societies actually invite them to help with their neighbourhoods.





A month ago, a group of senior citizens from Nisarg Society took their help to do a drive at Bhoir Estate, Landscape Road and adjoining areas. “The work done by these people is commendable and we are all trying to help them by contributing as much as we can,” noted Sunanda Bhide from Nisarg Society. “If more groups like this conduct campaigns in Pimpri-Chinchwad, people will start preferring to live here rather than Pune, given our better infrastructure,” cheered Darshan Shah, a Thergaon resident.





But clearly crushed by the complete apathy of the civic body TSF has now threatened to stop work, unless the officials step in and do their bit. To this, Hardikar reacted, “I am unable to recall the exact work they do but TSF is an active group in our jurisdiction. PCMC has taken up several initiatives against the illegal flex and hoardings, however, the involvement of citizen initiatives such as TSF is critical to maintaining some sanitation in our neighbourhoods. If they give up the situation will inevitably go back to being bad.”





Yet he also defended, “It is not that the departments are not doing their work. For the past six months several special drives have been conducted to remove all the major hoardings and flexes that could harm people. We will now also focus on removing the smaller ones.”





Acknowledging the threat from TSF, Sanjay Kulkarni, an officer at PCMC’s health department accepted, “Last week we got a letter from them saying they will go on a protest in 15 days if there is no action from our side. But we do take action against illegal hoardings. We will put more people on the job from our end, to resolve sanitation issues here.” Another official from PCMC’s encroachment department on condition of anonymity, insisted, “We’ve become extra cautious about hoardings ever since the one at Shahir Amir Shaikh Chowk collapsed killing four people and injuring nine others. However, it is difficult to act against small flexboards, as they are sometimes tucked away inside some lanes. But whenever we receive complaints we attend to them.”


