Impossible made possible: Congress tweets memes mocking PM Narendra Modi for Modi hai to mumkin hai slogan

The Congress, without wasting much time, has come out all guns blazing to counter the BJP's new slogan. (Photo: Twitter/@INCIndia)

A day after Prime Minister Narendra Modi coined his slogan of 'Modi hai to mumkin hai' (It's possible if Modi is there) for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, the Congress has hit back with a series of tweets explaining "impossible" situations that were made possible by the Narendra Modi. These include unemployment and the Rafale controversy, among others.

With the battleground for 2019 Lok Sabha polls being almost set, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Congress--two major national parties-- are doing everything possible to woo their voters. You make one mistake, one slip of tongue, and the other side will be breathing down your neck. The traditional way of putting down each other during speeches doesn't seem to be enough for parties this election season.

Keeping pace with the age of millennial, BJP and Congress have been modishly using social media platforms to strike a chord with the youth (who make a sizable chunk of the voters) with their witty posts while attacking their political opponents.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday (February 23) coined a new slogan for his party's campaign for 2019 Lok Sabha election-- 'Modi hai to mumkin hai' (It's possible if Modi is there). "Public trusts the present government because of the work carried out in last four years. People know Modi hai to mumkin hai (People know that if Modi is there everything is possible)," PM Narendra Modi said at a rally in Rajasthan's Tonk.

The BJP also took to Twitter to announce its what-could-be-the-possible slogan -- 'Modi hai toh mumkin hai'-- for the party's campaign for a second term at the Centre with PM Narendra Modi as its prime ministerial candidate.

The Congress, without wasting much time, has come out all guns blazing to counter the BJP's new slogan. The Rahul Gandhi-led Congress party has explained various scenarios on Twitter where PM Narendra Modi has made the "impossible possible" (pun intended) with the hashtag #NamumkinAbMumkinHai.

The Congress, once again targeting PM Modi over Rafale jet deal, put up a meme with PM Modi hugging Anil Ambani with a caption that read "Chowkidaar ka chori karna namumkin tha". Congress captioned the meme as "Chowkidaar hi chor nikla, kyuki #NamumkinAbMumkinHai".

In another meme, Congress said: "It was impossible to lie and hide the truth in Supreme Court." It captioned the meme as "they made the mockery of the biggest court of India as #NamumkinAbMumkinHai".

Congress, in another tweet, said "It was impossible to loot Rs 30,000 crore from the citizens" but then the prime minister made it possible as "#NamumkinAbMumkinHai".
