The Ambedkar-Owaisi show

Prakash Ambedkar

All India Majlis-e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen

AIMIM

Asaduddin Owaisi

Photo: Satish Malavade/BCCL

Prakash Ambedkar, Asaduddin Owaisi's joint mega rally sends clear signal to Congress-NCP and BJP 01:56

SOUNDING THE POLL BUGLE: Prakash Ambedkar with Asaduddin Owaisi at the rally at Shivaji Park in Dadar. The rally was attended by thousands of people. Ambedkar’s Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi has decided to contest all seats in the Lok Sabha and assembly elections in the state.

Shivaji Park rally sends a clear signal to Congress-NCP and BJP ahead of elections.Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi (VBA) leaderheld a joint mega rally with’s (at Shivaji Park in Dadar on Saturday.The rally, attended by thousands of people, was a show of strength meant to send a clear signal to the Congress-NCP alliance, which was hoping to bring over Ambedkar to its side ahead of the elections, as well as the BJP and Shiv Sena.Despite the recent failure of seat-sharing talks with the Congress, Ambedkar told the crowd that his doors are open for negotiations. He once again demanded a proposal of action against the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS).“Our differences are ideological. We are not fighting over seats. The RSS needs to be brought under the Constitution,” said Ambedkar, the grandson of BR Ambedkar. “This is our main demand and the Congress is not supporting it. We want to save the Constitution. If the current Congress leadership takes a stand like the Congress of old, we may consider holding talks again.”Owaisi condemned the recent terror attack in Pulwama, which claimed the lives of 44 CRPF jawans. “This is an intelligence failure. This is a systemic failure. What have we learned from this?” he said.He also told the Pakistan government and army to stop lecturing Indian Muslims. “Our solidarity was never with Muhammad Ali Jinnah, but the Indian state.”“We all want to see Prakash Ambedkar as the chief minister of Maharashtra. Let’s show our strength,” Laxman Mane, a former MLC, announced from the stage.AIMIM legislator Waris Pathan called the Congress and the BJP two sides of the same coin. “We have been used as vote banks in the past. Neither party had any intentions of looking after the welfare of backwards, Dalits and Muslims. We need reservations in jobs and education. That is our right,” he added.Pathan also criticised the government for failing to tackle cow vigilantism.“The Modi government failed to detect 250 kg explosives,” he added, referring to the Pulwama attack.
