Sabarimala: BJP MPs to protest outside Parliament on Monday over bomb hurled at V Muraleedharan’s residence

BJP MP V Muraleedharan. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: In wake of the ghastly act by anti-social elements in Kerala who hurled bombs at the residence of Bharatiya Janata Party’s Member of Parliament from Rajya Sabha V Muraleedharan following massive protests over the Sabarimala issue, all party MPs have decided to protest outside the Parliament on Monday.

The MPs will protest in front of the statue of Mahatma Gandhi at 10 am tomorrow when the winter session resumes. CPI(M) workers hurled bombs at Muraleedharan’s residence in Kerala’s Thalassery on Friday hours after a country-made bomb was hurled at the residence of CPI(M) MLA AN Shamseer on Thursday night.

Kerala has been witnessing unprecedented violence between the BJP and the CPI(M) workers and both the parties have accused each other of orchestrating violence in the state. The state witnessed widespread violence following hartal called by the right-wing groups over the entry of women in Sabarimala.

The attacks come at a time when the state is facing intense protest over the entry of two women of menstruating age into the Sabarimala, nearly four months after the Supreme Court quashed age-old restrictions.

Two women Kanakadurga, 44, a CPI(ML) activist from Kozhikode district and Bindu, 42, a government employee from Malappuram, became the first women of menstruating age to enter the Sabarimala Temple and offering prayers on Wednesday. The act was denounced by pro-Hindutva outfits which saw it as a breach of their centuries-old tradition.

As many as 5,769 people have been arrested and 1,869 cases have been registered in hartal-related violence in the state after the two women entered the Lord Ayyappa shrine on January 2.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
