IGNOU OPENMAT-XLV July 2019

IGNOU OPENMAT-XLV July 2019 – Indira Gandhi National Open University has released the official notification for MBA Entrance Test – OPENMAT XLV for admission to various Management Programs starting from July 2019 Session. Candidates can register for IGNOU MBA OPENMAT 2019 XLV through online mode only.

All the details regarding e IGNOU MBA Entrance Test 2019 – OPENMAT XLV such as application process, eligibility criteria, selection process etc. are given below.

IGNOU OPENMAT 2019

Starting its operation in 1987, the School of Management Studies today offers a wide range of Programs. The School follows a system of course-wise registration in its Management Program. In the Management Program, semester system is followed as January to June (first semester of the year) and July to December (Second Semester of the year).

IGNOU OPENMAT- XLV July 2019 Important Dates

Registration for OPENMAT XLV July 2019 – Open now

Last Date of online Registration :14th February 2019

Date of Exam: to be announced

Courses Offered through IGNOU OPENMAT 2019

School of Management studies offer Master of Business Administration (MBA) and various Post Graduate Specialisation Diplomas

Master of Business Administration (MBA), or

Post Graduate Diploma in Human Resource Management (PGDHRM), or

Post-Graduate Diploma in Financial Management (PGDFM), or

Post-Graduate Diploma in Operations Management (PGDOM), or

Post-Graduate Diploma in Marketing Management (PGDMM), or

Post-Graduate Diploma in Financial Markets Practice (PGDFMP)

Note:

All the above programmes have multimedia design, and technology aided delivery systems. These are offered through countrywide network of study centres.

The University will be admitting students for the above Degree/Diplomas in Management starting from July 2019 through an Entrance Test ‘OPENMAT-XLV’ to be held in March 2019 for MBA & PG Specialisation Diplomas.

Eligibility Criteria for IGNOU MBA Admission 2019

MBA (through Entrance Test Only)

The eligibility criteria for admission to MBA Program would be as per the AICTE norms viz. Any graduate (Including Chartered Accountancy/Cost Accountancy/Company Secretaryship) with 50% marks for general category/45% for reserved category as per government of India rules

Clearance of OPENMAT conducted by IGNOU

There is no age bar for admission to the above program

Note: Bachelor’s Degree means Bachelor’s Degree of not less than 3-year duration

IGNOU Admission 2019 to Specialisation Post Graduate Diplomas (Direct Entry- Without Entrance Test) at IGNOU

Any Graduate (including Chartered Accountancy/ Cost Accountancy/ Company Secretary ship) with 50% marks for General Category /45% for Reserved Category as per Government of India rules

Students who have directly enrolled for PG Specialisation Diploma, can subsequently enroll for MBA after clearing of OPENMAT entrance exam

Full Credit transfer would be given for completed courses. For further details refer to the separate ‘Students Handbook & Prospectus’ which is available on University website www.ignou.ac.in

There is no age bar for admission to the above program

Walk-in Admission for IGNOU MBA 2019

Candidates who qualify Entrance Test can submit the registration form (Form-2), available in the ‘Student Handbook & Prospectus’ along with the hall ticket of the Entrance Test, to the respective Regional Centres along with the required fee on any day after the receipt of result card, but not later than 31st May for admission cycle starting from July 2019.
