Arunachal Deputy CM house set on fire

Guwahati: Even after Arunachal Pradesh Chief Minister Pema Khandu’s clarification that his government was not going to give Permanent Residence Certificate to six non-Arunachali communities, violence continues to rock the state’s capital Itanagar.

Hundreds of protesters set deputy chief minister Chowna Mein’s house on fire and clashed with security forces in their attempt to attack the CM’s residence on Sunday. The protesters, who went on a rampage across Itanagar throughout the night, also set a police station on fire, forcing the state administration to call the Army and impose prohibitory orders.

A protester was killed and two others were critically wounded in police firing on Saturday night.

Security sources said that on Sunday they opened fire on protesters who were trying to attack the CM’s bungalow and shot dead at least three protesters. Senior police officers could not be contacted to confirm the deaths.

Arunachal Pradesh Congress chief Takam Sanjay on Sunday demanded President’s rule in the frontier state, blaming Union minister Kiren Rijiju, Mr Khandu and his ministers for the current situation in the state.

Mr Sanjay said the BJP was trying to turn Arunachal into another Kashmir. He said: “For the last four years they did nothing for PRC, but now at the fag end of their tenure, they are trying to give PRC hurriedly.”

Mr Sanjay, who was in New Delhi, told this newspaper that the BJP was trying to turn Arunachal into another Kashmir. He said: “For the last four years they did nothing for PRC, but now at the fag end of their tenure, they are trying to give PRC hurriedly. Like all other Northeastern states, Arunachal was also passing through a political turmoil on the issue of Citizenship Amendment Bill and the government’s sudden move to grant PRC has hurt people’s sentiments.”

Admitting that it has been a long pending issue of the state, Mr Sanjay said: “The BJP was trying to destroy the harmony between tribals and non-tribals, that existed in the state, by such divisive moves.”

He also regretted that all BJP ministers have fled Itanagar instead of dousing the fire. “The day protests started, the state leaders had an opportunity to talk to the protesters on the state Assembly premises, where they had gathered first,” Mr Sanjay said. “But instead of engaging with them, they resorted to suppress the agitation, provoking the sentiments of the people.” He outrightly rejected charges by the ruling party about his involvement.

He also appealed to the protestors to maintain peace and demanded judicial probe to fix responsibility.

Informing that even the Army has not succeeded in defusing the situation, security sources in Itanagar said provocative posts on social media were adding fuel to the violence, as protesters tried to attack the chief minister Pema Khandu’s residence on Sunday.
