BJP sounds poll bugle in Punjab

The saffron brigade sounded the poll bugle in Punjab from the holy city of Amritsar on Sunday, sans its decades-old ally, the Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD).

Even as the BJP’s national president Amit Shah hit out at the Congress-led State Government from left, right and centre on issues ranging from Kartarpur Sahib corridor, 1984 anti-Sikh riots, Cabinet Minister Navjot Singh Sidhu’s “hug”, to halting state’s development, the entire SAD leadership was missing from the event.

However, the state BJP unit maintained that the rally was of the party alone wherein Shah had come to discuss issues with the party workers, and that was why SAD leaders have remained absent from the event.

During his to-the-point address to the BJP leaders from Punjab and Haryana at the party’s rally or Karayakarta Sammelan, Shah gave entire credit for the opening of Kartarpur Sahib corridor to the BJP-led Central Government, while attacking Sidhu for hugging Pak Army chief General Qamar Javed Bajwa, “whose Army is killing our men everyday”.

He did not mince a word to attack Punjab Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh for ceasing state’s development and deceiving the state’s farmers, while blaming the State Government for stopping all welfare schemes which were initiated during the 10-year period of SAD-BJP Government in Punjab.

At the same time, he urged the people to elect Narendra Modi again as their Prime Minister if they want India to give befitting reply to Pakistan for Pulwama attack.

Observing two-minute silence in mark of respect of departed souls of 40 CRPF jawans who had lost lives during terror attack in Pulwama on February 14, Shah said that the saffron party has great respect for the four jawans from Punjab who were killed in the attack. In these hours of grief, each party activist was with the grief stricken family, he added.

“Bloodshed of these 40 jawans will not be ignored as BJP Government would teach befitting lesson to these terrorists,” declared Shah .

The blood of 40 CRPF martyrs in the Pulwama terror attack will not go waste and terrorists will be taught a lesson that they will remember for long, said Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) President Amit Shah here on Sunday.

“The blood of 40 (CRPF) martyrs will not go waste. The government will teach them (terrorists) a lesson,” Shah said.

He said that only the BJP could provide a strong and stable government at the Centre under the Prime Minister Narendra Modi and he would take the country forward. “The next Prime Minister will be Narendra Modi,” he asserted.

CONGRESS IS RAJA-MAHARAJA GOVERNMENT

Launching a scathing attack on the Congress dispensation in Punjab, Shah alleged that the “raja-maharaja” government brought to a standstill the development projects and schemes started during the SAD-BJP rule.

“The raja-maharaja government is no match for the previous SAD-BJP regime led by Parkash Singh Badal,” said Shah. “These days Capt Sahab (Amarinder Singh) has become vocal, may be because polls are near. Sometimes, he also goes to office. Now, he has started saying that the Centre has not done this and that. He is seeking accountability from us,” he added.

“But what about his promises to farmers, on ending the drug menace, about unemployment allowance? Even Rahul Gandhi had vowed loan waiver for Punjab farmers, but the way they came out with a loan waiver, it has not benefitted the state's peasants," Shah claimed.

He alleged that several schemes started by the SAD-BJP government has been stopped by the Congress dispensation.

“I do not know whether this government is the one to carry development or stop it. Raja Sahab (Amarinder Singh, who belongs to the erstwhile Patiala royals), you stopped development works,” Shah said.

CENTRE DID A LOT FOR PUNJAB

Touching upon how Punjab for decades has been meeting the country's foodgrain needs and safeguarding its borders, Shah said that the Centre has left no stone unturned to ensure the state's development.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley were always liberal in giving grants to Punjab, and the state got Rs 1,61,907 crore under the NDA dispensation as against the UPA's Rs 30,157 crore, Shah said.

Shah spelled out several schemes and projects for Punjab by the Modi government, including an IIM for Amritsar, AIIMS in Bathinda, improved road network, upgradation of road network and 41 projects sanctioned by the Union Ministry of Food Processing Industries led by SAD leader Harsimrat Kaur Badal.

LEADERLESS ALLIANCE CAN’T TAKE COUNTRY FORWARD

Shah made light of the opposition parties' effort to stitch up a mahagathbandhan saying that a leaderless alliance cannot take the country forward. “The people of this country have made up their mind to bring the BJP-led NDA back to power,” he said.

“This grand alliance cannot take the country forward, it cannot make the country superpower. Only a government under PM Modi can do so. Can Congress party give befitting reply to terror attacks? Only Narendra Modi government can,” he claimed.

About the proposed mahagathbandhan of opposition parties, he sought to know from Congress president Rahul Gandhi who is the leader of this alliance. “Can the grand alliance do any good to this country? Rahul baba, who is the leader of this alliance? If people elect you, who will become Prime Minister?” Shah posed.

“The leaders of this alliance are seeking mandate from public, but they have not decided who their leader is. Whereas, we are clear that on getting majority, Narendra Modi will once again become Prime Minister. The BJP, the Akali Dal and our other allies are going to fight under Modi's leadership...I can see the writing on the wall. Modi is once again going to be PM... Congress can daydream,” he said.

SIDHU HUGGED PAK ARMY CHIEF WHO KILLS OUR MEN

Slamming Punjab Minister Navjot Singh Sidhu, Shah said: “He claims that he went to Pakistan and made Kartarpur Sahib corridor possible...The Pakistan Army chief who is responsible for killing our soldiers, you gave him a warm hug and lowered country's image.”

“You (Sidhu) did not bring Kartarpur, but you are in that party which handed over Kartarpur to Pakistan at the time of partition, which could easily have been a part of India,” he said.

Shah, instead, credited the Modi government for the corridor, linking Gurdwara Darbar Sahib in Pakistan's Kartarpur - the final resting place of Guru Nanak Dev's - to Dera Baba Nanak shrine in India's Gurdaspur district to facilitate visa-free movement of Indian Sikh pilgrims.

About the 1984 anti-Sikh riots case, Shah said that Modi Government has set up a Special Investigation Team (SIT) to give justice to the victims. “For 30 years, not even a single person was punished. Now, Sajjan Kumar is behind the bars,” he said.

SHAH ASKS WORKERS TO PULL UP SOCKS FOR ELECTIONS

At the same time, Shah asked the party workers and leaders to pull up socks not for three seats rather for all the 13 parliamentary seats in Punjab. BJP contests Lok Sabha elections on three seats — Gurdaspur, Amritsar, and Hoshiarpur — in alliance with SAD, which feilds its candidates from the remaining 10.

JOSHI’s HOARDINGS REMOVED AHEAD SHAH’s VISIT

Earlier, hoardings carrying the photo of BJP leader and former Cabinet Minister Anil Joshi were either torn or removed from the venue allegedly due to some differences with the State president Shwait Malik, claimed close associate of Joshi.
