Country will lose 50 years if Modi doesn’t return to power: Nirmala Sitharaman

Bengaluru: Stating that the 2019 Lok Sabha elections were crucial for India, Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said that the country would lose 50 years if Prime Minister Narendra Modi did not return to power.

Speaking at an Informal Interaction organised by Thinkers Forum, Jayanagar here on Sunday, Ms Sitharaman said that India would be doing a disfavour to children born in the 21st century, who would be voting for the first time, if the BJP's work is not recognised.

Ms Sitharaman also chided AICC President Rahul Gandhi saying he was a ‘sub-adult child’ who does not understand issues, but feels that he has understood everything. Besides, the opposition allegations were not based on facts and they could stoop to any level to make allegations.

“A lot of noteworthy work was done during the last five years of Modi rule, but there is not even a whisper of corruption. The Congress President is worried about what to complain about?” she said.

There could have been truth in the allegations that India would run out of ammunition, if there was a continuous war for 10 days. But in the last five years, things have changed. The problems of the defence sector were so severe that the forces did not have bullet proof jackets, ammunition for tankers and technology upgradation for the air force. For the first two years, Mr Manohar Parrikar spent time understanding the problems of the forces. Next, Mr Arun Jaitley prepared a report on that. “After I took over, I could take it forward, as the report was ready,” she said.

Answering a question on the Pulwama terror attack, Mrs Sitharaman said that the anger, disappointment and the hunger of the people to strike back is known to the government quite well.

The Prime Minister has given a reply, saying that the sacrifice of the armed forces will not go waste.

On action against Pakistan, Ms Sitharaman said that Pakistan was under tremendous pressure, since it had been economically isolated by the world community. More can be done on this front, she said.

On the Rafale issue, Ms Sitharaman said that during 10 years of UPA rule, not even a single aircraft was added to the air force.

In such circumstances, it would be an abuse of human intelligence to compare the prices, she said adding that due process was followed and all the details were given to the Supreme Court and CAG.
