Rallies staged across KP against India

PESHAWAR: Protest rallies were staged throughout Khyber Pakhtunkhwa on Sunday to show unity against possible Indian aggression.

In the provincial capital, the activists of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) staged a protest against India for creating tension and war-like situation.

The protesting workers gathered near the Peshawar Press Club and chanted slogans against Indian leadership for launching propaganda against Pakistan and creating the war-like situation.

They set on fire the effigy of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and warned of befitting response if India tried to impose a war on Pakistan. They said the Pakistani nation was united and capable to teach a lesson to India in case of war. The Indian leadership should know that Pakistan’s armed forces and public were strong enough to foil any aggression by the enemy, they said and added every individual of the Pakistani Nation would not hesitate to render any sacrifice for safeguarding the country’s frontiers.

They vowed to defend every inch of the motherland even at the cost of sacrificing their life.

CHITRAL: The activists of various political and religious parties stage a protest rallies against India for threatening Pakistan. Hundreds of activists belonging to different political and religious parties from Drosh, Kalash valley, Ayon, Garam Chashma and Upper Chitral took out to the streets to condemn India’s warning against Pakistan. They were holding placards and banners inscribed with slogans against India. In this connection, such a rally was organised by Jamaat-e-Islami under the leadership Maulana Jamshed Ahmad.

Speaking on the occasion, the JI leaders, including Qari Jamal Abdul Nasir, Qari Naseem, and others said the masses would stand shoulder to shoulder with its army to thwart any aggression.

KHAR: People also took to the streets in Bajaur tribal district to protest against India. The traders and workers of various political parties staged separate rallies and gathered at Khar Bazaar. The protesters torched the effigy of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi on the occasion.

Addressing the protesters, the elders said that they were ready to fight along the army if India imposed a war on Pakistan.

BATKHELA: A protest rally was also staged in Malakand against India.

Workers of different political parties, traders and civil defence volunteers participated in the rally. Speaking on the occasion, the leaders warned India against any attack on Pakistan. “Pakistan is a nuclear state. It will receive a tit-for-tat response,” said a PTI leader Ikram Khan. The protest rallies were also staged in Mardan, Swat, Dir and other districts of the province to condemn Indian threats.
