Arvind Kejriwal: Indefinite hunger strike for statehood my last option

Delhi statehood: CM Arvind Kejriwal says indefinite hunger strike was last option left to him

NEW DELHI: Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday said his decision to sit on an indefinite hunger strike from Friday for full statehood to Delhi was the last option available to him.In a series of tweets, Kejriwal accused BJP government at the Centre of “snatching” Delhi government’s powers in the last four years. “In the last four years, the Modi government , through its orders, kept snatching Delhi government’s powers. It caused obstruction in every work of Delhiites. We tried everything — pleaded with them, staged dharna, went to court. With no option left, we are going on a hunger strike,” Kejriwal tweeted in Hindi.He also accused BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of “lying” on the issue and said the people of Delhi would punish them for “opposing” full statehood.BJP, however, termed Kejriwal’s move a “drama before elections” and alleged that the ruling AAP had nothing to show to the people as its achievements to seek votes in the upcoming Lok Sabha polls.Terming it “aar paar ki ladai” (the final battle), Kejriwal had on Saturday announced in the assembly his decision to sit on the indefinite fast to get Delhi the status of a full-fledged state. The AAP-dominated House also adopted a resolution demanding that the Union home ministry take necessary “legal and legislative steps” to declare Delhi a “full-fledged” state without any further delay and only the area under New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) is left under the Centre’s control.“Yes, Delhi is India’s national capital, so let the Centre keep entire NDMC area under its complete control. How can the rest of Delhi, in which Delhiites elect their own govt, be kept subservient to the Centre? No more injustice to be tolerated (sic),” Kejriwal said in another tweet on Sunday.AAP government started raising the demand for full statehood after the Supreme Court referred a case on who controls the bureaucracy in the capital to a larger bench earlier this month. Kejriwal then said Delhi government was powerless without having the authority to transfer and decide posting of senior officers.“Advaniji, as home minister, in August 2003 introduced the statehood for Delhi Bill in Lok Sabha. Pranab-da-headed parliamentary committee endorsed it in Dec 2003, but it finally lapsed. Did they intend to just play with the emotions of people of Delhi? Why this injustice with Delhiites (sic)?” the CM said.Delhi BJP chief Manoj Tiwari, however, called the demand “misplaced” after the Supreme Court order. “Delhi is not Kejriwal’s fief; it’s the capital of India. Its existing governance model is based on this fact. Kejriwal is just trying to fool people one more time before the polls by raising the full statehood issue,” he alleged.
