Five things to watch out for on February 25, 2019

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will inaugurate National War Memorial on February 25, in Delhi. The memorial is to honour soldiers who have laid down their lives for the country since Independence. The defence minister, chiefs of the Army, Navy and Air Force along with a few cabinet ministers will attend the inauguration. This new memorial has been instituted in the heart of Delhi, in close vicinity of India Gate and Amar Jawan Jyoti.

The six-day budget session of the Maharashtra Legislature to begin on February 25. It was initially planned for three weeks starting February 18 but was curtailed to a six-day affair due to general polls in March. On the other end, Tripura's Deputy Chief Minister (also Finance Minister) Jishnu Dev Varma will lay the Budget for 2019-20 on the second day of the session. Tripura's session is likely to end on March 1.

The members of Airport Authority Employees Union are likely to go on a nation-wide relay hunger strike on February 25. The strike is against the privatisation of airports in Jaipur, Guwahati, Trivandrum, Ahmedabad, Lucknow and Mangalore. The hunger strike will not hamper the daily activities at the airport. The strike was earlier called on February 20, but due to Pulwama attack, the union decided to postpone it.

The National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) on February 25, will hear the contempt plea filed by HSBC Daisy Investments (Mauritius) and other minority shareholders over an alleged default in payment against Reliance Infratel and its promoters. HSBC Daisy moved the appellate tribunal over alleged default of payment of Rs 230 crore by Reliance Infratel.

Around 4,400 schools in Maharashtra are likely to witness a bandh called by the Federation of Schools Association of Maharashtra (FSAM) on February 25. The bandh is due to Government administration’s failure to elicit a response over the implementation of the RTE Act on January 24. One of the argument of FSAM is that the reimbursement of Rs 17,000 per year per child was less than tuition fees at most schools.
