BJP Sarkar Jawab Do! Tens of Thousands Will Join National Andolan For Forest Rights

Today, the Campaign for Survival and Dignity, a national platform of adivasi and forest dwellers’ organisations, decided on a national Wave of Struggle over the next two weeks against the unjust attack on millions of people whose claims under the Forest Rights Act were rejected.

The Supreme Court’s order to evict over one million claimant families is the direct result of the BJP government’s decision to not say a word in court for the last four hearings. This is only the last step in this government’s consistent sabotage of this law, from May 2014 to the present.

Under the banner “BJP Sarkar Jawab Do!”, mass protests are planned from Feb 26th to March 10th. Each will draw several thousand people:

On February 26th , Jal Jangal Jeevan Bachao Sajha Manch will be holding a mass rally in Bhopal .

, Jal Jangal Jeevan Bachao Sajha Manch will be holding a mass rally in . On February 28th , Adivasi Chhattra Sanghatan and allied groups will be holding rallies in all districts of Madhya Pradesh.

, Adivasi Chhattra Sanghatan and allied groups will be holding rallies in all districts of Madhya Pradesh. On March 3rd , Sarv Adivasi Samaj and allied groups will be holding a mass rally in

, Sarv Adivasi Samaj and allied groups will be holding a mass rally in On March 3rd , a mass protest will be held by Adivasi Patel Sangh in Warla (Badwani district, MP).

, a mass protest will be held by Adivasi Patel Sangh in (Badwani district, MP). On March 5th , Jangal Jameen Jan Andolan will be holding a mass rally in Udaipur followed by indefinite dharnas in the tribal districts of Rajasthan.

, Jangal Jameen Jan Andolan will be holding a mass rally in followed by indefinite dharnas in the tribal districts of Rajasthan. On March 8th , Adivasi Mahasabha will holding a mass rally in Godhra in Gujarat in which thousands of tribals from four districts will join. Subsequent protest will be held for north and south Gujarat as well.

, Adivasi Mahasabha will holding a mass rally in in in which thousands of tribals from four districts will join. Subsequent protest will be held for north and south Gujarat as well. On March 8th or 9th , a mass rally will be in Bhubaneshwar .

, a mass rally will be in . Meetings are being held over the next four days in Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Jharkhand, and Dadra and Nagar Haveli and mass protests will be held in all these States before March 10th.

Each protest will be accompanied by poster and awareness campaigns about the Central government’s role, and in Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Nagar Haveli the rallies will be accompanied by padayatras in affected areas.

The protests will draw people’s attention to the attack on forest rights that has culminated in Supreme Court order. In particular we will demand:

The Central government immediately act to reverse the February 13th order, by any means appropriate, and to ensure that all rejection of claims under the Forest Rights Act are reviewed through gram sabhas (not only by officials).

The Central government ensure that, as per law, every village in forest areas in the country receives title to protect and manage their community forest resources, and to use their non-timber forest produce without any conditions or restrictions.

All compensatory afforestation and other forestry funds (including Joint Forest Management) should only be utilised under the control of forest welling communities through their gram sabhas.

Stop all diversion of forest land for corporate projects without consent of affected gram sabhas and without recognising rights.

Ensure that all officials responsible for violating forest rights are prosecuted.

Campaign for Survival and Dignity

www.forestrightsact.com, forestcampaign@gmail.com
