Sack CM, Rijiju, impose President’s Rule in Arunachal — Congress

New Delhi, Feb. 25 (IANS/PTI): Blaming the ruling BJP of trying to turn Arunchal Pradesh into “another Kashmir”, the Congress on Monday sought the dismissal of Pema Khandu-led state government for violence over the controversial permanent residence certificate (PRC) issue and demanded a judicial probe into the police firing on protestors killing three.

A Congress delegation led by party General Secretary Luizinho Faleiro submitted a memorandum to the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) seeking immediate sacking of Khandu, Deputy Chief Minister Chowna Mein and Union Minister of State for Home Affairs Kiren Rijiju for their failure to discharge their constitutional obligations.

It also demanded a probe into the police firing on unarmed protestors that led to the killing of three persons by a high court judge or a retired Chief Justice.

Addressing the media later, Faleiro said the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government through the PRC and Citizenship Amendment Bill has “let loose hell” in Arunachal and turning it into another Kashmir.

“Don’t try to make Arunachal into another Jammu and Kashmir. We have got enough problems in the country and under this regime the problems are only multiplying. Be it industries and the economy or agriculture, problems are only growing under the BJP.

“Whatever the Congress has done steadfastly over the years to maintain the identity and culture of North East, this government has undone all. This government through the National Register of Citizens (NRC), through the Citizenship Amendment Bill and now the PRC has destabilised the North East. This government is destroying the North East and palying with sentiments of the people,” said Faleiro.

“Through the PRC the present BJP government has let hell lose in Arunachal,” said Felerio, adding that the Centre must immediately sack Khandu, Rijiju and Chowna Mein for “plunging the peaceful state into anarchy”.

“There is no government machinery whatsoever in Arunachal and the Chief minister, his deputy and Rijiju in whose constituency three innocent people were killed and many others injured in police firing have disappeared into thin air. They must be immediately sacked,” he added.

Countering Rijiju’s allegation of the Congress instigating violence in the state, Arunachal Congress President Takom Sanjoy said a judicial inquiry into the police action is essential to find out the real culprits.

“Let there be a judicial probe to find as to who instigated the violence. If we are found to be guilty, then arrest us and put us in jail. But for that a judical probe is a must,” said Sanjoy.

In the memorandum to Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh, the Congress blamed the Khandu government’s “gross mismanagement” in handling the peaceful protest against the issue of PRC and claimed that law and order machinery in the state has “completely collapsed”.

Chief Minister says PRC a “closed issue”

Army patrolled the streets of Arunachal Pradesh capital Itanagar on Monday as people spilled out into the streets defying curfew despite Chief Minister Pema Khandu’s assurance that grant of permanent residence to six non-native communities in the state was a “closed issue”, officials said.

Curfew that was clamped in Itanagar and adjoining Naharlagun town on Saturday was in force but it did not deter protesters from venturing into the troubled streets that were scene of pitched battles with security forces over the last three days that left three people dead, including two in police firing on Sunday.

“Never again will we take up the issue of PRC. The issue is closed,” Khandu told national TV, as he attempted to smooth ruffled feathers of various community groups up in arms against his government over the proposed grant of Permanent Residence Certificate (PRC) to six communities that are not natives of Arunachal Pradesh but are living there for decades.

The BJP government of the state had decided to implement the recommendation of a Joint High Power Committee for granting PRC to these communities living in Namsai and Changlang districts for decades.

The JHPC’s recommendation was to be tabled in the state assembly on Saturday but the house was adjourned sine die amid spiralling violence.

“For the peace & tranquility of our state, Government has already dropped the PRC matter of Namsai & Changlang districts,” Khandu had tweeted on Sunday, seeking to calm the frayed tempers as mobs rampaged through the streets of the two towns, clashing with security forces, setting ablaze hundreds of buses and damaging public and private property.

Rijiju calls for talks with all stakeholders for peace in Arunachal

Union Minister of State for Home Affairs Kiren Rijiju on Monday urged the Arunachal Pradesh government to immediately initiate dialogue process with all stakeholders to restore peace in the northeastern state which has witnessed sustained violence over the move to grant permanent resident certificates to six communities living in the state.

Rijiju also clarified that the Pema Khandu-led state government has decided not to issue permanent residence certificate (PRC) to six non-Arunachal Pradesh Scheduled Tribes and insisted on all political parties to discuss the issue.

“The violence erupted because of the state government’s failure to communicate to the people that it will not implement the PRC. The state government has already decided that it will not issue PRC,” Rijiju told the media here.

“Peace must be maintained at any cost. The state government must immediately talk to all organisations, civil society and all political parties to ensure peace and normalcy. There should not be any politics on this. When it comes to issues of the masses, we all must work together,” he said.

Condemning the violence in capital Itanagar and Naharlagun that claimed three lives, Rijiju also asked the state government to provide monetary compensation and other support to the victims’ families.

“It is unfortunate that three lives have been lost. Home Minister Rajnath Singh and I have spoken to Chief Minister Khandu and the Governor, and they have assured of the situation improving and normalcy returning,” said Rijiju.

On Sunday, the Arunachal Pradesh government froze its decision on the controversial PRC that triggered widespread violence for a third day, leading to the torching of the Deputy Chief Minister’s house.
