JMM seeks safeguarding the interest of tribals settled on forest land

Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM) activists on Monday staged a demonstration in front of the office of regional chief conservator of forest (RCCF) at Sonari in protest against alleged exploitation of humble tribals living in the forest area.

The protest was led by JMM legislator, Kunal Sarangi and party's East Singhbhum district president, Ramdas Soren.

The activists demanded the state government to take measures for safeguarding the interest of the tribals settled on forest land immediately. The protestors, which include women threatened that if the tribals settled on the forest land have to vacate their houses, then they would resort to a massive agitation.

Sarangi, who is Baharagora MLA said that about 30,000 tribals who have settled on forest land following implementation of Forest Act in 2006 are likely to be removed from their houses in the light of a Supreme Court verdict given recently.

"We have gathered here to protest against the move. An NGO active in the wildlife field had filed an PIL with the apex court claiming that a huge area of forest land has been encroached and occupied by tribals and the process of forest land encroachment continues, thus threatening the wildlife across the country. But when the apex court held hearing over the PIL, legal departments of the Union government as well as the states concerned did not plead over the issue.

As a result of which the apex court gave its verdict instructing that the entire forest land should be relieved of encroachment," said Sarangi.

The Baharagora legislator and young leader noted that after the Forest Act-2006 was implemented 30,000 landless tribals had been given "Ban Patta" in the state. The "Ban Patta" (rights of land" had been issued to those tribals who had been residing in the forest since a long time.

“It is really sad that after the apex court judgement, those tribals will have to vacate their houses and hand over the land back to the forest department," said the legislator.

JMM district president, Ram Das Soren said that in East Singhbhum also a large number of landless tribals have been given "Ban Patta" and due to the anti-tribal attitude of the BJP-led Raghubar Das government those tribals will have to be rendered homeless now.

The Supreme Court has ordered that for the 17 states where rejection order has been passed, the chief secretary will ensure “eviction will be carried out on or before the next date of hearing”.

The court will hear the matter on July 24. “Forest Survey of India (FSI) make a satellite survey and place on record the encroachment positions and also state the positions after the eviction as far as possible,” the order states.
