BJP takes silent protest rally

The BJP on Monday took out a silent march in Satna to protest the kidnapping and killing of two twin brothers, and demanded the death sentence for the culprits besides action against those guilty of inept investigation into the case.

The march in Satna, around 375km from Bhopal, was led by senior BJP leader and former chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan.

The main opposition party also staged protests in other parts of the state, including Bhopal, over the shocking abduction-killing of the six-year-old twins, whose father is an oil businessman, and criticised the Congress government.

The twins - Priyansh and Shreyansh - KG students and sons of medicated oil merchant Brijesh Rawat, were kidnapped at a gunpoint by two masked persons from their school's premises in Chitrakoot in Satna district on February 12.

The kidnappers later killed the minors, whose bodies were found in the Yamuna River in neighbouring Uttar Pradesh, police had said Sunday.

Talking to reporters after the march, Chouhan said the state government should take measures to ensure such incidents don't recur in the future.

The Satna case should be tried in a fast-track court and the prosecution should ensure the death sentence for the culprits, Chouhan said.

Security of school and college students should be enhanced across the state, he said.

The ex-CM said those guilty of shoddy investigation should also be punished because the twins were in captivity of kidnappers for 12 days and could have been saved.

On Sunday night, Chouhan had visited the residence of Rawat to express his condolence.

The ruling Congress said this is not an issue related to politics.

"The incident of Satna was very sad. This is not an issue of politics. But, the opposition need to see the mirror. Why BJP people were found involved in recent crimes in Mandsaur, Ratlam and Barwani. Similarly, the people of BJP were also found involved in the kidnapping incident of Chitrakoot," said state Congress Media Cell Coordinator Narendra Saluja.
