Pune: 35 hearing-impaired youths, staging protest, injured after cops resort to lathi-charge; CM seeks report

Pune Police on Monday resorted to lathi-charge a crowd of hearing-impaired youths during a protest | Photo Credit: ANI

Pune: The Pune Police on Monday resorted to lathi-charge to disperse a crowd of hearing-impaired students who were staging a demonstration in Pune, resulting in 35 of the students getting injured in the incident. The cops also detained around 170 activists working for the Maharashtra Deaf and Dumb Association but later released them.

Nearly 11,000 hearing-impaired youths from across Maharashtra had gathered outside the Social Welfare Commissionerate in Pune near the police commissioner’s office, pressing for their long-standing demands. Among other things, the students were demanding the right to quality education, prevention of fraudulent distribution of disability certificates to able-bodied individuals and provision of trained interpreters for deaf students, reports said.

The police action against the protesters, most of whom were students, was widely criticised by opposition political parties, with many slamming the BJP government for the state of affairs. Meanwhile, chief minister Devendra Fadnavis has ordered the Pune police commissioner to submit a detailed report on the matter by Tuesday morning, as per reports.

#WATCH: Pune Police lathicharge protestors who were demanding among other things employment and setting up of govt school/colleges for specially abled people. #Maharashtra pic.twitter.com/a1QbfqpImp — ANI (@ANI) February 25, 2019

The Pune Police had said that it had decided not to proceed with the FIR process against the protesters and hence no FIR was filed. On the other hand, the cops have reportedly claimed that around 7 to 8 policemen had also suffered injuries during the protest.

Reportedly, the situation had escalated after the protesters had tried to block the road during the agitation. Speaking on this, senior inspector Mujawar told a news portal, “We tried to tell the students that they cannot take out a rally as they did not have prior permission. One of the protesters instigated others to overpower the cops. About 2,000 of them came forward and that is when we had to resort to mild lathi-charge to bring the situation under control.”

Notably, narrating the sequence of events, Pradip More, secretary of State Level Association of the Deaf, said, “When we tried to take out a rally, the police ordered a lathicharge in which several of our protesters were injured. They also detained some of the youths.”

Meanwhile, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leaders Supriya Sule, Dhananjay Munde, and Maharashtra Navnirman Sena chief Raj Thackeray all condemned the incident.

Sule, who met the protesters after the incident, said, "I condemn the lathicharge on the deaf and dumb youths in Pune. The chief minister should respond to this as he is also the home minister. He should resign if he cannot handle this." Thackeray also slammed the government and said that it was least bothered about the issues of the specially-abled and only wanted to win elections and earn money.


