Farmers oppose demarcation, say finalise compensation first

editorial@tribune.com

Ravi Dhaliwal

Tribune News Service

Dera Baba Nanak, February 25

The Gurdaspur administration and Batala police diffused a potentially volatile situation by opening last-minute negotiations with scores of agitating farmers whose land is sought to be acquired for the Kartarpur Sahib corridor project.

There were CID reports that the 75 farmers whose land is to be acquired by the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) for the corridor road and Integrated Check Post (ICP) and nearly 200 other farmers would turn violent when NHAI and revenue officials would reach the site to oversee the demarcation process this morning.

Deputy Commissioner Vipul Ujwal, acting on the inputs, asked Dera Baba Nanak SDM Gursimran Singh Dhillon and Batala Tehsildar Arvind Salwan to start confabulations. Batala SSP Opinderjit Singh Ghuman was asked to provide police cover to the SDM, Tehsildar and NHAI officials.

The land of 57 farmers is to be acquired for the corridor road, while the land 18 farmers is to be taken over for the construction of the ICP in 50 acres.

Cabinet minister and Dera Baba Nanak MLA Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa also spoke to the farmers to maintain calm.

The protesters, after seeing the large police force, which was led by SP (Headquarters) Nirmaljit Singh and DSP, Fatehgarh Churian, Balbir Singh, calmed down and sat on a dharna. They said the NHAI should first tell them the rate per acre at which their land would be acquired, while revenue officials maintained that the same could be decided only after the demarcation process was completed.

“We have to abide by norms which state that the amount of compensation can be decided only after the land is demarcated. The farmers are raising an illogical and irrational demand,” said an official engaged in the acquisition process.

The SSP had asked the policemen not to use force “whatever the provocation might be”.

“We had deployed police as a deterrent. I had given instructions to the officers not to be carried away by the situation,” said SSP Ghuman.

The demarcation procedure commenced after SDM Dhillon held a discussion with the protesters.
