NA witnesses war of words between Fehmida, Talpur

ISLAMABAD: Former speaker and sitting Federal Minister Dr Fehmida Mirza sounded a warning to the Pakistan People’s Party (PPP) not to force her to reveal secrets of their leaders as spouse of once close aide of Asif Ali Zardari and PPP parliamentarian Munawwar Talpur traded harsh remarks on floor of the National Assembly on Monday. “Reality of nobody (in PPP) is hidden from me and I know who used to wear what kind of dress,” Dr Fehmida while reacting strongly to allegations leveled by Munawwar Talpur, who is the brother-in-law of Asif Zardari, said adding everybody knew who attacked the Sindh High Court.

As Fehmida Mirza started her speech, the PPP members gathered in front of the speaker’s dais to protest her remarks. The former speaker alleged that it was the Sindh government which planned the attack on her house and instructions were given from the house of Faryal Talpur, who is acting like Sindh chief minister. “I have said nothing but knows many secrets,” she said.

Rejecting the allegations of the PPP parliamentarian, Dr Mirza said she never secured a loan from any bank but they (PPP leaders) looted the Summit Bank. “I possess evidence and document in support of my claims,” she said.

Earlier, PPP member Munawwar Talpur without naming Dr Fehmida Mirza, said that her family got her bank loans written off. “Her nomination papers were rejected as she was a bank defaulter but were later cleared in a matter of two days,” he said.

Once against without naming Dr Fehmida Mirza, he said they also used to owe their achievements to Asif Zardari. Talpur also strongly condemned the arrest of the Sindh Assembly speaker and his house search for seven hours while making the members of his family hostages.

Earlier, speaking on a point of order, PML-N’s senior parliamentarian Khawaja Muhammad Asif demanded of the speaker to issue production orders of Khawaja Saad Rafique and also sought the speaker’s ruling in this connection. “You issued production orders in past but discriminatory attitude is being meted out with Saad Rafique,” he said. He pointed out the production orders of PTI’s Punjab senior minister Abdul Aleem Khan and Senator Kamran Michael had also been issued.

On that, Speaker Asad Qaisar said that the file of Saad Rafique had reached his office and he would take a decision after consulting law experts saying that rules would be followed. “I will not disappoint you,” Asad Qaisar. The PML-N parliamentarian, however, insisted that there was no need to consult law experts as issuance of production orders of a parliamentarian is an old tradition.

Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi on the occasion observed that the PML-N member could have raised the issue in speaker’s chamber. However, he was hopeful that the speaker would take decision on demand of the opposition parties as he did in the past.

Meanwhile, responding to a point raised by JUI-F leader Asad Mahmood in the House, Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said the second phase of CPEC has been agreed with China, which indicates that Beijing is fully satisfied with the project. Regarding another point, the minister said there is no change in Pakistan’s policy regarding Israel. To maintain cordial environment in the House, Shah Mehmood Qureshi urged the opposition to cooperate with the treasury benches in running business of the National Assembly in line with the parliamentary traditions. He said opposition had the right to raise any matter and lodge protest but it should refrain from creating rumpus in the House.

JUI-F member Asad Mahmood, earlier, advised the government to refrain from changing the status of relations with Israel.

“Quaid-i-Azam had already given a statement in categorical words that Pakistan will not recognise Israel,” he said. He also asked the government to clear misunderstandings being created about the mega CPEC project. Minister for Water Resources Faisal Vawda assured the National Assembly that Pakistan’s share of water under Indus Water Treaty is secure and safe. Taking the floor, he said under the Indus Waters Treaty, India has the right over eastern rivers and it does not affect Pakistan if New Delhi stops their water.

Talking about the Mohmand Dam, the Minister of State said that Rs18 billion have been saved in negotiation with the bidder. He said out of these, Rs16 billion would be used in the construction of Naulong Dam in Balochistan.
