PM Modi: Before model code takes effect: PM Modi rushes through project launches

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been busy in the last few days, announcing several programmes and projects to woo prospective voters before the Election Commission announces the Lok Sabha poll schedule and the model code of conduct kicks in.A day after the Pulwama terror attack, the government had decided that though political programmes should be suspended, development projects should not take a hit. The PM flagged off the Vande Bharat Express from Delhi to Varanasi on February 15 and attended a programme at Jhansi where more projects were announced later in the day. He visited Pandharkawada and Dhule on February 16 and Barauni and Hazaribagh on February 17, launching new projects. Each of the PM’s visit has combined a party programme along with an official function. He launched the PM-Kisan programme to grant the first tranche of 6,000 to small and marginal farmers on Sunday. Later, he took a dip at Sangam in Prayagraj and washed the feet of safai karamcharis BJP has been trying to woo farmers, poor, Dalits, first time voters as well as arouse nationalist sentiments in the run-up to the elections. In this regard, the National War Memorial was dedicated to the nation on Monday evening. Modi will reach out to young voters on February 27 by taking part in the concluding session of the National Youth Parliament. On March 1, he will be in Vishakapatnam and Kanyakumari. An NDA rally comprising BJP and JDU supporters will be held at the Gandhi Maidan in Patna on March 3. On March 4, the PM will be in Ahmedabad to kick-start the construction of the local metro. The Union Cabinet had okayed the project in its last meeting.A huge NDA rally, where all constituents would be present, is being planned before the poll dates.The tentative date for the event is March 8. Modi is also engaged in party work and will address BJP booth level workers through video conferencing on February 28. Modi will take part in a ISKCON Geeta event on Tuesday.
