India warned against attacking Pakistan

Protesters shout slogans while holding an effigy of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi during a demonstration in Peshawar on Monday. — White Star

PESHAWAR: As rallies were staged in different parts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa against Indian threats to Pakistan, the provincial assembly unanimously passed a resolution condemning Indian leadership’s aggressive stand in the backdrop of Pulwama attack.

“This assembly clear upon Indian government that entire Pakistani nation is united against any aggression and every Pakistani citizen would stand by army for protecting the honour and dignity of the country,” read the resolution tabled by MPA Zahir Shah Toru of the PTI.

It was also signed by law minister Sultan Mohammad Khan, leader of the opposition Mohammad Akram Khan Durrani, PPP MPAs Sher Azam Wazir and Nighat Orakzai, ANP MPA Khushdil Khan and Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal MPA Inayatullah Khan.

Presenting resolution on the floor of the house, Mr Toru said Pakistani nation was ready for giving a matching response to Indian aggression.

He said the house wanted to make it clear to Indians that if Pakistan was seen with evil intention, then Pakistani nation would put up a strong defence.

The resolution was unanimously passed by the house when Speaker Mushtaq Ahmad Ghani put it to vote.

In Timergara, hundreds of people demonstrated against Indian threats to Pakistan.

The rally arranged by the Timergara traders’ body was attended by hundreds of political activists. The traders observed a complete shutter down strike on the occasion.

Carrying Pakistani flags and shouting slogans against Indian premier Nrendra Modi and Indian army chief, the participants warned that Pakistan, an atomic country, would never tolerate Indian aggression over the Pulwama incident and would respond befittingly.

The speakers, including president of the Anjuman Tajaran Timergara Haji Anwaruddin, Jamaat-i-Islami district chief Izazul Mulk Afkari, district nazim Rasool Khan, JUI-F Maulana Nabi Shah and PTI Haji Shah Nazar, said Pakistan was a peace-loving country, which wanted friendly relations with all its neighbours.

“All Pakistanis are standing with the Pakistan Army and they will fight side by side with it if India dare attack the country,” Izazul Mulk said.

Other speakers said Pakistan had nothing to do with the Pulwama attack, which was a handiwork of the Modi government in a bid to please voters ahead of the general elections.

The protesters burnt an effigy of the Indian premier.

In Swabi, leaders of various political parties and traders staged a joint protest against the Indian threats of aggression against Pakistan.

The protesters gathered at the Karnal Sher Khan Shaheed Chowk after marching on roads and through markets.

The protest led to the suspension of traffic on Swabi-Jehangira Road, Swabi-Mardan Road and Swabi-Topi Road inconveniencing motorists and commuters.

The speakers said Indian Prime Minister Narenda Modi had staged a ‘drama’ in Pulwama to divert the Indian people’s attention from his government’s failure to deliver during the last five years.

They warned if India imposed war on Pakistan, the whole Pakistani nation would fight it along with the armed forces.

The speakers demanded the immediate implementation of the UN resolutions on Kashmir.

Published in Dawn, February 26th, 2019
