Transasia receives accolades from Medgate Today

This is the second consecutive year that Transasia has been receiving the award in the same category.

Transasia Bio-Medicals Ltd., India’s Leading IVD Company, recently announced that it has been adjudged the ‘Best Company in Medical Devices’ by Medgate Today, an international healthcare magazine, with a strong presence in Asia and Middle East.

Transasia was selected the winner, from among other leading names in the industry, based on a primary research by the magazine. The award is a recognition given to companies with outstanding services and contribution to the healthcare sector.

This is the second consecutive year that Transasia has been receiving the award in the same category. The award was presented at a grand ceremony on 22nd February, 2019 and attended by some of the most well-known names of the industry.

On receiving the award, Suresh Vazirani, Chairman & Managing Director, Transasia, said “I am thankful to the jury members for recognizing Transasia as the Best Medical Device Company for the second year in a row. We are doubly delighted as this prestigious award comes our way, as we celebrate our 40th anniversary. For the last four decades, Transasia has been committed to offering laboratory testing instruments of the highest quality to meet the needs of the country for affordable diagnostics. We pride ourselves in offering the strongest service network in the country, from the largest city to the smallest town. We are thankful to the medical fraternity who trust us in offering their patients early and accurate diagnosis.”

The award ceremony was preceded by the Voice of Healthcare (VOH) Conference 2019 held at Pragati Maidan in New Delhi. The fourth edition of this international conference focused on ‘Viable Healthcare for All’ against the backdrop of disruptions and constraints of healthcare delivery system. This conference assumed strategic significance as participants from the healthcare and medical technology segment shared their practical approach while dealing with various issues.

During the panel discussion on ‘Affordable Access to Medical Devices’, Mrs. Mala Vazirani, Executive Director, Transasia Bio-Medicals Ltd. highlighted the impact of technology on healthcare. “Technological innovation is critical to expanding the reach of medical services, lowering costs of deployment and improving patient outcomes,” she said.

Transasia has been meeting India’s needs for essential diagnosis through affordable and innovative, Made in India products and solutions. Today, it boasts of over 65,000 installations in 35,000 labs across India and reaching out to millions in more than 100 countries worldwide. Through its R&D centres in India and abroad, Transasia has developed world-class technology for a wide range of products and solutions in Clinical Chemistry, Hematology, Immunology, Diabetes Management, Urinalysis, Coagulation, Critical Care and Microbiology.



Into its 9th edition, the Medgate Today awards, evaluates hospitals, companies & healthcare professionals on their outstanding performance in the healthcare and life sciences sector. It recognizes doctors & Hospitals that have demonstrated best practices in a variety of regional and global markets.
