India vs Pakistan: Nuclear weapons REVEALED - how air strikes could provoke WORLD WAR 3

India Pakistan: We are on 'brink' of war says Pakistani politician

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

More than 40 Indian troops were killed in an attack on February 14 by Pakistani rebel group Jaish-E-Mohammad. On Monday, India responded to the attack and launched air strikes against militants on Pakistani territory. And now, Pakistan says it has also shot down two Indian military jets and captured a pilot in a major escalation between the nuclear powers over Kashmir, while India said it had lost one MiG-21 fighter and demanded the immediate and safe return of its pilot. Pakistani PM Imran Khan said the two sides could not afford a miscalculation with the weapons they had. The recent attacks have led to increased tensions between the already strained nations.

How the air strikes could provoke World War 3 India has accused Pakistan of allowing military groups to operate on its territory. The air strikes made by India targeted a training camp of the JeM group in Balakot, an area in Pakistan’s north-western Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. The strikes are the first launched across the line of control - the de facto border that divides India-administered Kashmir from Pakistan-administered Kashmir - since a war between the two countries in 1971. READ MORE: Pakistan vs India allies and enemies: What countries support India? Who supports Pakistan?

India vs Pakistan: Pakistani PM Imran Khan and Indian PM Narendra Modi

Both the nations claim all of Kashmir, but only control parts of it. Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale told a news conference the strikes had killed a "large number" of militants, but had avoided civilian casualties. Mr Gokhale said: ”Credible intel was received that JeM was planning more suicide attacks in India. “In the face of imminent danger, a pre-emptive strike became absolutely necessary.” READ MORE: India ERUPTS: Kashmiri protesters clash with police as Modi supporters BURN Pakistan flag

Pakistani PM Imran Khan has said the two nation cannot afford a miscalculation on the weapons

India vs Pakistan: Indian government forces stand guard after clashes between Kashmiri protesters

Pakistan, however, downplayed Tuesday's incident, saying Indian aircraft violated Pakistani airspace and that Indian jets "released a payload" hastily in a forest area after crossing the line of control. Fears of World War 3 are now rising with the increased tensions between Pakistan and India. Both countries have ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons. According to the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) in Washington, India has nine types of operational missiles, including the Agni-3.

India Pakistan: Pakistani Foreign Ministry issue statement

India vs Pakistan: Kashmir is the northernmost geographical region of the Indian subcontinent
