India hands over dossier to Pakistan on JeM complicity in Pulwama attack, presence of terror camps in its territory: MEA-India News , Firstpost

The MEA said Pakistan was conveyed that India expects it to take immediate and verifiable action against terrorism emanating from territories under its control.

New Delhi: India Wednesday handed over to Pakistan a dossier on "specific details" of involvement of the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) in the Pulwama attack on CRPF jawans as also the presence of terrorist camps of the UN-proscribed terror outfit in that country.

The dossier was handed over to the Acting High Commissioner of Pakistan, who was summoned by the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to lodge a strong protest over Pakistan Air Force (PAF) targeting Indian military installations, a day after the Indian counter-terror action against the JeM.

Government sources have claimed that over 350 JeM terrorists were killed in the pre-dawn strike on the terror camps in Pakistan on Tuesday.

The JeM had claimed responsibility of the terror strike in Kashmir's Pulwama district on 14 February, in which 42 CRPF personnel were killed.

"Regret was expressed at continuing denial by Pakistan's political and military leadership at the presence of terrorist infrastructure in territories under its control," the MEA said.

"A dossier was handed over to Pakistani side with specific details of JeM complicity in Pulwama terror attack and the presence of JeM terror camps and its leadership in Pakistan," it said.

The MEA said Pakistan was conveyed that India expects it to take immediate and verifiable action against terrorism emanating from territories under its control.

In response to the Indian counter-terror operation, Pakistan air force tried to target certain locations in Jammu and Kashmir Wednesday morning which was countered by IAF jets.

In the aerial engagement, India shot down a Pakistani jet while an Indian IAF pilot was captured by the Pakistani authorities. India also lost a MiG-21 aircraft.

India lodged a strong protest at the "unprovoked act of aggression" by Pakistan, including violation of Indian air space and targeting military posts.

"This is in contrast to the India's non-military anti-terror pre-emptive strike at a JeM terrorist camp in Balakot on 26 February," the MEA added.
