Robbers hold baby to ransom, loot household

BHUBANESWAR: A gang of 10 masked robbers sneaked into the house of a banker, held her five-month-old baby at knife-point and looted household articles worth more than Rs 10 lakh in Kanan Vihar here in the early hours of Wednesday. A red-faced Chandrasekharpur police are yet to get any clue about the robbers.Five persons, including the boy, were staying on the ground floor of the two-storey building where the robbers struck.“We were in a state of shock and completely terrorised from 2.45 am to 5 am as the robbers pointed a knife at my baby’s throat, tied me up as well as my in-laws and husband’s younger brother. They assaulted my in-laws, when they tried to raise an alarm,” the baby’s mother Suranjita Rana said recounting her ordeal. She along with her husband are private bankers in New Delhi.“I came home on maternity leave. My husband is in New Delhi. The miscreants entered our house by breaking open a window. All were armed with sharp-edged weapons. When I heard the noise and found some people in our room, I was terrified. One of them immediately held my baby to ransom and threatened us to keep quiet,” she said.Suranjita said she repeatedly pleaded to the miscreants to leave her child, who too was gagged as he was crying. Her father-in-law, S K Dash said the miscreants took away cash of around Rs 1 lakh, jewelleries worth nearly Rs 9 lakh and six expensive cellphones. “Our house was completely ransacked. After taking all articles, they put the baby on the bed, locked us from outside and escaped,” Dash said, adding, “The person, who had held the baby hostage, kissed him before leaving”.The house owner and his family, who stay on the first floor, did not get a whiff of the robbery Deputy commissioner of police Anup Kumar Sahoo, who inspected the crime scene, said efforts are being made to catch the accused. “We have formed a special team to look for the miscreants. We will also go through the CCTV footages in the vicinity,” Sahoo said.
