Rape victims are not coming forward to lodge plaints: Police

COIMBATORE: Police who on Monday arrested three men for sexually harassing a 19-year-old woman on February 12 near Pollachi said there were indications the three suspects were involved in the rape of several women but that no victim had lodged a complaint.Women harassment cases have been registered against N Sabarirajan, 25, N Sathish , 29, and T Vasanthakumar, 22, and a hunt launched for a man named K Thirunavukkarasu. A group of DMK cadres on Wednesday staged a protest against police at Pollachi, demanding the immediate arrest of Thirunavukkarasu.On February 12, a police officer said, the 19-year-old victim, a second year BSc (maths) student of a private college, got a call from Sabararirajan, an acquaintance. He asked her to meet him at Unjavelampatty. She went there and was asked to get into a car where he began sexually harassing her. The other accused were present, the officer said. Vasanthakumar began recording the incident on his mobile phone and the men threatened to upload the video on social media platforms unless she granted them sexual favours, the police officer said.The woman, however, managed to escape and informed her elder brother who beat up Thirunavukkarasu. The man got admitted to a hospital and lodged a complaint against the woman’s brother. Police picked up the three men claimed they have been involved gang rapes since 2013 and had videographed some incidents. “In the absence of a formal complaint from any of the victims, we have not been able to proceed further,” the officer said.Sabarirajan, a resident of MGR Nagar at Jothi Nagar in Pollachi, and Thirunavukkarasu, a money lender who owned a farmhouse near Anaimalai, were the brains behind the gang, the officer said. Sabarirajan befriended married women or college girls on Facebook and after winning their confidence would invite them to the farmhouse where he and the others would sexually exploit them, the officer said. Videos of the incidents, shot secretly, were later used to blackmail the victims.“We have formed two special teams to nab Thirunavukkarasau. We suspect he may have lot more videos,” said another police officer.Sabarirajan, an engineer, worked in a private firm at Pollachi, 29, Sathish was employed at a textile shop, while Vasanthakumar was a third year engineering student who was suspended by the college management on Tuesday.One of the arrested men told investigators that a woman doctor from Chennai and a beautician from Coimbatore were among those lured to the farmhouse and sexually exploited.“We request all the victim to come forward to lodge complaint against the four -member gang to help us launch criminal proceedings against the offenders,” said the police officer.
