People, politicians vow full support to Pakistan Army

PESHAWAR: People took out processions in different areas here on Wednesday against the Indian aggression and vowed full support to the Pakistan Army for protection of the country.

Holding Pakistani flags in their hands, they marched on the Ring Road, Peshawar, from Achini Chowk and shouted slogans in support of the country’s armed forces. The people appreciated the Pakistan Air Force for shooting down two Indian fighter jets inside Pakistani territory and described it a brave step on the part of national leadership.

Meanwhile, the leaders of various political parties and minorities also condemned the intrusion by the Indian fighter jets and vowed that the entire nation would be part of the Pakistani security forces in case of war with India.

Qaumi Watan Party, Pakistan Peoples Party and Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz leaders and chief bishop of the Church of Pakistan in their separate statements on Wednesday expressed satisfaction over the shooting down of the Indian warplanes inside Pakistani territory and said that they would fully support the security forces for protection of the country.

Rallies held in Peshawar against Indian aggression

QWP chairman Aftab Ahmad Khan Sherpao condemned the violation of the Pakistan’s airspace by Indian warplanes and said his party would stand by the armed forces in case of any eventuality.

In a statement released from Watan Kor, he said that both the countries should exercise restraint as the situation could spin out of control and lead to a full-fledged war. “The region cannot afford a war between the two nuclear states as millions of people are already living below poverty line,” he said.

Mr Sherpao called for urgently summoning a joint session of the parliament to discuss the fresh violation of the Line of Control by India. He also urged the US, China and Russia to play their role in defusing tension between Pakistan and India. He asked politicians from both the countries to make efforts for reducing the tension.

The QWP leader said that India should not point fingers at Pakistan whenever an attack took place on its soil.

PML-N provincial president Amir Muqam said that India should learn a lesson from the shooting down of its fighter jets and stop bloodshed in held Kashmir. He said the entire nation would stand by the security forces against any aggression.

He said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi was using his security forces for political purposes, which was tantamount to playing with fire.

PPP provincial President Mohammad Humayun Khan said that the nation would move towards Kashmir whenever the security forces asked them in this regard. He said Mr Modi had lost his senses and he was pushing his forces towards war with Pakistan, but it would be very bitter experience for him.

The PPP leader urged the international community to play role for averting a possible war between the two neighbouring states.

The Church of Pakistan’s chief bishop, Humphrey Sarfaraz Peter, said that the Christian community wanted peace and development in the region and would extend full support to the Pakistan Army when needed.

“It is time that all the financial resources and energies in the sub-continent should be spent on development, peace and progress, but the aggressive policies of Indian government has endangered peace of the entire region,” the bishop lamented.

Meanwhile, the Upper Dir tehsil council presented tribute to the armed forces for the timely and befitting reply to Indian aggression by shooting down two of its warplanes.

The council also passed a unanimous resolution, saying that the people of Upper Dir would fight side by side with the armed forces in case of war with India. After the meeting, the councillors and people held a rally to show solidarity with the armed forces.

Published in Dawn, February 28th, 2019
