Provide individual houses to pourakarmikas, says Nat’l Safai Karmachari Commission

Mysuru: Member of National Commission for Safai Karmacharis, Jagadish Hiremani, has asked the Mysuru City Corporation to provide individual houses instead of group houses to all pourakarmikas , including those working on contract basis. He also asked corporation commissioner Shilpa Nag to make arrangements within 20 days to credit the salary of all pourakarmikas, especially those working on contract basis, to their respective accounts instead of sending them to their contractors.He was addressing pourakarmikas at an awareness programme on manual scavenging and its ill efffects at Maharaja College Centenary Hall here on Wednesday.“Instead of group houses which are being provided to pourakarmikas, the Mysuru City Corporation should take initiative to provide individual permanent houses measuring 20X30 or 30X40 to all the pourakarmikas. By 2022, all pourakarmikas in the country who are working on contract basis will be made permanent for which the Central government will give the required assistance to all state governments. If you want your city to be number one, you should also provide them number one facilities,” said Jagadish.Till the pourakarmikas on contract are made permanent, each one of them shall be paid Rs 17,500 per month, which is the minimum wage fixed by the labour department, he added.He also asked the pourakarmikas not to get inside the pit and do manual scavenging. He also briefed them about the various facilities which are available to them including free houses, free health check-up once in three months etc.He asked the health inspectors to look into the personal issues of pourakarmikas especially in getting their children admitted to schools. He also advised the health inspectors to take the pourakarmikas to health camps every three months.Jagadish also called upon the corporation to immediately provide life insurance with a coverage of Rs 5 lakh to all pourakarmikas including those working on contract basis. He also called upon pourakarmikas to use all the safety equipment including gloves and masks which are provided by local bodies or corporation.Corporation commissioner Shilpa Nag also briefed the pourakarmikas about the various facilities being provided to them and also to their family members.‘Mysuru in race for ‘Cleanest City’’Mysuru city has been nominated as both ‘cleanest city’ and ‘free garbage city’ in the Swachh Survekshan, 2019. Only a few cities in the country have been nominated in the two categories. The city will receive an award following the nomination at a function to be held in Delhi on March 6.Last year, Mysuru city stood first in the category of cleanest city in 3 lakh to 10 lakh population, but its overall position was at eight. However, it stood first in the overall ranking in 2015-16 and 2016-17.Speaking to TOI, Shilpa Nag, commissioner, Mysuru City Corporation, confirmed that Mysuru city had been nominated to both ‘cleanest city’ as well as ‘free garbage city’ category.“With outstanding efforts from our nearly 2,200 pourakarmikas, we have been nominated for both cleanest and free garbage city. The award presentation will be in Delhi on March 6,” said Shilpa Nag, who took charge as commissioner only a few days back.“A few days back, a team from Delhi visited Mysuru and took video of the city. We are hoping for good result this year,” said Dr Nagaraj, chief health officer, Mysuru City Corporation.
