2019 Geneva Motor Show: Tata's new seven-seater SUV teased

Tata Motors has teased the upcoming SUV codenamed the H7X in a recent video posted on their official handle. Tata's H7X seven-seater SUV is all set to be unveiled at the 2019 Geneva Motor Show which will be held between March 5 and March 17. The upcoming SUV is based on the same Modular platform as the Tata Harrier and could be Tata's flagship product.

The teaser video displays the outline of the upcoming SUV which will be equipped with roof rails and will have flared wheel arches. The teaser also shows the SUV will have a sporty diffuser. Staying true to the SUV heritage, Tata will offer the flagship SUV with larger wheel shod with dual-purpose tyres.

The power source for the H7X could be the same Kryotec 2.0-litre diesel engine borrowed from Fiat and the engine will be tuned to deliver power output upwards of 160PS. The diesel mill could come mated to a six-speed manual or an optional automatic gearbox. The full-size SUV could be offered with an all-wheel-drive system as an option.

The H7X is also expected to sport premium features such as a sunroof, multi-zone climate control, automatic projector headlamps, rain-sensing wipers. The SUV is also expected to have different levels of traction controls and a variety of drive modes.

The H7X is expected to be positioned above the current flagship model, the Hexa. Expect Tata to price the new flagship between Rs 15 lakh to Rs 20 lakh ex-showroom. Post its launch the, Tata's seven-seater SUV will rival the Toyota Innova Crysta and Mahindra XUV500.

Also read

Tata Motors christened its upcoming B+ Segment hatchback as Altroz

Geneva Motor Show 2019: Tata Motors to debut new EV

Also Watch

Price (Ex-Delhi)

Starts Rs 12.23 Lakhs Displacement

2179cc Transmission

Automatic Max Power(ps)

140 Max Torque(Nm)

320 Mileage

-NA-

Price (Ex-Delhi)

Starts Rs 13.69 Lakhs Displacement

1956cc Transmission

Automatic Max Power(ps)

170 Max Torque(Nm)

350 Mileage

-NA-
