Kashmir conflict: Tension at boiling point despite Khan's pledge to return captured pilot

India Pakistan: Kashmir is ‘flash point’ of nuclear war

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The airman, identified as Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, became the human face of the flare-up over the contested region of Kashmir following the release of videos showing him being captured and later held in custody. Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan said the pilot would be released tomorrow despite exchanges of fire which saw four Pakistani civilians killed by India shooting across the disputed border in Kashmir.

We are happy our pilot is being released RGK Kapoor

A rally in Pakistan featured protesters waving their country's flag and telling their military: “Move forward, the nation is with you.” But Mr Khan said: "As a peace gesture we will be releasing him tomorrow.” Indian military officials said they welcomed Pakistan's planned return of the pilot but pointedly ignored questions about de-escalating the conflict. Air Vice Marshal RGK Kapoor said: "We are happy our pilot is being released.”

Pakistani protestors burn Indian flags in Kashmir

Some Indian politicians have also called for more aggression including “secret missions” to target suspected terrorists in Pakistan. The EU, US, China and other powers have urged restraint from the two nuclear powers as tensions escalated following a suicide car bombing that killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police in Indian-controlled Kashmir on February 14. The Muslim-majority Himalayan region has been at the heart of more than 70 years of animosity, since the partition of the British colony of India into the separate countries of Muslim Pakistan and majority Hindu India. It is divided between India, which rules the Kashmir Valley and the Hindu-dominated region around Jammu city, Pakistan, which controls a wedge of territory in the west, and China, which holds a thinly populated high-altitude area in the north.

Indian troops on patrol at the Pakistan border in Kashmir

On Tuesday, India said it hit a training camp for a Pakistan-based group who claimed responsibility for the suicide attack, and a senior government source told reporters that 300 militants had been killed. Pakistan denies this, saying the attack was a failure and no one died, with bombs dropped on a largely empty hillside. It denies any militant camp was in the area. Local people said they had seen no sign of major casualties or significant damage, with only one man known to have been slightly hurt by the bombs. Asked about the damage caused by Indian warplanes in Tuesday's air strike, Mr Kapoor said it was premature to provide details about casualties.

Pakistani protestors are calling for more military action against India in Kashmir
