Rallies staged in KP to condemn Indian aggression

PESHAWAR: Rallies were staged in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa on Thursday to condemn the Indian aggression and support the armed forces. In the provincial capital, rallies were staged at various places to express solidarity with the forces.

The members of the Ahle Sunnat Wal Jamaat staged a rally in Khyber Bazaar. The speakers said they would support the armed forces if India attacked Pakistan.

Another protest rally was staged outside the Peshawar Press Club by the residents of Hassan Garhi, a village on the outskirts of the provincial metropolis. Students also staged a protest on the University of Peshawar campus to condemn the Indian aggression.

The members of the Al-Badr Mujahideen staged a protest outside the Peshawar Press Club to condemn Indian aggression. They torched the effigy of the Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

MINGORA: The civil society, political parties, students and traders organised rallies in different parts of Swat to condemn Indian aggression and in support of armed forces. An All Parties Conference was also arranged at Swat Press Club where local leaders of various political parties participated. The programme was also attended by the officials of district administration.

MANSEHRA: The lawyer fraternity took out a rally to condemn Indian aggression. The lawyers, led by district president of the bar association, Basharat Abid Swati, marched through various roads.

GHALLNAI: Tribesmen in the Mohmand district staged a rally to condemn the Indian aggression and in support of armed forces for taking timely action against the enemy. The participants of the rally marched from Mian Mandi, Ekkaghund Bazaar, Ghallanai Bazaar.

KHAR: Jamaat Ishaat-i-Tauheed Wal Sunnah (JITWS) announced support to the Pakistan armed forces against India. In this connection, a gathering was organised wherein hundreds of activists participated. Another rally was organised against India and in support of armed forces at the Raghagan Bazaar.

DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The students of Gomal University staged a rally in support of the armed forces and against the aggression by India. Led by Prof Dr Sattar Bakhsh, Director, Students Affairs and Dean Faculty, the participants of the rally chanted slogans against India. They lauded the armed forces for taking timely action against the enemy.

HANGU: Elders of Upper Orakzai, tehsil Ghaljo also organised a grand jirga in favour of the armed forces. The participants chanted slogans in support of the armed forces and against the Indian aggression.

CHARSADDA: The traders staged a rally in support of the armed forces.
