Trader’s mysterious death triggers protest

Ludhiana: Family members of a mobile shop owner whose body was found on the railway tracks under mysterious circumstances blocked traffic on Jagraon bridge demanding registration of a murder case.

The deceased was identified as Amit Goyal, 22, of Sherpur area.

Police officials said Amit along with his mother had gone to Jamalpur area on his scooter to attend a religious function on Wednesday evening. They added that after dropping his mother at the event, he took his friend Vishal along and went to railway crossing near Tandhari Kalan area.

Cops said Amit then handed over the shop keys to his friend and asked him to drop his mother at home and hand the keys. They said after Vishal returned, Amit’s brother Sonu got a message on his mobile phone with someone saying “I am dying”.

Police officials said later Government Railway Police (GRP) found the body from railway tracks near Tandhari Kalan.

As GRP initiated proceedings under Section 174 of CrPC into the matter, this angered the family of the deceased.

The family along with their near ones blocked the Jagraon bridge for about half-an-hour in the evening and demanded registration of a murder case in the the matter. They lifted the blockade only after the ACP of Ludhiana police reached the spot and pacified the protesters.

Family sources said Amit had an affair with a girl and the family suspected that her father got Amit killed.

Investigating officer Jaswinder Singh said they are scanning the call details of the deceased and are also waiting for a medical report in the matter. He added that they received a call at 12.10am from GRP officials who informed about the body and proceedings under Section 174 of CrPC.

GRP officials said they have received a letter from the brother of the deceased in which he had suspected that Amit has been murdered. They added that murder case will be registered only after the call details and medical report indicate the same.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
