Khaira demands Ashu’s resignation in CLU scam

Ludhiana: The Punjab Ekta Party president and MLA Sukhpal Khaira has demanded the resignation or dismissal of cabinet minister Bharat Bhushan Ashu for his alleged involvement in the CLU (change of land use) scam around the multi-crore housing project on Gill Road, and trying to threaten two government employees in audio clips, which are going viral these days. Khaira also claimed they were analysing the legal aspects of these audio clips, in which the minister even dared the Punjab and Haryana high court, and in case there is contempt of court, they will also file a petition in HC.

Khaira alleged that earlier Ashu misbehaved with the district education officer (DEO), and now two officers had also faced the minister’s wrath. He said: “The minister, who has taken the oath of constitution, should not indulge in such behaviour which goes against rules and the law, but here the minister is stopping the officers from taking any action.” He said the kind of language being used by the minister does not suit his post, so there should be strict action against him. “Moreover, he had clearly said in an audio that he did not care for HC orders, which is contempt of court. On moral grounds, Ashu should resign or the chief minister should dismiss him. Though an inquiry has been marked by the CM, Ashu should be removed from the cabinet, so that he does not affect the probe in any manner,” said Khaira.

He further alleged that Congress leaders wanted to leave Akalis behind in corruption, and this is the reason they have acquired the sand mafia, land mafia, and even the liquor mafia. He said: “Punjab Police was not given a free hand in the Akali regime, and even now in Congress rule, cops cannot take steps of their own. This is very much evident from Ashu’s conversation with DSP (MC) BS Sekhon that Congress leaders could take any action against anybody.”

Khaira was here in the city to stage a protest against Ashu in the CLU scam on Thursday. Earlier, they were supposed to gherao the minister’s office in Model Town Extension, but they only staged a protest near Kochar Market police station. Khaira said: “Since the scenario in the country is tense due to a war-like situation between India and Pakistan, the administration has been asked to make several arrangements, as they do not want to increase the problems of officers.” A one-minute silence was also observed in the memory of CRPF men who were killed on February 14. However, cops were deployed near the minister’s office and residence, who had also barricaded those places just to avoid any problem.

Meanwhile, mayor Balkar Sandhu and other councillors from West constituency were waiting for Khaira and his supporters. Sandhu said: “If Khaira had reached the spot, he should not have gone back, as we were waiting for him. We had arranged bouquets and tea for him. He must have some proofs against Ashu, and that is why he had come here. He should have shown those proofs to us.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
