Tahsildars protest mass transfer out of district

Say transfers are unwarranted and will affect election work; move comes ahead of elections

The Tahsildars in Madurai district on Thursday boycotted work and staged a demonstration here in protest against their mass transfer to other districts.

Ten out of 11 Tahsildars were transferred in the district.

The demonstration, supported by Tamil Nadu Revenue Officers’ Association (TNROA), was held at the Collectorate.

Official sources said Tahsildars of 270 of 296 taluks in the State were transferred in view of coming parliamentary elections after a video-conferencing of all Collectors with the Commissioner of Revenue Administration K. Satyagopal on Wednesday.

Terming such mass transfers outside their districts as ‘unprecedented’ and ‘unwarranted,’ the protesters said it would considerably affect election work.

The transfer was done as per the instructions of the Election Commission of India (ECI) that officials in the rank of Assistant Returning Officers (AROs), Assistant Election Registration Officers (AEROs), and Nodal Officers, who were generally Tahsildars, should not be posted in the home district or places where they had served for more than three years.

However, officials pointed out that such transfers of revenue officials were always done within the district but to other Taluks or Tahsildar-level posts. “That is how it happened in the 2014 parliamentary elections. We will not be posted in the same constituency,” said M.P. Murugaiyan, one of the State secretaries of TNROA.

Arguing that revenue officials, particularly Tahsildars, were involved in a variety of election-related work apart from being AROs and AEROs and were crucial in ensuring smooth conduct of elections. Transferring them outside the district would take a toll on election work.

“The newcomers will lack local knowledge, which is crucial for election work, particularly in identifying vulnerable areas and ensuring law and order,” he pointed out.

A senior official from the district administration said all transferred Tahsildars had been asked to report at their new Taluks forthwith. Of the 10 Tahsildars transferred from Madurai district, five were shifted to Theni, three to Dindigul and two to Virudhunagar.

Sources privy to the video conferencing on Wednesday said a number of Collectors expressed concern over the transfer.

The senior official said a formal request had been made to ECI from the Revenue department to retain the Tahsildars within the district while ensuring that they would not serve in their native constituency.

Meanwhile, the Tahsildars, who boycotted work on Friday, said they would not report for duty at the transferred locations. “If the orders are not revoked within this week, we will begin sit-in protests from Monday,” Mr. Murugaiyan said.
