More anti-India protest rallies held across KP

PESHAWAR: Religious groups, transporters and civil society organisations across Khyber Pakhtunkhwa held demonstrations against Indian aggression and in support of the Pakistan Army on Thursday.

In Peshawar, the protesters set on fire Indian flag and Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s effigy outside the Peshawar Press Club.

The members of Al-Badar Mujahideen, legal fraternity, Ahle Sunnat Wal Jamaat, Rah-i-Amn Pakistan, Sarhad Transport Owners Association and Pak-India Peoples Forum held separate rallies in different parts of Peshawar and expressed solidarity with the armed forces of Pakistan.

The transporters held a protest rally from Haji Camp Bus Stand to Gulbahar. Jamaat-i-Islami, Kyber Pakhtunkhwa chapter, announced a three-day awareness campaign from Friday to Sunday against Indian aggression.

Participants ready to give any sacrifice for country

The protesters were holding banners inscribed with slogans against the violation of Line of Control (LoC) by Indian fighter jets and vowed to fully support the Pakistan Army in case of war.

In Timergara, hundreds of youth from Lower Dir vowed to cross LoC and fight against the enemy troops if they were allowed by the government.

The announcement was made during an anti-India rally arranged by Al-Badr Mujahideen, Lower Dir chapter, in front of Timergara Press Club. Activists of political parties also attended the rally.

Al-Badr chief Bakht Zamin Khan, JI district chief Izazul Mulk, JUI-F’s Maulana Nabi Shah and others spoke on the occasion.

In Kohat, Afghan refugees held an anti-India protest near the Ghamkol Camp and announced full support to the armed forces of Pakistan offering their services for taking part in Jihad in case of any misadventure by India.

The rally was held under the auspices of Pakistan Zindabad Movement of refugees in Kohat and Hangu districts. The speakers said that according to decision of their Shura they were ready to wage Jihad against India. They said that they were standing shoulder to shoulder with the Pakistani armed forces.

They said that Pakistan had provided them honourable shelter for 40 years and now it was payback time for them.

In Swat, residents of Kabal tehsil took out processions from different villages and gathered at Kanju Township. They chanted slogans of ‘crush India’ and burnt the Indian flag and effigy of Narendra Modi.

They announced full support to the country’s armed forces in case of any aggression by India.

Another such rally was staged at Nishat Chowk in Mingora. Traders, lawyers, transporters and civil society members participated in the rally. Rallies were also held at Barikot, Kabal, Matta and Khwazakhela tehsils in support of the Pakistan Army.

In Mansehra, transgender persons also took to streets to protest against the Indian aggression.

In Bajaur, people staged demonstrations and vowed to defend the country by backing the security forces against any foreign aggression. The rallies were held in Khar, Regagan, Inayat Kallay, Sadiqabad and Mondal areas.

The rallies were addressed by tribal elders, including Nawabzada Ahmed Zeb, Sikander Zeb, Malik Fazal Waheed and Mashooq Khan. In Khar, the rally was jointly organised by Youths of Bajaur, Bajaur Traders Association and All Bajaur Political Parties Alliance.

In Swabi, speakers at the rallies assured full support to the Pakistan Army. JI leader Mehmoodul Hassan said that the international community should take notice of Indian atrocities in held Kashmir. Similar rallies were also held in Orakzai and Hangu districts.

In Ghalanai, thousands of people of Mohmand tribal district assured their full support to the armed forces. Rallies were held in Khwezai, Biazai, Main Mandi and Ekkaghund Bazaar besides other areas.

Published in Dawn, March 1st, 2019
