Prime Minister Modi’s engagements with Pakistan have reached a fork in the road

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

When PM Narendra Modi invited then Pakistan counterpart Nawaz Sharif to his swearing-in ceremony in May 2014 the possibility of a new dawn beckoned. The two prime ministers followed up with informal engagements culminating in a surprise visit by Modi to Sharif in Pakistan. The blowback from the Pak army began soon. The terror attack on the Pathankot air force base and other military installations began. Modi soon realised the futility of engaging with Sharif. The liberal commentariat began to mock his attempt to engage with Pakistan but he silenced them in style with the 2016 surgical strikes.

He proceeded to politicise it and corner brownie points over it even as the opposition scratched its head pondering over a response. Meanwhile, Modi’s flawed handling of Kashmir led to the situation spiralling out of control. The Pulwama terror attack orchestrated by Jaish-e-Mohammed, supported by Pakistan, and perpetrated by a 20-year-old local recruit tipped a horribly fraught situation over the precipice.

PM Modi responded to the killing of 40 CRPF jawans by ordering “pre-emptive non-military” air strikes in Pakistan. He was quick to celebrate the attack, the first foray into Pakistan by IAF in nearly five decades, in an election rally in Rajasthan and then during a metro ride in Delhi. The retaliatory strike by Pakistan on Indian military installations may have been foiled but the capture of an IAF pilot complicated the situation.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan got the better of Modi on two occasions, first calling for peace while announcing the pilot’s capture, and then by unconditionally announcing his release. Meanwhile, PM Modi refrained from addressing the nation, perhaps, conscious of the fast-changing scenarios and wishing to keep his options to himself. But his various official and political engagements did raise questions. Even the pun of a “pilot project” may have won him applause among the audience but was in poor taste.

Yet PM Modi may still walk away with his head held high. India’s official stand is that it has forced Pakistan to return the pilot by not yielding to bargaining tactics. By banning Jamaat-e-Islami in Kashmir, Modi has again seized the initiative by drawing the attention of his base to another muscular act against the hardline section of Kashmiri society. As a politician, PM Modi is in a league of his own. But the lessons from this first term must serve as a lesson as he aims for a second term.

There is no rash military solution to our troubles with Pakistan. A coercive policy on Kashmir isn’t yielding results either. A sustained diplomatic campaign combined with robust intelligence gathering to expose Pakistan’s terror activities, improving border infrastructure to curb infiltration, and wooing back Kashmiri society should be the focus if he wins a second term. Alternatively, he can continue to highlight Kashmir’s simmering tensions to keep Hindutva sentiment high in the rest of the country for electoral dividend. PM Modi must decide wisely which route he will take.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
