IAF pilots who died in Budgam copter crash cremated with military honours

In uniform, the deceased officer's wife, Aarti, who is also a squadron leader, laid a wreath before the last rites were performed. Siddharth Vashisht's father lit the funeral pyre. (Photo: Twitter/@ANI)

The last rites of Squadron Leader Siddharth Vashisht, who died in a helicopter crash in Jammu and Kashmir's Budgam district, were performed in Chandigarh on Friday with full military honours.

An IAF helicopter crashed in Budgam district of Jammu and Kashmir Wednesday, killing both its pilots and four others onboard besides a local resident.

The mortal remains of one of the officers, Squadron Leader Siddharth Vashisht, had arrived at the Air Force station in Chandigarh on a service aircraft on Thursday. It was taken to the cremation ground from his residence here in Sector 44 on a bedecked IAF vehicle.

In uniform, the deceased officer's wife, Aarti, who is also a squadron leader, laid a wreath before the last rites were performed. Siddharth Vashisht's father lit the funeral pyre.

The Indian Air Force gave a gun salute in presence of officials from the IAF, the civil administration and a large number of people who turned up to pay their last respects.

Squadron Leader Siddharth Vashisht who was the pilot of the Mi-17 helicopter that crashed in Budgam,J&K on February 27 was cremated in Chandigarh earlier today. (In pic 1: his wife Squadron Leader Aarti Singh holding the folded tricolour) pic.twitter.com/ShIBfpyBL3 March 1, 2019

Chandigarh BJP president Sanjay Tandon and Haryana Minister Naib Saini were also present there.

Vashisht (31) was a fourth-generation member from his family in the armed forces. He was commissioned in the IAF in 2010 and last month, he received commendation for his role in the rescue operation during the Kerala floods.

Ninad Mandavgane cremated with military honours

The mortal remains of pilot Ninad Mandavgane were consigned to flames with full military honours in Nashik on Friday.

Mandavgane (33), who hailed from Nashik, was cremated on the bank of Godavari river around 12.30 pm.

According to officials, the helicopter crashed in an open field near Garend Kalaan village in Budgam around 10.05 am. Besides its pilots, four others onboard and a local resident died in the incident.

Mandavgane's body was brought to Ojhar airport from New Delhi by a special IAF plane on Thursday night. Air Force officials, including Air Commodore Samir Borade, commanding officer of the IAF Station Ojhar, and Nashik Collector Radhakrishna B, paid tribute to the pilot there.

The body was later taken to his residence in DGP Nagar locality in Nashik.

A large number of people gathered at the crematorium on Friday to bid adieu to the departed soul. When the body was brought to the crematorium around noon, people present there raised slogans of 'Vande Mataram' and 'Bharat Mata Ki Jai'.

Mandavgane's father Anil, mother Sushma, wife Vijeta and their two-year-old daughter, his relatives and other people attended the funeral.

Before the funeral pyre was lit by Mandavgane's father, the Nashik unit of IAF and city police gave a 21-gun salute.

Before joining the IAF, Mandavgane had studied in Bhonsala Military School in Nashik, Services Preparatory

Institute (SPI) in Aurangabad and the National Defence Academy (NDA) in Pune.

(with inputs from agencies)
