Huawei P30 Pro Leak indicates Quad Rear Cameras

Huawei has rolled up its sleeves to launch the P30-series this month and before launch, the smartphones has been leaked multiple times within a few weeks. Now the renders of the alleged Huawei P30 Pro showcased the smartphone in three colours and also confirmed the speculated features.

The leaked images point out towards the quad rear cameras, curved display with thin bezels and a small teardrop notch of the Huawei P30 Pro. There are some renders of the Huawei P30 Pro having triple rear camera has also been leaked online. However, a product manager of Huawei shared a snap which is speculated to be clicked by the upcoming Huawei P30 Pro.

The Huawei P30 Pro renders in December 2019 indicated towards the quad camera at the back but they looked at a completely different sensor alignment. But the recent render shows the triple camera setup of the upcoming Huawei P30 Pro which is aligned vertically while the fourth camera is positioned just below the flash and the laser autofocus module.

Read Also: Redmi Note 7 Pro Launched in India With 48-Megapixel Camera

The declared official renders leaked the images of the Huawei P30 Pro which comes in three color options- electric blue, sea green, and black along with the gradient design. The front of the Huawei P30 Pro comes with a curved display along with a teardrop notch and at the bottom, there is a thin chin. As per the former leaks, the Huawei P30 series phones will come with 10x lossless zoom and an under-display fingerprint sensor.

The renders claim that the Huawei P30 will carry the same gradient design as of the Huawei P30 Pro along with the same color scheme. The key difference between the Huawei P30 and Huawei P30 Pro is that the former will carry a triple camera setup at the black and a flat display. The company has not uttered a word about the resolution of the cameras and the hardware it will be powered on.

Consumer business group CEO of Huawei, Richard Yu, shared an image which is considered to be clicked by the Huawei P30 Pro and during this he also confirmed that the smartphone will carry quad camera set up at the back. Now, Product Manager of Huawei, Bruce Lee, posted four images of a cell tower which is considered to be snapped by the Huawei P30 Pro. All the four images seem to be clicked in regular mode, ultra-wide-angle perspective, 5x zoom, and 10x zoom magnification.

But these are just rumors and there is no confirm statement from the company about it. We hope to know more about the Huawei P30 series at an event which will be held in Paris on 26 March 2019.
