CII condoles demise of Padma Bhushan Professor Lord Bhattacharyya

CII Friday condoled the passing away of Padma Bhushan Professor Lord Kumar Bhattacharyya, describing him as a visionary academic and a tall leader of manufacturing excellence.

"Prof Lord Bhattacharyya played a significant role in India-UK economic relations and helped found the Indo-British Partnership Initiative (IBPI) where CII was the Indian partner.

"This was launched during the visit of Rt Hon. John Major, then Prime Minister of the UK, in 1993 and was successful in taking bilateral trade and investment relations to new heights," CII said in a statement.

An alumnus of IIT Kharagpur, Prof Lord Kumar Bhattacharyya was globally respected for his vision and foresight. In 2002, he was conferred the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government for his services to science and technology.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------- India, US need to engage at all levels to boost trade, investment potential: CUTS



* Research and advocacy organisation CUTS International Friday said India and the US need to engage at all the levels to boost trade and investment between the two countries.

Ways to promote economic ties was discussed during a panel discussion on 'Advancing United States and India Relations - Mission USD 500 billion Bilateral Trade', organised by the organisation.

The momentum to deepen trade and economic partnership is building, however, a lot of contentious issues remains to be resolved, Udai S Mehta, deputy executive director at CUTS International said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Smart India Hackathon 2019 grand finale to be held on March 2,3



* The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) Friday said the Smart India Hackathon 2019 grand finale will be held on March 2 and 3 at 49 different centres.

It said more than 34,000 ideas will be evaluated in the process.

Launched on Aug 29, 2018, the hackathon aims at harnessing creativity and expertise of students, the department said in a statement.

"During the software edition grand finale, teams of thousands of technology students will build innovative digital solutions for problems posed by different industries, ministries and departments," it added.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
