Naidu wears black shirt, sets the tone for protest against PM

‘Modi’s visit to Vizag is aimed at furthering his political agenda’

Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to Visakhapatnam on Friday evoked strong protests in Vijayawada and other places in the State as Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu himself called upon the people to express their resentment over the “violation of the A.P. Reorganisation Act, denial of Special Category Status (SCS) and non-fulfilment of a host of promises given to the State at the time of bifurcation.”

Mr. Naidu described it as a “dark day” and set the tone for the protests by wearing a black shirt at various programmes during the day.

He reiterated that the purpose of Mr. Modi’s visit was to implement his “political agenda” even as the State bore the brunt of bifurcation. Minister Devineni Umamaheswara Rao, Vijayawada East MLA Gadde Rammohan Rao and other TDP leaders staged a protest at the NTR Circle. They denounced the “indifferent attitude” of Mr. Modi to the plight of the State and that of the BJP, which allegedly spread blatant lies.

TDP activists released black balloons and raised slogans against the Prime Minister for “cheating” the people in the name of “special financial assistance,” which, the BJP claimed, was several times higher than what SCS would have fetched.

Railway zone

Telugu Yuvatha and Telugu Mahila workers staged protests at the Lenin Centre and Benz Circle, pointing out that the sanction of railway zone devoid of the Waltair division proved that the BJP was bent on doing politics at the cost of development of the State. Members of the A.P. Students’ Joint Action Committee set an effigy of Mr. Modi on fire in Ongole for visiting the State “without implementing the promises given” to it.

They said that Mr. Modi should fulfil the aspirations of the people of the State lest the BJP should bite the dust in the elections.

On the sidelines of a separate programme in Prakasam district headquarters, Guntur MP Galla Jayadev said the TDP would intensify the agitation if the Centre did not yield to the people’s demands and expressed confidence that the Congress would stand by its word to accord SCS and extend the required hand-holding to the State if elected to power.
