Mobile store owner’s kin suspect his death a murder

Ludhiana: As a mobile shop owner was found dead under mysterious circumstances on the railway lines at Tandhari Kalan, Government Railway Police (GRP) are waiting for the viscera report and call details of the person from whose number he had sent a message to ascertain whether he had committed suicide or was murdered.

On Wednesday night, the body of Amit Goyal (22) of Sherpur — who owned a mobile store — was found under mysterious circumstances at Tandhari Kalan railway lines. His family members have suspected he might have been murdered. Amit had reportedly sent a message from someone’s mobile that read: ‘I am dying’.

GRP SHO Balvir Singh said Amit had made a call and sent a message from Sherpur to his family from the phone of a factory worker who was going home. He added that they had sent the phone number of the factory worker to the service provider concerned for getting call details of his number. The police officer said the post-mortem was done by a team of doctors at Civil Hospital, and his viscera had been sent to a laboratory for examination, which would clear the cause of death.

Police sources said after getting a message from the factory worker’s phone number the next morning, Amit’s family had called on the number. Amit’s family members suspect Amit might have had an affair with a girl, and her father (the factory worker) maybe behind his death.

On Wednesday evening, Amit Goyal, along with his mother had gone to Jamalpur on his Activa to attend a religious function, and after dropping his mother there, took his friend Vishal along, and went to a railway crossing near Tandhari Kalan.

Cops had said Amit had then handed over the keys of his shop to his friend, and asked him to drop his mother at home and hand them the keys. Later Amit’s brother Sonu got a message from someone’s mobile that ‘I am dying’, after which GRP had found his body on the railway track near Tandhari Kalan. Amit’s family had blocked the traffic on Jagraon bridge for about half an hour and demanded that the case be turned into a murder case.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
