Handover of pilot to India: Ulema council lauds PM’s decision

ISLAMABAD: Pakistan Ulema Council lauds the decision of Prime Minister Imran khan to handover detainee Indian Pilot Abhi Nanden to Indian authorities as goodwill gesture and to ensure peace and stability in the region.

On the call of Pakistan Ulema Council, ‘Solidarity and Defense Day’ was observed in all over Pakistan and clerics, Ulemas and religious scholars while addressing the Friday congregations lauded the services of Pak-Force for peace and stability in the country.

The religious scholars and clerics also announced to stay united with Pak-Force in face of any threat and aggression from India.

Pakistan Ulema Council Chairman Hafiz Muhammad Tahir Mehmood Ashrafi, while addressing a press conference after Friday prayers at Jamia Masjid Marhaba, Kurri Road, Rawalpindi stated that Pak-Force successfully retaliated Indian aggression and foiled the dreams of Indian supremacy in the region once and forever.

“The entire nation is united to support and endorse Pak-Security Forces,” said Hafiz Tahir Ashrafi, adding that government of Pakistan has got moral victory against India by handing over detainee Indian Air force Pilot Abhi Nanden to Indian authorities at Wagah border here on Friday. He said Prime Minister Imran Khan has given an explicit message to the entire world that Pakistan aims peace and stability in the region without compromising on its security.

Pakistan Ulema Council Chairman Hafiz Muhammad Tahir Mehmood Ashrafi also announced that 4th International Message of Islam Conference for eradication of terrorism, extremism and sectarian violence that was scheduled to be held in aegis of Pakistan Ulema Council on 3rd March 2019 at Convention Center Islamabad has been extended owing to prevailing scenario in the country and now will be held now on 14th April, 2019 at Convention Center Islamabad.

Earlier, addressing the press conference, Hafiz Tahir Ashrafi flanked by Maulana Nauman Hashir, Maulana Tahir Aqeel, Maulana Abubakar Sabri, Maulana Mumtaz Rabbani and Maulana Daud Khan, Maulana Naib Khan stated that hundreds and thousands of clerics and Ulemas Mashaykh of Pakistan Ulema Council and Wafaq ul Masajid Pakistan are ready to become volunteers for Pak-Force in face of any emergency situation. “The political, religious and military sections of Pakistan want peace and stability in the region but any aggression on part of India towards Pakistan will not be tolerated,” he said. Hafiz Tahir Ashrafi also lauded the decision of the government of Pakistan for not attending OIC Foreign Ministerial level meeting in protest for inviting Indian Foreign Minister Sushma Suraj at the said Islamic forum.

Hafiz Tahir Ashrafi also demanded of the leadership of Muslim Ummah to take notice on this decision of OIC for inviting the Indian Foreign Minister Sushma swaraj. Responding to a query, Hafiz Tahir Ashrafi welcome the endeavours on part of Saudi Arabia to ensure talks between Pakistan and India adding that Pakistan has never negated possibility of peace negotiations in the region. Pakistan aims at diffusing tension in the region, said Tahir Ashrafi adding that without resolving Kashmir dispute, peace can't prevail in the region. Replying to another query, Hafiz Tahir Ashrafi demanded of Ulemas and clerics of India to protest against the war hysteria of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. People of India should play their effective role against war hysteria of Prime Minister Narendra Modi who aims at winning support of Hindu extremists by coining Pak-India tension ahead of elections in India.

Hafiz Tahir Ashrafi also announced that 4th International Message of Islam Conference has been extended which will be held now on 14th April 2019 as it was getting problematic due to suspension of flight operations in Pakistan. President Shariah Court Palestine, Imam e Kaba and leadership from all over Muslim world were scheduled to arrive in Pakistan, which is not possible due to prevailing scenario in Pakistan as flight operations of different International airlines have been cancelled in Pakistan.
