SJIM Bangalore Admission 2020: Criteria, Process, Cut-off, Fees

PGDM admission 2020 at St. Joseph’s Institute of Management (SJIM), Bangalore is open for all categories of candidates - Karnataka domicile as well as Non-Karnataka candidates. The last date to apply online for Admission 2020 at SJIM Bangalore is March 7, 2020 with an application fee of Rs.1000/-. Apply for SJIM PGDM Admission Now

SJIM will accept scores of CAT, XAT, GMAT, CMAT, MAT, ATMA exams. The application process is online.

St. Joseph’s Institute of Management offers AICTE approved 2 years full time Post Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM) which has been awarded equivalence status of MBA.

The only Jesuit Business School in Bangalore, St. Joseph’s Institute of Management (SJIM) was formerly called St. Joseph’s College of Business Administration (SJCBA). As such both titles are for the same institute except the fact that name of the institute has been changed.

SJIM Bangalore is an autonomous institute, approved by the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE). The PGDM is awarded by SJIM.

SJIM has an excellent placement record for the last 20 years. Many of the top, reputed companies come to the campus for hiring.

PGDM with Dual Specialization

SJIM offers dual-specialization in PGDM. You can choose two among four streams of specialization – Finance, Human Resources, Marketing and Operations.

SJIM Bangalore: PGDM 2020-22 Programme Fee-Rs.8.30 Lakhs

The 2 years MBA programme fees payable for PGDM 2020-22 by the students at SJIMBangalore is Rs. 8,30,000/-

Scholarships at SJIM Bangalore

SJIM offers several scholarships to students. These include General Merit Scholarships, Merit-cum-Means Scholarships, and Fee waiver to economically weaker students.

SJIM Bangalore Placements

Over the years, SJIM Bangalore has recorded consistently high placements. Over 50-60 companies visit SJIM for campus hiring and the number of organizations and the compensation has consistently increased over the years.

The highest compensation in Placement 2019 stood at Rs.9.5 Lakhs per Annum. The average salary stood at Rs.6.25 lakhs per annum.

At least 70% of the companies who visit have recruited from SJIM in the past which is the testimony of the quality of SJIM students. Every year there are about 25% new recruiters coming for campus placements. List of prominent recruiters includes E&Y, Mindtree, Ujjivan Financial services, Bosch, Tata Consultancy Services, Grant Thornton, Morgan Stanley, Deloitte, ANZ, Honeywell

Last Date to Apply: March 7, 2020

The deadline to apply for admission at SJIM Bangalore closes on March 7, 2020 and the last date to receive supporting documents by post of courier at SJIM Bangalore is March 12, 2020. Please note that there is no provision of online submission of documents.

How to Apply for Admission

Application for PGDM Admission 2020 at SJIM Bangalore should be submitted online at the institute’s website by making payment of application fee of Rs.1000/-. As a part of your application, you will need to provide details related to your background, your past education, your achievements, and so on.

Once you submit your application, take a printed copy of it, sign it and send it with other supporting documents to the college office

You should fill your application carefully.

There are some fields which are marked not mandatory in the Application Form. However, you need to provide data of all those fields if you have. More the data you furnish, better are your chances of being shortlisted for interview.

Do not hide any information or provide wrong information as it will disqualify your application. If you have repeated subjects, you must mention them without fail.

You need to provide correct and working mobile numbers and email ids. Future communication regarding your application status will be sent to you on these.

No Admit cards will be given for the interview. Shortlisted candidates will be informed by SMS or on website.

Please note that your application is complete only when you have successfully completed online payment of Rs 1000 application fee.

Apply for SJIM PGDM Admission Now

Send Supporting Documents by Post/Courier

Following supporting documents are to be submitted by post or courier latest by March 12, 2020 to The PGDM Office, St Joseph’s Institute of Management, 28/1 Primrose Road, Off MG Road, Bangalore- 560025

Application form of PGDM-2020

10th marks card

12th marks card

Degree marks cards of all semesters (as available)

Degree certificate (if available)

Entrance exam score card (as available)

Work experience certificate (as available)

SJIM Admission Criteria 2020 describe in detail the admission eligibility, shortlisting criteria, Fee, cut offs and final selection criteria in admission process.

Apply for SJIM PGDM Admission Now

SJIM Bangalore Admission Eligibility

The candidate should be a graduate in any discipline from a recognized university under regular mode only

The candidate should have a consistent academic record of the first class (minimum 60% marks) in STD X, STD XII & Graduation.

The candidates who have cleared all the subjects in their first attempt will be preferred. Candidates with a history of more than two arrears need not apply.

Candidates who have appeared for the Final Graduate Level examination and are awaiting results may also apply.

The candidate should have appeared in at least one of the following MBA entrance exams - CAT 2019/XAT 2020/ CMAT 2020/MAT 2019-2020 (September, December, February, May) with a minimum of 550 score/ATMA 2019-20/GMAT and should have scored 60 percentile or above

SJIM Bangalore Admission Criteria

SJIM Bangalore Admission Criteria 2020 is a two step process involving the Shortlisting criteria based on entrance exam score and the Final admission selection Criteria based on other key components apart from entrance exam score:

SJIM Shortlisting Criteria

The first part of SJIM Bangalore Admission criteria is the shortlisting criteria before final selection round. SJIM Bangalore will shortlist the candidates on the basis of following parameters:

SJIM Bangalore will consider aggregate scores and not sectional scores of the applicants in the acceptable entrance exams for shortlisting.

SJIM will short-list the candidates for GD/PI round based on their best available test scores in CAT/XAT/GMAT/MAT/CMAT/ATMA.

Applicants may submit more than one entrance test score. SJIM will consider the best test score for shortlisting.

Alongwith the entrance test scores, due weightage in shortlisting will be awarded to consistent academic performance and work experience.

The list of shortlisted candidates will be put up on the SJIM website for Personal Interview and Essay writing at college campus

The individual candidates will also be informed through e-mail or sms.

Final Admission Selection Round Criteria

The objective of SJIM Selection Process for PGDM programme is to assess communication skills, presentation skills, knowledge on current affairs, entrepreneurial abilities, understanding of markets, attitude, and aptness to take up the rigor of the programme.

Post short-listing on the basis of various parameters, applicants will be called for the final selection round (PI Round)

All the shortlisted candidates are eligible to go through the Essay Writing & PI round to be held at college campus on March 14 & 15, 2020.

Final selection is based on entrance exam score, Academic Performance, Work Experience, performance in Essay Writing, and Personal Interview (PI)

Final Selection list based on above parameters will be announced on March 19, 2020 .

SJIM Bangalore Admission Cut Off

Although a minimum score of 550 in MAT exam is the required, there is no fixed cut-off for CAT/XAT/CMAT/GMAT/ATMA exams. However, you are expected to perform well in these exams because a candidate with a higher score will be given preference. Besides, admission into the PGDM program is dependent on your marks in your under-graduate studies and on your common test scores. Good performance in your class 10 and 12 helps to demonstrate consistent academic performance.

If you have a good entrance exam score, consistent academic performance above 60%, and you perform well in your interview, then you have a good chance of admission to SJIM.



SJIM Bangalore Admission Process 2020: Key Dates

Below are the important dates for PGDM admission process 2020 announced by SJIM Bangalore:

SJIM Admission Activity 2020 Important Date Last Date to Apply March 7, 2020 Last Date to Receive Supporting Documents by Post or Courier March 12, 2020 Essay Writing & Personal Interview round at SJIM Bangalore Campus March 14 & 15, 2020 Announcement of final selection list March 19, 2020 Availability of Skype Interview for North Indian Candidates Yes Inauguration of PGDM 2020 June 1, 2020

SJIM Bangalore has also international collaborations for student immersion programmes with foreign universities/institutes. SJIM is one of the prestigious business schools of India, and is the oldest business school in Karnataka. SJIM was ranked in the Top-100 Management Schools in the NIRF Rankings, and was one among only four business schools in Bangalore to be ranked by the NIRF. It has been rated A++ by Business India.

The PGDM programme at SJIM Bangalore is AICTE approved and learning experience at SJIM is good. SJIM Bangalore has been working with industry and academia for developing new domains of managerial thought and education and contributing to the process of building leaders in today’s global business environment.

Stay tuned to MBAUniverse.com for more updates on St. Joseph’s Institute of Management (SJIM), Bangalore
