Delhi govt school guest teachers stage protest outside Manish Sisodia's house

Thousands of guest teachers of Delhi government schools on Friday protested outside Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia's residence.

As per reports, as many as 25,000 teachers are staring at uncertainty as their contracts ended on February 28 and they have not yet been informed whether their services have been terminated or their contracts will be renewed.

Why this protest?

During the protest, the guest teachers said that the Delhi government has been saying that the Services Department is not with them and their hands are tied in the matter.

"We are being asked to report for work when there is no assurance from the government on our salaries or the bills that we have submitted. Around 2,000 teachers protested on Friday and on Saturday around 5,000 teachers will be there for the protest," Shoaib Rana, member of All India Guest Teachers' Association.

Notice to teachers:

"All guest teachers are informed that your contract ends and we haven't got any information from DoE about the matter. Tomorrow you are requested to not mark attendance and your attendance will not be considered if you do."

Earlier this year, after the Delhi government did not fulfill the promise of regularising, many teachers working in government schools staged a demonstration outside CM Arvind Kejriwal's residence.

The All India Guest Teachers Association has called a protest with three demands with three demands; all relating to their jobs being regularisation. In the memorandum submitted, the teachers, said, "We are being exploited. It is almost five years since the government came to power and there is no word on and there is no word on our regularisation. The government is not doing anything for our improvement and bringing in policies," as reported by Times of India.

Moreover, the Delhi High Court had earlier directed that guest teachers will continue till February 28 or till the time regular teachers were appointed.

The court had given the direction while hearing a plea of an NGO against the Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board over the appointment of permanent teachers.

In October 2018, the Directorate of Education (DoE) instructed all deputy directors of education to ensure compliance with the court orders.

(With inputs from PTI)

Read: Delhi govt school guest teachers stage protest outside Manish Sisodia's house

Read: Delhi govt education department to review teaching methods in schools to identify teaching loopholes
