Sabarimala Row: US, UK issue travel advisories over violent protests in Kerala

There have been violent protests in some towns and cities in Kerala over the issue of women accessing the Sabarimala temple. (Photo: Reuters)

Fresh travel advisories have been issued by the US and UK missions in India citing massive protests and violence in Kerala over the issue of entry for women to the Sabarimala temple.

The United States Consulate General Chennai issued an alert Protests and demonstrations concerning the Sabarimala Temple’, warning US citizens to take reasonable necessary precautions and avoid crowded places.

Media report widespread protests and a call for a general strike throughout the state of Kerala related to the opening of Sabarimala Temple to women of childbearing age. Despite an Indian Supreme Court decision allowing entry, the entry of two women into the temple on January 2 has led to violent protests throughout Kerala, including in Palakkad, Kasargode, and Kollam. The protests have, so far, led to the death of one person and caused substantial property damage, including the destruction of 45 public buses. A general strike could cause work stoppages, shop closures, and transportation delays, stated the advisory on US embassy’s website.

It is recommended for everyone to take reasonable precautions regarding personal security and avoid any large crowds, it added.

American citizens have been asked to avoid areas with demonstrations and civil disturbances, keep a low profile, be aware of surroundings, monitor local media for updates, and avoid drawing attention.

Similarly, the British High Commission also issued its travel alert because of the violent protests across Kerala. It has advised citizens to monitor media reports closely and avoid large gatherings.

There have been violent protests in some towns and cities in Kerala over the issue of women accessing the Sabarimala temple; some public services have been disrupted in the wake of clashes between police and protesters; if you're in Kerala or due to travel there, you should monitor media reports closely, remain vigilant and avoid large public gatherings, read the advisory.

The travel advisories were issued as Kerala has one of the highest number of foreign tourist arrival (FTA) rate in the country. Between January and November 2018, almost 10 lakh foreign tourists visited the state. Menwhile, almost 1.40 crore domestic tourists visited Kerala during the same period.
