SQUEEZING THE SIZE OF MAHA RALLIES

BY Justice (retd) B D Agarwal

Delhi Administration is in the process of enacting a law to limit the number of guests in functions like marriage, anniversaries, family occasions etc. This is with a view to save wastage of foodstuff, avoid ostentatious behavior of attendees of functions, to regulate traffic movements during wedding season etc. Similar laws already exist in some states, albeit in extinct state. However, it is nobody’s case to control the so called mob that gathers in political meetings. Reason is simple as neither the bureaucracy has the courage to suggest any kind of curb on political gatherings nor any political party would accept any such suggestion.

India is the second largest populated country in the world after China. Possibly India has the highest number of political parties than any other country. Besides recognized national and regional political parties Independent candidates also wield powers, akin to political parties, in their respective constituencies. Elections are frequently held in India, sometime general Lok Sabha election, sometime State Legislature elections and sometime Panchayat elections et all. Besides political rallies during election period pseudo/camouflaged political rallies are also organized under the banner of different political parties for the purpose of inauguration of official buildings, bridges, roads and also for launching various government schemes. The inaugurations of buildings, bridges, roads etc are preceded by foundation laying ceremonies as well.

There is a tendency by every political party to demonstrate their strength by holding political rallies as big as possible, which are now being termed as ‘Maharallies’. The political rallies and the so called public events are organized at the cost of gross inconvenience of common people. First of all private vehicles are forcibly hired by the henchmen of political parties. Secondly, poor people are also coerced to attend public meetings alluring them of free conveyance and free food. Poor traders are also fleeced by way of donating substantial amount of money to the organizers of rallies and meetings. Maharallies also require erection of big ‘pandals’ and expensive set-ups. In this digital age there is hardly any need of personal interface. Election manifesto, promises of the political parties, agenda of individual candidates and for that matter issues and concerns raised by any NGO can be easily communicated to the general public through electronic mode, TV channels, video conferencing of meetings etc.

These rallies, while serving the interest of political parties cause a multitude of inconveniences to the people and also affects the proper functioning of the administrative machinery. On the day of public meetings and maharallies transport system go haywire. Traffic is regulated and many busy routes are closed and traffic is diverted. Public roads and parking spaces are invaded by the supporters of meetings and events. Resultantly, school going children, office-goers and housewives have to trade the day with acute hardship.

The political leaders are not oblivious of this fact but choose to remain insensitive and passive to the chaos unleashed by their overtly ambitious rallies. Their lack of concern shows their ignorance about the principles of good governance and the political chiefs overshadow the expectation of people who attend their rallies.

Public complaints regarding this avoidable nuisance may have been muted in the past but now with the popularity of social media people have been frequently airing their ire over the issue of unlimited number of invitees to such events. The extravaganza and the inconvenience that is caused to the common people during marriage season may have drawn the attention of the Delhi government. However, the same set of political leaders and bureaucrats are stoically silent about the nuisance that is created during public meetings. The central government should take a cue from this initiative of Delhi administration and think of passing a similar legislation to squeeze the size of political rallies.

Although the innovative idea to control gathering at private functions, with varied objectives, indicates something positive the outcome will be far reaching if political as well as public rallies are also brought within the ambit of a similar legislation by the central government or respective state governments. Limiting the number of attendees by way of squeezing the size of public meetings and public events would eradicate political vices, wastage of public money, eliminate traffic woes on the days of meetings and that would give succor to the common people. However, to achieve this goal the Election Commission of India, bureaucracy and political leadership as well as civil society should play a proactive role from their respective ends. The sooner this step is taken the better for the society.

(The writer is Former Judge, Gauhati High Court)
