PSAJK condemns government decision to seal Falah-E-Aam Trust schools – KashmirWatch

CNS reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

Srinagar, Mar 1, CNS: Private Schools Association of Jammu and Kashmir has condemned the government decision to seal private schools run by Falah-E-Aam Trust (FAT) as the situation will impact around one lakh students and push Kashmir into an educational crisis.

The Association said that FAT is purely concerned with education and it has nothing to do with the politics. “These are government recognised private schools teaching syllabus prescribed by the Board of School Education. These are like any other private school following all the rules of government,” said G N Var Chairman PSAJK.

“It is not just one or two schools, but they are around 325 schools giving education to one lakh students. Any attempt to close them will have huge ramification on the education sector,” he said

The Association said that the step to ban the schools at this juncture will magnify the already crisis ridden education sector.

“At this time thousands of students have been thrown out of colleges outside the State. We are still grappling to deal with that and trying to accommodate those students. Now the government is pushing us down the hill by closing schools inside the Kashmir too. So where will we go?” he said.

“We are running out of capacity to deal with the situation. It will push the State into an educational crisis which is already in a huge mess,” said Var.

The Association said that most of the students at these schools are from poor families as this was one of the only options where they did get a quality education at a minimum fee. The closure of schools will affect only the poor class of people. “Those poor parents who had dreamt of their wards getting a quality education will be heart-broken. It will shatter the dream of an entire class of society,” said Var.

“Government should at least take care of interests of children. These children have nothing to do with politics,” he said.

The Association called on the government to reconsider the decision to ban the FAT run school as it is an apolitical organisation aimed to give quality education to masses. “Treat FAT separate from Jamaat e Islami. If you have any doubts check their syllabus or inspect them routinely, but do not close down these schools,” said Var. “The schools also employ more than 10000 people and all of them would be rendered jobless. The ban is going to hit us both ways.”

The Association condemned the harassment of school management of some schools which is aimed to destroy such schools.

PDP stages protest in Srinagar, demands revocation of ban on Jamaat-e-Islami

Srinagar, Mar 2, CNS: Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) on Saturday took out a protest demonstration in Srinagar against the Government decision of banning Jamat-e-Islami and termed such a measure unconstitutional and undemocratic.

Raising slogans against criminalising JeI in the state, PDP leaders questioned such a bizarre move of the central government, stating that such an action besides undermining the democratic principles and values is tantamount to inference into the religious affairs of Muslims of Jammu and Kashmir.

The party leaders further added that JeI has been playing a vital role in providing education to thousands of children by running hundreds of quality educational institutes and extending all necessary help to thousands of economically downtrodden people across the state.

Talking to reporters, PDP leader and MLC Mohammad Khurshid Alam and Abdul Qayoom Wani said the decision of banning the JeI and sealing its properties in Kashmir will have far-reaching consequences and could push the already alienated youth of Kashmir towards the wall further.

“These repressive measures are taken solely for electoral prospects. However, what the government of India fails to understand is that it is playing with fire and recent unfortunate incident of violence in Pulwama put entire South Asia on the brink of a destructive war. We urge the government not to adopt the ostrich-like approach and revoke the ban immediately,” said the PDP leaders.

The protest witnessed the participation of scores of PDP workers and functionaries led by senior PDP party leaders Mohammad Khurshid Alam, Mushtaq Ahmad Shah, Mohammad Ashraf Mir, Ab Rahim Rather, Abdul Qayoom Wani, Noor Mohammad, Dr Ali Mohammad, Nazir Ahmad Yatoo, Mohammad Yasin, Abdul Gani Naseem, Abdul Hameed Kosheen and Aijaz Ahmad Rather.

Banning of Political activities in Kashmir is shocking: National Front

Srinagar, Mar 2, CNS: Terming the ban on Jamaat-e-Islami as highly condemnable and sealing the residential houses of many Jamaat activists as shocking, Jammu Kashmir National Front has said that political activities have now been openly banned in the disputed region.

Deputy Chairman of National Front, Altaf Hussian Wani has said that Jamaat-e-Islami is known for its socio religious and humanitarian work across the region and banning it is an utter example of imperialistic mindset of India. After banning the Jamaat-e-Islami, police have started sealing of the residential houses of its members which has created panic across the region.

The National Front deputy Chairman said that the overall situation of the disputed region is alarming where even political activities have been banned. It speaks volumes about the state of affairs. Hundreds of fresh arrests have been made in hook and corner and raids are being conducted which is an act of intimidation, only to scare the freedom loving people who demand and struggle for their political rights promised to them at international level.

By banning political activities in Kashmir the government of India is in fact paving way for violence to create excuses to kill the Kashmiri people on one pretext or the other. However, Kashmiri people are determined on way of resistance and have time and again proved that they will never ever surrender before the military might of India.
