Houses of dozens of workers, leaders of JeI sealed by authorities – KashmirWatch

PTK reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

SRINAGAR, MAR 02 (PTK): Days after the Centre banned Jamaat-e-Islami J&K (JeI), houses of dozens of workers and leaders of the group have been sealed by authorities at several locations across Kashmir.

Magistrates issued orders of sealing all institutions and properties linked to JeI. The home ministry on Thursday, declared the JeI an unlawful organisation for five years, and over 200 of its workers were arrested in last four days.

The Centre alleged that the JeI was “in close touch” with terror groups and is likely to “escalate secessionist movement” in Jammu and Kashmir. The notification, banning the group under the stringent Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, was issued by the home ministry after a high-level meeting on security, chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, following the Pulwama attack.

The two main political parties of the state – the People’s Democratic Party (PDP) and National Conference (NC) criticized the Centre’s move to ban the JeI, J&K. “Why is the government so uncomfortable with Jamaat-e-Islami? Radicalised Hindu groups representing fringe elements are given carte blanche to spread misinformation and vitiate the atmosphere. But an organization that has worked tirelessly for Kashmiris is banned,” said PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti.

NC general secretary, Ali Mohammad Sagar was also upset over the Centre’s decision, saying it will impede the process of reconciliation in the state, and demanded that the ban be lifted.

Meanwhile, the National Investigation Agency or NIA over the last five days, raided seven locations, including on the houses of separatists like Mirwaiz Umer Farooq, in connection with cases related to funding of militants and separatist groups in Jammu and Kashmir.

NIA claimed that it found “high-tech internet communication setup” from the residence of Mirwaiz Umer Farooq. (PTK)

Rafi Mir slams Central government’s decision to ban Jamaat-e-Islami

SRINAGAR, MAR 02 (PTK): Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) Chief Spokesperson Rafi Mir slammed BJP led Central government’s decision to ban Jamaat-e-Islami Jammu and Kashmir, saying it is against the essence of democracy which allows space to opposing political thoughts.

While speaking to News agency Press Trust of Kashmir Rafi Mir said, “it is fourth time that government banned Jamaat-e-Islami in Jammu and Kashmir but they can’t achieve anything”.

He added that the schools of Jamaat e Islami are recognised by government and what about the career of these students by arresting Jamaat leader.

He added that democracy is a battle of ideas. “Crackdown followed by banning of Jamaat Islami (JK) is condemnable, another example of high handedness and muscular approach of GOI to deal with political issue of Jammu and Kashmir”, he added.

The Centre on Thursday banned the Jamaat-e-Islami Jammu and Kashmir for five years under anti-terror law on grounds that it was “in close touch” with terror outfits and is expected to “escalate secessionist movement” in the state.

A notification, banning the group under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, was issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs after a high-level meeting on security, chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

According to central government officials, the Jamaat was responsible for the creation of the state’s biggest militant group Hizbul Mujahideen and the brain behind the formation of Hurriyat Conference. (PTK)

Atmosphere of vengeance in state: Mehbooba Mufti, says ban on Jammat-e-Islami is unfortunate

SRINAGAR, MAR 02 (PTK): Former Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti today said that ban on Jamaat-e-Islami is unfortunate as jamaat e Islami schools were providing education to the poorest of poor in Kashmir.

“There is an atmosphere of vengeance in the state, especially in the Valley after JeI youths and leaders were arrested. JeI is a social and political organisation. It is an ideology and I do not think you can imprison an ideology by arresting some activists of the outfit. We totally condemn it,” Mehbooba told reporters at the PDP headquarters here.

The PDP president said while there was no action against those persons responsible for incidents of lynching in the country, “a social organisation involved in helping the poor” in Kashmir has been banned.

“You have Shiv Sena, Jan Sangh, RSS in the country who have lynched people on the basis of eating a type of meat, but there was no action. However, an organisation which has been helping the poor and running schools has been banned and its activists put in jails. We will not allow this. Its consequences will be dangerous,” she said.

Mehbooba asked the Centre not to turn Jammu and Kashmir into a prison. “You cannot imprison an ideology, we live in a democratic nation and in a democracy, there is battle of ideas. If you have a better idea, let there be a battle on that, but do not turn J-K into a prison.

“We had not allowed the BJP to do whatever it is doing now (during the PDP-BJP coalition), but unfortunately there is no one to stop them (now). When a Kashmiri is beaten, people applaud and become happy,” she said.

“It is unfortunate as these schools were providing education to the poorest of poor. Their students are meritorious. Where will all these students go after their schools have been banned. They are playing with our future and this is very wrong. They should rather ban (RSS) shakhas where swords are displayed. No Jamaati carries a sword,” she said.

The Centre Thursday banned Jamaat-e-Islami Jammu and Kashmir for five.

A notification, banning the group under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, was issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs after a high-level meeting on security, chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

The ban follows a massive crackdown on the outfit in the Valley since last week.

Around 250 leaders and activists of the outfit have been detained in raids at several places across Kashmir. (PTK)

Jamaat e Islami ban: 1 lakh students to be affected says PSAJK

SRINAGAR, MAR 02 (PTK): Private Schools Association of Jammu and Kashmir has condemned the government decision to seal private schools run by Fallah e Aam Trust (FAT) as the situation will impact around one lakh students and push Kashmir into an educational crisis.

The Association said that FAT is purely concerned with education and it has nothing to do with the politics. “These are government recognised private schools teaching syllabus prescribed by the Board of School Education. These are like any other private school following all the rules of government,” said G N Var Chairman PSAJK. “It is not just one or two schools, but they are around 325 schools giving education to one lakh students. Any attempt to close them will have huge ramification on education sector”

The Association said that the step to ban the schools at this juncture will magnify the already crisis ridden education sector. “At this time thousands of students have been thrown out of colleges outside the State. We are still grappling to deal with that and trying to accommodate those students. Now government is pushing us down the hill by closing schools inside the Kashmir too. So where will we go,” said Var. “We are running out of capacity to deal with the situation. It will push the State into educational crisis which is already in a huge mess.”

The Association said that most of the students at these schools are from poor families as this was one of the only options where they did get quality education at minimum fee. The closure of schools will affect only the poor class of people. “Those poor parents who had dreamt of their wards getting quality education will be heart-broken. It will shatter the dream of an entire class of society,” said Var. “Government should at least take care of interests of children. These children have nothing to do with politics.”

The Association called on the government to reconsider the decision to ban the FAT run school as it is an apolitical organisation aimed to give quality education to masses. “Treat FAT separate from Jamaat e Islami. If you have any doubts check their syllabus or inspect them routinely, but do not close down these schools,” said Var. “The schools also employ more than 10000 people and all of them would be rendered jobless. The ban is going to hit us both ways.”

The Association condemned the harassment of school management of some schools which is aimed to destroy such schools. (PTK)

PDP demands immediate revocation of Ban on Jamat-e-Islami

SRINAGAR, MAR 02 (PTK): Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) on Saturday took out a protest demonstration in Srinagar against the Government decision of banning Jamat-e-Islami and termed such a measure unconstitutional and undemocratic.

Raising slogans against criminalising JeI in the state, PDP leaders questioned such a bizarre move of the central government, stating that such an action besides undermining the democratic principles and values is tantamount to inference into the religious affairs of Muslims of Jammu and Kashmir.

The party leaders further added that JeI has been playing a vital role in providing education to thousands of children by running hundreds of quality educational institutes and extending all necessary help to thousands of economically downtrodden people across the state.

Talking to reporters, PDP leader and MLC Mohammad Khurshid Alam and Abdul Qayoom Wani said the decision of banning the JeI and sealing its properties in Kashmir will have far reaching consequences and could push the already alienated youth of Kashmir towards the wall further. “These repressive measures are taken solely for electoral prospects. However, what the government of India fails to understand is that it is playing with fire and recent unfortunate incident of violence in Pulwama put the entire South Asia on the brink of a destructive war. We urge the government not to adopt ostrich like approach and revoke the ban immediately,” said the PDP leaders.

The protest witnessed the participation of scores of PDP workers and functionaries led by senior PDP party leaders Mohammad Khurshid Alam, Mushtaq Ahmad Shah, Mohammad Ashraf Mir, Ab Rahim Rather, Abdul Qayoom Wani, Noor Mohammad, Dr Ali Mohammad, Nazir Ahmad Yatoo, Mohammad Yasin, Abdul Gani Naseem, Abdul Hameed Kosheen and Aijaz Ahmad Rather. (PTK)
