Bank strike January 2019: Two-day bank strike on January 8 and 9; here’s all you should know

Bank strike on January 8-9, if happens, would be the second large-scale bank strike within last 20 days. | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: There could be a possible disruption in the banking services across the nation on January 8 and 9, 2019 as a two-day nationwide bank strike has been called by banking unions. The said bank strike on January 8-9, if happens, would be the second large-scale bank strike within last 20 days. In December 2018, separate banking unions called for bank strikes on December 21 and 26 due to which a 5-day snag was witnessed in the banking facilities from December 21 to 26, barring December 24.

A couple of banks have informed through separate regulatory filings with regard to the so-called bank strike on January 8 and 9.

“All India Bank Employees Association (AlBEA) and Bank Employees Federation of India (BEFI) have served a notice of strike to Indian Banks' Association informing of their decision to go on strike on 8th and 9th January, 2019, in support of their demands. In the event of All India Bank Employees Association (AlBEA) and Bank Employees Federation of India (BEFI) proceed on strike on 8th and 9th January, 2019, the functioning of bank's branches/offices in some of the zones may be affected,” Bank of Baroda said in a statement.

“It is advised that the bank is in receipt of notice of two days nationwide strike on January 08-09, 2019 from All India Bank Employees Association (AIBEA) & Bank Employees Federation of India addressed to the Chairman, Indian Bank's Association (IBA), in support of their various demands,” IDBI Bank said in a stock exchange filing.

“The Indian Bank's Association (IBA) have advised the bank that the All India Bank Employees' Association (AIBEA) and Bank Employees Federation of India (BEFI) have served notice informing their decision to go on two days strike on 08th and 09th January, 2019 in support of their certain demands. The issues and demands are of industry level and strike call is also given at industry level. Therefore, if the strike takes place, the functioning of branches of the bank may be affected. The bank is taking all the necessary steps in terms of the existing guidelines for smooth functioning of bank's branches/offices on the day of strike (s), in the event the strike materializes,” Allahabad Bank said in a stock exchange filing.

According to a PTI report, 10 central trade unions -- INTUC, AITUC, HMS, CITU, AIUTUC, AICCTU, UTUC, TUCC, LPF and SEWA -- have also called for a nationwide general strike on January 8 & 9. The aforementioned trade unions have collectively placed about a dozen of demands before centre and have been protesting against the anti-people policies of central government, news agency PTI reported.
