India will not let sacrifice of jawans go in vain, says PM Modi at Sankalp rally | As it happened

The NDA rally is aimed at taking a resolve to make a new and secure India under the leadership of PM Narendra Modi, BJP said. (Photo: PTI)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed a massive rally in Patna to blow the bugle for the upcoming 2019 Lok Sabha polls in the politically important Bihar.

PM Narendra Modi addressed the National Democratic Alliance's Sankalp rally along with Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and Union Minister Ram Vilas Paswan at Gandhi Maiden.

The NDA rally is aimed at taking a resolve to make a new and secure India under the leadership of PM Modi, BJP General Secretary Bhupendra Yadav said Saturday.

Updates:

01. 50 pm: India shall not let the sacrifice of its brave soldiers go in vain. We shall ensure that a befitting reply is given for every sacrifice, PM Modi said

01.44 pm: Now they [the Congress] have even started asking for proof of the airstrike. Why are Congress and its allies demoralising our forces? Why are they giving statements which are benefiting our enemies?: PM Modi

#WATCH PM Modi in Patna: Now they have even started asking for proof of the #AirStrike. Why are Congress and its allies demoralizing our forces? Why are they giving statements which are benefiting our enemies? pic.twitter.com/cvSZd1ZBWd ANI (@ANI) March 3, 2019

01.39 pm: If Mahamilavat (Mahagathbandhan) government had been there, there would be no development as they only work for developing themselves: PM Modi

01.35 pm: PM Modi came down heavily on the Opposition for "doubting" Indian Armed Forces's bravery

01. 32 pm: The people of Bihar are very much aware of what all happened in the name of fodder. Only we (NDA government) have dared to end the culture of corruption and middlemen which had been a normal practice in the country for decades: PM Modi

01.30 pm: Nitish Kumar is a witness to Atal Bihari Vajpayee's railway development in Bihar: PM Modi

01. 25 pm: These days there is a competition to abuse the Chowkidaar, but you be assured, this Chowkidaar of yours is as alert as ever: PM Modi

01. 22 pm: Rs 75,000 crore will be deposited annually directly into the accounts of farmers: PM Modi

01.18 pm: NDA govt will work for Vikas in Bihar: PM Modi

01.12 pm: PM Modi pays tribute to Pulwama attack martyrs from Bihar

01.09 pm: Crowd chants "Bharat Mata ki Jai" with PM Modi

01.07 pm: PM Modi addresses Sankalp rally in Patna

01.05 pm: I assure PM Modi that we will win all 40 seats for him in Bihar: Nitish Kumar

01.00 pm: We should respect all religions, says Nitish Kumar at Sankalp rally

12.58 pm: Watch rally here

12.56 pm: Nitish Kumar promises PM Modi that every village in Bihar will have proper sanitation by October 2, 2019

12.55 pm: Nitish Kumar lauds PM Modi for bringing electricity to villages across the country

12.50 pm: Thank PM Modi the way he fought terrorism: Nitish Kumar

12.47 pm: Bihar CM Nitish Kumar addresses Sankalp rally in Patna

12.44 pm: PM Modi's chest is not 56 inch but 156 inch: Ram Vilas Paswan at Sankalp rally

12.40 pm: PM Modi has worked hard for last five years: Union minister Ram Vilas Paswan

12.30 pm: PM Narendra Modi reaches Gandhi Maiden in Patna

12.15 pm: Bihar CM Nitish Kumar receives PM Modi at Patna airport

12:05 pm: PM Modi has reached Patna to address NDA rally in Gandhi Maiden.

The Sankalp rally is being organised to take a resolve to make a new, strong, prosperous, safe and secured India. We are proud of Indian Air Force Wing Commander Abhinandan who returned to India yesterday (from Pakistan). We thank government and the Prime Minister Narendra Modi for this, Yadav, a Rajya Sabha member, told reporters here.

"The government is steadily moving ahead with its mantra of Sabka sath, sabka vikas, Yadav," BJP's Bihar in-charge, said. "There is a growing feeling among people to give another chance to Modi in the coming Lok Sabha polls."

Workers and leaders of all the three NDA constituents --BJP, JD(U) and LJP -- have been working hard to make the rally a grand success, Yadav said.

Asked whether PM is expected to announce some gifts for Bihar at the rally, Yadav said that the prime minister recently participated in a big public meeting at Barauni in Begusarai where he announced several schemes and projects.

Earlier in January this year, BJP Bihar president Nityanand Rai said PM Modi will present his government's five years report card during the NDA rally in Patna.

"NDA ki rally mein pradhan mantri saboot ke saath apne sarkar ka hisab denge aur Congress se 55 saalon ka hisab lenge [PM Modi will present his government's report card with proofs and will also demand the Congress to show the report card of its 55-year government," Nityanand Rai said.

When questioned whether the BJP was the big brother in the alliance, Nityanand Rai said that the 2019 Lok Sabha polls will be fought jointly by BJP national president Amit Shah, JDU national president and Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and Union Minister and LJP supremo Ram Vilas Paswan.

"Amit Shah, Nitish Kumar and Ram Vilas Paswan will be fighting elections together to win and make Narendra Modi the prime minister again, Nityanand Rai said.
