In briefs

Mahashivratri: Badnore greets people

Chandigarh: Punjab Governor and UT Administrator, VP Singh Badnore extended greetings to the people on the sacred occasion of Mahashivratri – the main festival in honour of Lord Shiva. In a message, the Governor said that this holy festival reminds us of our pursuit of truth and understanding and symbolizes salvation, devotion, dedication and fulfillment, in human life. The Governor appealed to the people to celebrate this festival collectively, rising above considerations of caste, creed and religion, in the true spirit of harmony.

Cabinet to meet on March 5

Chandigarh: Haryana Cabinet will meet under the chairmanship of Chief Minister Manohar Lal in the Committee Room, fourth floor, Haryana Civil Secretariat here on March 5 at 3 pm.

Food safety teams conduct 3k raids in 3 months

Chandigarh: Punjab Health Department’s food safety wing kept the guard on against unscrupulous food business operators even after the festival season was over. Under Mission Tandrust Punjab, the Commisionerate of Food and Drug Administration conducted 3,000 inspections of food items in last three months. Department filed 650 cases in the competent court against those indulging in food adulteration. Few cases, where the food items were found to be unsafe, were also filed in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrates. The state Food and Drug Administration commissioner KS Pannu warned of stricter action against those still indulging in selling of substandard food items.

Two IPS, Six HPS officers transferred

Chandigarh: Haryana Government has issued transfer and posting orders of two IPS officers and six HPS officers with immediate effect. Alok Kumar Roy, IPS has been Additional Director General (ADG), Haryana Police Academy, HPA Madhuban has been given the additional charge of ADGP, State Vigilance Bureau (SVB). Y Puran Kumar, IPS, IG Home Guards has been transferred as IG, HAP, Madhuban. Vinod Kumar, HPS, AIG/ Admin has been given additional charge of AIG, Provisioning and Welfare in addition to his present duties. Vinay Partap Singh SP/PTC Sunaria has been transferred as SP, Fatehabad vice Deepak Saharan, who goes as SP/ PTC Sunaria. Adarshdeep Singh has been transferred as ACP, Faridabad, Mahesh Kumar goes as DSP, 4th Battalion, HAP Madhuban and Joginder Sharma is posted as DSP, HIsar.

Chairman Haryana Yuva Aayog appointed

Chandigarh: Haryana Government has appointed Yadvinder Singh Sandhu, resident of Sardar Kulbir Singh Marg, NIT, Faridabad as chairman, Haryana Yuva Aayog with immediate effect. Notably, Haryana Cabinet had recently, approved the Haryana State Youth Policy with an aim to empower the youth of the state to achieve their full potential to facilitate all round development of the society. The objectives of the policy is to create productive work force that can make a sustainable contribution to the state’s and India’s economic development. It also aims to develop a strong and healthy generation equipped to take on future challenges.

5th PGI-AIIMS international course

Chandigarh: The PGIMER has started the 5th PGI-AIIMS international course on public health approaches to non communicable diseases which is being attended by delegates from all over India and abroad. The second day of the course started with the reflection of the first day sessions by two of the participants who informed the highlights of each session and expressed their complete satisfaction on content, comprehensiveness and quality. In the first session of day “Population level interventions”, Prof. J S thakur emphasized on the school-based approaches and ‘trim and fit’ programme of the young and highlighted the need to prevent the NCDs by catching them young. A need was urged for population-based intervention to prevent NCDs.

Four arrested with 100gm heroin

Ludhiana: Khanna police on Sunday arrested four drug peddlers and recovered heroin weighing 100 gram from their possession. Khanna SSP Dhruv Dahiya said that a police party saw an Indica Vista car bearing registration number CH-01-AL-9591 coming from the Khamano side at a spot opposite Heddon Police Post. “When the police party signalled the car to stop, the vehicle driver tried to flee. Later, the cops managed to stop the vehicle. During checking, 100 grams of heroin was recovered from the possession of the accused persons, identified as Tony of Hargobind Nagar in Ludhiana, Sikandar of Daddumajra near Mohali, Pritosh of Sarupah in Uttar Pradesh’s Ajamgarh, and Monu Kumar of Dinak Deewa of UP’s Gonda.

CBI serious for recovery in NPA accounts

Chandigarh: A spokesman of the Central Bank of India said that fraudulent borrower of bank’s Industrial Area, Ludhiana branch, Gulshan Pahwa Prop. M/s Pahwa Steel, who in the year 2012 fraudulently borrowed Rs 1crore from the bank on the basis of fake land documents, has been arrested by the police. Ultimately, with the untiring efforts of ASI, Balbir Singh-Police Booth Incharge, Millerganj, Pahwa has been arrested. This is a strong message to the other defaulters of Central Bank of India, the spokesman said.

3-day workshop on echocardiography ends

Chandigarh: The 13th Annual perioperative and critical care echocardiography workshop, organized by the Society of transesophageal echocardiography and Department of Anesthesia and Intensive care, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research concluded on Sunday. The workshop achieved its two main goals of taking the beginners in this field through a series of narrative lectures and promoting knowledge sharing among the experts. On Sunday, the workshop focused on examination in patients in whom the decision is taken based on a combined discussion between the patient, cardiologist, anesthetist and the cardiovascular surgeon. Subsequently, 3D echocardiography was elaborated upon and the workshop ended with evaluation and certification of the participants.

First of its own kind in tricity - Fire Escape Chute installed

Zirakpur: DD Builders promoted Altura Apartments, a 14-storey residential towers have installed the "Fire Escape Chute" - an exit that permits rapid, mass evacuation from high-rise structures during the life threatening emergencies. In times when residential towers are getting taller, this come as a welcome relief. Such increasing attempts to employ state-of-the-art technologies that benefit and protect residents create good instances for other developers to follow. Present on the occasion, BS Sandhu, Chief Fire Safety Officer, Mohali welcomed the move of builder.

Hoshiarpur based tractor maker - Sonalika made global mark

Chandigarh: Sonalika International Tractors while surpassing the industry growth of approx 10.9% has registered an overall growth of 17.8% with a sale of 1,02,693 tractors from April’18- Feb’19 as compared to 87,210 tractors same period last year. In Exports, the company for the month of February’19 has recorded an extraordinary growth of 20.3% with a sale of 1507 tractors as compared to 1253 tractors same period last year, said Raman Mittal, Executive Director Sonalika ITL.

‘Numero YONO’ held in Pkl

Chandigarh: The team of Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Mohali emerged victorious at the regional rounds of India’s biggest inter-college quiz contest - ‘Numero YONO’ held in Panchkula on March 2. IISER team bagged annual scholarship of Rs 2.16 lakh that witnessed participation of 198 teams from various colleges from the states of Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh besides Chandigarh. The first runner up of this competition was NIT Kurukshatra that won annual scholarship of Rs 1.44 lakh whereas the second runner up, another team of IISER Mohali again received a onetime amount of Rs 12000. ‘Numero YONO’ - presented by State Bank of India, is conducted across all 17 cities where SBI Local Head Offices are located.

CGRF members to hear complaints

Panchkula: The members of the Consumer Grievances Redressal Forum (CGRF) of Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam will make extensive visits in March 2019 for hearing grievances of the consumers and to entertain new complaints. A spokesman said, the proceedings of the CGRF will be held in Yamuna Nagar on March 5, BBMB Rest House Panipat hearing on March 6, Panchkula on March 8, Rohtak on March 11, Kurukshetra on March 12, Karnal on March 14, Sonipat on March 15, Ambala on March 19, Panipat on March 20, Kaithal on March 26 and Jhajjar on March 28 respectively.
