Indiaplast 2019: BST Eltromat India launches Alphamix

At the first edition of Indiaplast 2019 exhibition, held at India Expo Centre, Greater Noida, from 28 February to 4 March, BST Eltromat India presented Alphamix, a two-component adhesive mixing and dispensing system and EagleEye, a 100% web viewing line scan camera.

The other product on display, EagleEye, a 100% web viewing system, helps press operators get a complete overview of the web repeat at all times

The other product on display, EagleEye, a 100% web viewing system, helps press operators get a complete overview of the web repeat at all times

After successfully displaying Alphamix and EagleEye in Arabplast 2019 at Dubai, BST Eltromat demonstrated these systems for the first time in India. The company also displayed a solvent-less machine, powered by BSTe India automation and with Alphamix installed on it.

Khushal Patel, director, sales and marketing, BST Eltromat, said, “Alphamix is a revolutionary integrated mixer for solvent-less machines with self-calibration and auto cleaning function which currently no other mixer offers across the world.”

He said the two components, adhesive mixing and dispensing system, ensure zero de-lamination during the process. The mixer can be controlled from the machine console and its tension set-points are selected automatically. The mixer also calculates and display actual coating GSM along with all critical information on one HMI and sends tripping signal in the case of an issue. It provides roll/ job-wise reporting and ensures precise temperature and weight control.

The Alphmix system also calculates the weight of adhesive in real-time. “This system will revolutionise the lamination process. In future, our aim is to standardise this system with all the lamination machines. Last but not the least, auto-cleaning function of the mixer enables faster job set-up than any other mixer available in the market,” Patel added.

The other product on display, EagleEye, a 100% web viewing system, helps press operators get a complete overview of the web repeat at all times. The modular design and high-speed image capturing due to 7,300-pixel high resolution line chip camera, EagleEye is ideal for web width up to 2,800-mm using multiple cameras and press speeds of 600-m/m. “It has the camera with resolution of 132-dpi and tri-linear RGB true colour line sensor. It also facilitates fast remote maintenance for easy and immediate diagnosis,” Patel said.

BSTe India also displayed an upgraded version of one of its best web video systems SuperHandyScan 4100 (SHS 4100) with its web guide systems.
