How the prospect of a fifth term for Algeria's president sparked the biggest protests in 30 years

Joy and foreboding hung in the air as the protesters surged into the centre of Algiers just past midnight on Monday.

There were students and labourers, pious young women in headscarves and secular leftists sporting berets. The thousands of demonstrators from all walks of life demanded an end to the 20-year reign of Algeria’s ailing, 82-year-old president Abdelaziz Bouteflika, hours after he announced he would be running for a fifth consecutive term on 18 April.

“This is a republic, not a kingdom,” they chanted.

Algeria’s well-armed, highly trained security forces were standing guard. Some of the protesters felt fear as they entered the Place du 1er Mai, the very heart of the Algerian capital. At first the police seemed to block the way, but then at around 1:30 am, they relented, giving the protesters control of the square.

“The police gave up,” one protester told The Independent. “They were tired, and the crowd was extraordinarily resilient.”

Algerians frequently protest, but the two-week wave of protests against a fifth Bouteflika term now erupting across Algeria may constitute the greatest political challenge to the country’s complex regime in 30 years.

World news in pictures Show all 50 1 /50 World news in pictures World news in pictures 30 September 2020 Pope Francis prays with priests at the end of a limited public audience at the San Damaso courtyard in The Vatican AFP via Getty World news in pictures 29 September 2020 A girl's silhouette is seen from behind a fabric in a tent along a beach by Beit Lahia in the northern Gaza Strip AFP via Getty World news in pictures 28 September 2020 A Chinese woman takes a photo of herself in front of a flower display dedicated to frontline health care workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in Beijing, China. China will celebrate national day marking the founding of the People's Republic of China on October 1st Getty World news in pictures 27 September 2020 The Glass Mountain Inn burns as the Glass Fire moves through the area in St. Helena, California. The fast moving Glass fire has burned over 1,000 acres and has destroyed homes Getty World news in pictures 26 September 2020 A villager along with a child offers prayers next to a carcass of a wild elephant that officials say was electrocuted in Rani Reserve Forest on the outskirts of Guwahati, India AFP via Getty World news in pictures 25 September 2020 The casket of late Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg is seen in Statuary Hall in the US Capitol to lie in state in Washington, DC AFP via Getty World news in pictures 24 September 2020 An anti-government protester holds up an image of a pro-democracy commemorative plaque at a rally outside Thailand's parliament in Bangkok, as activists gathered to demand a new constitution AFP via Getty World news in pictures 23 September 2020 A whale stranded on a beach in Macquarie Harbour on the rugged west coast of Tasmania, as hundreds of pilot whales have died in a mass stranding in southern Australia despite efforts to save them, with rescuers racing to free a few dozen survivors The Mercury/AFP via Getty World news in pictures 22 September 2020 State civil employee candidates wearing face masks and shields take a test in Surabaya AFP via Getty World news in pictures 21 September 2020 A man sweeps at the Taj Mahal monument on the day of its reopening after being closed for more than six months due to the coronavirus pandemic AP World news in pictures 20 September 2020 A deer looks for food in a burnt area, caused by the Bobcat fire, in Pearblossom, California EPA World news in pictures 19 September 2020 Anti-government protesters hold their mobile phones aloft as they take part in a pro-democracy rally in Bangkok. Tens of thousands of pro-democracy protesters massed close to Thailand's royal palace, in a huge rally calling for PM Prayut Chan-O-Cha to step down and demanding reforms to the monarchy AFP via Getty World news in pictures 18 September 2020 Supporters of Iraqi Shi'ite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr maintain social distancing as they attend Friday prayers after the coronavirus disease restrictions were eased, in Kufa mosque, near Najaf, Iraq Reuters World news in pictures 17 September 2020 A protester climbs on The Triumph of the Republic at 'the Place de la Nation' as thousands of protesters take part in a demonstration during a national day strike called by labor unions asking for better salary and against jobs cut in Paris, France EPA World news in pictures 16 September 2020 A fire raging near the Lazzaretto of Ancona in Italy. The huge blaze broke out overnight at the port of Ancona. Firefighters have brought the fire under control but they expected to keep working through the day EPA World news in pictures 15 September 2020 Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny posing for a selfie with his family at Berlin's Charite hospital. In an Instagram post he said he could now breathe independently following his suspected poisoning last month Alexei Navalny/Instagram/AFP World news in pictures 14 September 2020 Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga, former Defense Minister Shigeru Ishiba and former Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida celebrate after Suga was elected as new head of the ruling party at the Liberal Democratic Party's leadership election in Tokyo Reuters World news in pictures 13 September 2020 A man stands behind a burning barricade during the fifth straight day of protests against police brutality in Bogota AFP via Getty World news in pictures 12 September 2020 Police officers block and detain protesters during an opposition rally to protest the official presidential election results in Minsk, Belarus. Daily protests calling for the authoritarian president's resignation are now in their second month AP World news in pictures 11 September 2020 Members of 'Omnium Cultural' celebrate the 20th 'Festa per la llibertat' ('Fiesta for the freedom') to mark the Day of Catalonia in Barcelona. Omnion Cultural fights for the independence of Catalonia EPA World news in pictures 10 September 2020 The Moria refugee camp, two days after Greece's biggest migrant camp, was destroyed by fire. Thousands of asylum seekers on the island of Lesbos are now homeless AFP via Getty World news in pictures 9 September 2020 Pope Francis takes off his face mask as he arrives by car to hold a limited public audience at the San Damaso courtyard in The Vatican AFP via Getty World news in pictures 8 September 2020 A home is engulfed in flames during the "Creek Fire" in the Tollhouse area of California AFP via Getty World news in pictures 7 September 2020 A couple take photos along a sea wall of the waves brought by Typhoon Haishen in the eastern port city of Sokcho AFP via Getty World news in pictures 6 September 2020 Novak Djokovic and a tournament official tends to a linesperson who was struck with a ball by Djokovic during his match against Pablo Carreno Busta at the US Open USA Today Sports/Reuters World news in pictures 5 September 2020 Protesters confront police at the Shrine of Remembrance in Melbourne, Australia, during an anti-lockdown rally AFP via Getty World news in pictures 4 September 2020 A woman looks on from a rooftop as rescue workers dig through the rubble of a damaged building in Beirut. A search began for possible survivors after a scanner detected a pulse one month after the mega-blast at the adjacent port AFP via Getty World news in pictures 3 September 2020 A full moon next to the Virgen del Panecillo statue in Quito, Ecuador EPA World news in pictures 2 September 2020 A Palestinian woman reacts as Israeli forces demolish her animal shed near Hebron in the Israeli-occupied West Bank Reuters World news in pictures 1 September 2020 Students protest against presidential elections results in Minsk TUT.BY/AFP via Getty World news in pictures 31 August 2020 The pack rides during the 3rd stage of the Tour de France between Nice and Sisteron AFP via Getty World news in pictures 30 August 2020 Law enforcement officers block a street during a rally of opposition supporters protesting against presidential election results in Minsk, Belarus Reuters World news in pictures 29 August 2020 A woman holding a placard reading "Stop Censorship - Yes to the Freedom of Expression" shouts in a megaphone during a protest against the mandatory wearing of face masks in Paris. Masks, which were already compulsory on public transport, in enclosed public spaces, and outdoors in Paris in certain high-congestion areas around tourist sites, were made mandatory outdoors citywide on August 28 to fight the rising coronavirus infections AFP via Getty World news in pictures 28 August 2020 Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe bows to the national flag at the start of a press conference at the prime minister official residence in Tokyo. Abe announced he will resign over health problems, in a bombshell development that kicks off a leadership contest in the world's third-largest economy AFP via Getty World news in pictures 27 August 2020 Residents take cover behind a tree trunk from rubber bullets fired by South African Police Service (SAPS) in Eldorado Park, near Johannesburg, during a protest by community members after a 16-year old boy was reported dead AFP via Getty World news in pictures 26 August 2020 People scatter rose petals on a statue of Mother Teresa marking her 110th birth anniversary in Ahmedabad AFP via Getty World news in pictures 25 August 2020 An aerial view shows beach-goers standing on salt formations in the Dead Sea near Ein Bokeq, Israel Reuters World news in pictures 24 August 2020 Health workers use a fingertip pulse oximeter and check the body temperature of a fisherwoman inside the Dharavi slum during a door-to-door Covid-19 coronavirus screening in Mumbai AFP via Getty World news in pictures 23 August 2020 People carry an idol of the Hindu god Ganesh, the deity of prosperity, to immerse it off the coast of the Arabian sea during the Ganesh Chaturthi festival in Mumbai, India Reuters World news in pictures 22 August 2020 Firefighters watch as flames from the LNU Lightning Complex fires approach a home in Napa County, California AP World news in pictures 21 August 2020 Members of the Israeli security forces arrest a Palestinian demonstrator during a rally to protest against Israel's plan to annex parts of the occupied West Bank AFP via Getty World news in pictures 20 August 2020 A man pushes his bicycle through a deserted road after prohibitory orders were imposed by district officials for a week to contain the spread of the Covid-19 in Kathmandu AFP via Getty World news in pictures 19 August 2020 A car burns while parked at a residence in Vacaville, California. Dozens of fires are burning out of control throughout Northern California as fire resources are spread thin AFP via Getty World news in pictures 18 August 2020 Students use their mobile phones as flashlights at an anti-government rally at Mahidol University in Nakhon Pathom. Thailand has seen near-daily protests in recent weeks by students demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Prayut Chan-O-Cha AFP via Getty World news in pictures 17 August 2020 Members of the Kayapo tribe block the BR163 highway during a protest outside Novo Progresso in Para state, Brazil. Indigenous protesters blocked a major transamazonian highway to protest against the lack of governmental support during the COVID-19 novel coronavirus pandemic and illegal deforestation in and around their territories AFP via Getty World news in pictures 16 August 2020 Lightning forks over the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge as a storm passes over Oakland AP World news in pictures 15 August 2020 Belarus opposition supporters gather near the Pushkinskaya metro station where Alexander Taraikovsky, a 34-year-old protester died on August 10, during their protest rally in central Minsk AFP via Getty World news in pictures 14 August 2020 AlphaTauri's driver Daniil Kvyat takes part in the second practice session at the Circuit de Catalunya in Montmelo near Barcelona ahead of the Spanish F1 Grand Prix AFP via Getty World news in pictures 13 August 2020 Soldiers of the Brazilian Armed Forces during a disinfection of the Christ The Redeemer statue at the Corcovado mountain prior to the opening of the touristic attraction in Rio AFP via Getty World news in pictures 12 August 2020 Young elephant bulls tussle playfully on World Elephant Day at the Amboseli National Park in Kenya AFP via Getty

On Sunday, the wheelchair bound Mr Bouteflika, currently under medical treatment in Switzerland, promised in a statement to stay in office one more year, draw up constitutional reforms, stand down, and call for early elections.

“I listened and heard the heartfelt cry of protesters and in particular of the thousands of youth who asked me about the future of our country,” said the letter, which was read aloud by his campaign manager.

But few trust him and his entourage at their word. Mr Bouteflika pushed through constitutional changes a decade ago so he could run for a third term, and promised five years ago to change the constitution and hand power to the young. He never did.

Protesters hit the streets again on Monday, with hundreds flooding the centre of Constantine and other cities.

“Historically Algeria’s protests have been about tangible things that the government can respond to - sanitation, water, electricity,” said Geoffrey Porter, a senior fellow and North Africa specialist at West Point and CEO of North Africa Risk Consulting. “These protests are about the system. And it’s difficult for the government to alter the political system in a way that mollifies their concerns.”

Dominated by competing networks of security officials and politicians with roots in the dominant National Liberation Front (FLN) that drove the French out of the country in the 1960s, the nation’s political elite has grown out of touch, and some say corrupt and incompetent.

Algerian students demonstrate at Algiers' school of medicine against ailing President Abdelaziz Bouteflika's bid for a fifth term. (AFP/Getty Images)

Algeria is Africa’s largest nation by land mass, an oil and gas-rich behemoth with one of the most modern militaries in the developing world, and an important if off often quiet security partner to the West, especially in combating extremist groups in North Africa and the Sahel.

Algeria’s international partners have taken notice of the protests. "France is following very closely what is happening in Algeria,” said Didier Guillaume, a French cabinet minister, said in television interview. “It looks like what happened before in other countries, such as Tunisia or Egypt. We need this region to be calm and peaceful.”

But trouble has been brewing in Algeria for years. Despite its resources, the nation of 41 million consistently punches below its weight economically and diplomatically. It has failed to invest its hydrocarbon revenues in industries that could provide jobs for its burgeoning youth, instead doling out patronage cash to maintain loyalty to the state. Unemployment is at nearly 12 percent and youth unemployment at 30 per cent.

Analysts warn that the country’s economic state is about to worsen with mismanagement leading to increased domestic gas consumption and decreased state revenues. Fitch Solutions, a London consulting firm, predicted earlier this year that Algeria’s annual growth rate will plummet from about 2.5 per cent, to 1.25 per cent in the next several years, not nearly enough to employ youth entering the job market.

Resentment towards the ruling elite runs wide and deep, with many among the youth, students, and struggling middle class utterly lacking faith in the country’s leadership. In recent years, Algiers authorities tightened already stringent restrictions on foreign journalists visiting the country, so there are few if any independent assessments of how and whether the protesters are connected to the broader malaise.

The protests also may signal a generational shift. Algerians took to the streets demanding political change in the late 1980s, sparking a brief democratic opening followed by a crackdown by generals against surging Islamists and a calamitous 1990s civil war that continues to haunt the country.

That may be why many Algerians were reluctant to take part in protests that coincided with the Arab Spring uprisings eight years ago. Videos of protests posted to the internet in recent days, show hundreds of Algerians in their early 20s, who never experienced the horrors of the 1990s. The demonstrations of the last few days have a devil-may-care spirit that may spook some older Algerians shaped by a war that left hundreds of thousands dead.

“There won't be a 5th term for you, oh, Bouteflika,” is one slogan protesters have been chanting. “Even if you bring the commandos and add the SWATs.”

So far, Algerians across the political spectrum appear supportive of the protests. On Monday, news presenter Nadia Madassi abruptly resigned amid allegations she was censored. Jurists and doctors have called for strikes. Labour action in the energy sector could prove decisive.

A former Algerian minister, Sidi Ferroukhi, on Monday resigned from parliament and the FLN in a Facebook post seen as a gesture of solidarity with the protesters.

Algerians participate in a protest rally against ailing president’s bid for a fifth term in power, in the northeastern city of Annaba (AFP/Getty)

But many Algerians could become squeamish if the protests turn violent either at the hands of demonstrators or the security forces. Except for neighbouring Tunisia, protest across the Arab world have rarely led to democratic openings - but more misery regardless of outcome.

Historically Algeria’s protests have been about tangible things that the government can respond to - sanitation, water, electricity Geoffrey Porter, a senior fellow and North Africa specialist at West Point and CEO of North Africa Risk Consulting

Still, Algeria has a far messier, pluralistic, and flexible political system than other Arab autocracies. It has a relatively free press and allows limited freedom of expression. Some 20 candidates are said to be running for the presidency, though none of them has much name recognition or will be able to marshall state resources like Mr Bouteflika.

Ali Benflis, a former prime minister turned prominent opposition leader, announced Sunday that he would not run, instead sketching out a roadmap for political change by postponing elections until October and forming a “technocratic, independent government tasked with organising a presidential election as well as running the usual affairs of the state

Algeria’s leadership is less a one-man show than an intertwined network of political, military, and business leaders. Even if Mr Bouteflika were to agree to stand down, it remains unclear who could win the confidence of both protesters and the ruling elite.

“There is a finite pool of qualified candidates that could run Algeria,” said Mr Porter. “And that finite pool is all in some ways connected to the current political system.”
