Citizens forum not to support outsiders in Lok Sabha polls

TIRUCHI: Expressing concern over Tiruchi missing out on several development projects in recent years, including the establishment of AIIMS, the Federation of Consumer and Service Organisations has resolved not to support any ‘outsider’ fielded as candidate for the Tiruchi Lok Sabha constituency in the forthcoming election.

“We will not support any candidate who hails from places other than Tiruchi. The candidate should belong to this place and should not be facing any corruption charges. The candidate should also not give money for votes,” read a resolution adopted at a special meeting of the federation held here on Sunday with its president M.Sekaran in the chair.

The federation, which comprises various service and consumer organisation of the city, expressed its frustration over the city being denied several development projects. The AIIMS was first proposed to be established in Tiruchi as early as 2002 but later the location was changed due to political reasons. Despite a series of protests by the city residents then, no political party had bothered to ensure that the city’s demand was met.

Even the Central University was first proposed to be established in Tiruchi before Tiruvarur was finalised as the location. Pending the transfer of a small piece of Defence land, the multi-level bridge coming up near the Railway Junction could not be completed. The expansion of the airport was also awaiting completion of the land acquisition process.

The city stretches of the four-laned highways were not fully safe for road users, the Federation alleged pointing to the absence of service lanes along the Thanjavur Highway, links over minor bridges on Tiruchi-Chennai bypass road and an underpass at G.Corner.

The Federation has no other option but to support a candidate who would support and strive to fulfil long pending demands of the city such as the establishment of a super speciality hospital on a par with AIIMS, operation of Pallavan Express from Tiruchi, expansion of the airport runway, addressing safety concerns on Thanjavur Highway, transfer of Defence land for the proposed integrated bus stand, ensuring the well being of the small scale industries dependent on the Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited and other issues.

The candidate should also strive to work for upholding the State rights on issues such as the Cauvery dispute, abolition of NEET and ensure that no project which would affect the people or environment of the state was implemented in Tamil Nadu, the federation said.

The federation also appealed to the Election Commission of India to bring in reforms in the election system and favoured a proportional representation system. Steps should be taken to rein in the expenditure of candidates. The election should be declared void if the 30% of the voters in a constituency opted for NOTA, it demanded.

ends
