Aonglenden by-election to coincide with Lok Sabha polls

Dimapur, March 4 (EMN): The by-election to 26th Aonglenden assembly constituency, though required by law to be conducted within six months from the day it was vacated, will not be held within the stipulated period.

The Representation of People Act 1951 requires casual vacancies to be filled through by-elections within six months from the date of occurrence of vacancies. In politics, a casual vacancy (casual in the sense of ‘by chance’) is a situation in which a seat becomes vacant during an assembly’s term. Casual vacancies may arise through the death, resignation or disqualification of the sitting member, or for other reasons.

By this calculation, the Aonglenden by-election ought to have been completed by March 23 after the seat was declared vacant on Sep. 23 last year following the death of the then legislator Imtikumzuk.

However, in an official notification, the Election Commission of India (ECI) has informed that the by-election will not be held before March 23.

“…the term of the 16th Lok Sabha is up to June 3, 2019. The preparatory exercise to conduct general elections to Lok Sabha is in full swing and the election related officials at district and state level are fully engaged in thick of activities in preparation for the Lok Sabha general election. The same officers would be involved in holding of by-elections. Hence holding of by-elections at this stage would affect the preparatory activities for the Lok Sabha election.

“Further, the commission also considers that rather than conducting these by-elections at this stage, it would be appropriate to hold the by-elections along with Lok Sabha election so that polling and counting are held as per common schedule and results are declared together,” the ECI reasoned.

It went on to say that the commission has, as required by the Representation of People Act 1951, consulted with the central government; and the latter has concurred with the ECI’s view.

“Now therefore, after taking all the relevant factors into account, the commission herby certifies that the process of by-elections to the legislative assemblies to fill up the said casual vacancies cannot be held within the period contemplated in section 151A of the Representation of People Act 1951,” it stated.

According to the commission, by-elections will be held in 26 assembly constituencies including Aonglenden.
