Tamil Nadu farmers protest against Thatchur-Chittoor expressway

After the controversial Chennai - Salem expressway, Tamil Nadu farmers are now protesting against the six lane road under the Bharathmala Prayojana from Thatchur to Chitoor that might cut through Tholaveedu village.

Officials surveyed the land in February that has caused much of a stir among the farmers.

A farmer, Purshotaman, who will lose two acres of his paddy field if this road comes up, said,"When we went to the Thaluk office to find out why they were laying the stones, the Thaluk office asked to go to the DRO office. The DRO office said they have mapped the place and we couldn't do anything. They called us to the collector office and they didn't even listen to us. This land is all we have. How can they do this?"



Paddy, cucumber, water melon, musk melon and flowers are grown here. About 26 villages in the area depend on agriculture for their livelihood and have markers in their field which demarcates the land this expressway will cut through.



Another farmer, Balaraman, has 3 acres of land in Tholaveedu village and will lose everything he has if this expressway comes up. He has five children and they all rely on agriculture. They have paddy fields from which they harvest thrice a year. Even compensation does not mean much to them. ''What will we do with money? We have no other way to survive. We have good water and fertile land. People use this water. There won't be place to graze cattle. We can't survive if we let go of this," said Balaraman.



"If the 6 lane road is put, the drinking water will be affected. Chennai people will not have drinking water," says A Sashikumar, a farmer who has been spreading awareness and grouping up farmers to protest against this expressway. He will also lose 2.5 acres of land of his own.



The project once implemented will provide better connectivity between Bengaluru and Andhra Pradesh and easy access from Bengaluru and Chennai to the Kamaraja and Kattupalli ports. The entire project is to cover a distance of 12.550 kms and the estimated cost of the project is about Rs. 3197.56 crores. 885.5 heactares of land is to be acquired for the project our of which 360.5 hectares is in Tamil Nadu and 525 hectares in the neighbouring state of Andhra Pradesh.



The new expressway will cut through 137 villages, 3 rivers, Pulikundram forest, 27 ponds and check dams and minor streams.

On the issue, the AIADMK government said that the state has not started any work on this project and that it is under the NHAI. The DMK, who hit out at the Chennai Salem expressway, has hit out at this as well.

"Our party has maintained that development should not be against the people. If there are existing roads like the Chennai Salem, why build new roads. Who will be benefitted and what are the goods moving? If it is a place with no roads, we will support it. But what is the use of development if it isn't benefiting the people", said A. Saravanan of the DMK.

Also Read | Deals and doles hurt farmers, schemes were delayed to name them on family members: PM Modi

Also Watch | Farmers crisis worsened in past five years: Yogendra Yadav




