Taking feminism to the streets

Bypassing Women’s Day celebrations, the Dhagam Foundation is out to remind Chennaiites that women’s issues can’t be confined to a single day

If you happen to be at Besant Nagar beach this Sunday, you might chance upon a group of men and women in their twenties, asking questions about gender equality. And if you find their socio-political discourse too much to take on a Sunday morning, well, there’s nothing you can do about it: the members of Dhagam Foundation have been actively vocal about women’s issues for two years now, and aren’t easily fazed by naysayers.

Says Govind Murugan, convenor of the foundation that was originally formed in Coimbatore: “We celebrate Women’s Day on March 8, but do we look at their needs and wants on other days of the year? That is the question we will be posing to our audience at the end of our play.”

The play, titled What SHE wants, has been scripted by Dhagam Foundation member Saivarsha Seetharaman. A simple 20-minute production, it looks at the problems faced by women in different stages of life. As Govind puts it, “Women face challenges right from their birth. So this play looks at four different issues: one faced by a girl child, another by a young woman, a third by a newlywed woman and a fourth by a woman in her fifties.”

All four narratives lead to the same question asked in the title, to which Dhagam Foundation has a ready answer as well. Freedom to take her own decisions is what is key to most of the causes women are fighting for today: be it in education, economic freedom, health or anything else.

Women’s health and sanitation is a cause that the foundation has taken up a number of times, from protesting against 12% tax on sanitary napkins to auditing the condition of public restrooms across 15 zones in Chennai city. “We also hold awareness programmes in schools and corporate offices about different women’s issues, and make it a point to address men as well,” says Govind. He emphasises on how the team has about 50% men and 50% women, and both play an equal role in these sessions, even before audience members of the opposite gender. “After all, the idea is to break these gender barriers,” he signs off.

What SHE wants - A Street Talk on Women Problems will be held on March 10, at 7.30 am at Elliot’s Beach, Besant Nagar. No tickets are required, and everyone is welcome to be a part of the audience.
