Indian Opposition leaning on inept, corrupt Western media to argue Pakistan’s case

Harbir Singh is a writer, thinker, political and social activist, engineer, banker and farmer. He studied and worked in the United States for over a decade and a half before returning to his roots in India. When he is not indulging in his pleasures of reading and debating, he tends to his farm. Someday he hopes to write a book that explores the Indian soul. LESS ... MORE

Kapil Sibal, the Indian National Congress Rajya Sabha member from Uttar Pradesh was recently seen on television saying that the international press had questioned the IAF strikes, and then asking were the International press pro-Pakistani too? Pakistanis have been gleefully circulating a New York Times article with a headline that said that India had “lost” a dogfight with the PAF. Isn’t the NYT’s pro-Pakistan, or at any rate, anti-India bias obvious, when it goes along with Pakistan denying the loss of its F-16?

The NYT article was about India’s military being outdated, but then so is Pakistan’s, most of the PAF fleet being outdated Mirage III, Mirage V, and Chengdu J7 (Chinese copy of the MiG-21). And India doesn’t use Islamic Terrorism as an instrument of state policy. So why did the New York Times spin the story to humiliate India and give Pakistanis such prestigious propaganda material with which to cover up the punishment it got for sponsoring Islamic Terrorism? Not pro-Pakistan?

Mr. Sibal and all the others who are blowing the International Media horn to run down the Government of India’s bombing the Pakistan Army’s terror training camps have conveniently forgotten that the media outlets they’re hooting about are in face corrupt and incompetent in the extreme, about the USA itself, and have no standing on India, Pakistan or the IAF strikes.

Let us remember that a mere 15 days before the 2016 US presidential election, The Washington Post boldly asserted that Donald Trump’s chances of winning had gone to near Zero. The “analyst” who made this genius prediction for the Post was recently seen making the same prediction on CNN’s website, “Trump would lose if the election were held today”. The New York Times had put the probability of Hillary Clinton winning the White House at a spectacular 85%! These news media outlets that didn’t know their own country are being offered up as the gold-plated adjudicators of what happened at Balakot by the Indian opposition and by the Pakistani sponsors of Islamic terrorism? How does this make sense?

After Donald Trump won, these outlets did no soul searching, didn’t stop to ask where they went wrong, didn’t bother to find out what it was that they didn’t know or understand. They just wrote their own failure off to that election being “unpredictable.” But it wasn’t unpredictable. World changing events aren’t random. They don’t arbitrarily pop out of nothingness. They are always like a dam breaking. The conditions for the outrageous event are pre-existent and developing towards the final breach.

Brexit was foreseeable as early as 1999 to those who understood that Blairism would cause a revolt of Britishness. Those who were watching Osama, the Taliban, the USS Cole bombings, the organized growth of fundamentalist Islamist organizations weren’t surprised by the 9/11 attacks. The 2008 financial crash was seen to be inevitable as early as 2005 by those who saw that the housing bubble was built on irresponsible lending that could not continue indefinitely.

There are always signs. To this author, it had become clear as early as February 2016, just before the South Carolina primary, that Donald Trump had a winning game, and that he would secure the Republican Nomination and the White House. How could it possibly be that the Washington Post and the New York Times never had a clue?

They really thought that the leaked videos of locker room trash talk would or should derail Donald Trump’s campaign! Talk about cluelessness. If we’re talking about the political cost of scandal, 1984 didn’t cost the Congress anything at all, did it? The blame got distributed to all Hindus, and then only to the Hindu Right and Congress got away scot-free. What does this tell us about stains and how the public responds to them?

The “grab them by the p**” video scandal wasn’t going to stop Donald Trump for one very simple reason: Those who wanted him to be President wanted it because he just cut the politically correct, committee tested, media-approved, political twaddle, and told it like it was, and they weren’t going to let crude locker room talk distract them from giving the man the support he needed.

The rules had changed. Scandal peddling by the corrupt, establishment-controlled media wasn’t going to work. Trump first tore the Republican establishment to shreds and Republican voters approved. He’d changed the narrative. It was obvious that what he was doing to the Republicans, he’d do to the Democrat candidate. And he’d win because he was telling truths that the traditionally Democrat voters of the American industrial heartland knew, which the Democrats, starting with Bill Clinton, had discarded in their sell out of the working class to corporate interests.

Donald Trump was on the path to victory right from the start. Cheap scandals about playing accounting tricks with his taxes or having a mistress or talking trash, weren’t going to derail this train. And they didn’t. The New York Times, the Washington Post and CNN didn’t have a clue.

Remember that the Washington Post is the newspaper of Washington, home to the US government. The New York Times and CNN are the pre-eminent print and electronic news outlets of the United States of America, respectively. These are the very people who should have had at least some vague hint about the vibrations in the country, enough comprehension of the state of the American polity, and enough sense of responsibility, to have moderated their boasts that put Hillary Clinton’s chances of winning at 85-100%.

The reality is that they either didn’t know and so are really, totally incompetent, or they were complicit with the entrenched political establishment in writing a political script for America and the world that included deliberately and willfully silencing the narrative that was driving Americans to reject the establishment and vote for Donald Trump. In which case these outlets are thoroughly corrupt. It was almost certainly actually both ineptitude and corruption.

It is these corrupt, inept, dishonest mouthpieces of the pro-Islamist Global Left, who don’t know their own country and can’t be relied upon to report honestly about their own country, that the Indian opposition and Pakistan are upholding as the adjudicators of what happened in Balakot.

Well, Mr. Sibal and Pakistan can trumpet the “international press” all they want. The actions of the Government of India, the will of the voters of India, and the fortunes of Pakistan will not be decided by any nonsense that the New York Times, the Washington Post, CNN or The Guardian peddle in Pakistan’s favour.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
