BL Changemaker Awards to be held in Delhi on March 15

It is that time of the year again, to celebrate people who, with their ideas, have made our society a better place. The second edition of the BusinessLine Changemaker Awards will be held in New Delhi on March 15. Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh will be the guest of honour.

Singh is a changemaker in his own right, having rescued the economy from a major crisis in 1991 and set it up for a rapid phase of growth that catapulted it to become the fastest growing in the world. He will give away the awards across six categories: Changemaker — Social Transformatiom, Changemaker — Digital Transformation, Changemaker — Financial Transformation, Young Changemaker, Iconic Changemaker, and Changemaker of the Year.

The awards, instituted last year by BusinessLine to commemorate its 25th year of publication, saw an overwhelming response from individuals, corporates, and government and social organisations.

The nomination window for the 2019 edition opened on September 15, 2018, and over 560 nominations were received. These were subjected to layers of scrutiny with the help of knowledge partners Ashoka: Innovators for the Public and Deloitte India.

The short-list that emerged was evaluated against various criteria and narrowed to five nominees in each category.

This year, we strengthened the award process by introducing another layer of due diligence, bringing in a validation partner, Niiti Consulting, which independently validated each of the nominees.

Independent jury

The validated list of nominees was then sent to an independent jury comprising eminent personalities for the final selection.

The jury members were S Ramadorai, former MD & CEO, TCS (jury chair); Sanjeev Sanyal, Principal Economic Advisor, Ministry of Finance; William Bissell, MD, Fabindia; Pallavi S Shroff, Managing Partner, Shardul Amarchand Mangaldas; Debjani Ghosh, President, Nasscom; Gopal Srinivasan, CMD, TVS Capital Funds; and Roshni Nadar, ED & CEO, HCL Corporation. The jury met on December 17 in New Delhi to select the winners.

Apart from felicitating the winners, the event on March 15 will feature a panel discussion and an inspirational talk by a Changemaker.

BusinessLine Changemaker Awards 2019 is powered by Volkswagen and has Tata Sons as Associate Sponsor, Dell India as Digital Transformation Partner, Qualcomm as Innovation Partner and Affilias as Dot Brand Partner apart from Casa Grand and Oriental Bank of Commerce as Supporting Partners.
