In brief

Punjab CM condoles Neelam Mansingh’s husband’s death

Chandigarh: Punjab Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh on Tuesday expressed profound grief over the demise of Pushwinder Chowdhary (73), husband of noted theatre director Neelam Mansingh Chowdhary. Pushwinder, who passed away here at his residence on Monday evening, is survived by his wife and two sons, Angad and Kabir.

Punjab Guv to inaugurate CII North India Business conference

Chandigarh: The Confederation of Indian Industry will organise the North India Business Conference on March 7 at its northern region headquarters here. VP Singh Badnore, Punjab Governor and Chandigarh Administrator would inaugurate the conference. It is expected to host more than 400 participants representing Government, policy makers, and experts from different industry sectors.

Online transfer policy for assistant district attorneys

Chandigarh: Haryana Government has, for the first time, launched an online transfer drive of Assistant District Attorneys pertaining to Prosecution Department, Haryana. At present, 405 Assistant District Attorneys are working in the department and in first transfer drive, 158 Assistant District Attorneys have been compulsorily transferred who have completed their five years’ tenure at one place of posting.

CGRF to listen to consumers’ grievances

Panchkula: The chairman, Consumer Grievances Redressal Forum (CGRF) of Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam, along with the members of the Forum, would take the proceedings of the forum in the office of XEN ‘OP’ Division Panchkula # 517-18, Power Colony Industrial area phase-II Panchkula to redress the grievances to hear the complaint of the consumers and to entertain new complaints from 12:30 am to 2:00 pm on March 8. The CGRF shall take all grievances/complaints of consumers like billing problem, voltage complaints, problems in metering, disconnection and reconnection of power supply, interruptions, failure of power supply, efficiency, safety, reliability, non compliance of Haryana Electricity Regulatory Commission orders etc.

SBI holds ‘Numero YONO’ in Pkl

Chandigarh: The team of Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Mohali emerged victorious at the regional rounds of India’s biggest inter-college quiz contest-‘Numero YONO’ held in Panchkula on March 2. IISER team bagged annual scholarship of Rs 2.16 lakh that witnessed participation of 198 teams from various colleges from the States of Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh besides Chandigarh. The first runner up of this competition was NIT Kurukshatra that won annual scholarship of Rs 1.44 lakh whereas the second runner up, another team of IISER Mohali again received a onetime amount of Rs 12,000. ‘Numero YONO’-presented by State Bank of India, is conducted across all 17 cities where SBI Local Head Offices are located.

Johnson & Johnson’s Talc production started again

Chandigarh: The production of Johnson’s Baby Powder in its Baddi plant has begun after Government sanctioned testing reaffirmed that the product does not contain asbestos and is safe. In recent months, regulatory authorities from Singapore, Thailand, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Kuwait, and Egypt have also reaffirmed the purity of Johnson & Johnson’s talc.

IIT Ropar students won smart India Hackathon (SIH) 2019

Ropar: IIT Ropar Computer Science and Engineering students won the first prize at the Smart India Hackathon 2019 software edition Grand Finale held on March 2 and 3 at Nagpur for the problem statement “Media Plan” under Ministry of Railways.
