AAP leaders protest outside Ashu’s house seeking his removal, Mayor pleads

LUDHIANA: Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) leaders on Tuesday staged a protest near the official residence of Punjab Civil Supplies minister Bharat Bhushan Ashu, seeking his removal from the state cabinet for his alleged involvement in the multi-crore ‘CLU’ scam. The protesting leaders later courted arrest and were taken to the police station.The leaders demanded that the chief minister should ask Ashu to resign, who should be booked for promoting corruption and threatening officials.Senior AAP leader and Leader of Opposition (LOP), Harpal Singh Cheema while addressing the gathering alleged that the state government was entrenched in corruption with its ministers indulging in open loot and thus making a mockery of the law. Climing that people in Punjab and his party would not accept such malpractices, he demanded that the the chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh should immediately sack the tainted minister to re-instill a semblance of peoples’ faith in the established democratic system. He also alleged that the Captain government had left its predecessor SAD-BJP government far behind in the corruption.Other prominent leaders who joined the protest included Deputy LOP Sarvjit Kaur Manuke, MLA and chief of the party’s core committee, principal Budhram, Kultar Singh Sandhawan (MLA), Manjit Singh Bilaspur (MLA), senior leader Suresh Goel, Malwa Zone-1 chief Gurdit Singh Sekhon, district president Daljit Singh Bhola, senior leader Ahbaab Garewal, and Aman Mohi, besides others.Deputy leader of opposition Sarvjit Manuke said that the local MLA and the minister Ashu had been hogging the limelight for all the wrong reasons and was deeply involved in corruption. “His role in the scam became even clearer from the audio clips showing the minister threatening the investigating officers that had gone viral on the social media platforms.”She added that the issue was raised in Vidhan Sabha during the recently concluded Budget session, and the members even staged a walk out but the government has failed to take any concrete action. “This points towards the government’s ‘non-serious stance’ on the issue that had rocked the House for days,” she said.Kotkapura MLA Kultar Singh Sandhwan added that despite assurance by CM Captain Amarinder Singh on the floor of the House, ‘nothing concrete’ had come out of the narrative, as “he neither sacked Ashu nor ordered an inquiry into the entire scam.”Others who were present during the protest included Rajinder Pal Kaur Sheena, Master Hari Singh, Gurjit Singh Gill, Dr Tej Pal Gill, Ravinder Pal Singh Palli, Punit Sahni, Sahil Goel, Sonu Katyal, Harnek Sekhon, and Nanak Singh. As AAP leaders were protesting against the cabinet minister, mayor Balkar Sandhu was seen convincing the leaders, including deputy LOP Manuke to call off the protest.Meanwhile Ashu was in Chandigarh on Tuesday said the protesters have been politicising the issue without any proof. "If CM has said anything in assembly it has some meaning. The opposition parties are raising hue and cry over nothing. If they have some substantial proof they should make it public instead of doing such protests. Probe will make everything clear,” he said.
