Pakistan tells India it has power to ‘DESTROY’ submarines if they head into waters

Pakistani youths stage anti-Indian protests in Karachi

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Pakistan said its navy "detected and blocked" an Indian submarine as it approached its territory in the Arabian Sea on Monday night. Officials released aerial video footage which they said showed the submarine breaking the surface of water with a timestamp of 8.35pm on Monday. Pakistan's Navy Director General of Public Relations said the submarine could have been "easily engaged and destroyed had it not been Pakistan's policy to exercise restraint in the face of Indian aggression and to give peace a chance to prevail”.

The statement described the incident as the latest in a "series of proactive actions against Pakistan”. But India responded by dismissing the claims as a false narrative being put out by Islamabad. Indian government sources disputed the video's authenticity and said their submarine would not have surfaced had it been trying to enter Pakistani waters. The sources said it was part of a wider propaganda campaign by Pakistan to create hysteria.

Pakistan released a video which it said showed an Indian submarine

The latest clash comes as tensions between New Delhi and Islamabad remain high following the Indian Air Force airstrike in Pakistan that took out Jaish-e-Mohammad's largest terrorist camp. Tensions boiled over when Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police in a suicide bombing in the disputed Kashmir region last month. The bomb attack led to the most serious conflict in years between the nuclear-armed neighbours with cross-border air strikes and a brief dogfight over the skies of Kashmir. Pakistan returned a downed Indian pilot on Friday as a “gesture of peace”.

Pro-Pakistan rallies have also taken place in the city of Peshwar
