Jeweller shot at in own shop

Incident took place in Rahatani; gang of five made away with gold, silver weighing over 3kg



A 25-year-old gold merchant was shot at twice inside his jewellery shop in Rahatani at Pimpri-Chinchwad on Wednesday by a five-member dacoit gang that made away with gold worth Rs 62 lakh.



The victim, originally from Rajasthan, has been identified as Divyank Pradip Mehta, of Arya Vendant Society, Link Road, Rahatani.



The victim, who opened the store, Punekar Jewellers, six months ago, was alone in the shop at 12.30 pm when three armed men turned up. Two of them waited outside, with one watching from a distance and the other distracting the nearby shopkeepers. They downed the shutter and siphoned off valuables from the store. The gang also looted gold and silver weighing well over 3kg. When Mehta tried to resist the goons, he was shot twice on his left thigh.



Mehta was rushed to Lotus Hospital, Pimple Saudagar. His condition turned stable after a surgery and he gave his statement to police officials attached to Wakad police station.



As per the deputy commissioner of police (DCP) (Zone II), Vinayak Dhakne, of Pimpri-Chinchwad, four of the suspects could be identified from the closed-circuit television (CCTV) footage from cameras planted at the shop and in the vicinity.



According to an eyewitness, the accused came via Kokane Chowk and stopped ahead of Royal Park society nearby. One of them stood there, taking the cover of a pickup van and observed. Three suspects went inside.



“Strangely enough, we heard no shooting sound. We were kept engaged by one of the suspects who was wearing a helmet and was seen to down the shutter. He asked me for a hammer and a bulb. I did give him a suspicious look, but he kept me busy all along, asking for random things such as wire and pipes,” said Himmat Choudhary, who runs a hardware shop nearby.



The gang left after opening the shutter, after which the nearby shopkeepers heard the cries of a few helper women who work in the area. “A few helper women screamed that Mehta was shot. We rushed in to see him in a pool of blood. We called for ambulance and police and we got him admitted,” said Choudhary.



DCP Dhakne informed that two crime units and the dacoity cell of Pimpri-Chinchwad police are tracking the suspects.



“The accused were aged between 25 and 30. The suspects escaped to the road that leads to Kalewadi. Forensic experts have gathered evidence,” he added.


