Punjab Agricultural University students’ hunger strike enters second day

LUDHIANA: Punjab Agricultural University (PAU) students entered the second day of their hunger strike on Wednesday, with five students going on fast as per their plan. MLA Simranjeet Singh Bains also approached the students, and had a word with the vice-chancellor on the phone.The five students who went on a fast were Gurinder Singh, Malkit Singh (both from M.Sc), Nikhil Arya, Subhpreet Singh, and Sukhwinder Singh (all from College of Agriculture). Gurinder said they would remain on strike as long as the authorities do not meet their demands, and they had come up with the plan of five students each day, as they did not want the studies of students to be affected.Nikhil questioned why the university did not allow students to bring vehicles inside the campus. “We students don’t see any problem in it, and if there is any problem, the authorities must talk to us so that we can find a solution. We will continue with our strike till our demands are met,” he added.PAU estate officer Vishavjeet Singh Hans said: “We have made several agreements with students like cab allowance, and allowing parents to come inside the campus. In addition, we have arranged buses, and two electric autorickshaws to move in the campus during busy hours, so that the commute can be smoother for students. We had arranged a meeting today at 11am, but no student came to have discussion with the panel.” He added that several other universities do not allow four-wheelers inside the campus, and so we have allotted parking space for the vehicles of students near the main gate.Malkit said: “We did not attend the meeting today with the authorities, as they have not suggested any permanent solution to their problem. In addition, there has been no particular written order by the authorities on allowing cabs and cars of parents inside the campus.”Sukhwinder said: “Our only demand now is that we should be allowed to take our vehicles to our departments, as during rainy days, we have to face a lot of problem. In addition, when we bring some material from our homes, we have to load them on our shoulders from the parking to the hostels. We don’t know why they are not allowing cars inside the campus.”
