FM underlines need for direct contact b

FM underlines need for direct contact b/w Pakistan and India to reduce tensions

Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi has said that Pakistan wants to de-escalate tension with India and desires to improve relation in the current situation.

He was talking to Pakistan's High Commissioner to India Sohail Mahmood in Islamabad on Thursday.

He said direct contacts are necessary to reduce the tension prevailing between the two countries. The Foreign Minister said both countries will hold discussions on 14th March in New Delhi.

They also exchanged views on Pak-India relations. Pakistan's High Commissioner will leave for New Delhi after the meeting.

Meanwhile, talking to his Luxemburg counterpart Jean Asselborn, in Islamabad today, Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said Pakistan has demonstrated restraint despite Indian intrusions.

He apprised the visiting dignitary about the prevailing situation in the region and India's ongoing atrocities in Occupied Kashmir against innocent Kashmiris struggling for their right to self-determination. .

Luxemburg Foreign Minister lauded Pakistan's role in talks between the United States and Afghan Taliban.

The two sides agreed to enhance present bilateral relations between the two countries in economic, trade and other sectors.

Addressing a joint news conference following delegation level talks with his Luxemburg counterpart Jean Asselborn in Islamabad on Thursday, Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said Pakistan desires to further promote its bilateral relations with European Union in diverse fields.

He said both sides held useful talks to promote relations in trade, economy, health, infrastructure, gem, jewelry and other sectors.

Speaking on the occasion, Luxemburg Foreign Minister said we highly welcome the Pakistani peace gesture of releasing Indian pilot to reduce the tension.

Addressing a reception hosted in honour of foreign ambassadors posted in Islamabad, Shah Mahmood Qureshi said the foreign envoys can play a great role in promoting bilateral relations.

He also urged the Pakistani envoys abroad to highlight Pakistan's foreign policy objectives in an effective manner.

The Foreign Minister said Parliamentary friendship Group can play a very useful role in boosting relations with the world countries.

In his address, Speaker National Assembly Asad Qaiser said we want to promote partnership with sister parliaments across the world.

Referring to the recent tension between Pakistan and India, he said Prime Minister Imran Khan has offered a hand of friendship to India and his gesture of opening Kartarpur Corridor reflects his vision for peace and stability in the region.

He, however, regretted that this offer was not reciprocated by India.

Asad Qaiser said gross human rights violations in Occupied Kashmir are not hidden from anybody. He said that India wants Kashmir but without Kashmiris.

The Speaker reaffirmed Pakistan's commitment to the just and legitimate struggle of Kashmiri people for their right to self-determination.

He said we want to resolve all disputes with India through dialogue.
