Mehbooba leads protest against ban on Jamaat

Mehbooba leads protest against ban on Jamaat

Threatens to intensity protests if ban not revoked, arrested persons not released

ANANTNAG, Mar 6: Former chief minister and PDP president , Mehbooba Mufti, today led a protest by her party in Anantnag against ban on Jamat-e-Islami and crackdown on its cadres.

She said her party will intensify the protests if the ban is not revoked and those arrested particularly the elderly persons not released.

Large number of PDP leaders and workers took part in the protest.

Talking to reporters during the protest Mehbooba said that after banning the Jamaat, its leaders and activists, including the elderly persons of the age of 80 years and 70 years were jailed. "What is their fault. They are innocent. If the government has any proof against them, it must present those," she said and demanded their early release.

"The BJP government in the center has imposed ban on Jamat-e-Islami which is a religious group. The elderly leaders of Jamat and imams are being arrested. The offices of Jamat are being sealed. Even leaders of Jamiat-e-Ahlihadees are being arrested. This is an interference in our religious affairs which is not acceptable to us," Mehbooba told reporters.

She said if the central government does not revoke ban on Jamat-e-Islami her party will intensify the protests across the valley .

"We will organise protest rallies at district and constituency level if the ban is not done away with," Mehbooba said.

Central government last week banned the largest socio-religious group Jamat-e- Islami and arrested hundreds of its top leaders and activists across the valley. The authorities also sealed several offices of Jamat in many districts.

The ban evoked sharp criticism from both the separatist groups and mainstream parties in Kashmir.

Mehbooba asked the central government to bring a charge sheet as to on what grounds the religious leaders were arrested.

"Attempts are also being made to fiddle with 35A which is unacceptable to us," Mehbooba told reporters.

She said that while in coalition with BJP, her party had not allowed BJP to run its communal agenda. "But after the fall of the government, this party is like a mad elephant and is trying to destroy everything," she said.

Asked about upcoming elections, Mehbooba said that elections are no priority for her party at this point of time.

"I think elections are no priority for me. Elections will come and go. Whether people vote or not that is a different thing. Arrest spree is on, there is a state of fear everywhere and in such a situation we should think about how to bring the people out of this misery," Mehbooba said.

Asked about the two nation theory, Mehbooba said, J&K being a secular state had acceeded to Gandhi's secular India to keep the communal bond going.

In reply to a question about his coalition with BJP earlier, Mehbooba said her party had tied up with BJP to rein in the party.

"In 2016, I refused to crackdown on Jamat-e-Islami and I think that also became a reason for break up. I withdrew FIRs against thousands of youth. We made BJP to work as per our will," former chief minister said.

Later Mehbooba after addressing hundreds of party workers from four districts of southern regions marched out of Dak Banglow and tried to lead the protest rally against ban on Jamat.

Carrying banners and placards reading slogans in favour of Jamat, the PDP workers led by Mehbooba held a sit in on the main road after being disallowed to march towards Lal Chowk. The sit-in protest by PDP workers halted the traffic movement for some time.

The protesting PDP workers later dispersed peacefully.
