Stocks gain weight on Day 4 on rupee clout

NEW DELHI: Stocks changed their mind many a time today, but in the end both benchmarks Sensex and Nifty rose for Day 4 as they took comfort from a rising rupee However, the upside was capped as global markets just didn't play the ball.There was no change in script by FIIs as they pushed ahead with more buying.The broader NSE Nifty ended flat at 11,058, up 5 points, or 0.05 per cent, while the BSE Sensex ended 89 points, or 0.24 per cent, higher at 36,725.Among Sensex issues, 13 advanced while 17 declined. L&T was in the lead with a jump of 2.76 per cent. Axis Bank, M&M, ITC and SBI were other index gainers, rising over 1 per cent each.Coal India was the worst performing stock, down 3.09 per cent.Weakness engulfed the broader market as BSE Midcap slipped 0.34 per cent and Smallcap 0.11 per cent.Sectorally, 13 of 19 indices lost. Capital goods was scored best, rising 1.51 per cent. Industrials and FCMG put up a good show too.The advance-decline ratio stood at 1:1 on the BSE.Rupee shines, again!Extending its winning streak to the third consecutive day, the domestic currency rallied against the US dollar amid firm foreign inflows. The rupee rose 32 paise against the greenback to gain past the 70-mark.Buying in index heavyweightsSelect buying in index heavyweights boosted the domestic indices higher. L&T, HDFC Bank, ITC, Axis Bank and RIL were among the top contributors.Rural push ahead of electionsThe Cabinet on Thursday made various decisions, including measures to promote the hydro-power sector and provide additional funds for sugar mills. The development led to gains in FMCG stocks as it was viewed as a sign for bolstering rural demand.Umesh Mehta, Head of Research, Samco SecuritiesPost a three-day rally, Dalal Street witnessed some consolidation, which kept Nifty50 rangebound. Broader market indices showed signs of weakness as they traded mildly in the red, but overall market depth tilted in favour of the bulls.Jayant Manglik, President - Retail Distribution, Religare BrokingWith no major event on the local front, we believe global cues will continue to dictate market trend. Though the recent rise in benchmark combined with recovery in broader markets has eased some pressure, we're not completely out of the woods yet. Banking looks strongest among the sectoral indices while indications are mixed from others. We suggest keeping focus on stock selection and maintaining balanced portfolio.
