Only 67 of Jet Airways's 119 planes currently operational

NEW DELHI: Less than 70 aircraft out of Jet Airways ' fleet of 119 are currently operational . The airline on Tuesday evening informed BSE it had grounded three more planes "due to non-payment to lessors". Earlier in the day, a senior DGCA official had said only 70 planes out of Jet’s fleet of 119 were operational. The evening announcement brought that number down to 67 out of 119 or just over half of the fleet is now flying and 52 grounded.While 28 planes have been grounded since last month due to non payment to lessors, the other 24 can't fly due to a severe cash crunch that is not allowing getting spares and engines."We have asked Jet to ensure it makes alternate arrangements for passengers booked on cancelled flights and that they do not suffer. Also whatever planes Jet is flying must be completely airworthy," a senior Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) official said on Thursday.Jet grounded 19 planes last month and nine so far in March due to non payment to lessors. Aviation officials expect a few more planes to be grounded for this reason. The remaining planes are grounded due to non payment to aircraft and engine maintenance companies.Aviation officials say the saving grace which gives them hope is that barring a handful of planes, lessors who have asked Jet to ground them due to non payment have still kept the planes at Indian airports. "Barring a few, most of the lessors are still watching if Jet gets money, can pay them and start flying the planes again. Once and if the planes leave India, then laying hands on them again will be tough," said an official.Sources say they are watching if Jet's downward slide, in terms of groundings of aircraft, is checked in the next few days. "If more planes are grounded beyond a couple that has been indicated to us, then we will need to take other steps. We are very closely watching the situation," said a source.Jet needs infusion of funds at the earliest to stay afloat as all stakeholders are running out of patience now.Jet Airways' pilots , who are awaiting a word in their last three months' pay, are planning to resume protests soon. They had deferred their black band protest due to the India-Pakistan border tension. "There is a strong feeling that protests must start when Pakistan opens its airspace and some normalcy returns in India-Pakistan relations. We had called off the same in national interest," said a source.The drastic reduction in Jet's fleet has badly hurt the entire aviation supply chain. Airport operators, when asked if Jet has run up dues beyond its bank guarantee, say: "With so many planes grounded, a large number of flights are cancelled. So their payment amount has anyway dropped."Some flight catering firms are also affected badly. "First Jet started selling meals on board in economy class of domestic flights. So the number of food trays ordered dropped. Now so many flights have been cancelled" rued a flight caterer.Jet chairman Naresh Goyal had recently told employees the situation will "gently ease" by March 18. "What else can we do but wait and watch. But the big people must realise mere talk can go only so far and beyond that one needs to show the money," said an employee.
