DDM IT Quiz 2019 Bhubaneswar Edition on March 17

Bhubaneswar: Mindfire Solutions, a leading IT services, consulting and business solutions firm, announces about the Bhubaneswar edition of DDM IT Quiz 2019, which will be held on Sunday, March 17, at Hotel Pal Heights, Bhubaneswar. Students of Bachelor and Master Degree courses of Technical and Management institutes can participate in the competition. Online registration for this already started with nil entry fees. Each team comprises of two members from same college have to go through a preliminary round. Only best 8 teams will get chances to make it to final round.

DDM IT Quiz has planned for Bhubaneswar and Kharagpur of eastern India. This Quiz competition has hosted every year in memory of a Mindfire Solutions employee late Debasish Das, who lost his life in a fatal road accident. To commemorate his thoughts and perceptions, Mindfire Solutions organises a national-level IT quiz annually every year, since 2011. The quiz has grown substantially from a level to where it stands now. For the very first time, DDM IT Quiz has held outside Bhubaneswar, at IIT Kharagpur in January, 2017.

Speaking about the event, Mr Chinmoy Panda, CEO, Mindfire Solution said that “ I am very happy to see DDMIT Quiz fly higher in India’s quizzing circle. It is very satisfying that DDMIT has been consistently growing, to fulfill the dreams of our late colleague Debasish Das. Debasish had dream of organizing an annual mega quiz contest, and DDMIT is our tribute to his audacious dream. In this 9th year, I welcome all students to have good time, test their mettle and win accolades for themselves and their colleges.”

The Quiz is open to all India Master and Bachelor degree students studying in any Management or Technical Institutes. Each team comprising of two members from same college will have to go through a preliminary round before the best 8 team will make it to the final round. Noted International Quiz Master Lloyd Saldanha will host the quiz programme.

The champion team will get cash prize of Rs 1, 00,000 and the first runners-up Rs 50,000 and Second runners up Rs 30,000 cash prize and with this every winning team will get a specially designed trophy and medals as well. The audiences in the finals can get an array of prizes such as Power Bank, USB pen drive, T-Shirts and lot more.

Related
