Hardik Patel to join Congress, contest LS polls from Jamnagar

It is official, Patidar leader from Gujarat, Hardik Patel, will join the Congress.

According to Patidar Anamat Andolan Samiti (PAAS) sources, a decision was taken at the Andolan's meeting held at Tarkhadi village of Rajkot district. Gita Patel of PAAS said that only Hardik Patel from the Samiti will join the Congress.



However, Hardik could not be contacted in person.



A senior Gujarat Congress leader while talking to THE WEEK confirmed that Hardik was joining the Congress and that he would contest the Lok Sabha election from Jamnagar. The constituency is currently represented in the Lok Sabha by Poonamben Maadam of the BJP.



However, Gujarat Congress chief spokesperson, Manish Doshi, was guarded in his response. He told THE WEEK that the Congress welcomes youth in politics. Doshi recalled that Hardik has been responsible in exposing the double standards of the BJP and raising issues of education and employment. It was because of Hardik's agitation that the government had been forced to bring 10 per cent reservation for those not falling in the reservation category.



Earlier in the day, when the rumours were rife that Hardik would join the Congress, Gujarat BJP president Jitubhai Vaghani said that the PAAS leader had stood exposed in 2017 assembly elections when he openly sought votes for the Congress.



Hardik, 25, had shot into the limelight when he spearheaded the Patidar agitation in 2015. In the last four years, he witnessed many ups and down, including going behind the bars on charges of sedition.



About a month ago, he had shown inclination to contest the elections. He had also said that nothing was decided about from where he would contest.



Patels constitute 14 per cent of the electorate in Gujarat and Jamnagar is a Patel dominated constituency. The effect of Patidar stir was felt in Saurashtra where Jamnagar is located.



Patel will join the Congress at a party rally in Ahmedabad on March 12. The rally will be attended by Congress president Rahul Gandhi, Sonia Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and former prime minister Manmohan Singh among others. Before the meeting, Congress Working Committee meeting will be held in Ahmedabad.
