In pictures: International Women's Day celebrated across the world

Pakistani civil society activists carry placard and shout slogans during a rally for women rights on International Women's Day in Islamabad. PHOTO: REUTERS

Activists attend a rally for gender equality and against violence towards women on the International Women's Day in Kiev, Ukraine. PHOTO: REUTERS

Activists attend a rally for gender equality and against violence towards women on the International Women's Day in Kiev, Ukraine. PHOTO: REUTERS

Pakistani civil society activists carry placard and shout slogans during a rally for women rights on International Women's Day in Islamabad. PHOTO: AFP

Activists attend a rally for gender equality and against violence towards women on the International Women's Day in Kiev, Ukraine. PHOTO: REUTERS

Activists takes part in an event to mark International Women's Day in Banda Aceh, Aceh province. PHOTO: AFP

Women's rights activists wearing black as a sign of mourning for the victims of violence hold posters condemning violence against women during a rally in downtown Tirana, Albania March 8, 2019. The banner reads: "With you to raise our voice". PHOTO: REUTERS

A woman waves a feminist flag as student protesters shout slogans during a demonstration marking International Women's Day in Barcelona. PHOTO: AFP

Student protesters shout slogans while holding signs reading "We are brave, we want to be free", "We are going to be the women we want to be" and "Woman, if you don't fight, they don't listen" during a demonstration marking International Women's Day in Barcelona. PHOTO: AFP

Student protesters march during a demonstration marking International Women's Day in Barcelona. PHOTO: AFP

Indian students pose with their faces painted on the occasion of International Women's Day celebration at a college in Chennai. PHOTO: AFP

Women take part in a protest on the occasion of International Women's Day in the Turkish capital Ankara. PHOTO: AFP

Campaigners for gender equality marked International Women’s Day on Friday with protests, discussion panels and walkouts as well as celebrations.The day marked the celebration of women's achievements and aims to further their rights and is sponsored by the United Nations since 1975.In one of the first protests of the day, several hundred women gathered in Spain in central Madrid around midnight to bang pots and pans and demand more rights for women in a society they say is still dominated by men.In Pakistan, women together with the transgender community, non-binary folks and men participated to mark the 'Aurat March' in events held across the country.In neighbouring India, hundreds of women took to the streets of New Delhi demanding an end to sexual violence, domestic abuse and workplace harassment.
