In brief

IT Dept conducts survey in Indiresh Hospital

Dehradun: The Income Tax department’s exemptions wing conducted a survey in Mahant Indiresh Hospital and commercial offices related to it on Friday. The checking of records and documents was continuing till late in the night, according to department officials. The official sources said that they suspect large scale irregularities due to which the documentation was being examined till late in the night. The statements of various employees were also recorded by the officials. The documents will be matched with the records available with the department after after examination of the available data the department will ascertain whether there are irregularities.

‘Vidhiotsav 2019’ at UPES

Dehradun: The first edition of the Law Fest ‘Vidhiotsav 2019 - Spring Edition’ has started at the Kandoli campus of UPES. The four-day fest organised under the aegis of the School of Law (SOL), UPES is being held from March 7 to 10. The fest aims to provide a platform for exchange of ideas and experiences to students of all the law schools across India, the university officers said. The event was inaugurated by S Farooq, chairman, Himalaya Drug Company, the internationally renowned pharmaceutical and herbal wellness company. Briefing on the event, Arun Dhand, senior director, Public Affairs UPES shared that the event has received good response from 28 prestigious national law universities, private universities, central universities and law schools across the country.

After investment, worry of falling market over

Dehradun: Achin Jain and Nitin Awasthi, director of ESGL Client Alley Pvt Ltd said that the biggest concern to all investors is that it should not happen that the market falls after the investment. They further said that if a long period is taken for investment the market might become volatile. According to them, the creation of a successful portfolio by classifying assets into various types of investments is one of the most important steps being taken in the direction of investment. “In the same way, if you invest in a special property category you get protection from fluctuation,” Achin Jain said.
