Multi-cornered poll fight in Haryana

The Lok Sabha polls to 10 seats in Haryana is heading for a high-pitched multi-cornered electoral battle with major political parties, either opting or being compelled to go it alone in the ensuing elections.

The political parties in the fray are ruling Bharatiya Janta Party, Congress, Indian National Lok Dal (INLD), Jannayak Janta Party (JJP), Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) and Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP)- Loktantra Suraksha Party (LSP) combine.

Among the 10 Lok Sabha MPs in Haryana, the ruling BJP has seven members, INLD has two and Congress has one member.

Buoyed by its big victory in Jind bypoll and civic body polls in five cities, the BJP has already kicked off its election campaign for the general polls 2019 and eyeing to win all 10 seats this time.

On the other hand, the Congress’ and INLD’s moral-shattering defeat in the bypoll and civic body polls in Haryana has already pushed these opposition parties on the back foot. The saffron party is way ahead of its rivals in terms of chalking out the election strategy, campaigning and has even, finalized a list of its probable candidates for the forthcoming elections.

The BJP, which had contested the 2014 Lok Sabha polls in alliance with Haryana Janhit Congress (HJC) of former CM Bhajan Lal’s son Kuldeep Bishnoi, has already made it clear that it will go it alone in the 2019 polls. HJC has now merged with the Congress.

The Congress will also contest on its own in the polls while the main opposition party, INLD is desperately searching for an alliance partner after the Bahujan Samaj Party had snapped ties with it to form an alliance with Loktantra Suraksha Party (LSP) of BJP rebel MP Raj Kumar Saini.

Shiromani Akali Dal headed by Badals in Punjab has also announced to contest the Lok Sabha polls in Haryana. Both INLD and SAD had broken ties in 2016 over the issue of Sutlej Yamuna Link canal.

With the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) and Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) failing to reach an agreement on seat-sharing pact for the ensuing parliamentary polls, both parties have also hinted at contesting on its own in the elections.

The BJP, which won seven of the 10 Lok Sabha seats in Haryana in 2014, had managed to get a vote share of around 35per cent as compared to 17.21 per cent in 2009 when it failed to win any seat.

As far as key poll issues are concerned, the BJP has geared up to contest on its achievements at the Central and State level highlighting Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Chief Minister Manohar Lal’s governance record in Lok Sabha polls.

On the other hand, the opposition parties will be relying on issues including farm distress, amendment in Punjab Land Preservation (Haryana Amendment) Bill 2019, non-completion of Sutlej Yamuna Link canal, violent Jat reservation agitation 2016 and dera violence 2017. National issues including Rafeal deal and India’s air strike on a Jaish-e Mohammad terror camp in Pakistan following the February 14 Pulwama terror attack is also likely to upstage the state issues during the polls.

Political experts also feel that the caste politics is likely to play a major role during polls, with the state of Haryana, bitterly divided on caste lines following the violent Jat reservation agitation 2016

Jat vs non-Jat divide is seen as a key factor that can impact the outcome of ensuing general elections. While around 25 percent of total electorate in Haryana are Jats, the remaining 75 percent are non-Jats, which include Dalits, Brahmins, Yadavs, Baniyas among others.

Ahead of 2019 polls, the Jat community is again gearing up for a fresh agitation over their unfulfilled demands of reservation in educational institutions and government jobs, release of youths arrested during quota stir 2016 and withdrawal of cases registered against them.

Notably, 31 people had died while more than 200 were injured during the violent Jat quota agitation in 2016 in the state.

BJP convenes meeting on March 9 in Rohtak

To gear up for upcoming polls, the BJP has convened a party executive committee meeting in Rohtak on March 9.

At the meeting which will begin in the morning and continue till late evening, the party will chalk out an election strategy and also take feedback from the party workers about the probable candidates on 10 Lok Sabha seats.

“The agenda of the party executive committee meeting will be focused on drawing up election strategies focusing on various sections of voters in the state,” said a senior party leader.

He said that the discussion will also be held on election rallies of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and other Central leaders in Haryana during the campaigning.

Notably, the Chief Minister Manohar Lal and state party leaders had this week met Kalraj Mishta, BJP’s incharge for the Lok Sabha elections in Haryana, Anil Jain, BJP’s incharge for Haryana party affairs and other central leaders to discuss the probable candidates for Lok Sabha polls.

Divided Congress yet to constitute poll committees

The factionalism in the Congress’ state unit continues even after its drubbing in Jind bypolls and civic body polls in Haryana.

While the Lok Sabha polls are round the corner, suspense is continuing over the replacement of state party chief Ashok Tanwar. While initial discussion on probable party candidates for Haryana has been held, the party is yet to announce election committees for the state.

Sources said that sitting Rohtak MP Deepender Hooda, son of former Haryana Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda, and former MP Shruti Choudhry, daughter of CLP leader Kiran Choudhry, are likely to bag Congress nominations from Rohtak and Bhiwani-Mahendragarh respectively. Among other contenders, Ashok Tanwar is frontrunner for Sirsa seat, Rajya Sabha MP Kumari Selja for Ambala, MLA Kuldeep Bishnoi for Hisar sear, Capt. Ajay Yadav for Gurugram, former MP Naveen Jindal from Kurukshetra.

Palwal MLA (Haryana) Karan Dalal and Meerapur MLA (Uttar Pradesh) Avtar Singh Bhadana are eyeing Faridabad seat while MLA Kuldeep Bishnoi and former Haryana Speaker Kuldeep Sharma are keen to launch their sons from Hisar and Karnal respectively in Lok Sabha polls.

Ashok Tanwar while talking to The Pioneer said that the party has began process to shortlist probable candidates for the elections. Once the election committees are constituted, we will finalize the lists of candidates and forward it to the party high command, he said.

AAP, JJP, INLD to go it alone

Hisar MP Dushyant Chautala’s Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) will contest on all 10 seats on its own in Haryana. Dushyant has said that the party is ready to contest on all Lok Sabha seats on its own.

JJP, a splinter group of INLD was formed in December and had performed well in Jind bypolls with its candidate managing to get second spot leaving behind other mainstream parties in Haryana.

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal’s Aam Aadmi Party has also begun scouting candidates for the polls. With JJP and AAP failing to reach a consensus on seat-sharing pact, the AAP had a day before started process to invite applications from candidates on all 10 seats.

Following AAP’s support to JJP in Jind bypoll held in January, it was widely believed that the two parties would enter into an alliance for the Lok Sabha poll and State Assembly polls.

However, JJP was offering only 2 seats out of 10 in Lok Sabha and 20 out of 90 in Haryana Assembly to the AAP, which was demanding equal representation.

On the other hand, INLD is also compelled to go it alone in the polls after the BSP had broken its alliance with it. While INLD chief OP Chautala has expressed willingness to form an alliance with the BJP, the ruling party has rejected the offer.

LSP-BSP alliance and SAD eyeing reserved seats

Mayawati’s Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) which has forged ties with LSP, an outfit floated by rebel BJP MP Raj Kumar Saini is eyeing reserved seats of Sirsa and Ambala in Haryana.

The alliance can play a spoiler for the other political parties as they are eyeing to woo the dalit vote bank in the state.

The BSP will contest on eight seats and the LSP on two Lok Sabha seats. Soon, candidates will be announced for the polls, said Raj Kumar Saini, LSP chief.

The LSP had also approached Shiromani Akali Dal to discuss a possibility of an alliance but the SAD is reluctant to join hands with Saini, due to his image of an anti-Jat leader.

The SAD is looking to form an alliance with the BJP, which is already its alliance partner in neighboring Punjab.

SAD leader and Haryana in-charge Balwinder Singh Bhunder said that the party has a voter base in Ambala, Sirsa, Kurukshetra, Karnal seats.

As far as an alliance in Haryana is concerned, we prefer to form an alliance with the BJP, he said.

The SAD will be holding a rally in Pehowa, Kurukshetra on March 10 and had in the past held rallies in Sirsa and Ambala to woo the voters.
