Police issue notice to activists over adivasi, kisan march

FIR registered to intimidate us, say organisers of November 2018 protest

The adivasi farmers’ protest march from Thane to Mumbai in November last year, has become a bone of contention between the Mumbai Police and the Loksangharsh Morcha, which organised the march.

According to members of the Loksangharsh Morcha, the Azad Maidan police have registered an FIR against them to intimidate them. Firoz Mithborwala, an organiser, said, “We were served notices by the Azad Maidan police on Tuesday, in the middle of a press conference that we had organised to voice our questions regarding the Pulwama and Balakot attacks. This is an attempt to intimidate all activists who support the struggling farmer, and all those asking questions that challenge the official version of the events in Pulwama and Balakot.”

The notices issued to Mr. Mithborwala, Smita Salunkhe, Afroz Mallik, Ravi Bhilani, and Jyoti Bandekar stated that an FIR was filed against them on November 23, a day after the march, for unlawful assembly, attempting to overawe the government by criminal force, or show of criminal force and wanton provocation with intent to cause riots under the Indian Penal Code. It also stated that all the five activists will need to be arrested.

“The police have asked us to come to court on March 22. Adivasis and farmers are standing with us. The march was completely legal and the State government even arranged for special trains to take protesters back to their hometowns. Why, then, have the police suddenly termed it unlawful?” Mr. Mithborwala asked.

The police, however, said that the protest march was in violation of the law and that the FIR was legally justified. “There are guidelines laid down by the Honourable Bombay High Court that forbid a protest march on foot through the city. We had clearly communicated to the organisers that they could protest at Azad Maidan but not march through the city, which they ignored. Our action is in accordance with the letter of the law,” Deputy Commissioner of Police (Zone I) Abhishek Trimukhe said.

The Loksangharsh Morcha will be addressing a press conference on March 13 over the issue.
