Nirav on London streets; Cong, BJP trade charges

laxmi@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, March 9

The video of fugitive jeweller Nirav Modi, a key accused in the multi-crore PNB scam, walking freely on the streets of London today saw the BJP and the Congress trade charges.

Posted by UK newspaper The Telegraph, the video shows a “plumper” Modi sporting a handle-bar moustache and wearing an Ostrich Hide jacket, estimated to cost 10,000 pounds. Trying to hail a cab, Modi can be seen repeatedly saying “sorry, no comment” to questions posed by a journalist.

The Congress slammed the government for “failing in diplomatic efforts in persuading the UK to act against” Nirav Modi and accused PM Narendra Modi of running a “fraudster settlement yojana” for such fugitives. It also alleged that fugitives had looted Rs 1 lakh crore from Indian banks but not even one of them was caught during the tenure of the BJP.

“Fugitive Nirav Modi is seen enjoying in London, living in a Rs 75-crore flat and wearing a 10,000-pound jacket,” Congress’ Randeep Surjewala said.

The BJP retaliated, calling it a case of “ulta chor chowkidar ko dante”, “chor” being the Congress and the “chowkidar” the PM. “Nirav Modi’s fraud to cheat the banks started in 2011 when the Congress-led UPA government was in power. It was detected and exposed during the tenure of the Narendra Modi government. The offender was declared a fugitive, his assets seized, illegal house blown up and businesses closed. Criminal cases have been filed against him and he is being pursued by enforcement and probe agencies,” BJP leaders said.

Also, according to the Ministry of External Affairs, the government was aware of Nirav Modi’s presence in London and was taking all the steps for his extradition.

Government functionaries add that Interpol red notices and extradition requests are pending and now they have no role in bringing Nirav Modi back until the process of his extradition begins in a London court.

‘Aware he’s in UK’

All necessary steps are being taken for the extradition of Nirav Modi. We have been aware of his presence in the UK. It (extradition request) is under their (UK govt) consideration. Raveesh Kumar, MEA spokesperson

‘Modis looted india’

The video of fugitive #NiravModi in London shows an uncanny similarity between him & his bhai, PM Modi. Both have looted India and are called Modi… both will face justice. Rahul Gandhi, Congress president

UK Home Secy certifies extradition request
