PLPA amendment meant to benefit builders: Dushyant

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, March 9

Hisar MP and Jannayak Janata Party (JJP) leader Dushyant Chautala said on Saturday that the main agenda of the two recent meetings of the state Cabinet was to benefit the builders’ lobby ahead of the Lok Sabha elections. “The amendment to the Punjab Land Preservation Act (PLPA) is an evidence that the BJP government has become a professional looting agency,” he alleged.

Dushyant, while speaking to mediapersons, here said that he was grateful to the Supreme Court for staying the PLPA decision of the government. “Delhi and Gurugram are the most polluted cities in the country. Thanks to the Supreme Court, the 3.25 to 3.50 per cent forest cover will remain intact in Haryana and the Aravalli hills will remain green,” he said.

The MP said that the increase in the floor area ratio (FAR) in case of existing licence holders by paying proportionate additional charges would benefit builders and deprive the state of revenue. “The bank guarantee amendments that allow their withdrawal before the occupancy certification is given is also a decision taken in the interest of the builders’ lobby. These decisions have been taken before the parliamentary elections to ensure that a few licences can be cleared,” he alleged.

Dushyant said the housing allowance demand had been pending for long. “If the Chief Minister is so employee-oriented, let him call a Cabinet meeting only for the employees,” he added.

On the possibility of a JJP-AAP alliance before the elections, he said that they were preparing to fight all 10 seats.

SC saved Aravalli hills

"The amendment to the Punjab Land Preservation Act (PLPA) is an evidence that the BJP government has become a professional looting agency. Delhi and Gurugram are the most polluted cities in the country. Thanks to the Supreme Court, the 3.25 to 3.50 per cent forest cover will remain intact in Haryana and the Aravalli hills will remain green." Dushyant Chautala, Hisar MP
