CISF celebrates golden jubilee, demonstrates strike capabilities

“Live rescue operations” carried out by newly inducted sub-inspectors marked the golden jubilee celebration of the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) on Sunday.

The 65 new sub-inspectors were trained at the force’s Special Tactics and Training Wing (STTW) based at Hyderabad.

The team demonstrated “VIP rescue and protection” during a terrorist attack, the rescue of hostages from a moving bus and neutralising attackers in their moving cars and vehicles.

Officials of the STTW said that the demonstrations showcased during the event required high levels of skill, energy and precision.

“In the first operation of VIP rescue, our officers fully secured and protected the VIP during an attack and took him safely to his car. When the movement of VIP fleet got disrupted by IED explosions, they were driven reverse in high speed and the three drivers took a 180-degree turn at the same speed to reverse the cars and drove them to a safer location,” said an officer, who did not wish to be named.

During the rescue of the VIP, the protection group officers also jumped into the moving cars through the windows. After securing the VIP, a quick reaction team (QRT) arrived and cornered the terrorists’ car. Several officers from the QRT jumped inside the cars in “leg-first” position surprising the attackers inside.

“The other exercise which we displayed was rescuing hostages in a moving bus which was captured by terrorists. The men from QRT chased the buses and entered through doors and windows and neutralised the attackers,” the officer said. The high-speed chase included driving in reverse, and quick 180-degree turns by CISF cars.

The officer said that the team was specifically trained to handle critical situations and also on crisis response based on pattern followed in the United States.

“After IC-814 hijacking case in 1999, we got the responsibility of securing airports. Likewise, after the terror attack on Indian Parliament, we received responsibility to secure all important building in the National Capital. Such responsibilities have changed our work character and our security cover has remained unbreached after taking up such challenging tasks,” said Rajesh Ranjan, director general (CISF).

With a strength of more than 1.56 lakh personnel and provides security cover to 345 vital installations, including 61 airports, seaports, nuclear and space installations besides the Delhi metro. The forces’ Special Security Group also provides security to over 83 categories of ‘protectees’.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi was the chief guest at the event held at the fifth reserve battalion campus in Ghaziabad. Lauding the efforts of the force, PM Modi said the role of the force had become more significant in wake of “terrorist forces” targeting the country.

PM Modi also presented Sudhir Kumar, inspector general (NCR); JS Negi, deputy inspector general; Inspector S Muthusamy and Constable R Surya with President’s Medal for Distinguished Service and Jeewan Raksha Padak. The medals were declared on the occasion of Independence Day, last year

CISF personnel also demonstrated various forms of martial arts like Kalaripayttu, a traditional form with origins in Kerala.

The demonstrations ended with a tricolour formation using water jet sprays by CISF’s fire service personnel.

SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON
