Hindu council to dedicate Holi festivities to Pakistan Day

In a show of solidarity with and support for Pakistan’s armed forces for defending the country as well as in order to condemn Indian aggression, the Pakistan Hindu Council (PHC) on Sunday announced that it will dedicate the Holi festivities to Pakistan Day, which is observed every March 23.

The decision was taken during a meeting of the managing committee of the country’s leading Hindu community body at the PHC House. According to the lunar calendar, Holi will be celebrated on March 20 this year, and like every year, this year too the Hindu community will play Holi and celebrate the day with great fervour.

The participants of the meeting termed the recent visit to India of prominent parliamentarian Dr Ramesh Kumar Vankwani, who is the PHC’s patron-in-chief, a remarkable peace initiative to defuse Pakistan-India tensions.

The meeting also passed a unanimous resolution against Indian aggression and vowed to support the brave Pakistan Army for defending the country. “Every year the Holi festival reminds us of the victory of good over evil. Also known as the festival of colours, it is celebrated all across the world, and with every passing year, it is increasing in popularity among all faiths,” stated the resolution.

Announcing their activities on Holi, the PHC announced that it will organise a colourful mega event in connection with the festival as well as with Pakistan Day on the 20th at the Shri Panchumukhi Hanuman Temple in the Soldier Bazaar neighbourhood of Karachi.

On the occasion, a large number of Pakistani Hindu families holding national flags will be present to demonstrate their love for their beloved country. Dr Vankwani said that the patriotic Pakistani Hindu community has decided to celebrate Holi in a very unique way.

He said that this year’s Holi festival will acknowledge the noble achievements of Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah and our elders, who had organised the historic Lahore Jalsa on March 23, 1940, when the Pakistan Resolution was passed.

He also appealed to all the segments of society to actively participate in the Holi celebrations, emphasising that their presence will deliver a positive message showing solidarity with non-Muslim minorities, promoting interfaith harmony, strengthening the patriotic zeal and representing the diverse Pakistani society according to the vision of the nation’s father.

The managing committee’s meeting was also attended by PHC President Gopal Khamuani, General Secretary Parshotam Ramani, Joint Secretary Paman Lal Rathi, Finance Secretary Bharat Kumar Mangalni, Adviser Prem Talreja and other members.
