Lok Sabha Elections 2019 | Time to throw out most dictatorial, anti-federal govt in history of India: Kejriwal hits out at BJP

Follow us on Image Source : PTI Kejriwal hits out at BJP ahead of general elections

It was time to throw out the Narendra Modi dispensation, "the most dictatorial and anti-federal" government in the history of India, with the help of the people, said Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday. The statement by the Aam Aadmi Party chief came soon after the Election Commission announced the schedule for Lok Sabha elections 2019.

Kejriwal took to Twitter and said, "Ultimately back to 'We the people' - the real power of our democracy. Time to throw out the most dictatorial and anti-federal govt in the history of India. Time to seek answers on demonetisation, jobs, destruction of traders and destroying brotherhood amongst different communities."

Lok Sabha elections will begin on April 11 and polling would be held over seven phases till May 19, followed by counting of all votes on May 23, the Election Commission announced on Sunday.

The elections to seven Lok Sabha seats in Delhi will be held on May 12.

The Election Commission has fixed the date for removal of the "autocratic" government in the country, said Delhi AAP convener Gopal Rai.

"People of Delhi and the country were waiting for this day. The Modi government by violating all constitutional and democratic norms humiliated and paralysed the Delhi government," he charged.

The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) is the first major political party in Delhi to announce its candidates. The party has fielded Atishi (East Delhi), Dilip Pandey (North East Delhi), Raghav Chadha (South Delhi), Gugan Singh (North West Delhi) and Pankaj Gupta(Chandni Chowk) for the Lok Sabha election.

The candidate for West Delhi seats is likely to be declared soon.

Meanwhile, the Aam Aadmi Party on Sunday staged a protest near BJP headquarters in Delhi and launched its mega campaign with the demand for full statehood at the centre. The party will protest outside Congress headquarters on Akbar Road on Monday.

"The Lok Sabha election will decide the fate of the country and also of Delhi, which was badly hurt during the "dictatorship" of the BJP-led dispensation at the Centre," AAP convener Gopal Rai said.

Mr Rai said the people of Delhi were eagerly awaiting the announcement of the Lok Sabha election dates, and added it will give them relief from the "autocracy" of Narendra Modi's government and its policies.

"Full statehood is the only way to end the autocracy of the Centre. It is central theme of AAP's mega election campaign because we feel it is the only way to speed up development work in Delhi," he said during a press conference on Sunday.

The Arvind Kejriwal-led party has designed a three-tier campaign in the first phase.

About 1,000 teams will go door to door; and distribute his letter to people on full statehood. Besides, 20 ''Mini Prachar Rath'' in each constituency will tour localities screening his speeches and playing the party's election song.

In the second phase, all AAP legislators will organise extensive campaigns in their constituencies and organise about 1,500 street meetings. Apart from this, the party is also preparing extensive campaigning through rallies by Kejriwal.

In the third phase of campaigning, AAP will field "star campaigners" in rallies and street meetings.
