Newspapers protest ad ban on 2 dailies, run blank front page

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Srinagar, March 10

Editors of local newspapers in Kashmir protested in Srinagar on Sunday and ran blank front pages to protest against the authorities for blocking government advertisements to two newspapers — Greater Kashmir and Kashmir Reader.

The editors carried the newspapers in their hands and protested at the Srinagar press club against the ban, demanding its immediate revocation.

“We are asking the government to come clear on what it is doing but it has been silent. Even while suspending the advertisements to Greater Kashmir and Kashmir Reader, no written communication was sent,” said a member of the Kashmir Editors’ Guild (KEG).

“We have written to the Governor’s administration, asking it to explain the reason behind the ban but we have not been provided any answers,” the member said.

The National Conference and Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) have come out in support of the papers and criticised the government for “muzzling the voice of the press”.

“For reasons best known to him, the Guv’s (Governor’s) admin (administration) in J&K has gone beyond its brief & is in no mood to step back. The decision to stop giving ads to local newspapers GK (Greater Kashmir) & Kashmir Reader is a punitive measure to force them into submission. Are they trying to stifle free press?” Mehbooba wrote on Twitter.

The KEG claimed that the Jammu and Kashmir administration, under Governor Satya Pal Malik, had suspended advertisements to the two newspapers in February but were not told the reasons behind the step.

On Sunday, all major papers ran a blank front page as a mark of protest against the advertisement ban. The first page of the newspapers, part of the Kashmir Editors’ Guild, read: “In protest against unexplained denial of government advertisements to Greater Kashmir and Kashmir Reader.” The Kashmir Editors’ Guild had earlier sought the attention of the Press Council of India and the Editors Guild of India to exercise their legal, ethical and professional mandate to intervene in the issue and ensure that the media was not strangulated.

Reporters Without Borders (RSF) in a statement has also condemned the move. “The government must restore state ads and treat all Kashmiri publications equally,” the RSF said.
