Indian troops martyr two youth in Pulwama

Srinagar (Web Desk): In occupied Kashmir, Indian troops in their fresh act of state terrorism martyred two youth in Pulwama district.



The youth were killed during a cordon and search operation at Pinglish in Tral area of district. The operation was going on till the last reports came in.



The Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir, Mohammad Ashraf Sehrai and High Court Bar Association have strongly condemned the summoning of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and son of Syed Ali Gilani by NIA to New Delhi and termed the action as a pressure tactics to suppress the Kashmiris’ freedom voice. They said that Mirwaiz was not only a pro-freedom leader but also a religious and spiritual head. The Bar Association pointed out that by summoning Mirwaiz Umar Farooq to New Delhi the NIA was actually going to subject him to humiliation and intimidation only because he was spearheading the Kashmiris’ ongoing struggle for right to self-determination.



Meanwhile, shutdown was observed in downtown Srinagar and adjoining areas, today, against the NIA summon to Mirwaiz Umar Farooq. Call for the strike was given by the Srinagar-based Traders Coordination Committee, an amalgam of various trade bodies. The authorities had imposed restrictions in parts of Srinagar city to prevent anti-India protests.



Most of English and Urdu newspapers, today, published blank front pages in protest against the unexplained denial by the Indian authorities of advertisements to the valley-based two leading newspapers— Greater Kashmir and Kashmir Reader.

The Kashmir Editors Guild held a protest demonstration at Kashmir Press Club in Srinagar against the ban on advertisements to the newspapers by Kashmir administration under Governor Satya Pal Malik. Senior editors and journalists took part in the protest to demand revocation of the ban.



Jammu and Kashmir Socio Economic Coordination Committee at a meeting in Srinagar said that Kashmir was facing an undeclared economic warlike situation as a result of Indian policies.



Non-governmental organisations community will submit a petition to the President of Human Rights Council and member states to hold a panel discussion on the Report of the United Nations Human Rights Commissioner on Kashmir as the rights situation in occupied Kashmir has massively deteriorated. This was disclosed at the roadside roundtable organised jointly by International Human Rights Association of American Minorities, International Muslim Women’s Union, South Asia Centre for Peace and Human Rights and International Commission for Human Rights in Geneva.
