What Is The Model Code Of Conduct? Here Are The Do's And Don'ts For The Political Parties

With the announcement of general election to be held in seven phases, the country has descended into a sea of political rhetoric masquerading as the campaign to woo the voters and for the next two months, it’s going to be politics left right and centre in the world’s biggest democracy.

But this political slugfest is bound to follow some rules set by the Election Commission of India (ECI) and they are known as Model Code of Conduct which needs to be followed by all political parties.

Let’s know more about Model Code of Conduct and how does it contain the political parties from crossing the line.

What is the Model Code of Conduct?

The Model Code of Conduct refers to the a set of guidelines released by the Election Commission in order to ensure a free, fair and peaceful conduct of elections. The Article 324 of the Indian Constitution vests power in the EC to monitor the Centre, all state governments, all candidates, polling booths, observers, and election manifestos to ensure that election process get completed in a fair and impartial way.

What are the components of an MCC?

Apart from election manifestos, the MCC deals with seven other provisions which includes meeting, processions, polling day, observers, polling booths, party already in power and general conduct.

1. General conduct is the most important aspect of the MCC as it allows the parties to criticise each other on the basis of their work and policies, but the use of religious and caste identities to lure voters is strictly prohibited under MCC.

Reuters

2. For meetings and gatherings, the parties have to seek prior permission from the local body such as police before organising rally and public gathering.

3. Burning effigies of the rival candidates or parties is not allowed and it’s the job of the police that rival parties shall not be given permission to hold rallies in one area at the same time. If they do, their routes should be diverted.

4. On the day of voting, the workers of the parties inside the booth must wear a badge with party name and symbol and EC will allow them to enter the booth.

5. No political campaign can be held within the distance of 100 metres of the polling booth.

Restrictions for the ruling party

In 1979, some restrictions were introduced for the ruling party., both in the state as well as in the centre.

These restrictions are:

1. The ruling party can’t advertise by spending from the state coffers which belongs to the public exchequer. It also can’t use official mass media for parties publicity or achievements.

2. No Member of Parliament or minister shall combine their official visit and the party campaign.

AP

3. During the campaign, the concerned minister or other authorities can’t announce any financial grant or promise to construct roads etc.

4. Other parties shall also be allowed to use public spaces for the campaign and the ruling party can’t use their power to stop them from campaigning.

(With News18 inputs)
