India wins first prize at `Golden Gate' awards for TV tourism ad campaigns

India wins first prize at `Golden Gate' awards for TV tourism ad campaigns

India has secured the first prize in the International ‘Golden City Gate Tourism Awards 2019’ In ‘TV Cinema Spot’ Category at the Internationale Tourismus-Börse – Berlin (ITB, Berlin).

India’s ministry of tourism won the first prize in the category of TV Cinema Spot at the prestigious international Golden City Gate Tourism Awards 2019. Yogendra Tripathi, secretary, Department of Tourism, received the awards on 8 March 2019 at ITB, Berlin, which is being held from 6 to 10 March 2019.

Following promotional films / television commercials produced by the he ministry as part of its Incredible India 2.0 Campaign received the awards:

Yogi of the Racetrack

The Reincarnation of Mr. and Mrs. Jones

Sanctuary in Paris

Maharani of Manhattan and

The Masala Master Chef

The Golden City Gate Tourism Multi-media Awards are given annually in various categories related to the tourism and hospitality sectors. The ‘Golden City Gate’ is a creative multi-media international competition for countries, cities, regions and hotels. The entries received for the awards are judged by an international jury comprising film and tourism experts. The annual award ceremony takes place at ITB Berlin, the world’s leading tourism trade show.

The ministry of tourism launched the Incredible India 2.0 Campaign in September 2017. The 2.0 Campaign marks a shift from generic promotions across the world to market specific promotional plans and content creation. The campaign produces and uses thematic creatives on different niche tourism products to cater to diverse consumer interests. These include the television commercials on yoga, wellness, wildlife, luxury and cuisine, which has been very well received the world over, registering about 155 million views on social media. The commercials have been produced in English with voiceovers in 9 international languages, viz. German, French, Spanish, Italian, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, Korean and Arabic.
