2019 Lok Sabha Elections: Priyanka Gandhi addresses first political rally, targets Modi govt on PM's home turf

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra | Photo Credit: ANI

Ahmedabad: Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Tuesday delivered her first political rally after assuming charge as Congress general secretary for Uttar Pradesh (East). Addressing an emphatic crowd in Gujarat, Gandhi said that she was upset by what was happening in the country.

Targeting the NDA government, Priyanka said it did not walk the talk as far as providing jobs to crores of people in the country was concerned.

She added that she was saddened by what was happening in the country. "Our institutions are being destroyed. Wherever you see, hatred is being spread."

Priyanka Gandhi further urged people to consider the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections as "another independence struggle" and told them to talk about the real issues facing them rather than getting drawn into trivialities.

"Your greatest weapon is awareness about the realities facing the country, your vote is your weapon. Use it with after due consideration and due discretion. Ensure that it does not hurt anyone," said Gandhi.

"True 'desh bhakti' is getting aware of real problems and challenges before the country."

Making her speech in Hindi, Gandhi said: "When I went to the Gandhi Ashram in Sabarmati, I was almost driven to tears," adding that it was "crucial that the message about real issues should go out from this land of the Mahatma."

"In this election, raise issues that are real, not trivial and diversionary, and this is your responsibility as the true citizens. This country belongs to nobody else but to you. So make the right and informed decisions after taking stock of the hollow promises given to you."

"Where are the two crore jobs? Where is the Rs 15 lakh in your account? Where is women's security? Think about this, ask these questions," she said.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi were also present at the rally near Gandhinagar district’s Adalaj village. The party held a rally in Prime Minister Narendra Modi's home state, Gujarat, to sound its poll bugle for the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections.
