CWC meet: Where are 2 crore jobs and Rs 15 lakh promised, asks Priyanka Gandhi in maiden rally

New Delhi:

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, addressing her maiden rally after making the political plunge, on Tuesday launched a scathing attack on the Modi government over a host of issues ranging from women's safety to the BJP's pre-poll promise of 2 crore jobs.

"Where is the Rs 15 lakh that was promised to the people? What happened to the promise of assuring safety to women? Where are the 2 crore jobs?" she said.

"I realised that this country is built with love and harmony. I feel sad at the current situation of the country. There is no better nationalism than being aware. Your vote is your weapon," she added.

RELATED



She was addressing her first political rally in Gujarat after assuming charge as Congress general secretary.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi and UPA chairpersonSonia Gandhi were present at the rally near Adalaj village ofGandhinagar district.

Priyanka said the Modi government did not fulfil its promises of providing jobs to crores of people in the country.

"Our institutions are being destroyed. Wherever you see, hatred is being spread. Nothing matters more to us that you and I protect this nation, work for it and move forward together," Priyanka alleged.

Appealing to the voters to make a wise choice in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections, she said: "Do not get distracted with unwanted issues. You should realise what benefits you, how you will get employment, how women can be safe. I appeal to you to take your decision with caution."

Amid slogans comparing her with Indira Gandhi, she made a short speech in a conversational style in Hindi, saying this was her first visit to Gujarat.



"When I went to the Gandhi Ashram in Sabarmati, I was almost driven to tears," she said, adding that it was "crucial that the message about real issues should go out from this land of the Mahatma.

Amid slogans comparing her with Indira Gandhi, she made a short speech in a conversational style in Hindi, saying this was her first visit to Gujarat.



"When I went to the Gandhi Ashram in Sabarmati, I was almost driven to tears," she said, adding that it was "crucial that the message about real issues should go out from this land of the Mahatma.

Priyanka Gandhi said the real India was not about spreading hatred everywhere.



"The true nature of India is love and compassion towards one and all, not hatred. It is this very ethos which is being destroyed," she said.

The Congress held a rally in Prime Minister Narendra Modi's home state to sound its poll bugle for the crucial Lok Sabha elections.
