Mumbai: BEST buses go off roads; Mumbaikars likely to face harrowing time on Tuesday - DETAILS

Representational image | Photo Credit: PTI

Mumbai: Commuters in Mumbai are likely to face a tough time on Tuesday due to a strike by the employees of Brihanmumbai Electric Supply & Transport (BEST). Albeit the management of the civic-run transport service has called the strike as “illegal”, the red buses went off roads from Monday midnight.

The indefinite strike by around 29,000 BEST employees will cause inconvenience to around 25 lakh passengers who commute by 3,000 BEST buses that ply on the streets of Mumbai city and the metropolitan region every day.

Various unions of BEST workers are calling for the renewal of their salary agreements that got expired in 2016, an increase in gratuity and bonus amounts, said a union official.

The unions are also calling for immediate resolution of the issues related to housing. They are also seeking mergers of various undertakings of BEST, and of the BEST and Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) budgets.

As per the official, the decision to go on a strike was called as the BEST administration could not come up with any concrete solution to resolve their demands.

In the meantime, news agency PTI has mentioned sources as saying that the Maharashtra government could impose the Essential Services Maintenance Act (ESMA) on the striking employees.

In a bid to stop BEST workers’ union from going ahead with the strike, the management had issued internal circulars warning them about strict action. The BEST management had even sought the intervention of the Industrial Court.

Earlier on Monday, Industrial Court Member SV Suryawanshi had restrained the union workers from going on strike till it hears the complaint filed by BEST management. However, the employees have still gone ahead with the strike.

Commuters in Mumbai are likely to face a tough time on Tuesday because of the all-India strike too. The Left-affiliated Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) will on January 8 and January 9 hold a nationwide general strike to protest against "anti-labour, anti-people and anti-national policies" of the Modi government.

The strike has also been supported by All India Kisan Sabha (AIKS), Bhumi Adhikar Andolan, Adivasi Adhikar Rashtriya Manch, and many other government unions.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
