In her first election speech, Priyanka Gandhi attacks PM Modi in Gujarat, says ‘hatred being spread everywhere’

Congress president Rahul Gandhi and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi were also present at the rally near Adalaj village of Gandhinagar district.

In her maiden election speech after assuming charge as Congress general secretary of Uttar Pradesh East, Priyanka Gandhi launched party’s 2019 Lok Sabha poll campaign by attacking Prime Minister Narendra Modi in his home state – Gujarat. Congress president Rahul Gandhi and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi were present at the rally near Adalaj village of Gandhinagar district.

“Hatred is being spread everywhere,” Priyanka Gandhi said addressing a big crowd.

Picking up the word ‘fitrat’ (nature) from one of PM Modi’s recent rallies, Priyanka Gandhi said, “Those who talk about fitrat, the fitrat of this country is to seek the truth, the fitrat of this nation is to blow away the winds of hate with love.”

Also Read: Amit Shah’s surgical strike: Congress leaders make a beeline for BJP ahead of Lok Sabha elections

“Do not get distracted with unwanted issues. You should realise what benefits you, how you will get employment, how women can be safe. I appeal to you to take your decision with caution,” she went on to add without naming PM Modi.

This was Priyanka’s first election rally outside Gandhi family stronghold Amethi and Raebareli in Uttar Pradesh.

Speaking at the rally after sister Priyanka, Congress president Rahul Gandhi raked up issues like Rafale, demonetisation, unemployment, Pulwama terror attack to corner PM Modi.

Also Read: Congress claims Ajit Doval blamed BJP govt for release of Masood Azhar, gave clean chit to JeM chief

Rahul Gandhi said the Congress government had put Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar in jail, but the BJP government freed him in 1999. “Modiji calls himself a patriot. I want to ask him from the soil of Gujarat who allowed Masood Azhar to walk free from India’s jail to Kandahar?” the Congress chief said seeking to corner the BJP government over Pulwama attack.

Also Read: Congress culture is anti-thesis of Gandhian thought: PM Modi says in his blog as Congress holds CWC

“BJP is dividing the country into two parts. One for the ‘suit-boot’, where they get all the benefits. And the other for our farmers, labourers, youth who get demonetisation and Gabbar Singh Tax,” he said.
