Plea Filed Against Conducting Road Shows During Lok Sabha Polls As They Pose Threat To Environment

The Chief Election Commissioner of India Sunil Arora announced the dates for Lok Sabha polls on Sunday. The elections will be conducted in seven phases starting April 11. The last day for voting is May 19 and the counting will be done on May 23.

As the election season kicks in, political parties are planning mega rallies in all cities. Reportedly, Prime Minister Narendra Modi will hold 100 rallies while BJP President Amit Shah is expected to hold around 200 rallies.

A former Director General of Police (DGP) from Uttar Pradesh and an ecologist have urged the Supreme Court of India to direct the Election Commission to ban road shows and bike rallies during polls, PTI reported.

Photo: BCCL

Former DGP Vikram Singh and environmentalist Shaivika Agrawal said in their complaint that these road shows not only violate the EC code of conduct but were also harmful for the environment. The plea was mentioned in urgent listing on Monday before a bench comprising Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and justices Deepak Gupta and Sanjiv Khanna.

The petitioners have alleged that bike rallies and road shows lead to a lot of air and noise pollution and traffic jams which cause a lot of inconvenience to the general public. Advocate Virag Gupta has drawn up the plea which mentions that as per the instructions issued by the Election Commission with regard to roadshows and political processions mandate that vehicles must be registered and a convoy cannot have more than 10 vehicles.

Photo: BCCL

Further, two convoys must maintain a distance of at least 200 metres, the number of vehicles and persons joining the roadshow have to be intimated to authorities in advance.

The petition argued that most of these rules remained only on paper. Political parties were using “raths” to carry out protests which violated Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 and Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989.

Photo: BCCL

The statement said that these modified vehicles could accommodate almost luxurious facilities including cabins, kitchen, toilets, hydraulic lifts, TV and often surpassed the election expenditure which is allowed by the EC.

The plea highlighted the larger cause of security saying that roadshows make VVIPs vulnerable to terrorist attacks. It has asked EC to ban roadshows during elections.
