Tibetans protest in New Delhi to mark 60th year of uprising

A Tibetan living in exile in India takes part in a protest against China near the Chinese embassy in New Delhi, India, Mar. 12, 2019. EPA-EFE/RAJAT GUPTA

A Tibetan activist stamps on a poster of Chinese President Xi Jinping as he takes part in a protest against China near the Chinese embassy in New Delhi, India, Mar. 12, 2019. EPA-EFE/RAJAT GUPTA

Tibetans living in exile in India take part in a protest against China near the Chinese embassy in New Delhi, India, Mar. 12, 2019. EPA-EFE/RAJAT GUPTA

Tibetans living-in-exile in India try to climb police barricades as they take part in a protest against China near the Chinese embassy in New Delhi, India, Mar. 12, 2019. EPA-EFE/RAJAT GUPTA

Around a thousand exiled Tibetans in India on Tuesday protested in front of the Chinese Embassy in New Delhi against the "illegal occupation" of Tibet.

Tibetan youths, with Tibetan flags painted on their faces, demonstrated some 500 meters away from the Chinese Embassy in New Delhi, a high security area where several embassies are located.

Around 150 people had also stormed into the Chinese Embassy, shouting slogans such as "Free Tibet", and were later detained by the police.

The protesters had gathered to mark the 60th anniversary of Tibet's failed uprising in 1959 against Chinese rule, led by the Dalai Lama, who had fled to India after the resistance failed.

"We stand here (...) to condemn the illegal occupation of Tibet and we pledge to continue resisting for a Free Tibet. The Chinese Government has imprisoned thousands of Tibetans since the occupation of Tibet and the situation remains grim till date," a statement from the Tibetan Youth Congress, the organizers, said.

The 60th anniversary of the Lhasa uprising was commemorated last Sunday, an anniversary that the TYC - the largest non-governmental independent organization of Tibetans in exile - remembers it as "60 years of oppressive colonial rule", but also as, "60 years of continued resistance from the Tibetans."

The president of the organization, Tenzing Jigme, said that the objective of the demonstration was to convey China that the Tibetan resistance continues to be "strong" and will not end until Tibet is free.

"The Chinese Government is directly responsible for the self immolations (of the Tibetans), so their leaders must be accountable to the world community," Jigme said.

Around 165 Tibetans have self-immolated in the recent past to protest Chinese rule in Tibet.

Two days ago, exiled Tibetans, across all age groups, along with a large number of Buddhist Monks, took part in the commemorative anniversary event in the northern Indian city of Dharamsala, where the Central Tibetan Administration - the Tibetan government-in-exile - is headquartered.

According to the CTA, the former president of Botswana Iam Khama was the guest of honor and members of parliament from over ten countries had attended the event.

Chinese delegations from three different groups also attended the event to show their solidarity with the Tibetan cause.

China says that Tibet has been a part of its territory for centuries and in 1951 it was "liberated from the theocracy" of the Dalai Lama, while the Tibetans argue otherwise.

There are more than 130,000 Tibetan refugees in India, according to the authorities.
