Priyanka Gandhi: Forthcoming elections are not less than an independence movement

People who make tall promises, question them about employment for 2 crore people which they promised, where is it? Where are the Rs 15 lakh? Where is women’s security? Ask the right questions during these elections,” she exhorted the audience.

Our Correspondent / GANDHINAGAR

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra today termed the forthcoming general election as another ‘independence movement’ and asked the people to overthrow the present government at centre in larger interest of the country.

Addressing the party workers at Congress CWC here Priyanka said: “This is nothing less than the independence movement. Our institutions are being attacked, hatred is being spread everywhere. There can be no bigger thing than guarding the country and moving ahead together.”

Making first-ever political rally outside the Gandhi family constituencies in Uttar Pradesh, Priyanka Gandhi said concept of India is based on love and brotherhood. “It is sad at what is happening in the country these days. There is no bigger patriotism than awareness. Your awareness is a weapon; your vote is a weapon. It is a weapon that will not hurt or harm anyone. It is a weapon that will strengthen you,” she said.

” People who make tall promises, question them about employment for 2 crore people which they promised, where is it? Where are the Rs 15 lakh? Where is women’s security? Ask the right questions during these elections,” she exhorted the audience.

Priyanka added that the patriotism of people should reflect during these elections by asking questions.

“Your vote is your weapon. Make the right decision, ask the right questions.” the newly-appointed Congress general secretary targeted PM Modi without taking his name.

The April-May national election, she said, was “nothing less” than the Independence movement.

“Think and decide – those who talk big in front of you, where are the jobs they promised? What about the Rs. 15 lakh in every bank account that they talked about? What about women’s safety?” she said.

“Those who talk about fitrat (nature), the fitrat of this country is to seek the truth, the fitrat of this nation is to blow away the winds of hate with love,” said Priynka.
