Odisha Parba- 2019 to be held from 15th to 17th March at India Gate Lawns in New Delhi

New Delhi: ‘Odisha Parba’ is once again set to make a comeback in the heart of New Delhi from 15th to 17th March 2019 at India Gate Lawns. Organised by Odia Samaj, the 3rd Edition of this three day long mega event, will showcase the unique culture, heritage, tradition, ethnic cuisine and handlooms & handicrafts of Odisha under one spectrum.

The inaugural ceremony will be held on 15th March 2019 at 6 pm at India Gate. Spreading over an area of 2 lakh 60 thousand sq. ft, this year ‘Odisha Parba’ will showcase the vision for a futuristic Odisha and how during ancient times Odisha was one of the most prominent states of the country with a rich maritime trade history. The event showcases the vision for reinstating that ancient glory to the state.

The entrance gate to the event will depict sunrise- symbolizing development of Eastern part of India specifically development of Odisha. A grand stage is being set up with backdrop of a lotus flower to symbolize the vision of flourishing or blooming Odisha. A 3D mapping film on the theme of ‘Utkal Uday’ shall be the highlight of the event.

The handicraft and handloom section in the festival will be one of the most in demand sections as award winning artisans and weavers from Odisha shall showcase traditional handloom sarees, dress materials, artefacts, handcrafted jewellery etc at very competitive prices.

Dance and music shows encompassing Odissi, traditional folk dance & music, fusion as well contemporary flavours from Odisha shall enthral the audience each day. Live music shows by seasoned artists like Tansen Singh, Abhijit Majumdar, Pankaj Jal, Susmita Das besides latest musical sensations like Sourin Bhatt, Aseema Panda, Chelsi Behura etc will keep the rhythm going in this three day event. A special musical programme titled “Smruti Pasara” dedicated to the memory of Late Shri Akshaya Mohanty by his son Chitrabhanu Mohanty is bound to take people down the memory lane. One of the highlights of the event will be the opportunity to see Odissi dance by Padma Vibhushan Sonal Mansingh. Odissi performances shall also be staged by disciples of Binayak Panda, Kasturi Pattanaik and Madhumita Raut. .

Odisha Parba is proud to bring to Delhiites a plethora of delicious treats from Odisha, ranging from street foods of classic cities like Cuttack, Berhampur and Sambalpur ; Odia thali and a diverse range of sweets from all over state. Many of these food items will be novelties for the food connoisseurs of Delhi NCR.

The event will remain open from 4 – 10 PM on the 15th of March and from 12 – 10 PM on 16th and 17th March 2019. Entry to the event is free.
