K Chandrasekhar Rao: Opposition kept out of Telangana Legislative Council

Telangana

Congress

All the four TRS and one MIM candidates have won in the elections held forLegislative Council on Tuesday.Mohd Mahmood Ali, S Subhash Reddy, Satyavathi Rathod and Y Mallesham of the TRS and Mirza Riyaz-ul-Hasan Effendi of MIM are the winners in the election held under MLAs' quota.With this election, the 40-member Telangana Legislative Council has set a record of not having opposition representation. The TRS and the MIM are on friendly terms. TheParty (with 19 MLAs) boycotted the election in the last minute protesting against the ‘poaching’ of its four MLAs by the ruling TRS. The TDP (2 MLAs) and BJP (one MLA) have stayed away from the election.The Congress initially fielded Guduru Narayana Reddy, the treasurer of the Pradesh Congress Committee. But PCC chief N Uttam Kumar Reddy announced the decision to boycott the polling on Monday. The Congress was upset with its four MLAs — Rega Kantha Rao, Atram Sakku, Haripriya Naik and Chirumarthi Lingaiah — pledging their support to the TRS. They all declared that they are ready to seek a fresh election on TRS ticket. TDP legislator S Venkata Veeraiah also gave a shock to his party by switching loyalties to the TRS. The Congress party issued a whip directing its legislators not to participate in the voting. The TDP also issued a whip to its two MLAs to stay away from the polling. Thus, even the defected MLAs were forced to stay away from voting as defying the whip would cause their disqualification. Lone BJP MLA Raja Singh Lodh chose to abstain from voting.While 22 legislators of the opposition parties did not participate in the voting, the 97 elected MLAs of the TRS and MIM and one nominated (Anglo Indian) legislator participated in the election. Each of the five contestants needed to get 21 votes to be elected to the Legislative Council. The TRS and the MIM followed the second preferential voting method, which helped all the five in the fray to get elected.
