Pollachi sex scandal case: SFI cadre protest demanding action against accused

BJP suggests formation of committee to create awareness among school, college students

Members of the Students Federation of India (SFI) on Tuesday staged a protest in front of the Coimbatore Collectorate seeking stringent action against the accused in the Pollachi sex scandal case and alleging that ruling party members protected the accused.

Around 40 SFI members led by State secretary V. Mariappan took part in the agitation. Mr. Mariappan said the SFI wanted the police to detain all the accused under Goondas Act and not just the four.

The police should also initiate action against the politicians or their kin who operated from behind the scenes and now tried to protect the accused. And, the State Government should provide protection to the complainant.

Around 45 students of the Government Arts College, Coimbatore, also staged a protest in front of the campus demanding stringent action against the accused.

Members of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) led by State general secretary Vanathi Srinivasan petitioned Coimbatore Rural Superintendent of Police R. Pandiarajan to appoint a senior woman police officer to investigate the case as the victims would feel comfortable to narrate their ordeal.

The police should set up a number, email and social media account and publicise the same to enable victims of sexual harassment to lodge complaints.

The BJP leader also suggested the formation of a committee comprising women advocates, police officers and social activists to create awareness among school and college students and members of the public as well.

She appealed to Mr. Pandiarajan to ensure that no photograph of the victim was circulated in the media.

Meanwhile, the IT wing of the Coimbatore rural unit of the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) submitted a petition to the Coimbatore City Police officials seeking action against Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) cadre for spreading falsehood in social media linking the party leaders with the sex scandal.

IT wing secretary R. Sasikumar said that though the police had taken action against the accused, the DMK, out of fear of losing the elections and with the intention of bringing disrepute to the AIADMK, was spreading rumours about Minister S.P. Velumani and Assembly Deputy Speaker ‘Pollachi’ V. Jayaraman through social media.

Now, with the model code of conduct in force, the police should view the issue seriously and take action, he added.
