DNA EXCLUSIVE: PM Narendra Modi & Uddhav Thackeray will address four joint-poll rallies in Maharashtra

After throwing several jibes at each other, BJP and Shiv Sena will now be jointly seeking votes for a resounding victory of the NDA government at the Centre.



Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray are expected to address at least four poll rallies in Mumbai, Vidarbha, Marathwada, and Western Maharashtra. Thackeray and Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis will hold 12 rallies - two each - in six revenue divisions of the state.



Both parties have already set the wheels in motion with a call to respective party units to provide necessary assistance and mobilise large crowd for the proposed rallies.



A Sena MP told DNA, "PM Modi and Thackeray will highlight the importance of a strong government at the Centre to achieve our a new high in our economy and handle cross-border terrorism strongly. The duo will highlight how Mahagathbandhan will be a disaster as the country is set to become a trillion dollar economy by 2025."



Thackeray will prominently talk about issues like the Ayodhya title suit, farm distress, low employment level and more funds for Mumbai in the event of burden of existing infrastructure due to migration.



Thackeray will also individually address election rallies in 23 Lok Sabha seats the party is contesting. In 2014, Sena had won 18 of the 20 seats which it fought in an alliance with the BJP. Thackeray's son and youth Sena chief Aditya Thackeray, who is very active on Twitter, will hold road shows in all 23 constituencies.



The Sena leader said the party is expected to renominate all its 18 sitting MPs for the upcoming general elections. Thackeray has already asked them to step up the voter outreach programme and activate booth-level poll work.



"There has been a demand from the BJP to spare few dates of Thackeray and Aditya for them to address rallies in few of its constituencies. Both will hold rallies in BJP seats, especially in Vidarbha and Western Maharashtra. The dates will be finalised in consultation with the BJP," the Sena leader said.



A state BJP veteran said that CM Fadnavis, Union Minister of roads Nitin Gadkari and state rural development minister Pankaja Munde are in huge demand as star campaigners by few sitting Sena MPs and some district leaders. Their meetings will be discussed considering their availability.

One-Man Charm

Uddhav Thackeray will also individually address election rallies in 23 Lok Sabha seats the party is contesting. In 2014, Sena had won 18 of the 20 seats which it fought in an alliance with the BJP
