No license for firearms in Bengaluru ahead of Lok Sabha elections

No license for firearms in Bengaluru ahead of Lok Sabha elections

City Police Commissioner T Suneel Kumar said the ban will be in force till May 27, after the end of vote count on May 23.

news Lok Sabha 2019

With the model code of conduct in place for the ensuing Lok Sabha elections in Karnataka on April 18 and 23, the issuance of licenses for fire arms and their possession have been banned in Bengaluru, an official order said on Tuesday.

"All the fire arms of license holders in Bengaluru shall be deposited with the jurisdictional police station with immediate effect," said the order dated March 11 from Bengaluru City Police Commissioner T Suneel Kumar.

The ban will be in force till May 27, after the end of vote count on May 23.

However, the State and the Central government departments, public and private sector agencies to whom firearms were issued for security, sportsmen who are part of the National Rifle Association and communities entitled to display weapons by long standing law and custom, are exempted from the ban.

The Lok Sabha elections in the southern state will be held in two phases -- on April 18 for 14 seats and on April 23 for another 14 seats.

The seats going for polls on April 18 are Udupi, Chikmagalur, Hassan, Dakshina Kannada,Chitradurga, Tumkur, Mandya, Mysore, Chamarajanagar, Bangalore Central, Bangalore North, Bangalore Rural, Bangalore South, Chikkballapur, Kolar

The other 14 seats— Chikkodi, Belgaum, Bagalkot, Bijapur, Gulbarga,Raichur, Bidar, Koppal .Bellary. Haveri. Dharwad. Uttara Kannada, Davanagere and Shimoga will go to polls on April 23.

The counting of ballots for the Parliamentary Election will take place on May 23.

If you have not registered to vote or if you have found that your name is not on the electoral rolls, then you have only a few days left to register and fill appropriate forms. If you are registered to vote in the seats which are going to see elections on April 18, you need to register your vote before March 16.

.The last date for voter registration is March 29 for the other 14 seats which are going to polls on April 23.
