Lok Sabha Election 2019: Modi, other BJP leaders to hold more than 1,000 rallies during elections

In the run-up to the general elections that begin April 11 and culminate on May 23, the date of counting of votes, Prime Minister Narendra Modi and many other BJP leaders will hold as many as 1,000 rallies across India.

The PM himself will address as nearly 200 rallies. Apart from him, the other major leaders who will be addressing the rallies across the length and breadth of the country will include BJP chief Amit Shah, Rajnath Singh, Yogi Adityanath, Nitin Gadkari, Sushma Swaraj, Uma Bharti, Smriti Irani, and Shivraj Singh Chauhan. The main theme of these rallies will be “50 years of being power against 50 months of service”.

BJP chief Amit Shah will hold the maximum rallies during the entire poll campaign.

A senior BJP leader who is closely associated with the party’s poll campaign said that the party’s main speakers will address rallies in all Lok Sabha seats, no matter whether the party was contesting from those seats or its allies. But the primary focus will remain on those seats where it is in a strong position and where its chances of winning are possible.

He said that the candidates will address rallies not just in their own seats, but also in other seats and once the elections get over, they will spend all their time in their constituencies.

Modi to address rallies in all voting phases of UP, Bihar and bengal

Sources say that the PM is likely to address rallies in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal in all seven voting phases of the three states.

Analysis of each phase

The BJP leaders will not just be holding rallies in various constituencies, but at the end of each voting phase, they will also analyse the situation and help the party’s core leadership tweak the party’s poll strategy accordingly.

‘Target 50 years of Congress rule’

The party’s main theme for all the rallies will be “50 years of being power against 50 months of service”. The party has made a 20-point list in which it has tried to highlight the work done in 50 years of Congress rule as against the 50 months the party has ruled at the Centre under PM Modi. The 20-point list also names various projects and schemes undertaken by the government. The party is ensuring that its main campaigners are conversant with the list so that they can, while talking about the Congress’s “misrule”, also list out the work done by the BJP government.
