Pollachi women abuse case to impact polls: Ex-MP

Chennai, March 13 : The case of sexual-assault-cum-blackmail of women in Pollachi will have its echo in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections, not only in that (Pollachi) constituency but also in the neighbouring seats, said a former AIADMK MP on Wednesday.

"The Pollachi sexual assault case will have its impact not only in the Pollachi Lok Sabha constituency but also in neighbouring seats like Coimbatore, Erode, Nilgiris and Tiruppur," K.C. Palanisamy told IANS.

According to him, the people of the area believe in self-respect and "will not go easy on this sordid episode in the polls," he said. He demanded a court-monitored time-bound probe and trial into the case.

The people of the area may display their anger at the polls as the sordid episode has taken place when the state is headed by E. Palaniswami who belongs to that community, Palanisamy said.

Referring to the expulsion of a local party official A. Nagaraj, Palanisamy said the ruling party should investigate on whose recommendation did he get the party post.

The Crime Branch-Crime Investigation Department (CBCID) has launched a probe into the case. There will be an impartial probe and the culprit will be brought to book, said a CBCID senior official.

Speaking to reporters in Pollachi, a town in Coimbatore district and about 535 km from here, a senior CBCID official said a special probe team has been formed and has started investigations.

He said documents and other items related to the case have been collected from the police. "The number of people involved in the crime will be known only after the probe," he said.

Tamil Nadu Director General of Police T.K. Rajendran had ordered transfer of the case to the CBCID on Tuesday.

The four accused -- Thirunavukkarasu, Sabarirajan, Vasanthakumar, Satish -- have been arrested in connection with the case.

The National Commission for Women has asked the Tamil Nadu police for the action taken in the sexual assault case.

In Pollachi, college students staged a protest, demanding action against the culprits involved in the sexual-assault-cum-blackmail scandal.

Similarly, college students in Thiruvannamalai, Thoothukudi and Villupuram also staged protests against the sexual assault and demanding action against the culprit.

A mob damaged the bar run by expelled Nagaraj in Pollachi.

Nagaraj was arrested and let out on bail after he and three others attacked the brother of the girl who had lodged the police complaint against sexual assault.
