Kerala tense as demonstrations mark closure of Sabarimala temple

BJP, UDF blames government for disregarding religious sentiments

The closure of the Sabarimala temple for purification rituals following the entry of two women to offer prayers at the sanctum early Wednesday has precipitated a tense situation in Kerala.

The incident has prompted public demonstrations by Hindu right-wing organisations across the State, including a black flag protest against Devaswom Board Minister Kadakampally Surendran at Guruvayur.

BJP demonstrators went on a rampage in front of the Government Secretariat, attacking journalists and damaging Left Democratic Front (LDF) hoardings.

The State police have declared an alert and upped the security for Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan and his cabinet colleagues.

They thwarted a bid by few activists to block Mr .Vijayan’s motorcade from driving into the Secretariat.

Mr. Surendran told reporters that the chief tantri of the Sabarimala temple had no legal mandate to the close the shrine as per the manual of the Travancore Devaswom Board (TDB).

The TDB, a public entity, owned the temple not the chief tantri nor the former ruling family of Pandalam, he said.

“Only the TDB could order the closure of the temple. The tantri is but an employee. The Pandalam family had no administrative role in Sabarimala. It was not clear whether the tantri had consulted the Board. Anyway he has violated the SC order. Let him answer to the Apex Court,” he said.

Mr. Surendran said it was illegal to verify the age of women who visited Sabarimala after September 28 because the SC had allowed those of all ages to enter and worship at the sanctum.

Mr. Vijayan told reporters that two women had indeed worshipped at Sabarimala and that some people had hindered their entry to the temple earlier. “Today there was no such hindrance. The Government would continue to provide security to women seeking to worship at Sabarimala as per the SC order”, he said.

Opposition Leader Ramesh Chennithala has called for Statewide demonstrations to protest what he described as a State-sponsored trespass against Ayyappa faith.

He said the Kerala police had housed the women at a safe house operated by District Police Chief, Kottayam. Plainclothes officers escorted them furtively to the sanctum under cover of darkness at 2 a.m. on Wednesday, he said. They skirted the “18 Holy Steps” and entered the sanctum through a path reserved for TDB employees, he added.

He said Mr. Vijayan had authorised the covert operation in total disregard for the religious sentiments of crores of devotees. The CM’s thoughtless actions would have severe repercussions in Kerala. “Non-believers have conspired to destroy faith,” he said.

BJP State president P. S. Sreedharan Pillai said Mr. Vijayan had betrayed Ayyappa devotees. “The Government would face a backlash against the assault on Hindu faith. Hindu social organisations and sanyasis, including the Sabarimala Karma Samathi, would react strongly,” he said.

Kodiyeri Balakrishnan, secretary of the Communist Party of India (Marxist), Kerala, has slammed the decision of the tantri to close the shrine for purification rituals. He described the action as “provocative” and said it was tantamount to contempt of court.

He said the Government had no insistence that women should worship at Sabarimala. “However, it was bound to uphold the SC order. Hence, it had no option but to provide security to women seeking to pray at the shrine. More women are welcome to worship at the temple and the State would ensure their safety,” he said.

The general secretary of the Nair Service Society (NSS), G. Sukumaran Nair, thanked the tantri and the Pandalam family for having closed the temple for purification rituals to uphold the faith.

The NSS had moved a petition in the SC seeking a review of its September 28 decision and been consistent in its opposition to any move to alter the traditions at Sabarimala.

Communist Party of India State secretary Kanam Rajendran and Industries Minister E. P. Jayarajan condemned the closure of the temple.

P. K. Sajeev, leader of the Malay Araya Samudayam, a tribal group which has claimed a traditional right to administer Sabarimala, described the closure of the temple as a brazen practice of untouchability. “The tantri should clarify whether he went by the Manusmrithi or the Constitution”, he said.
