Mumbai: 7 activists issued notice over farmers march, cry foul

Seven activists who had helped the Kisan March held in November 2018 have alleged vendetta against them. At a press conference held on Wednesday, the activists stated that the police action seemed contrary to how they had behaved while the march was being conducted.

On November 22-23, thousands of farmers marched from Thane to Chunabhatti and then proceeded to Azad Maidan. They had stayed over at Chunabhatti to avoid causing inconvenience to people. The long march was organised by Lok Sangharsha Morcha after assurances from government failed and farmers did not get land rights.

"Instead of working on the written promises, they are targeting people who supported us," said Pratibha Shinde, of Lok Sangharsha Morcha. She added, "They have been called to attend court hearing on March 22. If they are arrested, we will call over 500 farmers and all of us will go to jail too."

Among those whose names are mentioned are Ravindra Bhilare, Feroze Mithiborewala, Jyoti Badekar, Smita Salunkhe, Afroze Malik, Dhananjay Shinde, and Salim Alware. "We have been given notices stating that we helped morcha and to avoid this to happen in future we should be arrested as a precautionary measure," she said.

Shinde further added that, "Deputy commissioner and additional commissioners of police were present at the march. We even had joint commissioner of police who had come to meet us. There is no question of Hitlershahi," said Shinde.

"We were told on November 23 that a case is being filed. The sections they have charged us under for arresting are questionable. We were given a letter on the same when a press conference was organised by us. Later, we were informed to be present in court on March 22. This is being done to harass us," said Feroze Mithiborewala.

Abhishek Trimukhe, deputy commissioner police of zone 1 said, "Those people had sought permission for the march. They were given permission for Azad Maidan but they proceedd in other areas too. Hence a case was registered. I do not know what the organiser (Pratibha Shinde) has said so cannot comment on that."

IN BRIEF

Farmers march was organised by Lok Sangharsha Morcha on November 22-23. Thousands of farmers marched after assurances from government failed and farmers did not get land rights.
