Kirit Somaiya remains sticking point in BJP-Sena alliance

Kirit Somaiya

Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis

Uddhav Thackeray

Narendra Modi

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray, Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and Kirit Somaiya

Heavy-hitters

Sena workers continue to insist they will not canvas for the BJP MP.The BJP and Shiv Sena have ironed out most of their differences ahead of the election, but one sticking point remains:. Sena workers continue to refuse to work for the BJP MP from Mumbai North East.visited Shiv Sena chief’s residence, Matoshree, late on Tuesday night where the two held a long meeting to finalise their election strategy. Thackeray’s son Aditya, Sena leaders Subash Desai and Milind Narvekar, and BJP minister Chandrakant Patil were also in attendance.By the end of the meeting, the two leaders had resolved almost all of their disputes, but they reportedly could not agree on Somaiya. Thackeray reiterated that it was up to the BJP to decide whether to give him a ticket from Mumbai North East, but made it clear he would receive no support from Sena, according to a Sena functionary.Sena will get Palghar seat in the new 23-25 formula. They also agreed there would be no seat swap between the Sena and the BJP; the parties will fight the same seats they fought in 2014, he said.The parties also decided to hold a series of joint rallies across the state, starting from Amravati in the Vidarbha region later this month. They finalised a list of star campaigners who will canvas across the state. Prime Ministerwill address joint rallies with Uddhav. Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, Union ministers Rajnath Singh and Nitin Gadkari, and party president Amit Shah are among the heavy hitters the BJP will deploy.Mumbai North East and Jalna, which state BJP president Raosaheb Danve represents in Parliament, had emerged as problem seats during negotiations. Arjun Khotkar, minister of state for animal husbandry, dairy development and fisheries, had insisted on standing against Danve. Khotkar, a Sena leader, is an MLA from Jalana. The two are locked in a power struggle over control of local bodies such as the zilla parishad, municipal council, agriculture market produces committee and district cooperative bank.“It was decided [during the meeting] that the two will meet Uddhavji and end the fight,” the Sena functionary said. “Khotkar will be given an important cabinet berth in the state government. So that issue has been settled amicably.”-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Narendra Modi will address joint rallies with Thackeray. Yogi Adityanath, Rajnath Singh, Nitin Gadkari and Amit Shah are among the heavy-hitters the BJP will deploy.
