Exclusive: Will hold joint rallies with Mayawati from Navrati, says Akhilesh Yadav

Akhilesh Yadav said the people of the state were disappointed with the Yogi Adityanath-led government. (Photo: PTI)

Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav on Thursday said he and Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) supremo Mayawati would hold joint rallies across Uttar Pradesh for the upcoming 2019 Lok Sabha election. The first joint rally will be held in Deoband on April 7.

As per the seat-sharing pact between the two parties for the upcoming Lok Sabha polls, the Samajwadi Party will contest from 37 seats, while the BSP will contest from 38 seats.

"We held a meeting with Mayawati to finalise the programme of joint rallies for the upcoming Lok Sabha polls. We will begin our joint campaign during Navratri," Akhilesh Yadav told India Today TV.

The former chief minister of Uttar Pradesh said the people of the state were disappointed with the Yogi Adityanath-led government.

"Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has begun tweeting in English but he doesn't understand that people are disappointed with his government. The BJP has failed to deliver on promises. Farmers are forced to guard their fields and the youth is also unhappy because of the growing unemployment," Akhilesh Yadav said.

Akhilesh Yadav also took a dig at the recent incident where two BJP lawmakers from Uttar Pradesh were caught on camera hitting each other with a shoe.

"BJP leaders have become ill-mannered and we all have seen how the two leaders had an ugly spat during the meeting in Sant Kabir Nagar district. The BJP MP from Unnao has also written a letter to the top leadership warning about consequences if he is denied a ticket. Infighting is growing within their party; people have also lost confidence in both central and state leadership," Akhilesh said.

According to the seat-sharing pact, the RLD have been given three seats to contest. The Samajwadi Party and BSP said both the parties would not field any candidates in the Congress party's bastions -- Amethi and Raebareli - constituencies of Rahul and Sonia Gandhi, respectively.
