Bank strike today likely to be partial

NT NETWORK

PANAJI

Although banks have announced a 48-hour strike on January 8-9 in support of the Bharat bandh call given by trade unions, some public sector banks in the state are likely to remain open for services.

Sources at the United Forum of Bank Unions (UFBU), Goa, Monday said that three banks – State Bank of India, Bank of Baroda and Indian Overseas Bank – have decided to keep away from the strike. Private sector banks and state urban co-operative banks will also be open for business, said sources.

Among the large public sector banks, Bank of India and Canara Bank are expected to join the strike.

“We expect banking services in the state to be partially affected, by about 75 per cent,” said Santosh Haldankar, state convenor of UFBU. The strike call is being supported by the All India Bank Employees Association and the Bank Employees Federation of India, but with the largest bank not participating, the impact will be less, he said.

Meanwhile, petrol pumps are expected to remain open. A senior official from Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) said that there is no call to go on strike on Tuesday and all fuel stations in the state are expected to be open for sales.

The all-India bandh call has been given by trade unions in protest against the government’s anti-worker policy.

Meanwhile, Goa Convention of Workers, a joint group of trade unions and mass organisations, will be participating in the two-day national strike, said All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) leader Christopher Fonseca.

He said that a mass rally will be held in Panaji on Tuesday commencing from the KTC bus stand and culminating in a public meeting at the Azad Maidan to be addressed by leaders of various organisations.

He said that the trade unions want the government to take effective measures to control the prices of all essential commodities, food items, petrol, diesel, electricity, water and transport. He urged the government to protect taxi operators, bus operators, rickshaw operators, small hoteliers, restaurant and shack owners, fishermen, market vendors, small scale industries, traders and the artisans.

The two-day strike will witness participation of all public and private transport such as buses, taxis, rickshaws, ferryboats, markets, commercial services, business and industrial establishments and a complete bandh will be observed, Fonseca said.

The Goa Government Employees Association (GGEA) has also announced its support to the Goa Convention of Workers for the strike.

President of GGEA John Nazareth urged the government employees and members of GGEA working in various corporations and autonomous bodies to voluntarily participate in the rally to be organised in the city.

The GGEA back demands for implementation of the Seventh Central Pay commission scales to all the state-owned autonomous bodies and corporations, implementation of defined pension scheme to all government employees and transfer of amount, which is deducted from the employees under the new pension scheme, parity in pay scales, regularisation of service and payment of minimum wages to anganwadi workers.
