Mumbai: Nurses in Nair Hospital protest against misbehaviour by patient's relatives

Some of the nursing staff of the BYL Nair Hospital complained about relatives of a patient misbehaving inside the hospital premises. While the staff complained and protested in the hospital, the authority settled the matter with the patient's relatives and the staff union. The patients' relatives also complained about the nursing staff's misbehaviour.

A 30-year-old Amrut Lokhande, a resident from Junnar village, was admitted in the Nair Hospital after his pancreas swelled up. According to the relatives, the nursing staff started arguing with them over the availability of medicines.

The patient, who is related to Byculla corporator Surekha Lokhande, was admitted a few days ago. Surekha Lokhande, said, "I met the dean of the hospital to complain about the misbehaviour of on-duty nurses. On Monday morning, the staff union started gathering outside the dean's office and they wanted us to apologise. They should learn how to communicate with the relatives. I will be complaining about their behaviour to the DMC as well. We want strict action against their bad behaviour."

Dr RN Bharmal, Dean of BYL Nair Hospital, said, "The nursing staff was protesting in the morning. But, we have spoken to both the parties — the nursing staff union and the patient's relatives. The issue has already been resolved. The patient's relatives have also apologised for their behavior."

Trisila Kamble, nursing staff union leader, said, "This is not the first time that patients' relatives have misbehaved with us. In the night shift, only one nurse works per ward while there is a need of at least three nurses in each ward. We are already overburdened with work. The least we expect is good behavior from the patient and his or her relatives."

COUNTERPOINT

30-yr-old Amrut Lokhande, a resident of Junnar village, was admitted in the Nair Hospital. As per his relatives, the nurses argued with them over availability of medicines
