#ClimateStrike: How young people are rallying to take control of their futures today

100 countries

Latest update say:

2052 places in 123 countries on all continents, including Antarctica.

So, the question is:

What will you do on March 15 2019? https://t.co/ROmtFMrj6Y#schoolstrike4climate #FridaysForFurture #climatestrike #WhateverItTakes

(picture from Sydney today) pic.twitter.com/oFr6IryCnk — Greta Thunberg (@GretaThunberg) March 15, 2019

Extinction Rebellion Australia kept up with the live news from the city.

Students in Delhi at their #SchoolStrike4Climate today!

(spotted a support @GretaThunberg sign too)

Demanding clean air, clean energy, &clean water— asking governments to act now!

Solidarity among young activists across the world is so amazing!#ClimateStrike #FridaysForFuture pic.twitter.com/n79fV8yole — Pujarini (@pujarini_sen) March 15, 2019

Strikes began earliest in Australia, New Zealand and across the rest of the southern hemisphere, with a massivejust in Australia.In Melbourne alone,went on strike. According tothe movement in the country began in November last year, when. There have also been strikes across Asia, including India, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan and many more locations. Strikes were also seen across Africa and the Americas. Even Antarctica saw strikes.These strikes have been meticulously coordinated and organised, with areleased two weeks ago. You only need to searchand thousands upon thousands of tweets about the protests taking place all over the world today will appear. Swedish school girl Greta Thunberg , who inspired the movement and has today been nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize, has been showing her support for students, retweeting pictures from all over the world of those who are are taking a stand against their governments.The movementwas started in August 2018, following in Greta's footsteps, and has helped to coordinate students' protestsover the past few months. The Guardian today explained how. There have been many movements throughout history of this kind, such as protests against the war in Vietnam and protests to end Apartheid in South Africa. Both of these examples led to change, but it remains to be seen whether these strikes will force the worlds' leaders to listen and take action.

Image Credit: Leonhard Lenz on Wikipedia

A note from our Environment Editor, Matilda Martin:

The strikers have also been joined in many cases by parents, grandparents and other adults who are giving thier full support to the younger generation's statement that enough is enough. These strikes are organised and peaceful, although there is no doubt that the following days will see a vast amount of criticism from leading politicians.writes that young people are calling for 'system change, not climate change'."Our governments, particularly those in the West, are manufactured to reap the benefits of the short term, for those in power right now. The reason that governments have not taken substantial action against climate change is that it is not beneficial in the short term - in other words, for their pay cheques. "Our world revolves around money. Our leaders need to stop being selfish and change this, because in the long run, it is more beneficial for everyone to stop climate change. They've had their chance. Such lack of action shows us exactly why they should not be the ones making decisions for our future - because it is OURS." Lead Image:
