BJP urges Delhi CEO to seize data ‘illegally collected by AAP’

Data being misused to call voters, misinform them: Gupta

A delegation of the BJP’s State unit on Friday called upon the Delhi Chief Electoral Officer (CEO) to lodge a “strong protest” against alleged violations of the model code of conduct by the Aam Aadmi Party, including operation of call centres.

BJP leader Vijender Gupta, who led the delegation, said: “We submitted [to the CEO] that AAP continues to sponsor, manage and finance a large number of call centres in the NCR whose executives, at the behest of the party, are calling up Delhi voters and informing them that either their name, or the name of their family members, have been deleted from the voters’ list.”

Mr. Gupta said that the call centres are being run by AAP, which is “misusing illegally collected data from government school students, electricity, water and other utility bills”. He added that the delegation urged the CEO to immediately take “deterrent action” by ensuring that the “data and information illegally collected by AAP” was seized “without further delay”.

“This data needs to be seized so that its misuse is stopped. The delegation stressed that it must be ensured that the call centres do not function in violation of the directions of the election office and the Delhi Police,” Mr. Gupta said.

The operation of the call centres is a “deliberate, planned and sustained misinformation campaign” to “wrongfully and illegally influence voters”, said the Leader of Opposition in the Delhi Assembly.

He added that AAP’s protest at Nirvachan Sadan was an attempt to “pressurise” the Election Commission (EC) and the Delhi Police.

‘Unauthorised activity’

“It is nothing but sheer mischievous interference in conduct of free and fair elections. The delegation asserted that this is being done in a deliberate, planned and sustained manner to mischievously influence the voters in contravention of the directions of the Chief Electoral Office and the Delhi Police Commissioner to stop this unauthorised activity,” Mr. Gupta said.
