Pakistan Secretively Grabs Kartarpur Sahib Gurdwara Land As India Slams Move In Crucial Meet

At a time when tensions across the border between India and Pakistan are rife, Pakistan has "surreptitiously usurped" lands belonging to the Kartarpur Sahib Gurdwara in the name of developing a corridor.

The corridor was developed for the convenience of pilgrims and Indian devotees who can now visit Gurdwara Darbar Sahib in Pakistan’s Kartarpur: the final resting place of Sikh faith’s founder Guru Nanak Dev.

PTI reported that Pakistan has objected to most of the Indian proposals for the project which exposed its ‘double-speak’ approach. Officials from the Indian delegation attended the first India- Pakistan meeting on Thursday to finalise the procedure for the proposed corridor.

The meeting comes only a month after Pakistan-backed terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed attacked a CRPF convoy in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir in which more than 40 soldiers were martyred.

The Indian delegation strongly protested against the "rampant encroachment" on the lands belonging to the holy Sikh shrine in utter disregard to the sentiments of devotees of Guru Nanak Dev in India.

The officials called out Pakistan for resorting to its old reputation of making false promises and tall claims while delivering nothing. The encroached lands were donated to the Kartarpur Sahib by devouts like late Maharaja Ranjeet Singh and others.

A strident demand was made by India for restoration of these lands to the holy gurdwara urgently, keeping in view the strong sentiments on the issue within India," the official said. In a statement, the officials who attended the meeting said that India was serious regarding the initiative and was spending Rs 190 crore in executing the long-lasting and comprehensive facilities while Pakistan wanted to restrict the duration of Kartarpur agreement to just two years.

"Against the hype created by the Pakistan government and the Pakistan media, its actual offer during the talks turned out to be farcical and mere tokenism. There is a sea of difference between what Pakistan, including Prime Minister Imran Khan, had announced, and in what they offered at Attari meeting. Clearly, Pakistan is not interested in providing Indian pilgrims easy access to Kartarpur Sahib," the official said.

The differences that reflected Pakistan’s double-talk were reflected in the meeting as follows:

1) While India was keen on establishing a grand passenger terminal building where around 5,000 pilgrims are expected to make a visit on daily basis and over 15,000 pilgrims on special occasions like Vaisakhi, Pakistan has limited it to mere 700 pilgrims a day.

2) India wanted daily visits of pilgrims to the Kartarpur corridor while Pakistan has restricted it to “visiting days” which will be determined by them.

3) Pakistan has even disallowed permit travel of devotees on foot or as individuals, and has insisted on movement of groups of 15 and by vehicle.

Photo: AP

4) The Kartarpur corridor was hailed as the fall of the Berlin wall because Indian pilgrims would now not require a visa but an official at the meeting said that despite having assured visa-free passage to Kartarpur Sahib, Pakistan has now brought in, through the back door, the requirement of issuance of special permits by them to pilgrims, that also at a fee, which is "outrageous and defeats" the very purpose of the corridor.

5) It has even restricted the corridor facility to just Indian passport holders, ignoring the large number of overseas citizens of India and card holder devotees. “ Pakistan is pretending to be blind to the fact that Guru Nanak Dev holds universal appeal, including the large Indian diaspora” the official added.

Kartarpur Sahib is an important place for Indian devotees where Guru Nanak Dev is believed to have spent the last 18 years of his life. It is located in Pakistan's Narowal district across the river Ravi, about four kilometres from the international border.
