Hundreds of thousands join world youth climate demo

MONTREAL, March 16, 2019 (BSS/AFP) – Hundreds of thousands of young people

skipped school across the globe on Friday to march through the streets for an

international day of student protests aimed at pushing world leaders into

action on climate change.

Classrooms in capitals from Bangkok to Berlin and Lagos to London emptied

as organizers of the student strike called demonstrations in more than 100

countries.

Students flooded into the streets across Europe, North and South America,

and Asia carrying placards reading: “There is no planet B”, “You’re

destroying our future” and “If you don’t act like adults, we will.”

Despite three decades of warnings, carbon dioxide emissions hit record

levels in 2017 and again last year.

Loading the atmosphere with greenhouse gases at current rates will

eventually lead to an uninhabitable planet, scientists say.

In Stockholm, Swedish teen activist Greta Thunberg — who inspired the

protests — warned that time was running out.

“We are living through an existential crisis that has been ignored for

decades and if we do not act now it may be too late,” the 16-year-old, a

Nobel Peace Prize nominee, told Swedish public television station SVT.

Across the world, their placards formed a mosaic:

“Like the ocean, we will rise” (Sydney)

“Our future in your hands” (Berlin)

“System Change not Climate Change” (Vienna)

“Don’t be a Trump” (Hong Kong)

“The Titanic would have NO problem in 2019” (Elmshorn, Germany)

And everywhere, “There is no planet B.”

Montreal drew among the largest crowds, estimated by organizers at nearly

150,000.

In the United States, protests were more low-key, with events held in New

York, Washington, Chicago, Portland, Oregon, and St. Paul, Minnesota, where

one sign read: “So bad even introverts are here!”

Further south in Latin America, placards with messages such as “climate

change is not ‘fake news'” were seen in Buenos Aires, Argentina — while

young people also took to the streets in the Chilean capital Santiago and

Colombia’s Medellin.

In Delhi, one of the world’s most polluted cities, 200 students took part

in a colorful protest, waving ribbons, juggling and performing stunts with

hoops.

“We have to make a choice whether we want to sit and be indifferent or do

something for our planet,” said 16-year-old student Srijani Datta.

In Sydney, 18-year-old Charles Rickwood warned that Australia’s Great

Barrier Reef could be destroyed.

“If current trends in the environment continue, we’ll see the one, two

degrees increase in our ocean then it will simply become unsustainable and we

could lose the entire Great Barrier Reef,” he told AFP.

– Skipping exams –

European students were also out en masse. Several thousand youngsters

thronged the streets of central London in a raucous demonstration with

banners and placards.

Packing into Parliament Square, they cheered and chanted “Change… now!”

before marching past Downing Street and massing outside Buckingham Palace.

“They’re not going to stop me trying to save the planet,” said 15-year-old

Joe Crabtree from southwest London, who had missed two exams to join the

rally.

More than one million marched overall, according to estimates by organizing

groups such as the Youth For Climate movement and AFP reporters.

The Friday for Future movement said more than 300,000 young people

demonstrated in Germany alone.

As youngsters hit the streets, nations meeting at the UN environment

assembly in Kenya announced they had agreed to “significantly reduce” single-

use plastics over the next decade.

But experts said the pledge — which only referred to man-made global

warming and made no mention of the fossil fuels driving it — fell far short

of the steps needed to tackle Earth’s burgeoning pollution crisis.

– ‘Adults should learn a lesson’ –

The global action drew a mixed reaction from politicians.

Germany’s Economy Minister Peter Altmaier said the demonstrators should be

in class while Australia’s Education Minister Dan Tehan said striking was

“not something that we should encourage.”

But New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern hailed the action, saying:

“We hear you and we’re getting on with setting a path for carbon neutrality.”

UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres offered his strongest support yet for

the strikes, writing in The Guardian newspaper: “Without ambitious action,

the Paris agreement is meaningless.”

Guterres also called for world leaders to come to the Climate Action Summit

in New York in September “with concrete, realistic plans” to further reduce

their emissions by 2020, in order to reach a target of 45 percent lower

emissions over the next decade, and to net zero by 2050.

In the Indian Ocean island nation of Mauritius, students circulated a

petition to be submitted to the government demanding concrete measures.

– ‘My eyes hurt from pollution’ –

The Paris treaty calls for capping global warming at “well below” two

degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) but the planet is currently on track

to heat up by double that figure.

The UN’s climate science panel warned in October that only a wholesale

transformation of the global economy and consumer habits could forestall a

catastrophe.

“My eyes hurt from pollution. My shirt gets dirty from dust,” 13-year-old

protester Shagun Kumari told AFP in Delhi.

“I want fresh air that won’t harm my lungs and clean water to drink so that

I don’t keep falling sick.”
