Former BJP chief minister Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri's son joins Congress ahead of Lok Sabha polls

Former BJP chief minister Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri's son joins Congress ahead of Lok Sabha polls Senior BJP leader Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri's son Manish Khanduri on Saturday joined the Congress party during a rally in Dehradun. By: ABP News Bureau | 16 Mar 2019 02:48 PM (IST) FOLLOW US: Before joining Congress, Manish was working with Facebook India. (Image: PTI) Manish Khanduri on Saturday joined the Congress party He is the son of Sr BJP leader Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri is former Uttarakhand chief minister

Lok Sabha Elections 2019: Senior Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri's son Manish Khanduri on Saturday joined the Congress party during a rally in Dehradun in the presence of party president Rahul Gandhi. Welcoming him into the party fold, Gandhi said him joining the Congress will strengthen the party. As per reports, it is predicted that the Congress might field Manish Khanduri from Pauri, a Lok Sabha seat held by his father. Former Uttarakhand chief minister BC Khanduri was removed last year as chairman of the parliamentary standing committee on defence. The Congress had latched on to the removal of the former army general from the committee to attack the BJP. Before joining Congress, Manish was heading the News Partnerships department at Facebook India. He has also worked as a business journalist with the Business Standard newspaper and the Businessworld magazine in Delhi and Mumbai. Manish is a Marketing & Finance Graduate from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University in Illinois, US. However, BJP remains calm on the move as its state president Ajay Bhatt had said that Manish Khanduri is not a party member and so it doesn't matter where he goes. "Not a single BJP leader is joining the Congress at its rally on 16 March ," Bhatt had told PTI. It was Rahul Gandhi's first rally in Uttarakhand after the announcement of Lok Sabha Elections 2019. Gandhi, in his speech, took a jibe at Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the ruling BJP over various issues including Rafale aircraft deal, goods and services tax (GST), farmers distress and others.

Follow Elections News on abp LIVE for more latest stories and trending topics. Watch breaking news and top headlines online on abp News LIVE TV
