New Zealand terror attack: Heartbreaking tributes pour in from around the world

New Zealand: Gun laws will change following attack says PM

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Minute silences, vigils and prayers continue across the globe as millions struggle to come to terms with the worst peacetime mass shooting in New Zealand history. Australia honoured the victims by lighting up some of the country’s most famous landmarks, including the Sydney Opera House which projected the Silver Fern of New Zealand on its sails. Hundreds of demonstrators also took part in an anti-racist and anti-fascist rally against Islamophobia in Melbourne.

Meanwhile, across the Atlantic, the iconic Empire State building remained in darkness as a mark of respect, whilst hundreds of others attended a vigil held at the NYU Kimmel Centre in New York city. In the Indian city of Hyderabad, which is home to almost 2 million followers of the Islamic faith, thousands of woman came together to hold a silent protest. During the emotional service the woman all held a placard with the words: “Peace will save the world #Solidarity with New Zealand mosque victims.”

Tributes have poured in from across the world for the victims of the New Zealand terror attack

Sydney Opera House projected the Silver Fern of New Zealand

A Candelit Prayer is held outside the State Library of Victoria in Australia

Mosques across Europe were also inundated with messages of support, some of the largest gatherings were seen in Turkey’s largest city Istanbul, where hundreds marched outside the Hagia Sophia. The alleged suspect Brenton Tarrant, 28, from Australia, has since appeared in court in Christchurch charged with one count of murder, however New Zealand Police said further charges were expected to follow. Mr Brenton, a suspected white supremacist, was pictured handcuffed in the dock wearing a white prison shirt, and stood in silence without entering a plea and will be remanded in custody until April 5.

The iconic Empire State building remained in darkness as a mark of respect

Muslim women held a silent protest in Hyderabad

Turkey’s largest city Istanbul, where hundreds marched outside the Hagia Sophia

The tragic attack saw 41 people killed at the Masjid Al Noor mosque in central Christchurch, whilst seven others were killed at the suburban Linwood Masjid Mosque, and one person died later at Christchurch Hospital. The hospital also confirmed 39 people are still receiving treatment, with 11 of them in intensive care. A total of four people were arrested in connection with the incident - one of whom was in possession of a firearm but with the intention of assisting police was released a short time later.

Brenton Tarrant, 28, from Australia appeared in court in Christchurch

New Zealand: Man charged with murder after terrorist attack
