In #hashtag election, citizens are becoming mere pawns

One of India's most popular writers, Shobhaa De has seen it all: life as a model, a copywriter, a journalist, a socialite, a scriptwriter, a bestselling novelist and a busy mother of six children. "Politically Incorrect", which has been appearing as a column in The Times of India, carries her sharp observations on politics, society, economy and relationships. LESS ... MORE

There is a generation out there with votes that matter in this crucial election, feeling entirely left out of the process that will directly impact them. You know why? These good folks belong to the pre-hashtag demographic and cannot be counted as soldiers in India’s gigantic social media army. It is this army of mainly anonymous warriors, which will be on the frontlines of the Battle for the Ballot. The bizarre truth is if a topic isn’t trending, it doesn’t exist. Who can explain the meaning and impact of ‘trending’ to this genteel generation? So much for the oldie-goldies and their engagement with the political narrative.

The most hideous part of the current situation is how easy it has become to manipulate minds, with master puppeteers hard at work influencing voter sentiments. Given that Election 2019 will be dominated by an alarmingly young electorate (half of our population is under 25), the political party that successfully woos this demographic on various social media platforms will walk away with the biggest slice of the cake.

By far the most disturbing aspect of the hardsell is the manner in which Kargil, Pulwama and Balakot are being drawn into the debate to score political points, point fingers, accuse, defend and disown. So many theories are being floated that the average voter, sickened by the blatant mindgames, is turning away in disgust. To think any political party would shamelessly trade in such tragedies is an insult to not just our soldiers but humanity itself.

After all, armies fight to defend their country, not a political party. The army does not ‘belong’ to anybody. Netas should stop parading men in uniform as if they are loyal party workers paid for PR exercises, instead of concentrating on military ones. This has never happened in the past. Our armed forces were not pulled into political controversies and converted into party spokesmen. Well, it is happening. And citizens are aghast at this show of brazenness.

Everybody in the fray is guilty of hustling. Aggressive hustling has been legitimised. But there has to be a limit to peddling patriotism. To refer to Balakot as a ‘game-changer’ shows how brutally one can cash in and convert a tactical manoeuvre into a vote-catching opportunity. Critics of Balakot went so far as to suggest that the Pulwama terror attack could have been ‘engineered’. The suggestion itself is not just dangerous but also deeply wounding to the families of those who gave up their lives on February 14. And yet, these ugly discourses can still be heard in drawing-rooms across India.

Have we fallen so low that we shamelessly argue about electoral ‘gains’ or ‘losses’ after military engagements that take lives? I have read clinical analyses, complete with graphics and statistics that present the pros and cons of Kargil and now Balakot, as potential vote catchers. There have been foolish, insensitive debates around the BJP winning a decisive edge over opponents after ‘showing’ Pakistan who’s boss. Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman has been appropriated by all sorts of players and non-players, like he is a product or brand for selling packaged patriotism en masse. Nobody wants to hear the counter-narrative. This is a morally abhorrent thing to do. You simply cannot flog the images of a brave pilot for personal gain!

Once we were done with that story, we started hunting for another one that would get everybody excited. It’s easy to whip up religious fervour in India. And the bhakts found exactly what they were looking for in an innocuous detergent commercial. In the case of the Surf Excel ad, these hate-mongers went beyond the limits of decency by attacking the concept showing two children, a Muslim and a Hindu, helping one another during Holi. It was meant to generate a feeling of harmony at a time when hate is being encouraged, even glorified. What happened next? A barrage of protests was speedily engineered over social media, with the most negative, divisive comments going viral. The usual nonsense was spewed (“insult to Hindu sentiment’’, “disrespectful to Islam”), while trolls went into overdrive suspecting the timing and motives of the detergent promo. Vile!

As D-Day draws near, the fear is we will witness an aggressive stepping up of attacks and counter-attacks — which is expected. But these attacks won’t be based on the real issues that matter to citizens. Simply because nobody has the answers or solutions to our myriad problems. It is so much easier to distract and disrupt. Deceive and dump. If all else fails, bring Vijay Mallya back. That’s the only trick left in the book for desperados with nothing concrete to offer voters but a mega stunt like this one.

Oh dear… Here’s to us, the citizens/pawns of Election 2019. May the most trending #hashtag win.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
