Priyanka Gandhi to hold rally in Nagpur

Mr Patole will be fighting against Union minister Nitin Gadkari in Nagpur Lok Sabha constituency.

Nagpur: Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi is likely to address an election rally in Nagpur, which will be her political debut in Maharashtra, informed Nagpur Congress Lok Sabha candidate Nana Patole. He will be fighting against Union minister Nitin Gadkari in Nagpur Lok Sabha constituency.

Mr Patole who had quit the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and his Lok Sabha seat while challenging Prime Minister Narendra Modi both inside and outside Parliament is the sole MP who is not satisfied with the governance.

Listing irregularities and scams in the BJP ruled Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) which is under the direct supervision of chief minister Devendra Fadnavis and central minister Nitin Gadkari, Mr Patole said the duo have successfully damaged the autonomous status of the civic body and virtually robbed its charm. All the developmental and service activities are being privatised and Nagpur Metro Rail Corporation (NMRC) has been unnecessarily given undue benefits.

Mr Patole said a lot of resentment is prevailing among the common men as property taxes have increased, the water supply services have been handed over to private party (OCW), which has also affected the smooth water supply across most part of the city particularly in South, North and Central Nagpur areas.

Replying to a question, Mr Patole said, Mr Gadkari is our friend and has blessed me personally but during last five years; he has little to cheer up the youngsters waiting for employment opportunities. If elected, Mr Patole said his party will make all efforts to provide jobs to unemployed youths.

He ridiculed Mr Gadkari saying in year 2009, Mr Gadkari had made power point presentation at Yashwant Stadium and in Amravat to promise lakhs of jobs in Mihan. Where are the lakhs of job?” he asked.

On international issue, Mr Patole said Pakistan and China would be very happy if Narendra Modi is elected since China is dumping huge scrap in India and you see a large number of Chinese products have flooded in the market.
