Cong gets ex-CM Khanduri’s son after losing Patil’s in Maha

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Aditi Tandon

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, March 16

Barely days after the BJP poached the son of veteran Maharashtra Congressman R Vikhe Patil in Maharashtra, the Congress today took sweet revenge on the saffron party by managing to get Uttarakhand BJP stalwart BC Khanduri’s son Manish Khanduri into the party fold.

Manish crossed over to the Congress in the presence of party president Rahul Gandhi at a rally in Uttarakhand. This came as a huge setback to the BJP on the eve of Lok Sabha elections and in a season of poll-time defections.

Rahul Gandhi used the occasion to take a swipe at Prime Narendra Modi-led BJP government and said “there is a reason why Khanduri is here.”

Gandhi referred in his rally to the removal of BC Khanduri as the chairman of the parliamentary committee on defence after Khanduri had a castigating report revealing the weak state of defence preparedness in the country.

“There is a reason why (Manish) Khanduriji is here,” Gandhi said. “BC Khanduri was the chairman of defence committee of Parliament. He gave his whole life for the country and the armed forces. But when he asked a question on national security in the committee saying the government is not doing what it should do to help the armed forces, Narendra Modi removed him from his position. This is the problem in the BJP. There is no space for truth in the BJP,” said Rahul Gandhi, as the battle lines were drawn ahead of LS polls starting April 11.

Gandhi again flagged the alleged Rafale jet deal corruption today and said the Congress wanted a joint parliamentary panel probe into the matter.

Allies with Apna Dal faction in UP

Congress and Krishna Patel faction of the Apna Dal entered into a pre-poll alliance in UP on Saturday with the Congress reserving Gonda and Pilibhit seats for the alliance. The Apna Dal faction led by Krishna Patel's daughter Anupriya, an MOS in health ministry, has allied for two seats with the BJP.
