Highlights | One day holiday, 7 days’ mourning in Goa after CM Manohar Parrikar’s death

Sudin Dhavalikar wants to become the Chief Minister: Goa Deputy Speaker

Michael Lobo, Goa Deputy Speaker and BJP MLA: Sudin Dhavalikar (Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party leader) wants to become the Chief Minister. He said he has sacrificed many times by supporting BJP, he has put his demand but BJP will not agree to that.

Michael Lobo, Goa Deputy Speaker & BJP MLA: Sudin Dhavalikar (Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party leader) wants to become the Chief Minister. He said he has sacrificed many times by supporting BJP, he has put his demand but BJP will not agree to that. #Goa pic.twitter.com/pwwymv5Uj9 — ANI (@ANI) 18 March 2019

Our priority for now is to give Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar a proper farewell: MGP

Meetings conclude. No decision has been arrived at. “Our priority for now is to give Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar a proper farewell. A decision could be taken after that,” says MGP.

After one hour we will know who is the candidate: Sudin Dhavalikar

Sudin Dhavalikar, MGP after meeting with Nitin Gadkari: They will decide in 1 hour after discussions with the MLAs. I’m going to the executive committee of my party, I will ask them to have a resolution. After one hour we will know who is the candidate, reports news agency ANI.

MGP will have to take resolution on supporting government: Sudin Dhavalikar

“BJP said that they will get back to us in one hour. After that our party (MGP) will have to take a resolution (on supporting the government) whatever discussions we held with the BJP are confidential”, says MGP leader Sudin Dhavalikar.

Not easy to fill Parrikar’s shoes: Vijai Sardesai

We have discussed the contours of the alliance and how things should function. They (BJP central leadership) have told us that they will get back to us. It is not easy to fill Parrikar’s shoes. We’ll see tomorrow morning, says Vijai Sardesai after emerging from discussions with Nitin Gadkari and B L Santosh.

Independent MLA Prasad Gaonkar arrives at hotel where alliance partners are holding meeting over next Goa CM

Independent MLA Prasad Gaonkar who appeared to have deserted the ruling coalition now enters the hotel where BJP leaders and alliance partners are holding extensive parleys to finalize who should succeed Manohar Parrikar as CM.

Goa Forward Party chief Vijai Sardesai with party MLAs arrive for meeting with Nitin Gadkari

Panaji: Goa Forward Party (GFP) chief Vijai Sardesai with party MLAs Vinod Palyekar and Jayesh Salgaonkar along with two independent MLAs Rohan Khaunte and Govind Gaude arrive for meeting with senior BJP leader Nitin Gadkari.

Panaji: Goa Forward Party (GFP) Chief Vijai Sardesai with party MLAs Vinod Palyekar & Jayesh Salgaonkar along with two independent MLAs Rohan Khaunte and Govind Gaude arrives for meeting with senior BJP leader Nitin Gadkari. pic.twitter.com/0PwxbW9ea7 — ANI (@ANI) 17 March 2019

Goa Forward and two independents to meet BJP national leaders

Goa Forward and two independents to meet BJP national leaders. “We will see what they have to say,” says Vijai Sardesai. “Nothing is finalised”.

MGP leaders arrive at hotel in Goa to meet BJP central observers

MGP leaders Sudin Dhavalikar and Babu Ajgaonkar arrive at the hotel to meet with BJP central observers B L Santosh and Nitin Gadkari who are camping in Goa.

Nitin Gadkari arrives in Panaji for BJP legislature meet

Goa: Union Minister and senior BJP leader Nitin Gadkari arrives in Panaji for the BJP legislature meet following the demise of Goa CM Manohar Parrikar, reports news agency ANI.

BJP has no allies now: Goa Congress leaders write to Governor

Goa Congress leaders G Chodankar and C Kavlekar write letter to Goa Governor staking claim to form Government, letter reads “Coalition partners of Parrikar led government had allied with BJP on condition that government is headed by Manohar Parrikar. BJP therefore has no allies as of now.”

Goa Congress leaders G Chodankar & C Kavlekar write letter to Goa Governor staking claim to form Government, letter reads "Coalition partners of Parrikar led Govt had allied with BJP on condition that Govt is headed by Manohar Parrikar. BJP therefore has no allies as of now." https://t.co/5HIqE2WRDi — ANI (@ANI) 17 March 2019

Goa Congress leaders write to Governor staking claim to form government

Goa Congress leaders Girish Chodankar and Chandrakant Kavlekar write letter to Goa Governor, Mridula Sinha staking claim to form Government in the state.

Goa Congress leaders Girish Chodankar and Chandrakant Kavlekar write letter to Goa Governor, Mridula Sinha staking claim to form Government in the state. pic.twitter.com/vqFU6gBTUi — ANI (@ANI) 17 March 2019

We had given support to Manohar Parrikar not BJP: Vijai Sardesai

Vijai Sardesai, Goa Forward Party: We had given support to Manohar Parrikar not BJP. Now that he is not anymore, options are open. We want stability in Goa, we don’t want dissolution of house. We’ll wait for the decision at the BJP legislature meeting and then take the next step, reports news agency ANI.

Not only a loss for BJP, but also for society: Amit Shah

BJP President Amit Shah: Manohar Parrikar ji is no more with us, it’s not only a loss for BJP but also for the society. From modernization of the forces to the first surgical strikes under PM Modi’s leadership, he gave a good account of his administrative qualities.

BJP President Amit Shah: Manohar Parrikar ji is no more with us, it's not only a loss for BJP but also for the society. From modernization of the forces to the first surgical strikes under PM Modi's leadership, he gave a good account of his administrative qualities. pic.twitter.com/F9FdKxOmP0 — ANI (@ANI) 17 March 2019

Location of Manohar Parrikar’s ‘Vidhi’ changed from SAG grounds Campal to Miramar

The cremation of late Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar will take place full state honour on Monday evening.

The funeral procession will be taken from Kala Academy, Panjim, at four in the evening and last rites will be performed at five in the evening at Miramar.

Parrikar’s mortal remains will be kept at the BJP head office, Panjim, between 9:30 am to 10:30 am and would be moved to Kala Academy for the public to pay their last respects. The public can pay homage to Parrikar from 11 am to 4 pm.

All official programmes of BJP scheduled for tomorrow cancelled

All official programmes of BJP including the CEC scheduled for tomorrow, have been cancelled, following the demise of Former Defence Minister and Goa CM Manohar Parrikar, reported news agency ANI.

Goa Congress again stakes claim to form govt, second time in 48 hours

Goa Congress again stakes claim to form govt, writes to governor second time in 48 hours.

Modi biopic poster launch put off on Goa CM’s death

The launch of second poster of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s biopic of the same name was postponed following the death of Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar on Sunday evening, reported news agency IANS.

Parrikar passed away at the age of 63 after a prolonged battle with pancreatic cancer.

BJP President Amit Shah was to launch the poster of the film “PM Narendra Modi” on Monday morning in Delhi.

However, late in the evening the makers of the film messaged invitees, “We are extremely sorry to inform that the poster launch of our film ‘PM Narendra Modi’, which was scheduled for March 18, 10.30 am, has been postponed due to the death of Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar.”

RIP Manohar Parrikar: From an IIT engineer to BJP’s tallest leader in Goa

Goa Governor condoles Parrikar’s death

The Governor of Goa Dr. Smt. Mridula Sinha on behalf of the state Government and the people of Goa and along with Dr. Ram Kripal Sinha has conveyed heartfelt condolences and sympathies to all, on the death of beloved Chief Minister and Former Union Minister for Defence Shri Manohar Parrikar on March 17, 2019.

In her condolence message the Governor has said that she is deeply sorry to hear about the sad and untimely demise of Shri Manohar Parrikar. Further she has said, as a political leader he had, in his own way, chartered a new approach to various problems and succeeded in resolving many of them by his sincere personality. Shri Manohar Parrikar was an able Administrator and has raised the stature of the State of Goa to the highest level. He created an ideal for all the leaders to emulate and follow his path. He will be remembered as a social worker who gave his whole life to the cause of people. ln his death, the country and the State of Goa has lost a tall leader and the vacuum created by him will be difficult to fill, she added.

Odisha CM condoles death of Parrikar

Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik on Sunday condoled the demise of Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar.

“Deeply saddened by news of the passing away of former Defence Minister of India & Chief Minister, Goa #Manohar Parrikar. My thoughts and prayers are with his family, friends & followers. May his soul rest in peace,” Patnaik wrote on Twitter.

Goa govt declares one day holiday, 7 days’ state

The Goa government has declared one day holiday, and seven days’ state mourning period following CM Manohar Parrikar’s death.

Parrikar consulted Church in major decisions: Archbishop

Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar, who passed away on Sunday, often sought out influential Catholic Church leaders for opinions before taking “far reaching decisions” for the benefit of Goa, Archbisop Filipe Neri Ferrao said.

In his condolence message, Ferrao, whose influential Roman Catholic Church has had several run-ins with the Bharatiya Janata Party-led governments in the coastal state including those run by Parrikar, also said the 63-year-old politician’s “sense of secularism and communal harmony and respect for the various religions, cultures and traditions of the people have been generally appreciated by the population”.

Program plan of Manohar Parrikar’s final journey

Manohar Parrikar’s mortal remains will be kept at the BJP head office, Panjim from 9:30 am to 10:30 am on Monday.

His remains will then be taken to Kala Academy, Panjim, where the public will pay their final respects.

The funeral procession of Parrikar will then head to SAG grounds in Campal where the last rites will be performed.

Congress to stake claim to form government in Goa

With the BJP strength in the Goa Assembly down to 12 MLAs after the death of Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar on Sunday, the Congress is likely to stake claim to form the government in the coastal state, a senior party leader said.

“There is no cabinet in place now. We are going to demand the Governor to invite the Congress party to form a government because we are the single largest party in the Assembly with 14 MLAs,” the leader told IANS on condition of anonymity.

Congress secretary in-charge of Goa A. Chellakumar is expected to arrive here on Sunday night to take charge of his party’s bid to form the government.

Condolences over untimely death of former defence minister: Chandrababu Naidu

“Deepest condolences over the untimely death of former Defence Minister and Chief Minister of Goa #ManoharParrikar. May his soul rest in peace. May God give strength and support to the bereaved family at this saddest hour,” said Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu.

Centre announces national mourning on March 18

The government announced national mourning on Monday as Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar died this evening, officials said.

A Home Ministry spokesperson said the national flag will fly at half-mast in the national capital, the union territories and the state capitals.

A meeting of the Union Cabinet will be held on Monday at 10 am.

State funeral will be accorded to Parrikar.

Parrikar was most lovable and honest senior politician: Venkaiah Naidu

“Deeply saddened to learn about the untimely passing away of Shri Manohar Parrikar, Chief Minister of Goa.

He is one of the most lovable and honest senior politicians of our country. He was a dynamic and dedicated individual who led life full of values and principles,” tweeted Vice President of India M. Venkaiah Naidu.

Manohar Parrikar away from VIP culture: VHP

“Manohar Parrikar away from VIP culture, carried his own luggage, stood in queues as an ordinary man, cleanest politician, represented the modern suave generation & demonstrated excellence in whatever he did,” tweeted Vishva Hindu Parishad.

Not even cancer can kill a spirit like Manohar Parrikar: Kamal Hassan

“Party ideologies apart a good and gentle man will always be it. Not even cancer can kill a spirit like @manoharparrikar . Have had the honour of breaking bread with him. As will the Nation, I too will remember him,” tweeted Kamal Hassan.

A man of impeccable integrity: Ravi Shankar Prasad

“Deeply condole the sad demise of Manohar Parrikar. A brilliant IIT graduate, an outstanding CM of Goa, an accomplished Defence Minister, a man of impeccable integrity, firm believer in good governance and above all a good human being. Miss you Manohar ji,” tweeted Union minister Ravi Shankar Prasad.

Manohar Parikkar was epitome of integrity: Vasundhara Raje

“Anguished by the news of Shri #ManoharParikkar Ji’s untimely demise. He was the epitome of integrity and honesty, having served the people of Goa with dedication and commitment that will inspire generations to come,” tweeted Vasundhara Raje.

India grateful to Manohar Parrikar for his tenure as defence minister: PM

“India will be eternally grateful to Shri Manohar Parrikar for his tenure as our Defence Minister. When he was RM, India witnessed a series of decisions that enhanced India’s security capacities, boosted indigenous defence production and bettered the lives of ex-servicemen,” PM Narendra Modi tweeted.

Manohar Parrikar was the builder of modern Goa: PM Modi

“Shri Manohar Parrikar was an unparalleled leader.

A true patriot and exceptional administrator, he was admired by all. His impeccable service to the nation will be remembered by generations.

Deeply saddened by his demise. Condolences to his family and supporters.

Om Shanti,” PM Narendra Modi tweeted.

“Shri Manohar Parrikar was the builder of modern Goa. Thanks to his affable personality and accessible nature, he remained the preferred leader of the state for years. His pro-people policies ensured Goa scales remarkable heights of progress,” PM said in another tweet.

Devendra Fadnavis condoles death of Manohar Parrikar

“He was a true son of Goa and served India in many roles and responsibilities !

No doubt Shri Manohar Parrikar will be remembered as one of best Defence Ministers of India.

My deepest condolences to his family, friends and people of Goa & India,” tweeted Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis.

Immediately leaving for Goa: Nitin Gadkari

“BJP has faced a huge loss with the demise of #ManoharParrikar Ji... Apart from being a party member, he was a really close friend of mine. He isn’t with me today & I’m personally very pained by this. I am immediately leaving for Goa,” said Nitin Gadkari, reported news agency ANI.

Parrikar always led by example in his public life: Arun Jaitley

“Saddened to know about the demise of senior BJP leader Shri Manohar Parrikar ji, Chief Minister of Goa. He always led by example in his public life & was loved by masses. He will be missed by everyone of us. May God render peace to the departed soul,” tweeted Arun Jaitley.

From surgical strikes to OROP: How Manohar Parrikar shaped India’s military

An outsider in Delhi, Parrikar was quick to grasp the intricacies of the ministry, the working of the armed forces and the challenges of modernising the military in the face of shrinking budgets.

Manohar Parrikar’s passing away has left a huge gap in politics: Kharge

“He (Goa CM Manohar Parrikar) was a good human being. His passing away has left a huge gap in politics; we have lost a good politician. His demise has caused us immense grief. I express my grief and I pay my tributes on behalf of my party and myself,” said senior Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge.

Manohar Parrikar was respected by all across political lines: HD Kumaraswamy

“Extremely saddened to hear of the passing away of the Chief Minister of Goa Shri #ManoharParrikar.

He was respected by all across political lines.

My heartfelt condolences to his family, friends and loved ones. May his soul rest in peace,” tweeted HD Kumaraswamy.

Parrikar’s contribution to the nation will never be forgotten: Ram Vilas Paswan

“Deeply saddened by the demise of Goa Chief Minister and former Defence Minister, Shri Manohar Parrikar ji. He lived a very simple life. His contribution to the nation will never be forgotten. May God give strength to his family to bear this tragic loss,” tweeted Ram Vilas Paswan.

Parrikar was committed to philosophy of Nation First, Party Next , Self Last: Amit Shah

“Parrikar ji has shown the entire nation how a BJP Karyakarta, even during his toughest time, is committed to the philosophy of Nation First, Party Next and Self Last.

He will always be remembered for his contributions as India’s Defence Minister and as CM of Goa,” tweeted BJP national president Amit Shah.

As Raksha Mantri his contribution will remain unparalleled: Nirmala Sitharaman

“Shri Manohar Parrikar is no more. A sincere, honest & sensitive political activist. Was simple and down to earth, I learnt a lot from Shri.Parrikar. As Raksha Mantri his contribution to making the armed forces a modernised, lean & mean fighting machine will remain unparalleled,” tweeted defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman.

Manohar Parrikar, first IITian to become CM of a state: Suresh Prabhu

“Extremely saddened by the untimely demise of my good friend Manohar Parrikar ji. An epitome of impeccable integrity, a down to earth personality, the first IITian to become CM of a state, great son of India gone too soon... RIP my dear friend...,” tweeted Suresh Prabhu.

A symbol of simplicity in politics: Arvind Kejriwal

“Extremely saddened at the news of passing away of Goa CM Sh Manohar Parrikar ji. A symbol of simplicity in politics who led a humble life is no longer with us. May his family bear the irreparable loss with courage. Prayers with them,” tweeted Arvind Kejriwal.

Parrikar’s exemplary leadership will continue to inspire us: Piyush Goyal

“Extremely saddened to know about the sad demise of our beloved and stalwart leader Shri Manohar Parrikar Ji. His exemplary leadership will continue to inspire us and serve as a benchmark,” tweeted Union minister Piyush Goyal.

Manohar Parrikar: BJP’s crisis man in Goa

Manohar Parrikar, who rose from a pracharak of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) to become the country’s Defence Minister and also chief minister of Goa, enjoyed a man-next-door image in the politically-volatile coastal state.

Parrikar, 63, served the state four times as chief minister and had a three-year-long stint as Defence Minister in the Narendra Modi-led cabinet.

Aam Aadmi Party condoles death of Manohar Parrikar

The Aam Aadmi party has condoled the death of the CM Shri Manohar Parrikar. Extending sympathies to the bereaved family members, AAP Goa Convenor Elvis Gomes said that with the passing away of Parrikar, Goa has lost a politician who had changed the political discourse from the time he ascended into power.

“Having closely seen him work, I can say that he showed the right intentions in the beginning though political pulls and pressures affected the direction of his governance. We parted ways on ideological differences, but still saw him as a buffer against the divisive designs of the party he belonged to. We pray that his soul rests in peace” said Gomes.

Security tightened outside Parrikar’s residence

As Goa chief minister Manohar Parrikar died at his Panaji residence on Sunday evening, relatives, officials and admirers have begun gathering and security has been tightened outside his house.

Security tightened outside Manohar Parrikar’s house ( HT Photo )

May his soul rest in peace: Priyanka Gandhi

“My condolences to the bereaved family of Shri. Manohar Parrikar. I met him only once, when he graciously visited my mother at the hospital two years ago. May his soul rest in peace,” tweeted Priyanka Gandhi Vadra.

Manohar Parrikar was one of Goa’s favourite sons: Rahul Gandhi

“I am deeply saddened by the news of the passing of Goa CM, Shri Manohar Parrikar Ji, who bravely battled a debilitating illness for over a year.

Respected and admired across party lines, he was one of Goa’s favourite sons.

My condolences to his family in this time of grief,” tweeted Congress national president Rahul Gandhi.

Saddened at the passing away of Goa CM: Mamata Banerjee

“Saddened at the passing away of Goa Chief Minister #ManoharParrikar ji. He patiently endured his illness. Condolences to his family and his admirers,” tweeted Mamata Banerjee.

We condole passing away of Goa CM Manohar Parrikar: Congress

“We condole the passing of former Union Minister & Chief Minister @manoharparrikar. We hope that his family finds strength in their moment of grief,” tweeted Congress.

Omar Abdullah condoles Manohar Parrikar’s death

“My heartfelt condolences to the family, friends & colleagues of Manohar Parrikar Sahib. His untimely demise has left a void that will be difficult to fill. May his soul rest in peace,” tweeted Omar Abdullah.

Condolence meet for Goa CM Manohar Parrikar at 11 am tomorrow

Condolence meet to be held in the Union Cabinet at 11 am tomorrow for Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar, reported news agency ANI.

Goa CM Manohar Parrikar dies, tweets President Kovind

“Extremely sorry to hear of the passing of Shri Manohar Parrikar, Chief Minister of Goa, after an illness borne with fortitude and dignity. An epitome of integrity and dedication in public life, his service to the people of Goa and of India will not be forgotten,” tweets President Ram Nath Kovind.

Extremely sorry to hear of the passing of Shri Manohar Parrikar, Chief Minister of Goa, after an illness borne with fortitude and dignity. An epitome of integrity and dedication in public life, his service to the people of Goa and of India will not be forgotten #PresidentKovind — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) March 17, 2019

Relatives, officials arrive at Goa CM’s residence

A stream of well wishers have begun to gather outside the Chief Minister’s residence including current and former ministers and MLAs.

Officials and ministers streaming into Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar’s residence. Chief Secretary, Director General of Police , Speaker of the assembly. Union Minister of State for Ayush Shripad Naik all arrive at Parrikar’s residence. Area cordoned off. Official announcement yet to be made. Family is being privately informed first.

Goa CM Parrikar ‘critical’

Ailing Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar’s health condition is extremely critical, his office said Sunday.

Parrikar, 63, is suffering from a serious pancreatic ailment, and is currently at his private residence at Dona Paula near here.

Chief Minister @manoharparrikar's health condition is extremely critical. Doctors are trying their best. — CMO Goa (@goacm) March 17, 2019
