RJD refuses to leave 11 seats for Congress in Bihar, seat-sharing announcement delayed

PATNA: The seat-sharing announcement by opposition’s grand alliance in Bihar for the comong Lok Sabha elections has once again been deferred after big brother RJD on Sunday refused to leave 11 seats for the second major ally Congress. Bihar has 40 Lok Sabha seats.The seat-sharing arrangement would now be announced on March 19, instead of March 18.Sources in the grand alliance said an emissary of RJD boss Lalu Prasad on Saturday asked the Congress leadership that the grand old party is free to contest all 40 seats alone if it was not ready to accept 8 seats. Congress demands at least 11 seats.The Congress has reportedly roped in an old leader who enjoys cordial relations with Lalu and his son Tejashwi Prasad Yadav to sort out the seat-sharing issue.The senior Congress leader, who hails from Gujarat, on Sunday took personal initiatives and invited Tejashwi for fresh round of talks, sources said.Tejashwi, who was scheduled to return to Patna along with the Vikassheel Insaan Party (VIP) president Mukesh Sahni on Saturday evening, was requested by Congress leaders to stay in the national capital for seat-sharing discussions.RLSP chief Upendra Kushwaha , who landed at Patna airport this afternoon to go to Rafiganj, had to return to Delhi from the airport itself at the request of Congress leadership.“Kushwaha had arrived at Patna airport to visit Rafiganj in Aurangabad district to address a party programme where some leaders of other parties were scheduled to join the RLSP. But he returned to Delhi from the airport,” RLSP national general secretary and spokesperson Fazal Imam Mallick said.Congress legislature party (CLP) leader Sadanand Singh too left for Delhi by an evening train at the directive of AICC to participate in the fresh round of seat-sharing talks.Sources said Kushwaha, Tejashwi and senior Congress leaders would once again meet in Delhi on Monday to discuss issues related to seat-sharing between the RJD and the Congress in the wake of the RJD’s plea of not giving more than 8 seats to the Congress.“Seat-sharing among the RJD and other smaller allies like RLSP, HAM(S) and the VIP is clear. Whatever difficulties remained is between the RJD and the Congress,” a senior leader of one of the smaller allies told TOI on Sunday.He said the Congress wants at least 11 seats while RJD is not ready to give more than 8 to Congress. But the issue would be resolved by Sunday as both the parties might be ready to forgive one or two seats.Contacted over phone, the AICC in charge for Bihar Shaktisinh Gohil said, “There is no difficulty in the seat-sharing. All allies of grand alliance have agreed. Please wait for two days. Everything would be announced before media.”However, the VIP president Mukesh Sahni, who returned to Patna this evening after holding several rounds of parleys with alliance leaders on seat-sharing, told TOI on Sunday that the seat-sharing among all allies had been finalised and it would be formally announced to public at a joint press conference in Patna on March 19.State Congress chief Madan Mohan Jha had on Saturday told TOI that the joint press conference would be held on March 18 (Monday). “Now, Tejashwi will return to Patna on Monday evening and Kushwaha too has some engagements on Monday. Hence, we have decided to hold the joint press conference on Tuesday,” Sahni told TOI.The VIP president also claimed that he was satisfied with whatever seats his party has been allotted in the deal. “The RLSP and Jitan Ram Manjhi ’s party HAM(S) too are satisfied with the number of seats being allotted to them,” Sahni said.The RLSP national general secretary Mallick further said the issue of seat-sharing among the GA allies had been “almost finalised.” The name of constituencies, to be allotted to different allies, would be finalised by Monday, he said.
