Job Alert! Here's how you can apply for jobs in RRB, FCI, Indian Army

There is good news for all those people looking out for government jobs!

After the Railway Recruitment Board (RRB) recently released job notification for over one lakh posts in Group D, NTPC, a multitude of vacancies have opened up in various government and private jobs this month.

Candidates can apply in civil services, defense, staff selection commission and in other sectors as advertised.

Here, check out the list of jobs whose recruitment process will end in the month of March.

RRB group D recruitment 2019-21: 1.4 lakh vacancies

The online registration process for the Railway Recruitment Board (RRB) group D vacancies has started. There is a total of 1,03,769 vacant posts and the candidates can apply through all the region based official websites. The last date to apply online is April 12. The candidates can submit their application fee until April 23, 2019.

Candidates will have to appear for computer-based test (CBT) level 1 and 2 after which physical measurement test (PET), medical test and document verification will be conducted. The first exam is scheduled to be conducted in September-October, 2019.

Age limit: The upper age limit of the candidates should not cross 33 years of age. The minimum age of the candidates should be less than 18 years.

The candidates will get age relaxation as per rules and regulations.

Eligibility: All those who wish to apply for the posts should have passed SSC or should have done ITI from institutions recognised by NCVT/SCVT

RRB NTPC recruitment 2019: 35,277 vacancies

The online registration for the 35,277 vacant posts started from March 1, 2019.

The first stage - computer-based test (CBT) is expected to be conducted in June. Earlier the registration time was 10 am, which later got postponed to 4 pm. However, the timings for the application link is now 6 pm.

One will not be able to apply after March 31, 2019, however, candidates can pay the fee till April 5, 2019. The computer-based test is expected to be conducted between June to September.

UPSC civil services prelims: 896 vacancies

The registration process for the civil services preliminary exam conducted by the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) is March 18, 2019 (today).

Interested candidates need to apply at the official websites, upsc.gov.in or upsconline.nic.in.

This year, the government has advertised for 896 vacant posts in various departments.

The exam is scheduled to be conducted on June 2, 2019, for 896 posts including those reserved for PWD candidates. While this is a slight increase from last year, a look at the data of the previous seven years shows the vacancies continue to be low.

ONGC recruitment 2019: 4000 apprentice posts

The Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) Limited has advertised for around 4,104 apprentice positions this year.

The online application process has started and the candidates can apply through the official website, ongcindia.com till March 28, 2019.

Eligibility: The upper age limit of the candidates should not cross 24 years.

Educational qualification: The candidates need to possess a Bachelors degree in Commerce or Arts.

For the post of Accountant: The candidates need to possess a Bachelors degree in Commerce from a government recognised university or institute.

For the post of an Assistant: The candidates need to possess Bachelor’s degree in Arts or in Business Administration.

For the post of an Electrician: The candidates need to possess ITI in Electrician Trade.

Air India: Over one lakh vacancies

Air India Engineering Services Limited (AISEL) has advertised for Aircraft Maintenance Engineer posts. There are 160 vacant posts, and the walk-in-interview will be conducted from April 1 to 12, 2019. The candidates will be hired for a period of five years on a fixed-term employment basis.

The selected candidates will get a pay scale between Rs 95,000 to 1,28,000 per month, according to the official notification.

Indian Army mega recruitment rally in March

India Army is conducting a mega recruitment rally at various places in India from March. The recruitment rally is being conducted for young aspirants from March to April in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand, Chennai, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Nagaland, and Punjab.

In the recruitment rally, the candidates have to go through physical admission and medical test.

The selected candidates have to appear for the Common Entrance Examination, the dates of which will be notified soon.

The candidates will get the admit card on the official website, joinindianarmy.nic.in which they are expected to carry at the recruitment rally.

Indian Army jobs 2019: Important dates

Army recruitment rally, Secunderabad: March 30

Army recruitment rally, Rajasthan: March 25 to 26 at Indira Gandhi Stadium, Alwar

Army recruitment rally, Ranchi: April 1 to 15

Army recruitment rally, Ludhiana: March 10 to 20

Army recruitment rally, Assam: March 2 to 9, 2019 at Mariani, Assam.

FCI (Food Corporation of India): 4103 vacancies

The ongoing application process for 4,103 vacant posts of Junior Engineer (Civil Engineering/ Electrical Mechanical Engineering), Assistant Grade (Hindi), Steno Grade-II (Hindi), and Assistant Grade- III (AG III) in the Food Corporation of India (FCI) is open till March 30, 2019.

Interested candidates can apply at the official website - fci.gov.in.

The candidates will be selected on the basis of online examination, skill test, and document verification.

Candidates can apply in any zone they wish to but have to limit to one zone only. In case any candidate has filled forms for multiple zones, their candidature might be cancelled, according to official notification.
