India lodges protest with Pakistan over diplomats facing harassment in Islamabad

Indian diplomats have been facing massive harassment in Islamabad and India has sent a note verbale to Pakistan regarding the same. India has asked Islamabad to not only to investigate the incidence but also share the results.

India has highlighted to Pakistan Foriegn Minsitry how two Pakistan agency personnel have been seen following Indian High Commission's car on a daily basis.

The current instance of harrasment of Indian diplomats took place from 8th to 11th March in which they were not only aggressively followed by Pakistan security personnel but constant surveillance was kept on them.

Pakistani security agency personnel have been seen approaching local security gaurds at officers residence and pressurising them to divulge information

On 8th march, first secretary was aggressively tailed by Pak security agencies while going to bank. On the same day itself Indian naval advisor was tailed in bike while going from chancery to residence

On 9th march India's Deputy High Commissioner was followed by a bike where ever he went. The Indian Naval advisor was again followed on second day. Incidentally, Pakistan agency personnel kept surveillance in a car stationed infront of the residence of naval advisor.

The Harrasment continued on 10th as well when Deputy High Commissioner (DHC) was aggressively followed by Pakistan security personnels. The Pakistani agency personal were observed meeting local security guards and asked details regarding availability of the officer, details of occunpants.

On 11th March, Indian naval advisor & military advisor were aggressively tailed while going from residence to chancery.

Other than this 2 officers of Indian high commissioner in Islamabad have been receiving hoax calls for last few days from one number.

New Delhi has remind Pakistan that the incidents are violation of vienna connvention on diplomatic relations and safety and security of Indian High commission, its officers , staff members responsibility of govt of Pakistan.

The functioning of diplomatic missions between India and Pakistan is governed by the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 1961 and the bilateral Code of Conduct signed by the two countries in 1992.

India, Pakistan code of conduct of 1992 says safety and security of the premises of diplomatic personnel, their families shall be respected and protected. It also says intrusive and aggressive surveillance such as verbal and physical harassment shall not be allowed.

INDIAN DIPLOMATS HARRRASED: A timeline

8th March: 1st secy, Naval advisor followed aggressively

9th March: DHC, Naval advisor aggressively followed; surveillance infront of naval advisor residence

10 March: DHC aggressively followed; surveillance infront of house

11 March: naval advisor, military advisor aggressively followed
