Myanmar morning news for March 19, 2019

Advertisement

More than 40 human trafficking cases reported in first two months

More than 40 human trafficking cases have been reported in the first two months of this year, with the majority of victims sent to China for forced marriage, according to the Myanmar Anti-Human Trafficking Police Force, state media reported.

— Mizzima

Myanmar strives to attract investment for western Chin state

Myanmar is striving to attract investment in the western Chin state, stressing that private investment can help resolve the challenges of poverty and inequality and create a better social environment there.

— Xinhua

Sembcorp fires up Myanmar power plant

Sembcorp Industries has officially opened a US$310 million (S$420 million) power plant in Myanmar.

— The Straits Times

Thailand releases Myanmar activist, plans to deport him

Prominent Myanmar migrant activist Ko Ye Min, one of founders of the Aid Alliance Committee in Thailand, was released from jail pending deportation by a Thai court on Friday, a colleague said.

— Myanmar Times

Rohingya future depends on safe, dignified return: UNHCR

Volker Turk, UNHCR assistant high commissioner for protection, has laid emphasis on safe and dignified return of Rohingya people to their place of origin in Myanmar with full restoration of their rights.

— New Age BD

Ministry to produce 3,000 mw more in next three years

The power ministry will produce an additional 3,000 megawatts of electricity in the next three years, said Union Minister for Electricity and Energy Win Khaing, on March 6.

— Eleven Myanmar

Narcotic drugs worth $1 mn seized in Myanmar

Myanmar authorities seized narcotic drugs valued at 2.56 billion kyats ($1.69 million) in Mandalay region, the Central Committee for Drug Abuse said on Monday.

— Business Standard

Sanctuary plan for Myanmar elephants in captivity to save them from conflict or performing for tourists

Not long ago, elephants hauling logs through the jungles of Myanmar – home to the largest captive population of Asian elephants – for the country’s thriving timber trade were a common sight.

— South China Morning Post

State Counsellor vows no discrimination in issuing IDs

State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi has vowed to ensure that there will be no discrimination in the issuing of national IDs to Hindus and Muslims.

— Myanmar Times

Suu Kyi pressed for dam decision

Amid increased pressure from China to resume construction of the controversial Myitsone hydropower dam in the far north of Myanmar, State Counselor Aung San Suu Kyi has said that the public should think about the project “from a wider perspective,” the Myanmar website The Irrawaddy reported on March 14.

— Asia Times

Myanmar increases banana supplies to China

The price of bananas recently showed an overall increase in banana production areas in southwest China. The sudden and rapid increase was at its strongest in the first week of March but weakened in the second week. In some production areas the price stopped rising, but the average banana price still steadily climbs.

— Fresh Plaza

Updated National Export Strategy to add new sectors, address constraints

Stakeholders from the public and private sector gathered last Friday to discuss the National Export Strategy (NES) 2020-2025, including actions to take to boost Myanmar’s export sector.

— Myanmar Times

Three women arrested for illegal gems

Myanmar authorities have seized 22.9 kilograms of suspected uncut amber stones in Mokaung township, Kachin state, Xinhua reported.

— Mizzima

Myanmar peace process may take longer than thought: US

Despite some progress, the Myanmar peace process may take longer than expected, US Ambassador to Myanmar Scot Marciel said.

— Myanmar Times

Ethnic language teaching’s decentralisation dividend

The teaching of ethnic languages in schools and development of local curricula could deliver both educational and political benefits, and represent critical steps towards decentralisation.

— Frontier Myanmar

Destruction of routes for teak smuggling in Bago Yoma Ranges and Rakhine Yoma in progress

Efforts at destroying of illegal smuggling routes in Bago Yoma Ranges and Rakhine Yoma have taken more than expected. and it is hoped that these illegal routes will be destroyed during March according to Pyae District Forest Department.

— Eleven Myanmar

Adding value to local produce for better export earnings

Under the updated National Export Strategy 2020-2025, Myanmar is targeting total trade volumes of US$31 billion for the current fiscal year, with US$15.3 billion for exports and US$15.8 billion for imports. If successful, this would reduce the trade deficit to US$500 million.

— Myanmar Times

UNHCR: Future of Rohingyas lies in restoring their rights

More than 16,000 Rohingyas have arrived in Bangladesh since January 2018.

— Dhaka Tribune

Surmounting the humps of their lives

For most of his life Ko Tun Win Zaw had been dependent on his eldest sister for his survival as he was afflicted with polio since the age of one.

— Myanmar Times

Couple jailed for abusing Myanmar maid, ordered to pay compensation

A couple were jailed on Monday (18 March) for abusing a maid from Myanmar, more than two years after they were convicted for committing similar offences against an Indonesian maid.

— Yahoo News

Mandalay compensates farmers for seized land

Farmers were paid on Wednesday for land seized by the Prisons Department when Mandalay Central Prison was built in Aung Myay Tharzan township, U Zaw Myint Maung, chief minister of Mandalay Region, said.

— Myanmar Times

Myanmar military fights rebels among ancient Rakhine temples

Fighting between Myanmar’s military and ethnic Rakhine insurgents has now reached the ancient temples of Mrauk U, the former capital of the Rakhine kingdom and a popular tourist site, local residents said on Monday (Mar 18).

— Channel NewsAsia

Myanmar confiscates precious stones

Local police force declared that Myanmar authorities have confiscated 22.9 kilograms of suspected uncut amber stones in Mokaung township, Kachin state.

— Menafn

Opening ceremony of second Thailand-Myanmar Friendship Bridge in Mae Sot prepared

Transport Minister Arkhom Termpittayapaisith visited Tak Special Economic Zone in Mae Sot district to view preparations for the opening ceremony of a second Thailand-Myanmar Friendship Bridge.

— Pattaya Mail

AA to attend Nay Pyi Taw peace talk

The Arakan Army (AA) will attend the peace talk between the government and Ethnic Armed Organizations (EAOs) which have not signed the Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement (NCA), to be held in Nay Pyi Taw on March 21, said Khaing Thu Kha, the spokesperson of the Arakan Army (AA).

— Eleven Myanmar

Suu Kyi, China and the controversial Myitsone dam

Amid increased pressure from China to resume construction of the controversial Myitsone hydropower dam in the far north of Myanmar, State Counselor Aung San Suu Kyi has said the public should think about the project “from a wider perspective,” Myanmar website The Irrawaddy reported on March 14.

— Asia Times

Rohingya ‘lost generation’ struggle to study in Bangladesh camps

Sixteen-year-old Kefayat Ullah walked to his school in southern Bangladesh in late January, as he had done most days for the previous six years, to find that – despite being one of the top students in his class – he had been expelled.

— Reuters

Myanmar-India Seminar and Workshop held

The Myanmar-India Seminar and Workshop on Issues of formal and informal trade was held at the Tamu Border Traders Association, in Sagaing Region on March 17.

— Mizzima

Co-accused in Tanintharyi CM case is former vice-chairman of CB Bank

CB Bank spokesperson told ‘Myanmar Now’ that GGS Company Ltd. managing director Thein Htwe who was recently arrested under corruption charges along with the former Tanintharyi Region Chief Minister was a former Vice-Chairman of CB Bank who retired from his post many years back and the case would not have any impact and implications on the bank.

— BNI

Myanmar’s exchange takes its time learning to walk

Myanmar’s stock exchange could hardly be in a better location. The imposing stone building commands a corner on one of downtown Yangon’s busiest intersections and was originally the central Reserve Bank of India’s branch when Burma was a dominion of the British Raj.

— Euro Money

Ex-Blackwater boss moves into Myanmar security

Frontier Services Group (FSG), founded by former US military contractor Erik Prince, says it is moving into Myanmar to provide security services to Chinese and other foreign investors.

— Myanmar Times

Thailand releases Myanmar activist, plans to deport him

Prominent Myanmar migrant activist Ko Ye Min, one of founders of the Aid Alliance Committee in Thailand, was released from jail pending deportation by a Thai court on Friday, a colleague said.

— Myanmar Times

Vallourec to support PTTEP in Myanmar

French contractor Vallourec has won a contract from PTTEP to supply oil country tubular goods (OCTG) for the Thai national upstream company’s upcoming M-9 West exploration well off Myanmar. Vallourec will supply more than 5000 tons.

— Upstream Online

Feature photo Pxhere



This week’s Myanmar morning news feature photo acknowledges World Water Day, March 22.



Find our previous morning news feature photos in the AEC News Today Morning News Feature Photos gallery where you will find a pictorial display of daily life throughout the Asean Economic Community (AEC).

Myanmar morning news by AEC News Today is your one stop source for Myanmar news on matters of governance and policies affecting Asean business communities. It is published M-F by AEC News Today: Governance, not government; policies not politics.
