4 Things Told By Manohar Parrikar's Friends That Prove He Was The Real 'Aam Aadmi' Of The Masses

Manohar Parrikar, Goa's late CM, was laid to rest last evening with complete state honours, and in the presence of his family, party members and thousands of Goans, who had gathered to bid adieu to “Goa's son”.

© Twitter

From his colleagues, to the people of the state he worked for and even the opposition leaders, everybody has stepped forward to recall Parrikar's relentless efforts and goodwill not only for his state Goa, but also for the society and nation at large.

On Monday, the ex-Defence Minister's friends reminisced about their humble mate Manohar, who always seemed like a born leader to them even when they were a bunch of young lads studying at IIT-Bombay between 1973-1980.

Here are 4 impressive details that have been revealed by Manohar Parrikar's friends, which prove that India has lost a valuable and invested leader of our times.

1. While studying at IIT-Bombay, Parrikar was the mess secretary. And once when the mess workers went on strike and refused to serve the students, Parrikar churned out delicious food for everyone along with his friends.

Parrikar's hostel mate from IIT-B recalls the incident thus, “He was on good terms with the mess workers as he always participated in the committee. After the strike was called, he spoke to the workers. When they refused to serve us, he convinced 40 of us to cook ourselves. That was the best meal we ever had.”

2. His friends from IIT-B remember him as a born leader and a humble individual who attended all alumni meets.

3. Another friend recalls how Parrikar left his position behind when he met his friends. Hostel mate and close friend Bakul Desai recalled how Parrikar would wait in the queue to have lunch during alumni meets, for which the alumni members were given coupons. He also asked his security personnel to stay away when he was in the company of his friends.

4. Another IIT-B batchmate of Parrikar, Ganesh Natarajan, recalled Parrikar's humility even after he took charge as the Goa CM. "Have seen him take an auto rickshaw at Mumbai airport even after becoming Goa CM. He will be missed across all walks of life."

There might be a ton more incidents about Manohar Parrikar, but these few personal incidents coming from his friends prove that not only was Parrikar a great politician and leader, who was invested in his work and duty, but also that he was a great human being whose heart was in the right place all along. He is the real aam aadmi of the masses.
