Pollachi sexual assault case: Lawyers boycott court proceedings

Various Tamil organisations members hold placards during a protest against the Pollachi rape case in Chennai. (Photo: PTI)

Around 100 advocates affiliated to Coimbatore Bar Council staged a protest outside the court premises urging for a court monitored probe presided by a women judge.

The Pollachi sexual abuse incident has triggered widespread protests in the state with students and advocates demanding stern action against the accused in the case.

The advocates also boycotted the court proceedings and demanded resignation of superintendent of police R.Pandiarajan for revealing the victim's name and having supported one of the accused.

Speaking to India today TV, Thenmozhi, President of Coimbatore Bar Council, said the investigation in the case must be expedited.

"Whenever there is a sensational case in society the law is amended but it's not executed properly. There should be a committee formed with judges to oversee the swift investigations in matters relating to crime against women," she added.

Reena, an advocate lamented on the delay in judicial process, said time bound investigation would bring justice to the victim.

"Despite several laws for crime against women, these kind of incidents continue to happen. Invoking provisions of Goondas act alone is not sufficient we need stringent punishment that will be a lesson to the perpetrators," she said.

Meanwhile, the traders in Pollachi observed a dawn to dusk bandh in the town condemning the gruesome sexual assault incident that has shocked the entire state. The bandh was in total as 90% of the shops were closed.

More than 700 police were deployed to monitor the situation. A rally by various social and political organisations has been planned on Tuesday evening at Pollachi.

Police have refused permission for protest rally citing law and order reasons. The rally was to be conducted by various social and political organisations.

Also Read | Key accused in Pollachi case remanded to judicial custody

Also Watch | Pollachi sexual abuse horror rocks Tamil Nadu
