Top news of the day: new Goa CM Pramod Sawant seeks floor test tomorrow, several feared trapped in Dharwad building collapse, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

New Goa CM Pramod Sawant seeks floor test on Wednesday

Hours after being sworn in, Goa’s new Chief Minister Pramod Sawant on Tuesday said his government had sought a floor test on Wednesday to prove its strength in the Assembly.

Building collapses in Dharwad, Karnataka; several feared trapped

A multistorey building collapsed at Dharwad in the afternoon on Tuesday. Several persons are suspected to be trapped under the debris, but the numbers are yet to be confirmed.

Congress may pit K. Muraleedharan against P. Jayarajan in fight for Vadakara

Congress workers on March 19 feted MLA K. Muraleedharan amidst strong indications that the party's central leadership had chosen him to fight P. Jayarajan, strongman of the Communist Party of India (Marxist), in Kannur in the coming Lok Sabha election.

Country's leadership capable of reacting to any act of terror, says Doval

National Security Advisor Ajit Doval said on March 19 that the country had neither forgotten the Pulwama terror attack nor will it ever forget it.

Rahul Gandhi, Deve Gowda to hold joint rally in Bengaluru-Mysuru region on March 31

In a show of solidarity against their “common enemy” — the BJP — top leaders of the Janata Dal (Secular) and the Congress on Tuesday announced that they would hold a ‘historic public rally’, with Congress president Rahul Gandhi and JD(S) supremo H.D. Deve Gowda sharing the stage on March 31.

No riots in U.P. since BJP came to power: CM Adityanath

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Tuesday said the State had not seen a single riot after the BJP came to power and his two-year government had shown zero tolerance towards crime and criminals.

MP tracker: How did your parliamentarian fare in 16th Lok Sabha?

As many as 571 members were elected to the 16th Lok Sabha. This includes the byelections that were necessitated as and when the seats fell vacant. Of them, 62 members were part of the Cabinet at some part of the time.

Mindtree promoters unconditionally oppose L&T's ‘hostile’ takeover bid

Mindtree promoters, who hold around 13.3% stake in the global information technology (IT) consulting and services firm, have decided to unconditionally oppose what they call a hostile takeover bid by engineering and construction major Larsen and Toubro Ltd (L&T).

China rejects Dalai Lama’s assertion that his successor could be found in India

China on Tuesday rejected the assertion by the Dalai Lama that his successor could be found in India — a move that could undermine the legitimacy of the next in line chosen by Beijing.

Cyclone’s death toll into the hundreds in southern Africa

Hundreds are dead, many more are missing and thousands are at risk from massive flooding in Mozambique, Zimbabwe and Malawi caused by Cyclone Idai and persistent rains.
