Rahul Gandhi, Deve Gowda to share the stage in ‘historic’ rally on March 31

In a show of solidarity against their “common enemy” — the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) — top leaders of the Janata Dal (Secular) and the Congress on Tuesday announced that they would hold a “historic public rally” in Bengaluru, with Congress president Rahul Gandhi and JD(S) supremo H.D. Deve Gowda sharing the stage on March 31.

At a joint press conference on Tuesday, the parties said they were committed to defeating the “divisive, communal and anti-democratic” forces in Karnataka in the Lok Sabha elections.

Faced with the challenge of convincing their own party workers to band together and garner votes for candidates fielded by the alliance, the coalition parties held deliberations from Monday night to work out the modalities of the campaign.

Observers to coordinate

Listing out the measures planned, Congress Legislature Party leader and coordination committee chairman Siddaramaiah said senior leaders from both parties would be appointed as “observers” in every Lok Sabha constituency. “These observers will ensure coordination between the parties. Strict direction will be issued to the district units of both parties that they should forget their differences and work to defeat the BJP in the interest of State, country, and democracy,” he said.

Saying the March 31 rally would “sound the poll bugle” of the coalition parties, Mr. Siddaramaiah said leaders from both parties would hold joint campaigns in all 28 segments of Karnataka.

Asserting the unity of the coalition parties, Mr. Gowda said, “We are together on everything. Whatever misunderstanding we have between us, we have to resolve now. Filing of nominations for the polls has started and there is very little time.”

The bigger picture

Appealing to workers of both parties, Mr. Gowda said, “My request to party workers is to look beyond any trouble our decisions may have caused and [to] focus on the larger aspect of defeating the BJP. Our resolve is to not only retain the seats we won in 2014, but also win a majority of the 16 seats held by the BJP. We will ensure that the BJP does not reach the double-digit mark. If there are any issues in any constituencies, Mr. Siddaramaiah and I will resolve them,” he said.

The Congress and the JD(S) have also discussed nominating designated leaders as spokespersons to interact with the press on behalf of the alliance. Also, legislators from the parties have been asked not to voice dissent in public. “We will play our part by showing unity. That is when voters will be convinced about us,” the former Prime Minister said.

Taking a dig at Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Mr. Gowda said, “Mr. Modi talks lightly about the Mahagathbandhan, which started from Karnataka. But they themselves are running coalition governments in many States. We will give a fitting reply to the BJP by winning this election.”

Replying to queries, he asked, “Why is it hard to believe that Mr. Siddaramaiah and I are together? We will rally together and we will win the elections together.”

Parameshwara conspicuous by his absence

Deputy Chief Minister G. Parameshwara of the Congress was conspicuous by his absence at the joint press conference. While the BJP took a dig at this as an indicator of continued differences between the Congress and the BJP, the coalition partners and Dr. Parameshwara himself said it should not be misread.

Dr. Parameshwara has been unhappy with the Congress conceding Tumakuru Lok Sabha seat, his home turf, to the JD(S).

Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee president Dinesh Gundu Rao defended the Deputy CM’s absence by saying that he was out of town for personal reasons. “He was very much part of our deliberations, but could not attend today as he had some personal work,” he said. Dr. Parameshwara also tweeted that he was unable to attend the press conference because of a family programme.

However, the BJP took to Twitter and tweeted, “Alas! Congress-JDS leaders tried to send a message of unity by holding a joint press conference. But Deputy CM@DrParameshwara, who is the face of the Congress in the coalition government, skipped the crucial meeting. It was like a marriage without bride.”
