Bengaluru wins Round I of elevated corridor battle

Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy

elevated corridor

KRDCL

IISc

Bengaluru

At least 2,000 citizens staged a massive protest against the elevated corridor project on March 16

CM decides to hold public consultation, consider all aspects of the projectcalled a meeting with representatives of citizen’s groups opposing the elevated corridors project on Tuesday. This move came after at least 2,000 citizens staged a mass protest against theon March 16 as the Karnataka Road Development Corporation Limited () had called for tenders for the project earlier this month.In the meeting that lasted 15 minutes, he listened to the view points of the citizens on the project, after which he promised to come to an understanding on how to proceed. Professor Ashish Verma fromalso presented the mobility report he had prepared to assess the project that includes alternative options.Kumaraswamy said that public transport was his priority and that he wished to developas a high quality liveable city. Vinay Sreenivasa from Bengaluru Bus Prayaneekara Vedike (BBPV) who also attended the meeting says, “The CM’s response was both swift and spontaneous, and at very short notice, he met with citizen representatives and listened to various points of view at the meeting and offered his own comments in the discussion. He has said that he is tied up till the elections and that he is looking forward to hold public consultations on the project right after the elections. He also mentioned that the project will come to him for approval before getting finalized so he still has the final call and may consider all the aspects with public consultation before any decision is taken.”Kumaraswamy also tweeted after the meeting saying, “Spoke to representatives of various organizations and citizen groups opposing the proposed elevated corridor project. I will have a detailed discussion on the subject soon after the general elections.”On March 14, he had said that he was open for public consultation. He had tweeted, “One of the biggest hurdles in Bengaluru’s progress is traffic congestion. The #elevatedcorridor project is the solution to this. Some citizen groups are protesting against the project. My request to all is to come to me and raise their concerns. I will listen with an open mind to your feedback.”Also present in the meeting were Leo Saldanha from Environment Support Group, Professor Ashish Verma from IISc, architect Naresh Narasimhan, activist Prakash Belawadi, Vinay Sreenivasa of Bengaluru Bus Prayaneekara Vedike (BBPV), Zibi Jamal, activist from Whitefield Rising, and Isaac Amritaraj of Slum Janaandolana Sanghatane and, Srinivas Alavilli and Tara Krishnaswamy from Citizens for Bengaluru (CfB).At the end of the dialogue, he agreed to hold wide ranging and open public consultations on the issue of mobility itself, including the proposed elevated corridor project before proceeding any further in the matter.
