Money for statues, not for people?: Mahul residents ask Maharashtra state Revenue Department

Mahul residents have been protesting for 114 days now demanding to be rehabilitated from the toxic environment of Mumbai. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: Living Conditions in Mahul have been getting worse day by day and the entire population needs to be shifted. Mahul residents have been protesting for 114 days now demanding to be rehabilitated from the toxic environment of this locality in Mumbai. Mahul residents have been waiting for a long time to move towards a safer place.

These residents had been moved to Mahul earlier from their Marol (Andheri) slums under the Project-Affected People (PAP) rehabilitation programme. But Mahul turned out to be a highly polluted place and is even labelled toxic hell by activists who have been fighting for these residents. The state government was to give rent to these residents to find an alternative safer accommodation elsewhere but has now reneged and says it has no money.

A day before the hearing on rehabilitation, Maharashtra government submitted an affidavit to the Bombay High Court pointing out reasons whether they can pay rent to 30,000 residents on whether they would be given an alternative accommodation to stay, but surprisingly once again the state government have mentioned in the affidavit that they cannot pay rent to the residents of Mahul because it will be a huge burden on the state's Revenue Department.

As per the affidavit, the state government is not supposed to pay rent to Mahul residents and requested the court not to pass any such order regarding the same. In fact, the government says that these were unauthorised illegal structures hence the residents who are staying in Mahul currently they do not have valid registered documents and they are not even enlightened to the house that they are staying in the right now,

Mirror Now highlighted the issue since long and whether it is Chief Minister of Maharashtra Devendra Fadnavis, Housing Minister, Prakash Mehta, and even the respective department like Mahada and BMC who are responsible in the matter are being questioned for the same.

However, the officials are ensuring verbally that they would provide alternative accommodation and are working every now and then for the betterment of 30,000 residents.

As far as Bombay High Court is concerned they were only depended on IIT Bombay report and now considering that report has been submitted which establishes that there are water and air pollution in the area. Meanwhile, An order might be expected from the Bombay High court against the state Government either to pay rent to these residents or to shift them to an alternate safe place.
