Top news of the day: Aseemanand, 3 others acquitted in Samjhauta blast case; Nirav Modi denied bail, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

NIA court acquits Aseemanand, 3 others in Samjhauta train bombing case

A special National Investigation Agency (NIA) court on Wednesday acquitted main accused Swami Aseemanand and three other accused in the 2007 Samjhauta Express bombing case.

Nirav Modi denied bail, to stay in jail till March 29

Fugitive billionaire jeweller Nirav Modi was arrested on behalf of Indian authorities on Tuesday afternoon in London and was produced before a judge at the Westminster Magistrates Court on Wednesday.

EU regulators fine Google €1.49 billion for blocking rival online search advertisers

European Union (EU) antitrust regulators handed down a €1.49 billion fine to Google on Wednesday for blocking rival online search advertisers, marking the company’s third penalty in two years.

Goa CM Pramod Sawant wins trust vote

Goa's new BJP-led coalition government of Pramod Sawant on Wednesday won a vote of confidence on the floor of the Legislative Assembly during a specially convened session.

All is well in grand alliance, seat share will be announced after Holi, says Tejashwi Yadav

After much speculation and hectic parleys between ''mahagathbandhan'' (grand alliance) constituents, Rashtriya Janata Dal leader Tejashwi Yadav on Wednesday said everything was all right in the alliance and seat share will be announced after Holi.

Dharwad building collapse death toll rises to 5; rescue operation on

The death toll in the building collapse in Dharwad has risen to five and a total of 55 persons had been rescued so far, Director General of Police N.M. Reddy told press persons in the city on Wednesday.

Separatists’ strike affects life in Kashmir

Life in Kashmir was affected on Wednesday due to a strike called by separatists to protest against the custodial death of a youth. Schools, colleges and universities remained closed due to the strike called by the Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL), an amalgam of separatist groups, to protest against the death of Rizwan Pandit in police custody on the intervening night of March 18 and 19, officials said.

US State Dept. names Amit Shah, says uncertain future for 4 million in Assam

The US State department has taken note of uncertain future of four million individuals in Assam who were not included in the draft NRC. A 55-page report that includes reference to BJP leadership and government ministers, has detailed description of human rights abuses in India targeting minority communities and vulnerable sections of society.

Germany initiates move at EU to list Masood Azhar as global terrorist

Germany has initiated a move at the European Union (EU) to designate Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) chief Masood Azhar as a global terrorist, days after China blocked a bid at the United Nations to designate him so, diplomatic sources said.

U.S. President Donald Trump warns of tougher sanctions on Venezuela

U.S. President Donald Trump said on Tuesday that the United States could impose harsher sanctions on Venezuela in its campaign to oust President Nicolas Maduro.
