TN college correspondent booked for sexual abuse of staff, students

TN college correspondent booked for sexual abuse of staff, students

The incident at the paramedical and research college came to light after a woman staff member who reportedly escaped an attempt to harass her filed a complaint.

news Crime

In a shocking case of harassment in Kanyakumari district in Tamil Nadu, a male college correspondent and two women staff members have been arrested for allegedly abusing and abetting the abuse of students and other staff members at a college. The incident, which took place at the Jacob Memorial College, came to light on Tuesday after several students, women staff and their families staged a protest, demanding the arrest of the correspondent.

According to one report in the Times of India, Ravi, 35, the correspondent of the paramedical and research college reportedly made women students and staff feel uncomfortable. Two women staff members – Nalini, 30 and Kala, 28 – reportedly aided the abuse. The complaint leading to the trio's arrest was filed by one of the female staff members at the college soon after Ravi attempted to misbehave with her.

The co-educational institution is reportedly attended by 80 students and 10 staff members. The newspaper also reports that in the past, staff members had allegedly quit the institution after they faced harassment from Ravi.

Speaking to TNM, Additional Superintendent of Police of Nagercoil, G Jawahar said, “The three have been arrested and remanded on Wednesday. A case under Indian Penal Code Sections 354 (Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty) and 506(2) (Punishment for criminal intimidation) have been filed on the correspondent. The two women staff members have been booked under Section 354B (Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe). Further action will be taken based on the investigation.”

On Tuesday, staff and students of the college staged a protest, demanding the arrest of the correspondent as well as the two staff members. Following the arrests, the protesters have dispersed, said the police.
