After five years of passing of the law India gets its much-awaited Lokpal

The newly appointed chairperson of Lokpal the retired Judge of Supreme Court Pinaki Chandra Ghosh | Photo Credit: YouTube

New Delhi: The process of reforms in any democratic set-up is usually slow, primarily owing to compulsions of public opinion, or for some other reasons peculiar to the particular system.

With the appointment of retired Supreme Court Judge Pinaki Chandra Ghose as the first Lokpal on March 19 by President Ram Nath Kovind the country has made its entry amongst the comity of nations which have the anti-corruption body like this.

As a matter of fact, though the suitable Act-named “The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act” for creating the office of Lokpal at the centre and Lokayukta at the state level was enacted five years ago on January 1, 2014 when the then President of India Pranav Mukherjee gave his assent to it but appointment to the office of Lokpal was delayed owing to some political reasons.

On March 19, with the appointment of Justice Ghose as the chairperson and other eight other members, the official operationalisation of the office of Lokpal will begin. With this, the years' long crusade against the pervasive corruption and misgovernance in the political and administrative spheres of the country is most likely to get a further boost.

Powers and functions

The institution of Lokpal will be manned by a total of nine members which include its chairperson and maximum of eight members. These eight members will include the equal number of judicial and non-judicial members (mainly bureaucrats or civil servants). So far as the powers of the office of Lokpal are concerned it will cover all categories of public servants including the Prime Minister (In 2002 in its report- The Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution headed by MN Venkatachaliah kept the PM outside the purview of the Lokpal). Containing provisions like attachment and seizing the property of corrupt officials and public servants even while the trial is not complete the Act provides extra teeth to the office to deal with instances of corruption in the government.

The Act, in order to ensure the functioning of the office in an impartial manner, puts a bar on the chairperson and other members from contesting for the post of President of the country or being a member of either house of parliament or member of either house of a state legislature or municipality or panchayat within a period of five years from the date of stepping down from their office.

The developments behind

In India, the institution of Lokpal was envisaged to curb the instances of corruption and wrong-doing on the lines of ‘office of ombudsman’ functioning in the Scandinavian countries.

Way back 1963 the term Lokpal-the Indian version of ‘Ombudsman’ was coined by eminent constitutional expert Laxmi Mall Singhvi. Later on, the first Administrative Reform Commission (ARC) headed by Moraji Desai in its report named "Problems of Redressal of Citizen's Grievances" in 1966 recommended for two bodies Lokpal and Lokayukta for the redressal of citizen’s grievances respectively at the Union and state level. Further, decades later in 2002 the National Commission to Review the Constitution headed by Justice MN Venkatachaliah (2002) and second Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) headed by Verappa Moily (2007) too favoured the institution of Lokpal at the centre level.

However, it was the movement launched by veteran octogenarian social activist Anna Hazare in 2011 demanding the anti-graft institution like Lokpal which also played the key role compelling the successive governments agreeing to set up such an office at Union level.

Anna, being an anti-corruption activist, launched his movement from April 5, 2011, by sitting on hunger strike at the Jantar Mantar in the national Capital-Delhi. His movement got the nationwide support which was chiefly aimed at bringing Jan Lokpal Bill in order to remove corruption from the country.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
