Facebook to host AI for India Summit on March 26

Facebook’s AI for India Summit will be held in Bangalore and is aimed at discussing the possible application of AI to drive advancements across healthcare, education, agriculture, and crisis/disaster mitigation.

Highlights

Facebook announces inaugural AI for India Summit

The event will be held on March 26 in Bangalore

AI for India Summit aims to discuss the possible applications of AI to drive advancements across healthcare, education, agriculture, and crisis/disaster mitigation

Facebook has announced that it will be hosting the inaugural ‘AI for India Summit’ this month. The event will be held on March 26 in Bangalore and focuses on “discussing inclusive growth and solutions to the most enduring social challenges.”

The AI for India Summit aims to bring together key representatives from the AI community in India. It will also be attended by the platform’s global AI teams who plan to get a better understanding about the future of AI tech in India, especially those that aid with social change.

“Facebook is committed to the growth of India, and wants to be an ally to India for developing an expertise in AI. The Summit has been conceptualized to serve as a platform for thought-leaders from across domains to discourse on the possible applications of AI to drive advancements across healthcare, education, agriculture, and crisis/disaster mitigation, in line with the National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence that was outlined by NITI Aayog last year,” the company noted in its press statement.

Facebook also noted that it is already working on AI projects for social good. The company mentions the Blood Donations Center in Facebook that helps hospitals and blood banks connect with blood donors quickly.

AI has been a particular point of focus for Facebook. Last month, the company announced that its AI scientists were working on a chip aimed at powering a digital assistant like Alexa, Siri and Google Assistant. Further, it is also designed to help Facebook’s human content moderators sift through and regulate videos and posts on the social media platform.
