Lok Sabha elections preparation begins

Dimapur, March 22 (EMN): In view of the upcoming elections to the 17th Lok Sabha which will be held in Nagaland on April 11, the first round of training for presiding officer and 1st polling officer started at Kohima College on March 22.

The master trainers for election process trained the presiding officer and 1st polling officer on their roles and responsibilities during the elections. They were also briefed on the function of EVM, VVPAT and CCTV and the eleven documents to be produced by the voters for identity proof on the polling day, informed DPRO, Kohima.

The master trainers also highlighted on the procedures and guidelines given by the Election Commission of India (ECI) that should be followed while performing their duties in order to conduct the election process smoothly in their respective assigned polling stations.

The 1st round of training for the 2nd and 3rd polling officers will be held on Saturday, March 23 at the same venue (Kohima College) starting from 10:30 am.

Training underway in Dimapur

The first phase training for polling personnel for the ensuing Lok Sabha election for Dimapur District got underway at Government College Dimapur on March 22.

DC & DEO Dimapur, Kevekha Kevin Zehol appealed to the presiding officer and 1st polling officers during the training programme to take their responsibility seriously as they are going to facilitate every eligible voter to exercise their franchise as enshrined in the constitution, according to an update issued by Watimenla, IA Dimapur. The DC also congratulated the polling personnel who were on duty during the by-election held last year for successfully conducting the polling process without any re-poll.

Zehol thanked the principal of the college for allowing the district administration to conduct the training in its premises and also reminded the trainees not to litter the college campus during the event.

The training of 2nd and 3rd polling officers will be conducted on March 23.

Randomisation of EVM, VVPATs held at Peren

The first phase of randomisation of EVM/VVPATs for parliamentary election to the Lok Sabha for Peren district was held at deputy commissioner’s office, old Peren on March 22, according to an update sent by Kiso, IA Tening.

Randomisation of EVM/VVPATs was done in the presence of deputy commissioner and district election officer and assistant returning officer, Sarita Yadav, IAS, additional deputy commissioner Albert Ezung, and election officials along with different political parties.

Secretariat peons drafted for LS election

About 200 regular peons under the establishment of the Nagaland Civil Secretariat have been drafted for the ensuing parliamentary elections and the employees were briefed at a meeting held at the Secretariat Plaza, Kohima on March 22, stated an update from asst. director Kepelhoutuonuo.

Deputy secretary, home department and nodal officer for election, Nchumbemo NCS briefed the gathering on the role of Grade-IV staff during the upcoming elections. He also instructed the peons, who have been drafted for election duty, to report to the deputy commissioner’s office in Kohima on April 4 at 12 noon and added that attendance will also be taken. He appealed to the Grade-IV staff to sincerely carry out their election duties with utmost discipline.
