Nation Remembers Bhagat Singh, Rajguru And Sukhdev On The 88th Anniversary Of Their Martyrdom

In has been well over eight decades, but they continue to inspire us, with their love for India and the sacrifice they made for the country's freedom, at a very young age.

On Saturday, India paid homages to the memories of three of the most shining icons of the country's freedom struggle - Bhagat Singh, Shivaram Rajguru, and Sukhdev Thapar, three unparalleled revolutionaries in history.

Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and Sukhdev were hanged by the British on March 23, 1931, in Lahore Central Jail which was then a part of British India.

As a mark of respect for their contributions, March 23 is observed as 'Martyrs Day'.

The trio, were members of the Hindustan Socialist Republican Association.

Born on September 28, 1907, at Banga in Lyallpur district (now Pakistan) Singh got involved in socio-political movements and the freedom struggle at an early age.

Singh who initially was a follower of the Gandhian way of peaceful and non-violent protests decided to take up arms following the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre in 1919 and killing of unarmed Akali protesters at the Nankana Sahib in 1921.

The turning point in his life was in 1928 when Lala Lajpat Rai, one of the founders of National College led a peaceful march against the Simon Commission on October 30. During the police crackdown on the demonstrators, Rai was badly injured and succumbed to his injuries on November 17.

To avenge the killing Singh and his associates plotted to kill James A Scott, the police officer who ordered the crackdown.

But in a case of mistaken identity another officer JP Saunders was killed by them. Singh and his associates had to flee Lahore to escape arrest in the case.

The escape didn't last long as they got arrested in 1929 after the trio hurled a bomb at the Central Legislative Assembly in Delhi to protest the implementation of the Defence of India Act and then surrendered.

The trio who were arrested was tried for the murder of Saunders and hanged on March 23, 1931, when Singh and Sukhdev were 23 old and Rajguru was just 22.

Singh who was born into a Sikh family, however, held himself as an atheist. As far as political ideology was concerned, Singh subscribed to socialism and Communism and used to write for Punjabi and Urdu language newspapers about Marxism. He is credited with popularizing the catchphrase “Inquilab zindabad” (“Long live the revolution”).
