Delhi: Residents say Okhla plant danger to environment; resort to protest

The plant is responsible for emitting toxins in the area (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: There are constant cases in India which prove that the environment is in danger. While the magnitude of destruction seems to be multiplying, it cannot be denied that there is increased awareness among the people. A similar incident happened in Delhi when residents staged protest against Okhla waste-to-energy plant.

The residents flew into a rage after the concerned authorities did not shut down the Okhla waste-to-energy plant. The plant is responsible for emitting toxins in the area.

According to the Times of India's report, the protesters said that the plant is located at a residential area and is responsible for polluting it with its emissions. The incinerator of the plant is also located near a host of areas like Sukhdev Vihar, Ishwar Nagar, Jasola Vihra, Haji Colony and New Friends Colony.

The citizens alleged that a joint panel comprising the Central Pollution Control Board and the Delhi Pollution Control Committee had told the Supreme Court that the waste-to-energy plants in Okhla, Ghazipur and Narela-Bawana do not work in alignment with emission standards. Despite their repeated efforts, the concerned authorities have done nothing to put an end to the woes of the people. It was also alleged that the operator of the plant was even planning to expand its capacity to 20 megawatts from 16 megawatts.

The situation of waste in the national capital seems to be going from bad to worse. The Centre for Science and Environment made a new assessment stating that only 13 per cent of the waste generated in Delhi can be recycled. The assessment is a clear indication of mismanagement of waste.

According to the assessment, three waste-to-energy plants were constructed to handle 50 per cent of the municipal waste generated in Delhi. It was also alleged that the construction of another plant was in the pipeline. Though the National Green Tribunal (NGT) had asked the Okhla waste-to-energy plant to make its emission data public in 2017, it was discovered that the data had not been updated since 2016.
