PM Modi to address seven rallies in West Bengal

KOLKATA: In the run up to the Lok Sabha polls , the BJP will hold at least 21 rallies across the constituencies in West Bengal with Prime Minister Narendra Modi scheduled to attend at least seven meetings. Party national president Amit Shah and Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath are also likely to attend rallies in districts.According to party leaders, Modi, who has already attended three rallies in the state in past two months, might address a rally at Brigade in Kolkata on April 3. The Prime Minister is likely to attend at least two meetings in Kolkata including one each in south Kolkata and north Kolkata constituency. "We are yet to finalise dates for that, but both the meetings are likely to be held by mid-April," the BJP leader said. The Bengal BJP leaders are also keen to hold rallies at constituencies like Ghatal, Raigunj, Malda where Adityanath will address the crowd.The party leaders in the state on Saturday held meeting with the karyakartas over preparation at 29 constituencies in the state. "We have to reach out to each of the voters before the polls. We should also talk to those who have not voted for us earlier," West Bengal party president Dilip Ghosh told Karyakartas.BJP leaders on Saturday pointed out that several constituencies are still lacking enough booth committees. "Even in Kolkata we do not have enough strength at the booth level and that needs to be addressed soon. Although we are much better positioned than 2014 Lok Sabha polls , we need to take advantage of the strong anti-incumbency sentiment in the state," said a BJP leader. Party karyakartas were asked to campaign about a "stable and progressive government" under Modi and a "growing discontentment" about the government in West Bengal.Meanwhile, party leaders were also concerned about sporadic protests in some of the constituencies like Cooch Behar and Malda. Bengal's co-minder and national executive member Arvind Menon had on Friday rushed to Cooch Behar and spoke to the warring factions separately. He had also spoken to some of the karyakartas individually. Menon, BJP leaders said, is likely to leave for Malda on Saturday night after discontentment among the party's rank and file have also been reported."Those who have joined our party, whether an ordinary worker, or a leader, have risked their lives. I congratulate them for the courage they have shown," Ghosh on Saturday said. Fashion designer Agnimitra Paul joined the party on Saturday.The BJP on Saturday afternoon released the name of former CPM leader Mafuja Khatun as a candidate from Jangipur in Murshidabad. Former CPM MLA Khatun switched over to the BJP in 2017. She had earlier won from the Kumargunj in South Dinajpore seat in 2001 and 2006 but lost in 2016.
