Sericulture farmers in distress, but it’s hardly an election issue

Farmers say caste affliations matter more than development during elections

Over the last five years, the busy Bengaluru-Mysuru highway has been blocked on multiple occasions by sericulture farmers protesting against the collapse in the price of cocoons.

Though the price fluctuates owing to various reasons, the State’s sericulture farmers attribute one cause to be the Centre’s policy of decreasing the duty on imported silk.

Karnataka is the largest producer of silk in India, accounting for more than a third of the country’s production.

The import duty on silk was pegged at a high of 30% more than five years ago. But, its reduction to 10% has brought down the cost of Chinese silk which has, in turn, affected the demand and marketability of indigenous silk.

The reduction in import duty has helped only weavers, particularly power loom owners, who are numerous in Varanasi represented by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in the Lok Sabha, said Gautham Gowda, president of Ramanagaram District Sericulture Farmers’ Welfare Association. But, the move has hit the sericulture farmers of Karnataka hard.

Yet, Mr. Gowda believes that the issue does not resonate with the farmers of the region.

Though Ramanagaram is part of the Bengaluru Rural parliamentary constituency, which is among the sericulture-intensive areas of the State, Mr. Gowda rules out the possibility of farmers being influenced by the Centre’s decision on import duty while casting their votes.

“Such issues do not figure in the minds of the voters. The people of the region, including sericulture farmers, will vote as per the local sentiments. They look to the local leaders for help when it comes to laying a road or some assistance when they have work in the panchayat offices. So, their word matters a lot to the voters,” Mr. Gowda said.

Nagaraj from H.D. Kote in Mysuru was more articulate when he said people will vote more on emotional grounds, like caste, than on any development issues.

Caste affiliations overpower material benefits, including issues of development, he said. Many farmers in parts of Old Mysore region are frustrated with the State government over the delay in the loan-waiver scheme, lamented Muthuraj, a farmer from Periyapatna.

But, he will vote for a candidate put up by the “secular” alliance partners in the constituency, he added.

President of Sugarcane Growers’ Association of Karnataka Kurubur Shanthakumar regretted that there is lack of awareness of the real issues that are affecting the people.
