No hostile discrimination towards female officers: HC

More than 21 female CRPF Sub-Inspectors had moved the High Court over the matter of promotion

In a significant verdict towards gender equality in promotion in the paramilitary force, the Delhi High Court has ruled that there cannot be “hostile discrimination” towards female officers in the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) in the matter of promotions.

A Bench of Justice S. Muralidhar and Justice I.S. Mehta rejected the Centre’s stand that in the absence of any vacancies in the female cadre, it was not possible to grant promotions to the female officers.

“This cannot be a rigid immutable number but has to be flexible to ensure that a female Sub-Inspector (SI) who is up for promotion is not denied that promotion,” the Bench remarked.

Over 21 female CRPF SIs had moved the High Court contending that though the force maintained a combined seniority list of female and male SIs, their further promotions as Inspector and then Assistant Commandants (ACs) is much later than their male counterparts.

They argued that their selection into the force was through a common examination with common selection along with the male counterparts.

Common seniority list

They contended it was incumbent on the Centre to issue a common seniority list for male and female SIs (General Duty).

The Centre argued that “Mahila personnel can be promoted to the next higher rank only on accrual of a vacancy against the sanctioned strength of Mahila personnel in the higher rank”.

The High Court, however, said that this argument cannot be accepted for the simple fact that the earmarking of vacancies is done by the Centre themselves.

A junior male SI cannot be allowed to “steal march” over his senior female SI in the combined seniority list only because there is a vacancy against which he can be accommodated whereas there is no vacancy available at that time for the female SI to be promoted as an Inspector, the High Court said.

“If the mere creation of separate cadres for female and male SIs gave the licence to the respondents [Centre] to discriminate against the female SIs in the matter of promotion to the next higher post of Inspector, notwithstanding that they are senior to the male counterparts, then such invidious discrimination would be vulnerable to invalidation,” the Bench observed.

The High Court remarked that the Centre mistakenly interpreted Rule 5A (d) of the CRPF Rules, which provides for creation of separate cadre for Mahila Battalion up to rank of Inspector, as permitting them to treat the female SIs differently from the male SIs in the matter of promotions.

‘Violation’

“This resulted in hostile discrimination that was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution,” it noted.

It directed the Centre to fix the notional dates of promotion of each of the officers who had moved the High Court, subject to their being otherwise eligible within twelve weeks.
