Lok Sabha polls 2019: It's Modi versus faceless opposition in polls, says Amit Shah

AGRA: Dubbing the Lok Sabha elections as a contest between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and a ‘faceless’ alliance of opposition parties, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) president Amit Shah , on Sunday, appealed to people to vote for a PM who could guarantee national security and give a befitting reply to terrorists and Pakistan.Launching the party’s poll campaign here, Shah ridiculed opposition parties, including the Congress, Samajwadi Party (SP), Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) and others, for forging an “unprincipled” alliance with the sole agenda of ousting Modi. They are all scared of Modi, he said.“They are faceless and have no PM candidate. They don’t have a leader to take on Modi. For them, Akhilesh [Yadav] is a leader on Monday, Mayawati on Tuesday, Sharad Pawar on Wednesday, Mamata Banerjee on Thursday, Chandrababu Naidu on Friday, Rahul [Gandhi] on Saturday and they will take holiday on Sunday,” mocked Shah, while adding that the county would doomed under such an alliance, which has neither an ideology nor policy.He further said it was ironical that leaders like Mayawati wanted to remove Modi, but didn't have the courage to contest elections themselves. “They are corrupt and fear Modi, and have come together only for this purpose,” he said.Accusing the Congress, SP and BSP of playing caste and communal politics, Shah said that these parties have ruled the country and Uttar Pradesh (UP) by dividing its people. “Congress ruled Delhi for 70 years and the SP and the BSP (‘bua-bhatija’) remained in power for 30 years in UP. However, all they did was to loot people and further their own interests,” he said, adding that BJP had governed the nation with the policy of ‘sabka saath, sabka vikas’.Criticising political leaders, including “Rahul baba” and Ram Gopal Yadav, who have raised doubts over the recent Balakot air strikes by the Indian Air Force , Shah said it is “sad” that these leaders do not have faith in their own military forces. For years, he said, Indian armed forces were being killed and beheaded at the borders. But, the Congress government had done nothing to avenge their killings, he alleged.Shah also said that the Indian Air Force strikes, post-Pulwama, had made India’s resolve clear to the world that under Modi the country will no longer take acts of terrorism lying down. “Earlier, it was only the Americans and Israelis who used to avenge the killing of their soldiers, but now India would do the same,” he added.Claiming that India was only safe under a leader like Modi, Shah said national security was on top of the BJP’s agenda. Shah announced that the party will hold 500 public rallies across Lok Sabha constituencies on March 24 and 26, with a call for a second term for PM Modi.
