Auckland.Scoop » Seeing is believing? Media in a post-truth world

Press Release – University of Auckland

The emergence of “fake news” along with sophisticated techniques using machine learning to create realistic looking media such as Deep Fakes has led to a resurgent interest in digital media forensics.

The emergence of “fake news” along with sophisticated techniques using machine learning to create realistic looking media such as Deep Fakes has led to a resurgent interest in digital media forensics.

Professor Nasir Memon from the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at NYU Tandon School of Engineering delivers a public lecture on new technologies such as machine learning and the challenges we all face from cybercrime and fake news at the University of Auckland.

He will discuss new approaches for creating media that are leading us to a world where images and video cannot be believed any more as they can evade traditional detection techniques.

He will also discuss new approaches that are being developed to return integrity and trust in digital media.

Professor Memon visits the University as a Hood Fellow. His research interests include digital forensics, biometrics, data compression, network security, and human behaviour.

He earned a Bachelor of Engineering in Chemical Engineering and a Master of Science in Mathematics from Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS) in Pilani, India, and a PhD in Computer Science from the University of Nebraska.

He is a founding member of the Center for Cyber Security (CCS), a collaborative initiative of multiple schools within NYU. He is the founder of Cyber Security Awareness Week (the largest student-run cybersecurity event in the world), and the Offensive Security, Incident Response and Internet Security Laboratory (OSIRIS) at NYU Tandon.

Having published over 250 articles in journals and conference proceedings and holding a dozen patents in image compression and security, Professor Memon has won several awards including the Jacobs Excellence in Education award and several best paper awards.

This free public lecture will be held on Monday, 25 March at 6pm in Lecture Theatre SLT1, Ground Floor Building 303, 38 Princes St, University of Auckland.

All welcome.

Light refreshments served from 5.15pm, Level 4 Common Space.

Ends

Content Sourced from scoop.co.nz

Original url
