Artists vent anger against VMC

People turned in huge numbers to see hundreds of artworks that were exhibited outside Mahatma Gandhi Nagargruh on Sunday

Vadodara: On Sunday morning, artists from the city came together and protested against the Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) in a unique way.

Hundreds of artworks including paintings, sculptures and photographs were displayed outside Mahatma Gandhi Nagargruh and the street nearby even as people turned up in big numbers to watch the exhibition.

The artists are angry as the civic body hasn’t allotted them a gallery for exhibiting their works. “The civic body had a city gallery in Badamdibaug near Dandia Bazaar that was rented out to artists for displaying their works. However, about two-and-half years ago, it was demolished to build a new city command centre. We were promised a gallery in the same building,” said Pulkit Dave, one of the artists.

“But after the building came up, we were not given space for the gallery. The new building shows space for art gallery on the map but there is no gallery there. The civic body cheated us so we approached the municipal commissioner and even district collector to register our protests. They kept making promises but nothing happened,” Dave told TOI.

Dave and other artists then approached Gujarat chief minister, Vijay Rupani. “Akota MLA Seema Mohile helped us in zeroing in on a plot in Akota for building an art gallery last year. But the project stopped after the locals objected,” Dave added. The artist community, however, continued making representations to the authorities.

“Vadodara is called a city of art and culture. Isn’t it a matter of shame that the artists here have to protest for having a public art gallery? Every city has a public art gallery so it is the duty of VMC to build one here,” said Manish Vyas, a photographer. “Private art galleries charge an exorbitant rent compared to token amount by city art gallery. Common artists can’t afford high rents so they need a platform to display their works,” he added.

Dave said that he has even demanded vigilance inquiry against the concerned authorities who demolished the public art gallery and duped the art community.


