VIMSAR's ex-director Aswini Pujahari joins Congress

BHUBANESWAR: Aswini Pujahari, former director of Veer Surendra Sai Institute of Medical Sciences and Research (VIMSAR) in Burla, joined Congress here on Sunday. Pujahari, who was in the eye of storm for his alleged unethical medical practices at VIMSAR, had resigned from the prestigious post last month.Pujahari joined the opposition party in the presence of Congress state president Niranjan Patnaik and All India Congress Committee (AICC) temporary in-charge of Odisha, TS Singhdeo. “We are delighted to have the senior doctor and former VIMSAR director with us,” Niranjan said.Pujahari, who had faced massive revolt from junior doctors of VIMSAR for allegedly applying table salt on a cancer patient and conducting experimental surgeries on patients without approval of the medical ethics committee, said he joined politics to fight against corruption.Pujahari also slammed the state government for allegedly instigating junior doctors against him as he was repeatedly raising his voice against bad practices at VIMSAR. “My sole objective was to maintain discipline, streamline healthcare system for the patients and end corrupt practices at VIMSAR. I drew wrath of many when I objected the irregular and delayed arrival of some doctors at the hospital. When I tried to improve the system, the government did not support me. I hope that by joining politics, I can fight against corruption,” said Pujahari, who is reportedly aspiring for Congress ticket for Sambalpur Lok Sabha seat. Pujahari said the Congress invited him to join the party. “I had also received joining offer from BJP. But I chose Congress,” he said.Meanwhile, Niranjan, while replying to a question on the status of seat-sharing agreement with Left parties, said the Congress would spare Aska Lok Sabha seat for CPI, Bhubaneswar Lok Sabha seat for CPM and Mayurbhanj Lok Sabha seat for JMM. Niranjan said the Congress will also spare a few assembly seats for Left parties in Odisha. The Congress has so far released names of candidates for 8 of 21 Lok Sabha seats and 89 of 147 assembly segments.Niranjan came down heavily on those, who vandalized Congress Bhawan here on Saturday evening. Miscreants, supposedly to be the supporters of a ticket aspirant, went on the rampage at Congress Bhawan in protest against the candidature of Ekamra-Bhubaneswar assembly seat Rasmirekha Mohapatra. “We will lodge complaint with police. Revolt among aspirants, who are denied tickets, is routine in all parties. But nobody should resort to violence,” Niranjan said.
