PIPFPD India criticizes govt agencies for dissuading invitees

PIPFPD India criticizes govt agencies for dissuading invitees

Pak National Day

JAMMU, Mar 24: The Pakistan-India Peoples’ Forum for Peace and Democracy (PIPFPD) has strongly criticized the behavior of government agencies, standing outside Pakistan High Commission, New Delhi, and trying to dissuade invitees from attending a programme to celebrate Pakistan’s National Day.

In a statement issued to the press, PIPFPD India co-chairpersons Dr Syeda Hameed, Tapan Bose and general secretary Vijayan MJ stated that their attitude was all the more shocking as they noted down names of the people attending along with their contact details.

“Such kinds of get-togethers are normal practice across the world. Every year Pakistan celebrates its National Day and India sends her representative also. This time, the Indian government decided to boycott the function on the pretext that Pakistan High Commission has invited Kashmiri separatist leaders. The invitees including retired ambassadors, journalists, senior members of PIPFPD and other dignitaries who have served country in various capacities were harassed and humiliated by the cops in civil dress,” they said.

They stated that the action of the police was contrary to the “greetings and best wishes” sent by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to the people of Pakistan on the National Day of Pakistan. “The Prime Minister also said, ‘It is time that people of the sub-continent work together for a democratic, peaceful, progressive and prosperous region, in an atmosphere free of terror and violence.’ The policy of the government needs to be consistent and it has to be of peace and dialogue. There should not be double standard in the foreign policy. The PIPFPD has been consistently saying only dialogue, people-to-people contact and diplomacy can resolve the key complex issues between India and Pakistan,” they said.

They stated that this blatant behavior of the cops was going on in full view of the diplomats of other countries. “What kind of message Indian government has sent to the international community? The government must respect and trust the people of the country. The boycott by the government does not mean every citizen should not participate in a programme. The government must apologise to the people of the country for the harassment of the known persons invited by the Pakistan High Commission to attend their National Day programme,” they demanded.
