Rear Admiral Sanjay Jasjit Singh Assumes Charge as Western Fleet Commander

Rear Admiral Sanjay Jasjit Singh Assumes Charge as Western Fleet Commander

At an impressive ceremonial parade held on 22 March 2019 at Naval dockyard, Mumbai, Rear Admiral Sanjay Jasjit Singh, NM assumed charge of Western Fleet, the 'Sword Arm' of the Indian Navy, from Rear Admiral MA Hampiholi, AVSM, NM.

Rear Admiral Sanjay Jasjit Singh was commissioned into the Indian navy in 1986 and is an alumnus of the National Defence Academy, Khadakwasla. A specialist in Navigation and Direction, he has held a range of command, training and staff appointments during his career. His sea command appointments include that of the ASW and UAV-control Frigate Taragiri, where he was awarded the Nao Sena Medal, and the multi-role Frigate Trishul. His other important appointments include Officer-in-Charge Local Workup Team (West), Indian Naval Attache at Iran, Joint Director of Personnel, Principal Director of Naval Operation and Principal Director of Strategy, Concepts and Transformation at IHQ MoD (N). On promotion to Flag rank, he served as Assistant Chief of Naval Staff (Communication Space and Network Centric Operation) and Flag Officer Sea Training.

He also has the distinction of being the lead drafter for the Indian Navy’s Maritime Doctrine in 2009, Indian Maritime Security Strategy and Strategic Guidance to Transformation in 2015. A keen student of military affairs, he has completed several post-graduate study programmes, including MSc and MPhil in Defence and Strategic Studies from Madras University, MA in Defence Studies from King’s College, London and MA (History), MPhil (Pol) and PhD in Political Science from Mumbai University.

Rear Admiral MA Hampiholi is proceeding to IHQ MoD (N), New Delhi, as Director General Naval Operations in the rank of Vice Admiral on 27 March 2019. Under Rear Admiral MA Hampiholi, the Western Fleet had undertaken several operational deployments and multinational exercises, strengthening maritime security and deterrence at sea, for which he was recently awarded the Ati Vishist Seva Medal.
