Indian expatriates: ‘Qatar-India 2019 Year of Culture bringing two nations closer’

Odissi, one of India’s classical dance forms, performance organised by the Embassy of India as part of Qatar-India 2019, at the Al Majlis Hall of Sheraton Grand Doha Resort and Convention Hotel in Doha, yesterday. Pic: Salim Matramkot/The Peninsula

With the wide array of exciting cultural events and activities lined up for the Qatar India 2019 Year of Culture, Indian expatriates see the year as a golden opportunity to introduce the rich and diverse tradition and culture of India to their children and the wider international community.

A number of cultural events are scheduled to be held during the course of the year. A number of activities were organised in February and March and many events will be followed in the coming months. One event ‘Dances of North Eastern India (Amrapali Repertory)’ is slated to be held in April.

These events cover a wide range of activities including dance performances, musical presentations, film festivals, painting and photography exhibitions, food festivals, fashion shows, calligraphy exhibitions, textiles exhibitions and yoga.

“I have been living in Qatar for the past 11 years and it is the first time Indian culture and traditions are being showcased at this level under the events of Qatar India 2019 Year of Culture,” Subramanya Hebbagelu, Joint Secretary, Indian Community Benevolent Forum (ICBF) told The Peninsula.

He said that children are more exited in attending cultural events especially musical shows like those performed by Vishal Shekhar and A R Rahman.

“I attended all prgrams held under the event. A big number of people of all age groups including families with children enjoyed the programs, especially classical musics and dance,” said Hebbagelu.

Mohamad Sharif, an Indian expatriate attended a classical dance program with his family held under the event on March 22. “My children who were born and brought up in Qatar watched first time such porgarms live. Really it is a great opportunity to introduce the children to the culture and tradition of their country,” said Sharif.

Opening Ceremony of India-Qatar Year of Culture 2019 at Opera House, Katara Cultural Village held on February 4, 2019 was in collaboration with Qatar Museums & Katara Cultural Village.

Scintillating fusion music show by Indian musicians led by Naveen Kumar, in partnership with the talented members of the Qatar Philharmonic Orchestra, mesmerised the audience at Qatar National Convention Center (QNCC). An energetic rendition of Indian contemporary dance enthralled the audience at DPS- MIS Auditorium on February 22.

Tabla Virtuoso & Percussionist Anuradha Pal and her team entertained the audience with their live performance at Drama Theatre, Katara Cultural Village on February 28, 2019.

An Odissi dance performance by Rina Jana Group from India was held on March 21 at Majlis Hall, Hotel Sheraton, Doha. It was an exquisite rendering of classical Odissi by them.
