Deepika Padukone REACTS to her fans bashing Filmfare for not giving her Best Actor Award for Padmaavat

Deepika Padukone is one of the best talents we have in the film industry. With her films like Om Shanti Om, Goliyon Ki Raasleela - Ram Leela, Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani, Cocktail, Love Aaj Kal, Piku and many others, she proved her acting mettle. Last year, Deepika Padukone played one of the most challenging roles in her career of Rani Padmavati for Padmaavat.

The character of Rani Padmavati wasn't an easy one for Deepika. The actor took herself into a zone where she had to experience different emotions which also affected her mentally a lot. If that wasn't enough, Karni Sena protested against the film's release. Not only that, Deepika even received death threats and like her nose or head will be chopped off if the film releases.

All this led to the film's delay for 2 months. It was earlier scheduled to release on November 12, 2017; however, due to the several protests, Padmaavat hit the screens on January 25, 2018.

The actor's performance was praised by the audiences and the critics. Everyone loved how she performed the role of Rani Padmavati with utmost finesse on screen. So, it was natural of her fans to expect that she will be given the Best Actor Female Award.

However, at the recently held Filmfare Awards 2019, Deepika wasn't given the award. Alia Bhatt won the Best Actor Award for Raazi. This didn't go well with her fans. One of her fan clubs commented on her Instagram post where they bashed Filmfare as well as Sanjay Leela Bhansali for not valuing and respecting Deepika and her efforts enough. The fan group even raised the point that if Ranveer Singh and Ayushmann Khurrana can share the Best Actor Award then why wasn't Deepika given the award along with Alia.

The Piku actor apologised to her fan club for letting them down. She replied, "To all my fans, I am sorry I let you all down and promise to work harder than ever before...".

Check out the post:

Today, Deepika Padukone shared the first look of her upcoming film Chhapaak. She plays the role of an acid attack survivor in this Meghna Gulzar's film which also stars Vikrant Massey.

Her first look for Chhapaak has left not just her fans but even many Bollywood celebs amazed and excited for the film.

Chhapaak will hit the screens on January 10, 2020.

What do you have to say about Deepika Padukone not winning Filmfare's Best Female Actor Award? Let us know in the comments section below.
