Discontent over choice of BJP candidates

Many of them are facing protests at their election meetings in Rajasthan

Discontent has emerged at several places in Rajasthan over the candidates fielded by the BJP for the Lok Sabha election without obtaining feedback from the party workers. Though the party has tried to “play safe” by retaining as many as 14 sitting MPs in its first list for the State, several candidates are facing protests in almost all of their election meetings.

The retention of 14 MPs, including four Union Ministers, in the BJP’s first list announced on March 21 was earlier perceived as a signal of the party being confident of victory in the State. The BJP has announced candidates for 16 of the 25 seats in Rajasthan, while the list of Congress candidates is still awaited.

Infighting in the BJP’s Jaipur unit has been visible in the marches, road shows and meetings of Ramcharan Bohra, who is seeking re-election. The supporters of former Bagru MLA Kailash Verma raised slogans against him at the party’s Vijay Sankalp Yatra in the presence of senior leaders here on Sunday.

Resignation over choice

Supporters of some other leaders also held Mr. Bohra responsible for their defeat in the recent Assembly elections. Veteran Rajput leader in Bikaner Devi Singh Bhati has quit the BJP in protest against the decision to give a ticket to Union Minister Arjun Ram Meghwal, while alleging that his political activities had harmed the party.

The candidature of sitting MP Sumedhanand Saraswati from Sikar was opposed by a rival group of party workers in the BJP’s local unit on Monday. Two groups of party workers raised slogans and scuffled with each other at a meeting of the district’s eight Assembly segments. Zila Parishad member Jagdish Lora alleged that Mr. Saraswati had paid no attention to his constituency.

In the Jhunjhunu Lok Sabha constituency, the BJP’s decision to drop its only woman MP Santosh Ahlawat and replace her with Narendra Khinchar has not gone down well with party workers. While a section of the party cadre believes that it was done to reduce the stature of the rising Jat leadership, Ms. Ahlawat has announced that she would not contest the election as a rebel candidate.

The Nagaur and Rajsamand seats, where the candidates are yet to be fielded, are in the eye of a storm because of the local party workers opposing the plans to nominate Union Minister C.R. Chaudhary and erstwhile Jaipur royal family member Diya Kumari, respectively. The Mewar Kshatriya Mahasabha has demanded that only a local Rajput candidate be fielded from Rajsamand.

Second list

The candidates for the remaining nine Lok Sabha seats are likely to be announced shortly after a meeting of the State’s core committee headed by the BJP’s campaign in-charge and Union Minister Prakash Javadekar in New Delhi.
