Kamal’s decision not to contest has few parallels

Critics feel it is a poor strategy from a new entrant

The last-minute decision of Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM) founder Kamal Haasan not to enter the fray in the coming Lok Sabha elections and Assembly bypolls has few parallels in Tamil Nadu politics.

While his supporters say it would help him travel across the State to canvass votes for his candidates, critics feel it is a poor strategy from someone who presented himself as an alternative to established political party leaders.

Leaders such as PMK founder S. Ramadoss have stayed away from testing electoral waters themselves while steering their party.

MNM spokesperson Murali Appas, however, argues that Mr. Haasan’s objective is to capture power in Tamil Nadu and there was no need for him to enter Parliament.

The State nonetheless has seen leaders like DMK’s C.N. Annadurai and VCK’s Thol Thirumavalavan, who contested and won in both Lok Sabha and Assembly elections. But there are also those like MDMK general secretary, who has always focussed more on Delhi politics, even deciding to boycott the 2011 Assembly elections. In 2016, Mr. Vaiko had at the eleventh hour withdrawn from the Assembly elections and fielded another candidate in his place. Similarly, in 2004, soon after coming out of prison following his detention under POTA, he decided not to contest from Sivakasi and instead fielded Sippiparai Ravichandran. Though he had been active in politics for many decades, he first won a Lok Sabha election in 1998, having been in the Rajya Sabha earlier.

“Mr. Vaiko and Mr. Thirumavalavan contested in the Lok Sabha polls because they were not able to create a space for themselves in the State politics,” contended Mr. Appas.

However, K. Thirunavukkarasu, a historian of the Dravidian movement, said a leader could infuse confidence in the minds of cadre and voters only if he led from the front.

“It is the fear of defeat that keeps leaders such as Kamal Haasan from entering the electoral battle because they have not built their party as a political movement. They fear that their image will take a beating if they lose,” he argued.

Asked about Mr. Haasan’s earlier assertion that he would contest, Mr. Appas said though there were plans, he had now decided to concentrate on State politics.

“We have fielded candidates for the Lok Sabha poll. Our target is to provide an alternative to Tamil Nadu politics,” he said.
