MC swings into action after SAD MLA goes on hunger strike

Ludhiana: In a bid to protest against the alleged lacklustre attitude of the municipal corporation and state government, Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) MLA from Sahnewal, Sharanjit Singh Dhillon on Monday sat on hunger strike.

Dhillon said that repeated complaints have failed to draw the attention of the authorities and the residents of the 14 villages on Rahon Road have continued to remain at the recieving end. The residents are faced with issues like choked and sewage overflow.

Dhillon who along with his son Simranjit, area residents and other Akali workers sat on dharna near octroi post. They alleged that the MC was hand in gloves with owners of dyeing units who had illegally linked their connections with the main sewerage line leading to sewage overflow. The protesters also claimed that the sewerage pipelines were laid in 2017 but still these pipelines have not been connected with the main line. On the other hand, the dyeing units in the area were allowed to get their sewerage lines connected with main line.

Dhillon said, “We were forced to sit on hunger strike against authorities as nobody paid any attention towards the issue. After getting permission from the local bodies department in 2016, for the sewerage laying work in the villages, residents have been suffering as the discharge of dirty water from the dyeing units is adding to their problem.” Dhillon claimed that a few months ago, the MC had snapped the sewerage connections of these dyeing units but the connections were restored again. He alleged, “The funds earmarked for development of these areas too have been forfeited by the Congress government because this area falls under my constituency and as I am from rival party, the ruling government does not want that any development should take place in my area.”

Meanwhile soon after the protest, the MC officials reached the spot and persuaded Dhillon to end dharna assuring that the sewerage connections of dyeing units would be snapped. They also claimed in case these connections were restored, the MC would get a FIR registered against those involved. SDO of operation and maintenance cell of the MC, Parshottam Lal said, “Sewerage pipeline was laid by water supply and sanitation department and the issue would be resolved once pumping system was installed to check overflow of sewerage.” After assurance, Dhillon and his supporters ended the hunger strike and claimed that the MC disconnected the sewerage connections of some of the dyeing units and the officials have promised action against violators.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
