Narendra Modi starts his poll campaign from all-important Uttar Pradesh

PM Modi will begin campaigning for elections in Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Western Uttar Pradesh on Thursday.

PM Modi will been addressing an electoral event in Uttarakhand’s Rudrapur on Thursday. (Photo: File)

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP president Amit Shah will be addressing around 125 and 150 rallies between last week of March and mid-May when campaigning for the upcoming national elections.

PM Modi will begin campaigning for elections in Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Western Uttar Pradesh on Thursday.

The highlight of the day will be a massive rally in Meerut on Thursday. It will be aiming for public support for the ruling party in eight seats across western UP. Uttar Pradesh will go to the polls in the first phase of elections on April 11.

Despite of ruling the state, BJP is expected to face a tough fight from the BSP-SP alliance this time.

However, BJP chief Shah and Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath have been making rounds to stir up supporters. On Monday, Adityanath visited a temple in Mathura along with local lawmaker Hema Malini after which she filed her nomination papers.

PM Modi will been addressing an electoral event in Uttarakhand’s Rudrapur on Thursday.

In 2014 elections, the BJP had swept all the five seats in Uttarakhand.

Prime Minister will visit Jammu and Kashmir for a rally in Akhnoor the same day. Security has been tightened in the town in view of his visit.

He is scheduled to visit Jammu region again in the second week of April for a rally in Kathua.

On Friday, PM will have a packed scheduled with three rallies in Odisha’s Koraput, Telangana's Mahboob Nagar and Andhra Pradesh's Kurnool.

PM will be in Odisha on March 29 and April 1. He will also hold two rallies each in Assam and West Bengal on March 30 and April 3.

Modi will be having a public meeting at Itanagar on March 31, and will hold a video interaction on the same day with those who extended support to his Main Bhi Chowkidar (I, too, am a watchman) campaign.

Keep yourself updated on Lok Sabha Elections 2019 with our round-the-clock coverage -- breaking news, updates, analyses et all. Happy reading.
