Won't file police complaint against students, strict disciplinary action will be taken: JNU VC

New Delhi (India), March 26 (ANI): Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) Vice Chancellor Mamidala Jagadesh Kumar said he will not file a police complaint against the students who "barged " into his house on Monday, but strict disciplinary action will be taken against them as per the varsity rules.

Speaking to ANI, Kumar said: "It was an attack on me and my wife. It is the matter of our personal security but we have decided not to go for the police complaint and forgive the students."

"However, few of the security guards were seriously injured. This is a medico-legal case and I stand by my security. Also, Chief Proctor will take action against those involved as per the university rules. The Security office will also approach the Chief Proctor office. JNU administration will definitely take strict action against them as per the rules," he added.

The JNU official also took to Twitter to reaffirm that no police complaint will be filed against the students who barged into his house.

"While last night's violent behaviour by students in front of my JNU residence is condemnable, neither I nor my wife will file a police complaint against the students. We have forgiven them. Wish them the best and hope they will reform and not repeat such acts in future," Kumar tweeted on Tuesday.

On Monday evening, hundreds of JNU students allegedly barged into the residence of the Vice Chancellor and allegedly confined his wife inside the residence for hours before she was safely rescued by security staff and others.

The incident took place when about 200 students marched towards the VC's residence but were stopped by the security staff at the residence gate. However, the protesters smashed the gates and allegedly barged into the residence after quarrelling with the security guards.

It is worth mentioning that university students under the banner of JNU Students Union had been on hunger strike for nearly 8 days against the "new admission policy" and several other issues. On Monday, the students had called for a march to the VC residence.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
