Nirupam: now, I can focus on campaigning for LS elections

Expresses hope that with his exit, factionalism in Mumbai Congress comes to end

Senior Congress leader Sanjay Nirupam has accepted that he has been removed from the post of Mumbai Congress president, and said he will now devote all his energy to campaigning for the Lok Sabha elections. The Congress on Monday declared him as its candidate for Mumbai North West.

“It has been reported that I have been removed from the post of Mumbai Congress president. This is the truth. The post was never permanent, and it had to happen some day,” Mr. Nirupam said on Tuesday.

Milind Deora was appointed the new Mumbai Congress chief on Monday, ending months of infighting in the city Congress unit. Several top leaders had complained against Mr. Nirupam’s style of functioning to the party high command in Delhi.

Calling the post a ‘crown of thorns’ Mr. Nirupam congratulated Mr. Deora and wished him luck. “I hope that with my exit, factionalism in our unit ends and there are no complaints to the high command in Delhi,” he said. Mr. Nirupam said his exit has come at the right moment as he will now be able to focus fully on campaigning. He will be up against incumbent Shiv Sena MP Gajanan Kritikar.

Mr. Nirupam said there is widespread discontentment among people against the BJP and the Sena, who have failed to deliver basic amenities to people. “Under the garb of infrastructure development, Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis has only put up barricades across all roads,” he said.

The Congress leader also said nearly all key infrastructure projects in the city such as the Bandra-Worli Sea Link were developed under the previous Congress regimes.

Mr. Nirupam said it was his dream to represent the people of Mumbai North West constituency in Parliament, and thanked Congress president Rahul Gandhi for giving the opportunity. “I have been living here for 22 years, and know the local issues. I will continue to raise people’s issues at the national and gully level,” he said.
