Relief for SBI customers! State Bank of India to stay functional during 2-day bank strike on Jan 8 & 9

State Bank of India (SBI) is expected stay functional during the two-day bank strike on January 8 and 9. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

New Delhi: It seems like a relief for SBI customers as State Bank of India is likely to remain functional during the two-day bank strike whereas banking services all across India, especially at the PSU banks, are likely to see a partial disruption. The two-day bank strike started on Tuesday, January 8, called by a couple of bank unions, will continue till Wednesday, January 9, 2019. Bank of Baroda, Allahabad Bank, IDBI Bank are some of public sector banks that have issued advance intimation with regard to strike at respective bank branches through separate regulatory filings.

According to a PTI report, banking facilities at India’s largest bank by assets, customers and bank branches -- State Bank of India (SBI) -- are expected stay normal during the two-day bank strike on January 8 and 9. "All the SBI branches will remain operational. Out of nine union constituents, only two have called the strike and rest are not supporting it this time," news agency PTI reported citing Siddhartha Khan, West Bengal Convener, United Forum of Bank Unions.

Other than State Bank of India, Indian Overseas Bank and Bank of India will continue to function in their full capacities while there are possibilities of partial interruption in banking services at some other banks, Siddhartha Khan was seen as saying in a PTI report. The Reserve Bank of India employees have supported the strike only on January 8, the report added.

"Two major RBI employees union have jointly decided to observe the strike in solidarity on January 8. On January 9 there will be a joint lunch-time gate demonstration in all offices against central governments anti-people, anti-worker, anti-national, pro-corporate policies," PTI said in a report citing Samir Ghosh, general secretary, All India Reserve Bank Employees Association.

Apart from the two-day bank strike, about 10 central trade unions, namely -- INTUC, AITUC, HMS, CITU, AIUTUC, AICCTU, UTUC, TUCC, LPF and SEWA -- have called for a nationwide general strike (Bharat Bandh) for two days, January 8 & 9. Following the Bharat Bandh, the southern and eastern part of the nation are largely affected with train, buse, auto-rickshaw services being impacted. The trade unions have collectively placed about a dozen of demands before centre and have been protesting against the anti-people policies of central government.
