Farmers inflicted self injuries: Bhavnagar SP

RAJKOT: The 92 farmers of Mahuva and Talaja taluka of Bhavnagar district who had alleged police atrocity during the agitation against mining by a cement company were in for a shock when the Bhavnagar superintendent of police (SP) said they hurt in their own action and not as alleged. Refuting the atrocity allegations, in its reply the police said the farmers were hurt in the stampede and also received injuries in their own stone pelting activities.Soon after this incident, the general secretary of the Koli community, Rasik Chavda made a representation to the Bhavnagar SP and district collector demanding CBI inquiry. In his reply to the representation on March 7, SP Jaypalsinh Rathod said, “Police, as a part of duty, lobbed teargas shells to disperse the mob and resorted to light lathi charge, but didn’t commit any atrocity.”The letter further read: “Because of the lathi charge there was a stampede and some of the farmers received minor injuries in that stampede. The farmers were hurling stones at the police and during that farmers received injuries.”The letter also stated that the mob carried pipes and sticks and sharp edged weapons which they used to vandalize police and private vehicles, assault police personnel and also injured policemen on duty with the intention of murder.At the time of the incident, Pravin Mal was the SP who had been transferred last month.Nearly 1,500 farmers from 13 villages of Mahuva and Talaja taluka took out a protest march on January 2 to protest the mining activities by a private cement company. Farmers alleged that cops began lathi charge on the protesters including women near Bambhor village. Seeing the women protestors getting assaulted, some farmers started pelting stones on the policemen. Farmers also alleged that after detention, police continued to beat them inside the custody and many farmers received serious injuries including fracture. The farmers later approached the Gujarat high court (HC) alleging police atrocity as well as custodial violence on 54 farmers. The HC ordered Talaja court on February 1 to conduct a judicial inquiry into the allegations and take appropriate action after its findings.The farmers’ advocate, Aanand Yagnik said, “The SP is committing perjury by this letter. The HC prima facia accepted that atrocity is committed and ordered court concerned to conduct an inquiry. We have video evidence of police committing atrocity even inside the custody. The SP should not try to cover up the act of his predecessor and junior officers. The misguiding statement issued by a senior officer is a crime.”Bhavnagar SP Jaypalsinh Rathod could not be contacted despite several attempts.
