BJP’s Mandal dam & Rajhara colliery poll gambit fails to create waves

Daltonganj: Even a couple of months ago, it seemed that BJP was banking on two key government initiatives — revival of Mandal dam project and Rajhara colliery — to win the confidence of the voters in the north-western part of the state. Palamu and Chatra Lok Sabha seats fall in this area.The prime minister, Narendra Modi, laid the foundation of Mandal dam project in January this year. The Rajhara colliery was reopened in February 2019 on the back of sustained efforts by Palamu MP V D Ram after remaining shut for nine years.However, due to lack of any significant progress on the two projects in recent months, BJP leaders are now dithering to bring up either Mandal dam or Rajhara colliery in their public speeches.According to BJP insiders in the region, leaders of the saffron party have been asked by their party bosses to avoid referring to the revival projects.A senior BJP leader here, on condition of anonymity, said, “The state leadership has even given leaders the green signal to talk about the Rafale controversy. But they have been asked to not bring up the issue of Mandal dam.”“Displacement continues to be one of the biggest poll issues in this region. But the way in which the opposition along with some tribal outfits are protesting against the dam, it will instil further fear about displacement among the local population. We could have rebutted the charges of the opposition, had there been some progress in implementing the dam project.” a BJP worker said.“So sensing the growing disenchantment among tribals , the BJP has decided to downplay the Mandal dam card as much as possible,” he added.BJP MPs of Chatra and Palamu — Sunil Singh and V D Ram, respectively — never broach the subject of Mandal dam in their public meets these days.On the other hand, the alleged ill-effects of Mandal dam, including displacement, were raised repeatedly at JMM working president Hemant Soren’s four-day Sangharsh Yatra in Palamu division about a month ago. Moreover, supporters of BJP are now finding it difficult to dispute the fact that more than Jharkhand, Bihar will benefit from the interstate reservoir project on North Koyal river.Ram could not be contacted for comments. but talking to TOI from Delhi, Chatra MP Sunil Singh said, “Mandal dam is our commitment. Prime Minister took care of this project which remained grounded for 47 years. It will boost irrigation and water will reach the fields.” Asked if the dam will help BJP’s poll prospects in the state, Singh replied, “Mandal dam is not a political issue for us. People will reap the benefits of the dam project by 2022 as promised by the PM.”Palamau and Chatra will go to polls on April 29.
