Modi Hardly Represents India, Only the Hindi Belt!

Still, BJP May Turn in a Better Performance in TN

Whatever one may have against Dravidian parties in Tamil Nadu, they were able to keep majoritarianism at bay, until late Jayalalitha became Chief Minister.

An alumnus of a premier Christian institution, Jayalalitha soon realised any anti-secular pitch will not serve her well and began to place accent more on governance than on religion.

Still, I think the BJP led by Hindu fundamentalist Narendra Modi will turn in a better performance in Tamil Nadu in the upcoming parliamentary elections. Modi does appeal to a section of fanatic Tamilians, particularly among the intelligentsia and among those who have developed a revulsion for Dravidian parties that are seen to have corruption in their veins.

However, the BJP has teamed up with the most corrupt of those Dravidian parties with a divisive agenda, the AIADMK.

Gaja Floods, Sterlite Firing and NEET

That said, Modi does not hold any relevance for Tamil Nadu. At best, he represents only the Hindi belt and can hardly be seen as a national leader. Even when a few years ago, he visited Singapore, a country where Tamil is a national language, it was a Hindi harangue at an event I attended. He spoke in Hindi. As he thrives on his popularity with people from the North (besides NRIs), his aim is to connect just with them!

Throughout his five years at the Centre, Modi has generally not demonstrated any genuine inclusive willingness, with the South remaining the least of his priorities.

As this BBC report states, he ignored the devastation left behind by the Gaja floods (which caused devastation in 12 districts and left more than 300,000 people homeless) last year. He did nothing meaningful when anti-Sterlite protests led to indiscriminate police firing and loss of 13 lives.

Image from https://ahseeit.com/tamil/?qa=3445/go-back-modi-meme

Suicide Over NEET

On the issue of NEET, relating to medical admissions, Tamil Nadu sought exemption for the State for a year, but Modi’s Government went against its promise and told the Supreme Court that it could not accept the request. One Dalit aspirant (Anitha) missed the cut despite being a topper in the State exams – with a cut-off score of 197 out of 200 which will have easily given her a medical seat but lost admission because of NEET. She committed suicide, sparking wide protests across the State.

But Puthiya Tamilagam (PT) party president K. Krishnaswamy, who is said to have got medical admission for his daughter with help from Jayalalitha, appeared to cast doubts on Anitha’s suicide, drawing criticism from people across the State.

His party (PT) is now part of an alliance that includes the BJP and the AIADMK.

Nasty Comments Against Kerala

It is not just Tamil Nadu that has been cold-shouldered by Modi, he received flak from Kerala too when he said that “infant mortality rate was higher in the State than in Somalia.”

Anyone obsessed with his own religion and language, valuing whatever ethos he holds more than regional cultures, will struggle to find ideological resonance in the State. I, however, do see small segments of people getting drawn to leaders propagating narrow ideas. That is their right in a democracy.

For that matter, even the Congress showed a lack of empathy with the sentiments of people of the State when the Government led by late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi sent the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) to Sri Lanka, a decision that cost him his life in 1991.

The peace mission ironically turned into a war-like scenario when the IPKF launched a full-scale fight against the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam. The IPKF was even reported to have fired at a big hospital where militants were suspected to be hiding. Casualties were not just militants, but also patients and doctors.

Sadly, India lost more than 1200 of its soldiers during the three-year fight for a cause that did not serve the country’s interest.

All said, it does look like the Lok Sabha elections may deliver better results in Tamil Nadu for the BJP through its association with likeminded parties that have no interests of the State at heart.

G Joslin Vethakumar
