Exclusive: Minimum income scheme is about empowering people, says Raghuram Rajan

File Photo

New Delhi: The minimum monthly income scheme announced by the Congress party as a pre-poll promise which will ensure a minimum monthly income of Rs 6,000 per month for the 20 crore poorest poor in India, is a scheme about better targetting and empowering people, believes former RBI Governor Raghuram Rajan. In an exclusive interview with Supriya Shrinate of ET NOW, Rajan said that the proposed scheme will empower the poor to fulfil the basic needs of food and education so that they can emerge as a better workforce.

Rajan said it is important that schemes offered to poor do not hold them back from job hunting. The basic idea is to target the poor and give them an ability to create good livelihood, he said.

Refuting arguments that the proposed minimum monthly income scheme, touted as NYAY, will make the poor lazy and stop them from working, the former RBI Governor said, Rs 6,000 per month income is not a level of income which is enough to live comfortably in a big city.

Given that agriculture distress and poverty are two sources of stress in the economy, Rajan said there would be a need to create fiscal space for such a scheme. The scheme can be funded by cutting overlaps in other ongoing schemes or by higher taxes, he added.

On Monday, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi promised an annual minimum income of Rs 72,000 to 20 per cent families in the poorest of the poor category, trying to win votes in the forthcoming elections.

While other economists and policymakers have put a question mark on the fiscal viability and feasibility of the scheme, Rajan said fiscal space can be created for the same. “It’s important to create room for those schemes, which are actually effective,” Rajan told Shrinate.

Rajan said that the Congress party consulted him on the proposed minimum income scheme and there is no reason why the Congress consulting him should be seen through political prism. Direct benefit transfer has been a common theme between the last two governments, he said
