Edgeworth Economics Wins a 2019 Concurrences Antitrust Writing Award

[March 27, 2019] Edgeworth Economics Wins a 2019 Concurrences Antitrust Writing Award

Edgeworth Economics, a leading provider of economic analysis and expert testimony, is pleased to announce that an Edgeworth publication, "Comparative Analysis of Court-Determined FRAND Royalty Rates," has won a 2019 Concurrences Antitrust Writing Award. The article, authored by Edgeworth Partners Dr. Fei Deng, Dr. Gregory K. Leonard, and Dr. Mario Lopez, was selected by the Concurrences jury for the Business Article award in the category of Intellectual Property. The award was announced at the Concurrences Gala Dinner held March 26, 2019 at the National Press Club in Washington, DC. In the award-winning article, which was originally published in the Summer 2018 issue of the American Bar Association's Antitrust, Dr. Fei Deng, Dr. Gregory Leonard, and Dr. Mario Lopez review and compare the two most recent court decsions in FRAND rates in cellular standards, Unwired Planet v. Huawei (News - Alert) and TCL v. Ericsson, to determine the extent to which the two decisions are consistent with each other and potential implications for future litigations. The authors conclude that the two decisions found different rates for Ericsson's LTE (News - Alert) Standard Essential Patent (SEP) portfolio primarily because they reached different conclusions from their respective comparable license analyses, not because of disagreement on the appropriate aggregate royalty burden for all LTE SEPs. Therefore, future FRAND rate litigation in the cellular space may focus more on the measurement of relative portfolio strength and less on the level of the aggregate royalty burden.



Edgeworth experts have been at the forefront of FRAND-related litigation across various jurisdictions, including the US, China, and Europe. They have consulted for and/or testified in cases such as Samsung (News - Alert) vs. Huawei (US and China litigations), TCL v. Ericson, Dolby v. Oppo and Vivo (India litigations), In re: Innovatio, RealTek v. LSI Corporation, Ericsson v. D-Link Corporation et al., Microsoft v. Motorola, Asus v. InterDigital (News - Alert), INVT v. HTC and ZTE (ITC proceedings), and Unwired Planet v. Samsung (UK litigation). About Edgeworth

Edgeworth Economics (www.edgewortheconomics.com) is an economic, financial, and quantitative consulting firm that provides economic analysis and expert testimony for clients facing complex litigations involving antitrust, class certification, complex commercial damages, consumer financial services, intellectual property, labor and employment, mergers and acquisitions, and transfer pricing. Our clients include law firms, Fortune 500 companies, and government agencies. View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20190327005259/en/

[ Back To TMCnet.com's Homepage ]
