Deora courts Geeta Nagar slum voters

Allays fears of displacement, says won’t allow anyone to touch even a single home

The newly appointed Mumbai Congress chief Milind Deora kick-started his campaign in Mumbai South, the seat he is contesting in the Lok Sabha elections, with a visit to the densely populated Geeta Nagar slum in Navy Nagar on Tuesday night, assuring slum dwellers they need not fear being uprooted as long as the Congress stood with them.

Residents of the slum area are fearing displacement due to a fresh round of surveys initiated by the collector from March 16.

“The fresh round of surveys is very serious. It is nothing but a ploy of the BJP and Shiv Sena [to pressurise the residents]. But I want to assure you that I will not let anyone touch even a single house in Geeta Nagar,” Mr. Deora said while addressing a large crowd of residents, mostly women. He said the Deora family has been closely associated with Geeta Nagar, and he entered politics to be able to take up issues of the people living in slums like Geeta Nagar.

Dig at MP Sawant

Hinting that Mumbai South MP Arvind Sawant had ignored his constituents, Mr. Deora said to the residents, “If you see him any time, do ask him where he has been for the past five years.” Mr. Deora lost to the Shiv Sena leader in the 2014 election.

The Geeta Nagar slum is located on the coast on Naval land. A high wall separates the slums from the main area and has pushed the hutments to a corner. The slum has been the epicentre of high drama and protests over the years. In 1992, slum dwellers had boycotted the civic elections after their access roads were blocked. It is from this area that actor Shabana Azmi rose to prominence as an activist.

Mogana Valli (39), one of the residents, said their biggest fear is being shifted to Mankhurd or Mahul, where the conditions are not liveable. “Our livelihood is dependent on this area. The government wants to push us to Mankhurd and Mahul, where the living conditions are not fit even for animals. Those who have been rehabilitated there have been suffering from severe health issues,” Ms. Valli said.

Another resident, Gauri Kamble (33), said they should be rehabilitated to a nearby area. “The government cannot uproot us completely,” Ms. Kamble said.

Visiting Koli community

Mr. Deora’s next stop was Machhimar colony at Cuffe Parade. The Koli community in the area has been raising several issues, such as shrinking fishing ground and Mumbai Metro authorities taking over a large piece of land where local fisherwomen dried the catch.

“I have always believed the city stands on the shoulders of the Koli community and mill workers. I am aware of the problems faced by the people in Worli Koliwada due to the proposed coastal road. The Congress has always stood by locals, and the party will continue to do so,” Mr. Deora said.
