Agri-podcast: Glen College celebrates centenary





The college was established in 1919 and today serves as a centre of excellence in agricultural training in and around the Free State Province, as well as nationally and internationally. Glen College also focuses on higher education and training in the Agricultural sector. Various activities are planned throughout the year including an open day, as well as a number of sporting and cultural activities to mark this pioneering centenary celebrations. According to the college’s principal Melvin Makangu, they are ecstatic about the milestone the College has reached.



Meanwhile, Glen Agricultural College will be conferring an honorary diploma in Agriculture upon Dr Benny Malakoane during an upcoming graduation ceremony to be held on the 5th of April. Malakoane, the current MEC of Agriculture, has previously sat on the boards of several companies and also worked as Chief Executive Officer of Bloem Water. He also worked as municipal manager at Matjhabeng local municipality before being roped in as MEC of Health in the Free State. Before joining the department of agriculture, Malakoane worked briefly as MEC of Tourism, Environmental and Economic Affairs. Glen College principal Melvin Makangu says it is the first time in the history of the college they would be bestowing an honorary diploma to someone who never studied Agriculture. He says his work speaks volumes, and his passion for agriculture is enormous. Makangu says they will be also be honouring the employees who worked for the department for over 30 years. He adds this year's graduation ceremony will be a special one as the college celebrates its centenary.





AND

In an effort to realise the conversion of North West farmers, the provincial department of Rural, Environment and Agricultural Development Agricultural Support Services recently held a Conservation Agriculture (CA) planting demonstration at the Kgora Farmer Training Center in Mahikeng. About 70 farmers including stakeholders such as the Agricultural Research Council (ARC) and departmental officials attended this ground breaking initiative where 50 hectors of land was planted with sunflower seedlings. Departmental spokesperson, Emelda Setlhako said the department aims to convert as many farmers to Conservation Agriculture. The department is determined to help farmers. He says this method of farming has been explored successfully in countries such as India and Zambia. She added that climate change has become a serious challenge. With the recent drought experienced in the province, farmers need to adapt to new methods that will ensure the sustainability of the industry as well as continuously contribute to food security and tackle the triple challenges of poverty, inequality and unemployment.





Content hosted by iono.fm





OFM News/Michael Tlhakudi
