Karnataka: Congress, JDS sit on dharna against IT raids on ministers

Karnataka Chief Minister and JD-S leader HD Kumaraswamy, Congress leaders Dinesh Gundu Rao, Siddaramaiah and DK Shivakumar during a demonstration by Congress and JD-S against Income Tax Department's raids at various places in Karnataka. (Photo: IANS0

Hours after Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy alleged that I-T department officials were preparing to raid Janata Dal(Secular) and Congress in the state, a massive search operation began in the state early on Thursday morning [March 28].

The raids began on Wednesday first at the residence of Siddiqui Sait, a jowar trader closely associated with the JD(S). It soon spread out to several locations but the majority of the raids were carried out in the Old Mysuru region.

According to sources, search operations were conducted in over 20 places in Bengaluru, Mandya, Mysuru and Hassan. All these searches took place with security provided by the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF).

In Hassan, three close associates of PWD minister and Kumaraswamy's brother HD Revanna were raided. Minor irrigation minister Puttaraju's house in Chinakurali, Mandya was also targeted. Multiple premises linked to him, including his relatives' in Mysuru, were also raided.

The I-T department seized Rs 1.66 crore cash in raids across the state. 24 premises were covered in the raid which started in the morning.

HD Revanna while addressing the media said that, "BJP leaders were shortlisting leaders who should be raided by the I-T Department. Some BJP leaders have told this to the chief minister [HD Kumaraswamy]. The I-T chief in Karnataka is an agent of the BJP national president [Amit Shah]. The BJP has raided me to help independent candidate Sumalata Ambareesh.'

However, Sumalatha, who is an independent candidate from Mandya and has the BJP's support retorted saying, "The I-T Department would have worked for several months before conducting a raid. Probably they raid places were those where they have information money is being distributed."

HD Kumaraswamy also took to Twitter to state that this was the 'actual surgical strike' of the PM. "PM Narendra Modi's real surgical strike is out in the open through I-T department raids. The constitutional post offer for I-T officer Balakrishna helped the PM in his revenge game. Highly deplorable to use government machinery, corrupt officials to harass opponents during election time."

As the raids picked up momentum, JD(S) workers launched protests by blocking the highway in Mandya. Party workers also blocked the traffic on the Srirangapatna-Bidar highway and Mysuru-KR Pet main road.

In the evening, JD(S) and Congress workers staged a protest opposite the I-T Department office in Bengaluru. The protests were attended by the CM HD Kumaraswamy, former CM Siddaramaiah, deputy CM G Parameshwara, KPCC president Dinesh Gundu Rao and minister DK Shivakumar.

HD Kumaraswamy said that during elections, the I-T department which has to operate independently has acted on the orders of the PM and the BJP president and that this needs to be condemned. He further added that "Since the BJP came to power, many constitutional institutions have been misused. In the coming days, it looks like they want to change the constitution given by Dr Ambedkar. This is a dictatorship."

Former CM Siddaramaiah also attacked the I-T department saying, "Those working in government offices must remain within the bounds of the law."

The BJP however, rubbished the allegations made against them. Muralidhar Rao, senior BJP leader told India Today TV "The BJP as a political party has no role in the raids."
