I-T raids several ‘individuals’ in Karnataka, CM Kumaraswamy leads protest

BENGALURU: Income-tax raids on aides of top coalition leaders in Karnataka early Thursday brought Congress and JD(S) together once again. Karnataka chief minister HD Kumaraswamy led a joint protest against the central agency, calling the searches 'revenge politics' by the Modi government.The CM addressed Congress-JD(S) workers outside the I-T office here, following raids on aides of top leaders of both parties in the Old Mysuru region. Kumaraswamy singled out BR Balakrishnan, principal chief commissioner of I-T (Karnataka and Goa region), in his fusillade against the department. "We are not against raids. But we protest selective raids conducted in Mysuru, Mandya, Hassan, Shivamogga and Kanakapura. Don't work as agents of the NDA government in its last hours,'' the CM said.The income tax department said no MP, MLA or minister had been covered in the ongoing searches in Karnataka. Though the department, till late Thursday evening, didn't identify individuals whose properties were searched, sources privy to the developments revealed some details. According to sources, 20 premises of eight individuals, including minor irrigation minister CS Puttaraju's relatives in Mandya and Mysuru were searched."Among those whose properties were raided include a senior JD(S) leader in Bengaluru, a business venture of a relative of former PM HD Deve Gowda in Shivamogga, offices of PWD in Hassan and taluk office in Kanakapura. The office of a Congress leader in Kanakapura too was raided," they said.Kumaraswamy, who had Congress leaders Siddaramaiah , G Parameshwara, DK Shivakumar, Dinesh Gundurao and JD(S) ministers by his side during his address to the workers of the two parties, took exception to raids on government offices in Hassan and Kanakapura. "Raid the Hassan PWD engineer's house, not his office. Visit my office in Vidhana Soudha too. Income-tax officials think they are above reproach and descendants of Harishchandra. Everyone knows how a 'settlement' takes place after a raid,'' he alleged.After predicting on Wednesday that 300 CRPF personnel would arrive in Bengaluru to assist in the raids, a furious Kumaraswamy on Thursday said he, too, can unleash the Anti-Corruption Bureau on tax sleuths.Later, in a tweet, the chief minister accused the PM of misusing the income tax department to threaten Congress and JD(S) leaders during elections. "This is revenge politics; we won't be cowed down by this," he said.
