Congress, JD(S) protest I-T raid ‘surgical strikes’

Income Tax raids

Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy

Bengaluru

Balakrishnan under attack



surgical strikes

I-T Dept Statement



Who all were targeted



Snap protests in city; BJP asks why worry about raids, if you have nothing to hideIn a show of solidarity against the, alliance partner Congress joinedto protest against “politically motivated surgical strikes”, on JD(S) leaders and sympathisers.There were multiple raids in, Mangaluru, Mandya, Hassan, Shivamogga and Mysuru on Minister CS Puttaraju’s residences and offices, JD(S) MLC BM Farooq, JD(S) sympathisers including officials, PWD contractors, those close to former prime minister HD Deve Gowda and members of his family, PWD offices in Hassan and Taluk Offices in Kanakapura.The I-T department, in a statement, however, denied any raids on any Minister, MP or MLA. This is the first time that a Karnataka Chief Minister was protesting against the Centre. In the recent past, he is the second chief minister to protest against a central government agency. A month back, Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Bannerjee protested against the CBI for arresting the State’s top cop.Kumaraswamy was flanked by CLP leader Siddaramaiah, KPCC president Dinesh Gundurao, Deputy Chief Minister G Parameshwara and Water Resources Minister DK Shivakumar besides a large number of Congress and the JD(S) legislators and supporters.Addressing the protesters, leaders from both parties slammed Prime Minister Narendra Modi for targeting political rivals by using Central Government agencies like the CBI, I-T and the Enforcement Directorate.The raids which began hours after the Chief Minister on Wednesday stated that close to 300 officials from outside the State conducted targeted I-T raids on the rival parties - JD(S) and Congress besides these party `sympathisers.’ He had also condemned the use of CRPF men instead of the local police. The raids began late on Wednesday night and intensified on Thursday.Protesting the raids, there were snap protests in various parts of Mandya district.Reacting to the raids, Kumaraswamy said: “PM @narendramodi’s real surgical strike is out in the open through IT dept raids. The constitutional post offer for IT officer Balakrishna helped the PM in his revenge game. Highly deplorable to use govt machinery, corrupt officials to harrass opponents during election time. (sic)’’ BJP has reacted strongly and asked why the Chief Minister has to worry about the raids. “If they are honest and has not committed any wrongdoings why do they need to worry,’’ asked State BJP president BS Yeddyurappa. He added that since the Chief Minister knew about the raids in advance, they could have safeguarded against it. BJP leader KS Eshwarappa said Kumaraswamy was not qualified to be a CM. “He has passed on the I-T raids information obtained from intelligence officials to the cheats,’’ Eshwarappa said.On Wednesday, Kumaraswamy tweeted that PM Narendra Modi was misusing the official machinery to target political rivals: “Hon’ble PM @NarendraModi is misusing the IncomeTax Dept to threaten the political leaders of Karnataka from JDS and Congress during election time. They have planned to conduct IT raids on our important leaders...BR Balakrishnan, dirctor general of income tax (investigation), Bengaluru, has become a point of target for rival Congress and the JD(S) for the last two years. On Wednesday, the top IRS officer came under attack from Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy.At the protest in front of the I-T office on Queen’s Road, the Chief Minister alleged that the Central government has dangled a Governor’s post for Balakrishnan post his retirement.“I have all details of this man who is acting as a BJP and Central government agent who is conductingon rival party leaders and their fans to trouble during the elections.”The Chief Minister’s brother and PWD Minister HD Revanna alleged that Balakrishnan was a “420 and an agent of the BJP who gave clean chit to BS Yeddyurappa in the diary case.”In a statement, the I-T department termed the CM’s comments as “deplorable”, and appealed to everyone not to politicise raids. “We request that the activities of the income tax department not be politicised, personalised or trivialised. In statements which sounds like an incitement to physical violence issued by persons holding very responsible posts are deeply deplorable,” they said. We are committed to carrying out functions in a professional and fearless manner. “Department will act on credible information regardless of political affiliations.” On the deployment of CRPF personnel, the I-T department said they followed protocol by requesting the State Police through ADGP (Law and Order).Residences, offices and businesses of the following were raided: Irrigation Minister CS Puttaraju, his nephew Ashok and other relatives JD(S) MLC BM Farooq PWD Contractors CHVN Reddy, Timme Reddy, Narayan Gowda, Ashwath who are all perceived to be close to Revanna. PWD Offices in Hassan, Executive Engineer Manjunath, is being quizzed Shruti Motors owned by relatives of Deve Gowda family, a few other relatives and friends of the the JD(S) first family.
