Mamata shows she is better leader than Rahul by condemning 48-hour bandh

At a time when Congress leaders like Rahul Gandhi have been repeatedly criticizing Prime Minister Modi’s national government for not generating employment for millions of youths, the only opposition leader to prove that she really cared was Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee.

When ten central trade unions protested against what they termed as the national government’s “anti-people” policies by calling for a 48-hour bandh on January 8 and January 9 (something which would not only cause a loss to the exchequer of thousands of crores of rupees but severely hurt the most vulnerable sections in the unorganized self-employed sector like millions of pavement-vendors and hawkers throughout the country), perhaps the only opposition leader to take a firm and principled stand was the Bengal CM.

PTI quoted Mamata as telling reporters at the state secretariat in Kolkata, “Enough is enough, there will be no bandh in Bengal. In the last 30 years, they (the Left Front) have destroyed the state by calling bandhs.”

The Bengal CM implemented what she had said. The state government announced that its employees would be banned from availing of casual leave or half-day leave not just on January 8 and January 9 but on the days preceding and following the bandh.

The state government also announced that 500 additional buses would run on Kolkata’s roads and that the police had been authorized to take strict action to prevent any disturbance. “Nobody will be allowed to put up barricades to stop people from trying to open shops or visit offices,” a police official was quoted as saying. “Market-places, shops, malls and business entities will be operating normally.” he added.

The hypocrisy of the bandh called by the Congress on September 10, 2018, to protest against rising fuel prices has been shown up with the latest decision by its government in Karnataka to hike taxes on fuel so as to ensure that the state government’s revenues were not affected by the recent dip in international prices. The 48-year-old Rahul is 16 years younger than Mamata but it is high time he learnt that leadership comes with responsibility and that much more is required than televised dramatic gestures like hugging the prime minister during a Rafale debate on the floor of the Lok Sabha and then returning to his seat and winking, almost as if to indicate that everything was a joke including what he had just said about not hating those who, he claimed, hated him. Contrast that with the Congress-JD(S) ruled state of Karnataka where schools and colleges were closed during the bandh and those few buses which tried to run on the streets of Bengaluru were stoned. In other parts of the country, there were reports of tyres being burnt to block vehicular traffic on roads and highways. One can only hope that no one was critically ill and had to be rushed to hospital on the two days of the bandh called by the trade unions and the political parties supporting them despite high courts terming bandhs as illegal.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
