Will bring NRC in West Bengal, throw out infiltrators: Amit Shah

On his first visit to Bengal after the notification of the Lok Sabha elections was issued, BJP national president Amit Shah attacked West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on the issues of appeasement and corruption.

"You pay honorarium to imams. We have no problem. But what about the Hindu pundits? They should be paid too. Mamata is giving recognition to Urdu language and hiring Urdu teachers at schools in West Bengal, but where is Urdu taught? When two of our young party workers protested against this, they were shot dead," Shah said at a public meeting in Alipurduars district on Friday.

He said that the allocation for Madrasa education in the state budget was Rs 4,000 crore which was more than the budgetary allocation for higher education.

The district, along with Cooch Behar, goes to poll on April 11 in the first of the seven phases of poll process in Bengal.

Shah said that once they come back to power, they will implement National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Bengal to throw out infiltrators from here. "Hindu refugees here need not worry. You have our commitment that Citizenship Amendment Bill will be implemented and they will live here in peace. We will implement NRC here and once you give the government of India 23 seats from Bengal, all infiltrators will be thrown out of Bengal," said Narendra Modi's trusted general. He reiterated that Hindus of Bengal could not freely celebrate Durga or Saraswati Puja.

He asked members of the spectators to shout loud in favour of Modi so that the sound reaches to the ears of 'deaf Mamata'. Shah took a dig at TMC's slogan 'Maa Mati Manush' saying that 'Maa' is bereft of affection, 'Mati' has been given to infiltrators and 'Manush' are being killed.

"You had brought this government after a long rule of the Communists but now you feel that the Communists were better. This government not only needs to be defeated but they need to be uprooted and thrown away," he said.

Shah also said that when the Modi government ordered and executed an air strike on Pak terror camps in retaliation to the 40 CRPF Jawans killed in Pulwama, Mamata was unhappy. "She was sad because it affected her vote bank but don't worry. Irrespective of whatever people like Akhilesh (Yadav), Mamata and Mayawati said, Modi government will give such fitting replies to Pakistan," he said.

He also mimicked AICC president Rahul Gandhi saying Rahul always wanted accounts of the Modi government's performance. "We will not give accounts to Rahul baba. We will give our work report to the people of Alipurduars rather," he said.

Later in the evening, TMC MP Mamata's nephew Abhishek Banerjee hit back at Shah from a public meeting at Purulia district. "They pretend to be well wishers of the Hindus. Then why are they summoning organisers of Durga Puja through the income tax department. Are organisers of Ganesh puja in Maharashtra or Hanuman Jayanti in Uttar Pradesh called by the IT department?" Abhishek said.

He said that none of the other leaders across the country has done for the Hindus as much as Mamata in Bengal. "Only during elections they start talked about building Ram Mandir at Ayodhya," Abhishek Banerjee
