After the exodus of senior leaders, Congress gets in action mode in Maharashtra

The Congress high command seems to have taken a serious note of exodus of party leaders to BJP. Now in a bid to quell the discontent, a three-member delegation comprising Mallikarjun Kharge, KC Venugopal and Muralidhar Shetty will visit Mumbai on Saturday as part of party's damage control exercise. They will hold a series of meetings with senior leaders with a call to put up unity in the 24 constituencies where Congress has fielded its candidates.

Already, leader of opposition Radhakrishna Vikhe-Patil's son Sujay Vikhe Patil and Satara district unit chief Ranjit Naik Nimbalkar have joined BJP and are fighting the polls from Ahmednagar and Madha seats respectively. Furthermore, Kalyan Kale, who runs two sugar factories in Solapur district, may migrate to BJP expressing displeasure over the ticket distribution. Similarly, nine-term MP and former union minister Manikrao Gavit and his son Bharat may quit Congress party protest against party's decision to nominate legislator KC Padavi from the erstwhile Congress bastion and tribal dominated Nandurbar seat in north Maharashtra. It is notable that Manikrao won from the constituency nine times in the past.

Gavit senior was disappointed after the Congress party did not consider fielding his son Bharat, who was elected to the Nandurbar Zilla Parishad four times. Gavits has convened a meeting of their support on March 30 to decide whether to join BJP or field Bharat as an independent in the Nandurbar constituency.

Maharashtra Pradesh Congress Committee spokesman Sachin Sawant told DNA,'' It is really unfortunate that some party leaders are leaving the party at a time when the lone objective is to defeat the communal and fascist forces.'' He hoped that the interaction between Kharge, Venugopal and Mistry and various leaders will help resolve all issues.

Further, Saturday's visit by three senior leaders is crucial when state unit president Ashok Chavan last week in a purported audio conversation had threatened to quit the post citing that his views on deciding candidates were not taking into account by the high command. Subsequently, the Congress high command fielded former Shiv Sena legislator Balu Dhanorkar instead of Vinayak Bangade in Chandrapur constituency. Similarly, in Ramtek constituency, the party has fielded former bureaucrat Kishor Gajbhiye after party general secretary Mukul Wasnik refused to contest. Wasnik was opposed by several local leaders.

Dance of Democracy
