Farmers on warpath across state

editorial@tribune.com

Ruchika M Khanna

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, March 29

Restive farmers in Punjab have launched agitations across the state, forcing all political parties in the fray for the May 19 General Election to sit up and take note.

Their agitation, launched just as the poll scene begins, is likely to force political parties — the ruling Congress, SAD-BJP, AAP and Punjab Democratic Alliance to commit to fulfilling some of their demands.

While the Opposition parties — both SAD- BJP and AAP — have been extending their support to the farmers, the latter are venting their ire against the ruling Congress, for most of their troubles, be it a complete loan waiver or farmers being forced to give blank cheques as security for loans. But they are equally blaming the Centre (BJP-led NDA government of which the Akali Dal is a constituent) for the rise in costs of all farm inputs, poor remuneration of crops and not implementing the recommendations of the Swaminathan Commission report.

“The agitations launched now are not in favour of or against any political party. We only want each party to commit that they will take up our cause if voted to power,” said Satnam Singh Pannu of Kisan Mazdor Sangharsh Committee. Beginning today, he is leading a “Jail Bharo Andolan”, wherein 51 farmers will court arrest everyday in Amritsar, Tarn Taran, Ferozepur, Gurdaspur and Jalandhar. Other than this, seven other farmer organisations, led by the Bhartiya Kisan Union (Ekta Ugrahan), are protesting outside banks each day, demanding that the blank cheques taken from indebted farmers “illegally” be returned to them. These organisations will also be holding a protest from May 2 to 4 in Patiala (hometown of Chief minister Capt Amarinder Singh, from where his wife Preneet Kaur is seeking to contest the polls) against the inability of the state government to give a complete loan waiver to farmers.

Other than this, though the cane growers, who protested against the non-payment of their dues by the sugar mill at Dhuri for 20 days, have ended their stir, these farmers have stated that they will re-launch their agitation from April 2, in case their dues (as promised by the administration on March 26, when the dharna was lifted) are not cleared. Today, a case was registered against 100 of these protesting farmers for locking the SDM and other officers in their office, when the agitation was on earlier this week. This has led to widespread condemnation by almost all farmer organisations and they have extended their full support to the farmers against whom case is being registered.

“First, the government held back the dues for cane given by farmers to sugar mills. They protested for 20 days and no payment was released. Only when in desperation these farmers took an extreme action of locking officers, the government promised to release their dues. This means that the government had money, but were not willing to release it to us,” rued Sukhdev Singh Kokrikalan, general secretary of the BKU (Ekta Ugrahan), adding that this time they would force each political party in fray to announce and commit to the promises made for farmers.

‘Jail Bharo Andolan’ begins today
