Miscreants loot laptops, computers from government school

PATIALA: Police here have booked unidentified persons for stealing one laptop , five computers and other items from a government school in Sher Majra village of the district. The incident came to fore on Friday morning when the school teachers went to the laboratory and were shocked to notice that the new laptops and computers have been stolen. The teachers immediately informed the cops and a case was registered under sections of the IPC.The school principal claimed that it is the third such incident reported in the district. She said in the past one year the burglars had stolen number of things from the school and the matter was brought to the notice of the higher authorities. It is pertinent to mention that the school did not have a security guard and the principal was unaware if any such provision exists for primary schools.On Thursday night, some unidentified persons allegedly stole computers and laptops worth lakhs of rupees. They allegedly decamped with five computers, one laptop and three monitor screens from the Government Elementary School in Sher Majra village.The computers from the SOLE ( Self Organised Learning Environment ) lab along with chargers were stolen. Besides this, the accused did not even spare the CCTV cameras installed in the school. The school authorities have reported the incident to the police. The police have already registered a case under Sections 457 and 380 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).Station house officer, (SHO) Baljit Singh, said they have received a complaint from the school and a case has been registered. The investigation is underway, he added. However, they are yet to identify the accused.Prior to this incident, some unidentified persons had stolen gas cylinders and groceries meant for the mid-day meals from a government school in the district. A case regarding this was also registered. However, the accused are still at large as no arrests have been made in the case so far.
