Shiv Sena unhappy with BJP candidate Poonam Mahajan for excluding Aditya Thackeray's photo in her posters

The Shiv Sena workers have asked Poonam Mahajan to apologise for not including Aditya Thackeray's pictures in her campaign posters. (India Today file photo)

Shiv Sena Chief Uddhav Thackeray on Saturday accompanied Shah as he filed papers for the Gandhinagar Lok Sabha constituency, and also shared the dais with him at a rally. Meanwhile, the Shiv Sena workers were reportedly fighting with the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) over the protocol regarding the usage of pictures.

The Shiv Sena workers are reportedly unhappy because the banners and the pamphlets put up for the BJP-Shiv Sena alliance candidate in Mumbai North Central Lok Sabha, Poonam Mahajan, did not have pictures of Aditya Thackeray.

Furious over the absence of Aditya Thackeray's pictures from the banners and the pamphlets, the Sena workers have demanded Poonam Mahajan to apologise on social media. The workers said that the banners have pictures of all top leaders and only Aditya Thackeray's photo is missing.

The workers have now written a letter to the party which reads: "Yuva Sena team from North Central Lok Sabha seat will not work or move with our alliance candidate (Poonam Mahajan) till the time she doesn't have protocols in place. We have repeatedly informed our alliance candidate to keep the protocols in place, this is our decision and we shall stick to it till the time she (Poonam Mahajan) understands that our leaders mean to us."

"Today, she is doing this with our leaders, tomorrow, she won't respect our Shiv Sainiks."

Poonam Mahajan said, "I have good relations with Aditya Thackeray and we speak regularly over several issues. There are issues in all families and they get resolved. We don't have any such serious problems and it will be resolved soon."

According to the reports, the Sena workers have been planning to stage a protest against Poonam Mahajan.

Yuva Sena core committee member Rahul Kanal said, "It is disrespect to our leader. She is not going according to protocol. Gopinath Munde's photo is missing. She has to apologise. In fact, we are going to stage a silent protest and show the power of Shiv Sena."
