Time for Jammu to unite to fight against Kashmir centric forces, says Sham Lal after joining BJP

NL Correspondent

Jammu Tawi, Mar 30

Former minister and senior Congress leader Sham Lal Sharma on Saturday soon after joining the BJP, slammed the Kashmir centric forces and appealed to the people of Jammu to join hands and get united to fight against them.

“Jammu and its people always faced discrimination in the hands of Kashmir centric people but time has come when Jammu have to unite against them,” Mr Sharma here told reporters after being welcomed into BJP’s fold.

Lauding BJP for its role when in opposition, Mr Sharma said, “Jammu got everything with struggle and BJP has played a major role in it.”

“Kashmir centric parties have dared people of Jammu, so I want to appeal to people of Jammu that let us unite and give them a befitting reply,” he added and said that they (Kashmir centric forces) live in India, eat in India but in return, raise ‘anti-India’ slogans, it will not be acceptable.

The National Conference, PDP and Congress, who raise a bogey of secularism, must first understand and learn the definition of “secularism.”

“It was Mahatma Gandhi’s time when Congress was the party but it is no more like that,” he claimed.

He however, also took a jibe at the AICC president Rahul Gandhi saying, “he is 48 now, no more a youth leader.”

“He (Mr Gandhi) must understand the definition of young/youth leader,” Mr Sharma said.

The firebrand leader said that alongwith him four block presidents of his organisation also resigned from the primary membership of the Congress and joined BJP while 200 delegates, associated with also entered into BJP’s fold.

“Congress never thought about Jammu region and served interests of particular section,” he said and added that he joined BJP with oath to serve society and Nation and I assure party leaders that I will serve with all my might.

Mr Sharma, said that he was feeling suffocated in Congress as he was never allowed to raise voice for the betterment of Jammu region.

“Congress always worked at the behest of a particular section and favoured the anti-National elements, which compelled me to leave that party,” he added and said that PM Modi has raised international stature of India and he have confidence that he will be more than efficient in his aim to serve the interests of motherland under his leadership.

Earlier Mr Sharma was welcomed by the state president Ravinder Raina and senior leader and In-charge J&K affairs Avinash Rai Khanna.

Mr Khanna, welcomed the Sham Sharma presenting him with party Patka and termed Mr Sharma as leader and capable person to do good work in a right atmosphere.

Mr Raina said that BJP welcomes senior Congress leader Sham Lal Sharma from the core of heart.

He said that as Cabinet Minister and MLA for many years, Sham Sharma always raised his voice strongly for Nation and Dogras.

His decision has made Jammu free from Congress, Mr Raina said and added that those who feel pride in saying “Bharat Mata Ki Jai” cannot breathe freely in Congress.

“Congress, NC, PDP workers are Mujahideen, Terrorists are “Sahib”, when they question Indian Army, no person can live in Congress,” said the BJP State Chief.

There were speculations that Mr Sharma will join the BJP amid the presence of Prime Minister Narendra Modi on March 28 at village Doomi Malpur in Akhnoor tehsil where he addressed a public rally.

Akhnoor constituency is a political bastion of Mr Sharma from where he remained three times MLA.

He also remained minister during PDP-Cong government in 2002 and 2008 when NC-Congress was in rule in Jammu and Kashmir.

He lost to a BJP candidate in 2014 from his hometown constituency when the saffron brigade won historic 25 seats from Jammu region.
