Is Tamil Nadu politics ready for a life without Jayalalithaa & Karunanidhi?

THOOTHUKUDI: Subandrapandian Nadar, 71, is unruffled until he starts talking about Prime Minister Narendra Modi. “Our farmers were protesting for so many days, but he didn’t meet them even once,” says the farmer and vegetable trader at Puthiamputhur, a village near the coastal city of Thoothukudi in southern Tamil Nadu . Nadar is referring to the 2017 protests by the state’s drought-hit peasants in New Delhi, who carried skulls they claimed were of farmers who had killed themselves.Nadar is a voter in the Thoothukudi parliamentary constituency, one of 39 in Tamil Nadu which will see polling, along with by-elections in 18 assembly seats, on April 18.The sleeves of his short-sleeve shirt further rolled up, Nadar responds to questions with more questions.“Why didn’t Modi or our CM come to Thoothukudi after the police firing?” he asks. (The chief minister is Edappadi K Palaniswami of the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, or AIADMK.) This time Nadar is referring to the police firing that killed 13 people on May 22 last year. They were part of a protest march against a Sterlite Copper smelter in Thoothukudi, which has since been ordered shut by the state government.Jansi Fernand was one of the 13 killed in firing. In a dimly lit home in a lane opposite a beach lined with fishing boats, her husband Jesu Balan, a fisherman, says, “We really hope the plant is not reopened but you never know.” Many people in Thoothukudi, who had been opposing the Sterlite plant since its inception in the 1990s for allegedly polluting their air and water, are looking for assurances from the candidates that the plant will stay shut.It is from Thoothukudi, which is still rattled by the police firing, that Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam’s (DMK) Kanimozhi — daughter of M Karunanidhi and member of Rajya Sabha — is fighting her first Lok Sabha battle. She is facing Tamilisai Soundararajan, president of the state unit of the BJP, which has an alliance with the AIADMK, Pattali Makkal Katchi (PMK) and the Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam (DMDK), among others.The AIADMK’s decision to give the Thoothukudi seat — which it won in 2014 — to BJP could be the result of the severe criticism the state government faced over the Sterlite issue. Soundararajan’s candidature may deflect the blow but it will still be tough for the alliance as the BJP does not have a strong base there.In 2014, Kanyakumari — which has an almost equal number of Hindus and Christians — was the only seat the BJP got in Tamil Nadu. It won by consolidating Hindus against Christians. That game plan will not work in Thoothukudi as Christians account for just 17% of the population in the district. Caste will play a more crucial role. Nadars are a key caste group in the constituency, as are Nayakkars and Devendra Kula Velallar in some pockets.BJP’s Soundararajan, 57, is from the Nadar community, as is Kanimozhi’s mother. Party loyalties clash in Soundararajan’s family: her father is a Congress leader and her uncle, H Vasantha Kumar, is a Congress candidate against Union minister Pon Radhakrishnan in Kanyakumari.Kanimozhi, 51, says the Sterlite issue was a key factor in her choosing Thoothukudi. “But it’s not the only issue. Farmers here have had no help from the government.” Kanimozhi spent six months in prison in 2011 in the 2G spectrum allocation case, but was acquitted by the Supreme Court six years later. A local journalist says the DMK has done a lot of groundwork in Thoothukudi, which has been among the recipients of Kanimozhi’s funds from MPLADS (Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme). She also adopted a village in the district under an initiative launched by the prime minister in 2014.Soundararajan believes the police firing will not affect her prospects. “I strongly feel that there has been a propaganda against the BJP on the Sterlite issue. But people know the truth.”The last time Tamil Nadu saw a DMK Congress and an AIADMK-BJP combine was in the 2004 general election, when the latter could not win a single seat. While it may not be so dire this time, the AIADMK can in no way replicate its performance in 2014, when it fought on its own and bagged 37 seats; the BJP won one and its ally PMK the other. A Times Now-VMR opinion poll has given the UPA 34 seats and the NDA 5 seats, while a News Nation opinion poll has given the former 24 and the latter 15.“There is a scenario of double anti-incumbency in Tamil Nadu,” says Maalan V Narayanan, a senior journalist. The AIADMK has been in power in the state since 2011. He also points out that in the absence of the two figures who dominated the state’s politics for years — Karunanidhi and J Jayalalithaa , who passed away in 2018 and 2016, respectively — the election will be fought on issues unlike past elections.S Anandhi, a professor at the Madras Institute of Development Studies, says the past five years have given the DMK an opportunity to rebuild its Dravidian ideology by picking up issues like federalism and opposition to Hindi imposition. “It was difficult for the DMK to target the AIADMK the same way they are targeting the BJP because the AIADMK is from the same ideological fold.”There is a widely held perception in Tamil Nadu that the state government has been a proxy for the Centre since Jayalalithaa’s demise. But RM Babu Murugavel, an AIADMK spokesperson, disputes it. “The AIADMK leads the alliance in Tamil Nadu and we will demand from the Centre whatever is in the interest of Tamil Nadu.” The AIADMK and the DMK are fighting 20 seats each, but are facing off in just eight. The BJP is contesting in five and the Congress nine. “Voters in Tamil Nadu don’t think religion should be a deciding factor in politics. Ours is an alliance to protect the secular fabric of Tamil Nadu,” says Kanimozhi. It would be interesting to see how much of a spoiler TTV Dhinakaran’s breakaway party will be for the AIADMK.The opinion polls ’ indication that UPA has a clear edge in the state holds true in Thoothukudi too. An opinion poll by Daily Thanthi, a Tamil newspaper, has given the UPA 44-50% of votes in Thoothukudi and the NDA 36-42%. Besides the Sterlite issue, Soundararajan will also face a backlash for the arrest of Lois Sophia, a research scholar from Thoothukudi, for raising slogans against the Union government, on a complaint made by Soundararajan.This general election will be an indicator of how the electorate sees the state’s two major Dravidian parties in the post-Karunanidhi, post-Jayalalithaa phase.
