Rajya Sabha proceedings disrupted due to protests by AIADMK, DMK

NEW DELHI: Rajya Sabha saw repeated adjournments on Wednesday morning as AIADMK and DMK members protested over the Cauvery river dam issue while many Congress MPs raised slogans for a JPC probe into the Rafale fighter jet deal.The AIADMK members trooped into the Well of the House and raised slogans demanding justice. The Tamil Nadu parties are protesting against the proposed Mekedatu dam in Karnataka on Cauvery, claiming that it will affect farmers in their state.While the House was adjourned twice during the Zero Hour, it was again adjourned till 2 PM during the Question Hour , despite assurances by the government that Water Resources Minister Nitin Gadkari would make a statement on the issue.The House was first adjourned for 15 minutes at around 11.25 am and again till noon. When it met again during question hour, it was adjourned within minutes till 2 pm.As AIADMK members, who were joined by those of the DMK during Question Hour, shouted slogans of "We want justice", the Congress members were on their feet raising the slogan "We want JPC".The protests started soon after Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu made a fervent appeal for smooth functioning of the House as only four working days were left in the current Winter session and many important bills and discussions were pending.The Rajya Sabha has faced repeated disruptions on various issue and not transacted any substantial business since it met on December 11 for the Winter session."People are ridiculing us," Naidu said, referring to repeated adjournments in the Upper House because of disruptions.Naidu expressed anguish that the image of the House was "taking a beating" and warned that action could be taken against members protesting in the Well.He "earnestly" requested members to co-operate in clearing the bills and taking up discussions on issues like Rafale deal, agrarian crisis, price rise and cyclones in some states.Naidu said action would be taken against members protesting in the Well, if there is consensus in the House. However, he added that action would be against all members who troop into the Well. "It cannot be selective".During the Question Hour, Deputy Chairman Harivansh said Lok Sabha is functioning, but Rajya Sabha is unable to do any business."The Chairman is very concerned with your issue and that is why he has called the minister concerned to talk to you. Please allow him to talk to you. He is at a function and left it and is coming here. He will talk to you soon," he said."You are not allowing the House to function. The entire country is watching that the House has not functioned since last 11th. The minister is coming, please wait," the deputy chairman again said while making an appeal to the protesting members to allow the House to function.Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs Vijay Goel also said, "I request the AIADMK members that after talks with them, we have already asked Minister Nitin Gadkari to talk to you and make a statement in the House. Please allow the House to function."However, the unrelenting AIADMK members first raised slogans from their seats and then entered the Well. They also displayed placards on Cauvery issue.They were later joined by DMK members in the Well and amid the din the house was adjourned till 2 pm by the Deputy Chairman.
