NDA out in strength for Shah

shalender@tribune.com

Manas Dasgupta

AHMEDABAD, March 30

BJP national president Amit Shah today filed his nomination papers for the Gandhinagar Lok Sabha constituency after a massive roadshow and rally addressed by leaders of various constituent units of the NDA.

“The idea is to demonstrate that the NDA is bound together unlike the Opposition ‘mahagathbandhan’, where the alliance partners are all the time fighting against each other,” a senior BJP leader commented.

Thousands of BJP workers converged on the main thoroughfares of Ahmedabad, which formed part of the Gandhinagar constituency, for the ruling party’s show of strength as Shah — flanked by Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh and Gujarat Chief Minister Vijay Rupani — reached the district collector’s office to file his papers.

At the time of filing his nomination papers, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray, Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley and several other leaders were also present.

The roadshow began after the NDA leaders, including Shiromani Akali Dal supremo Parkash Singh Badal, LJP chief Ram Vilas Paswan, and several other leaders addressed the BJP workers. While Badal described Shah as an “institution and not just an individual”, Paswan said the show of unity was a sure sign that the alliance would return with even a bigger majority than it won in 2014.

Thackeray, while admitting that the Shiv Sena had developed differences, said all the “misgivings are over and we have developed strong bonds among ourselves”.

Rajnath Singh attacked the Opposition for questioning the Balakot air strike and asked if the Congress was giving all credit to former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi for bifurcating the then Pakistan in 1971, why should not the credit for the air strike be given to Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Meanwhile, differences over the choice of candidates continued to persist in the Congress, forcing it to further postpone the announcement of the names of the remaining 13 candidates in the state. Worried at rebellion over the choice of some of the candidates, state party chief Amit Chavda and Leader of the Opposition Paresh Dhanani, who were in Delhi, rushed to Ahmedabad.

Party sources said the complete list of Congress candidates for all 26 seats could be expected only by April 2 or 3 as the last date for filing nominations was April 4.

The BJP too was facing some problem in finalising candidates for seven seats, but Rupani said the names were expected in a day or two.

Who is oppn leader?

They (Opposition) have started pulling each other’s legs even before polls as everyone wants to be PM… who is their leader? — Uddhav Thackeray, Shiv Sena chief

Why not give credit?

If the Congress was giving all credit to Indira Gandhi for bifurcating the then Pakistan in 1971, why should not the credit for the Balakot air strike be given to Narendra Modi? — Rajnath Singh, Union Home minister
