Jet Airways' pilots defer strike, set April 15 deadline to clear dues

NEW DELHI: Jet Airways ' pilots on Sunday deferred their decision to go on a mass strike a day after the debt-laden carrier said it will soon pay the remaining December salaries to its employees.The cash-strapped airline’s pilots' body held an emergency meeting in Mumbai today where it decided to give more time to the management to clear the dues.The union, National Aviators’ Guild (NAG), said the pilots will go on strike from April 15 unless the airline ‘substantially’ clears their dues. Sources said NAG decided to give time till April 14 to the management to give a clear roadmap of the company’s future and funding infusion plan."Due to a change of guard at the top, we have decided to defer the 'no fly' call to April 15 to give them more time. First officers will get their salaries dues first as a priority. Amount of dues to come in is based on the interim funding coming in (proportionately),” said a senior pilot.With mounting salary dues, the 1,000-member strong NAG and Jet’s aircraft maintenance engineers (AME) had said they will stop working from April 1. On Saturday evening, Jet management told them that 87.5% of December salary will be paid as it awaits emergency funding from lenders.NAG’s earlier decision was to stop flying unless a substantial amount — at least half — was paid. The Sunday meet was called to discuss what they should do after the airline promised to pay just 87.5% of December salary dues. “We will cooperate with the management and wait for a fortnight. Hope they can sort things out this time,” said a pilot.Jet CEO Vinay Dube had written to pilots and AMEs on Saturday evenin. saying: “The board of directors and management are working as fast as possible to implement the resolution plan agreed with the consortium of Indian lenders ... These are complex processes and it has taken longer than we had expected and as such we are only able to remit your remaining salary for December 2018. We realise that this remittance does not lift the financial hardship that each of you are facing and we do not take your sacrifices for granted. We continue to work on additional funding on an urgent basis and shall advise you about the release of the remaining salary arrears as the funds come in.”Jet Airways has paid 12.5% of the December salary to pilots, AMEs and senior management. It is yet to clear 87.5% of December dues as well as those of January, February and March.Lenders, led by State Bank of India , had promised to pump in Rs 1,500 crore emergency funding, but the airline is yet to receive the money. Comments from SBI were sought on the issue Friday night and are awaited.“Our pilots, AMEs and senior management team in particular have persevered despite the adverse personal and financial impact it has had on each individual and their respective families. We understand the hardship, anxiety and uncertainty which each of you have endured and for that you have our deepest, heartfelt gratitude ... Once again, we thank you for standing with us through our toughest times ... We are confident that with your continued support we will surge ahead in times to come and restore our rightful presence in the skies,” Dube’s letter said.
