Blast victim’s relative protests against police inaction in blast

canon blast

Bangalore

By Amit KumarClimbs mobile tower as no action has been taken yetAgonised by the delay in the arrest of the film crew responsible for the death of a 29-year-old woman and her seven-year-old daughter due to a misguidedon the sets of bilingual move Ranam, a family member of the victims scaled up a mobile tower and threatened to commit suicide unless the police take action against the accused persons.The brother-in-law of the victims, Mehboob Khan, climbed up the tower near Bagalur bus stand on Sunday afteroon to protest against police inaction. It’s been nearly three days since Sumana Banu and her daughter Ayesha Banu died in the blast, so the family members of the deceased are getting restless and are unhappy with the police officials. Police officials have been claiming that the crew members who were part of the film are absconding.Mehboob Khan, who runs a travel office, demanding justice for his younger brother, Tabrez Khan, who lost his wife and daughter. Tabrez Khan is also admitted in hospital as he suffered major injuries in the blast.After Mehboob’s act of protest, ACP North – East intervened and assured justice to the family of the victims. Sa Ra Govind, President of Karnataka Film Chamber, later spoke to Mehboob.Mehboob said, “We are shocked with the behaviour of the police officials, members of KFI and the state government, as no one came forward for us. We have lost two of our family members. We are common people and so there has been a delay in delivering justice to us. If any family member of a politician or any other VIP had died in the blast, then police would have taken quick action and arrested those associated with the film.”He also wondered why no one from the film industry was speaking about issue. “The negligent film crew are responsible for the accident and they should be put behind bars. The president of the film chamber have called us and we will be meeting them tomorrow (Monday). Our fight for justice will continue,” he added.An official from Bagalur police station toldMirror, “The crew members are still absconding. We are in search of them,” the official added. Sumana’s elder daughter Zainab (7), has been declared out of danger by the doctors.
