Flaunting their crucial caste-based vote bank, smaller parties gain more significance in UP

The top BJP leaders immediately reached out to the Nishad Party chief after he broke the alliance with BSP-SP-RLD combine. (Photo: ANI)

The small parties in Uttar Pradesh are pitching themselves as game changers due to their caste-based influence in different areas of the state ahead of the Lok Sabha polls. All the major parties in the state are trying to reach out to the people for their support. What has made the Lok Sabha elections more interesting is the making and breaking of alliances in the state.

In the Gorakhpur by-polls held in March last year, the Samajwadi Party (SP) sprang a surprise by defeating the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's bastion. The results brought the lesser-known Nishad Party in limelight and without which, it was an uphill task for Akhilesh Yadav to challenge the BJP in one of the most important seats in Eastern UP.

The Nishad Party was formed in 2016 after its president Sanjay Nishad, a former Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) leader, parted ways with party chief Mayawati. The Nishad community constitutes two per cent of the total state population but have a sizeable 3.5 lakh electors in Gorakhpur which comprises about 15 per cent of the total voters.

The community had united to support Praveen Nishad in Gorakhpur, son of Nishad Party chief, who won the by-polls after contesting from the SP symbol.

A week before, the party had announced support to the BSP-SP-RLD alliance but withdrew it two days, accusing Akhilesh Yadav of not giving them importance. Sources say that the Nishad Party was demanding two seats from the SP but Akhilesh Yadav agreed only on giving it the Gorakhpur seat.

The top BJP leaders immediately reached out to the Nishad Party chief and organised a meeting between him and UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath. Sources say that the BJP has offered support to the Nishad Party in Gorakhpur to win in its stronghold and is also contemplating to give one more seat nearby which could either be Maharajganj or Mau.

Similarly, Apna Dal faction lead by Union minister Anupriya Patel has once again been offered two seats including Mirzapur after it threatened to quit the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), alleging ignorance by the BJP. The party enjoys significant support of the Kurmi voters in some parts of the Eastern UP.

The BJP may also offer a seat to the Suheldev Bharatiya Samaj Party (SBSP) in Eastern Uttar Pradesh after the party chief, Om Prakash Rajbhar, criticised their bigger alliance partner in UP. The Rajbhar community forms 2.6 per cent of the total state population and have influence in parts of Purvanchal.

Therefore, facing a strong challenge from the Maya-Akhilesh alliance in UP, the BJP is willing to placate the smaller parties to build a strong caste consolidation ahead of the polls.

Speaking to India Today TV, UP Deputy CM Dr Dinesh Sharma said "Our alliance with other parties is not opportunistic. We have tie-ups with parties who have been supporting our ideology. Our friendship with Akali Dal and Shiv Sena is going on since decades because we value our partners."

Meanwhile, former Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav has been eyeing support of more than 40 per cent of the total vote share of the state which includes Yadavs, Jatav Dalits, Muslims and Jats.

A spokesperson of the Samajwadi Party said, "The small parties hold influence in certain pockets and we have worked with them. However, the BSP-SP-RLD alliance is very strong and will be able to outflank the BJP. If the other smaller parties are willing to support us in the alliance, then we will welcome them as well."

The Congress party in Uttar Pradesh, which is hoping to revive itself after Priyanka Gandhi's entry into politics, has also reached an agreement with Apna Dal faction led by Krishna Patel, Mahan Dal and the Jan Ahikar Party in order to get support from the Kurmis, Kushwaha, Mauryas and Shakyas which are important castes within the OBC community.

Interestingly, the party has fielded Apna Dal leader Pankaj Niranjan from the Phulpur Lok Sabha seat on a Congress ticket.

The Jan Adhikar Party has also been given seven seats in agreement. The party will contest five seats on its own symbol and would contest its candidates from two seats on the Congress symbol.

The UP Congress spokesperson, Zeeshan Haider said, "The smaller parties carry a bigger relevance in a different region and all the major parties need their support. We benefit them and they also provide us with strength in return."

Meanwhile, after being ignored by the Congress party in UP, Shivpal Yadav, the chief of Pragatisheel Samajwadi Party (PSP), formed a Progressive Democratic Alliance with the support of the Peace Party and other lesser known parties. The Apna Dal faction led by Krishna Patel has also supported him along with the Congress.

The Peace Party enjoys the support of the Muslims in some parts of Eastern UP and had won four assembly seats in 2012.
