Fact Check: Truth behind photo claiming Jignesh Mevani was beaten up in Begusarai

Twitter user Murari Sharan Shukla has claimed Mevani and Kanhaiya's JNU brigade were assaulted by the Bhumihar youth of Begusarai.

Three days after Gujarat MLA Jignesh Mevani reached Begusarai to campaign for former JNUSU president Kanhaiya Kumar, a picture of the Dalit leader being beaten up is doing the rounds on social media.

Twitter user Murari Sharan Shukla has claimed Mevani and Kanhaiya's JNU brigade were assaulted by the Bhumihar youth of Begusarai. He hailed the Bhumihars (a prominent caste in Bihar) of Begusarai for their act.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found this post to be misleading as the picture is from Ahmedabad and was shot in 2018.

The archived version of the post can be seen here.

The English translation of the text with the picture says, "This is not Gujarat, this is the land of Begusarai. Here, people let their fist do the talking."

The tweet had received more than 450 retweets and was liked by nearly 1,000 people at the time of filing the story.

On Thursday, Vadgam MLA Mevani reached Begusarai district in Bihar to support Kanhaiya Kumar, who is contesting from the seat on a CPI ticket.

The photo was also shared by Facebook page ModiNama which has received more than 500 shares.

A news blog website, Dainik Bharat, used this image in its article dated March 31. The website had also put a disclaimer saying they could not confirm the news.

Using Google reverse image search, AFWA found the original image. The photo is from Gujarat's Ahmedabad, and was shot in February 2018.

On February 18, 2018, the Vadgam MLA and his aides were detained by the Gujarat Police. Mevani was protesting against the "alleged apathy" of the Gujarat government over the self-immolation of a Dalit activist, The Times of India had reported.

Searching with the headline on YouTube, AFWA came across many videos posted by big media houses. One such video was posted by News24. The viral photo is actually a screenshot taken from the video. At 23 seconds, one can see the frame from which the picture was taken.

Mevani had himself shared the image on Twitter after the incident.

The 50 lakh Dalits of Gujarat did not have any slight confidence in this BJP Govt. So we will give antitrust proposal to Gujarat Governor against this Anti Dalit Guj Govt and request for president's rule in Gujarat.#Democracy_Killed pic.twitter.com/CRA2joOOIb Jignesh Mevani (@jigneshmevani80) February 18, 2018

Also read | PM Modi spends crores on facials, ignores the faceless: Kanhaiya Kumar

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim The claim with a viral photo says Jignesh Mevani was beaten up in Bihar’s Begusarai district. Conclusion The photo is actually from Ahmedabad and was shot in February 2018. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
