Ahmedabad: GIIS authorities locked kids in classroom for not paying fees

Parents of Global Indian International School (GIIS), at Gota, on Monday alleged that their wards were locked up in a classroom by the authorities for not paying fees. After the complaint, a team of education officers were sent by the District Education Officer (DEO) Ahmedabad rural to inspect the case. However, little did they know that their inspection will be in vain due to non-functioning of the CCTV cameras.

"They not only locked up our children but also cancelled their admission due to non-payment of fees as per their demand," the parents said.

The parents and the authorities have been at loggerheads over the issue of fees. Last month, the parents had staged a protest outside the school for violating the order of the Fee Regulatory Committee (FRC). While the FRC had fixed Rs 50,000 as school fees, the school charged Rs 70,000 from the parents for the year 2017-18 and 2018-19. Those who followed the FRC order and paid accordingly have been suspended for non-payment of fees, the parents alleged.

Rakesh Vyas, District Education Officer (DEO) Ahmedabad rural said, "My education officers have visited the school after we received a complaint from parents alleging harassment by the school authorities. The parents had alleged that the children were locked in the room so we wanted to verify the same through CCTV cameras. But many of them were not working hence the allegation could not be proved. We will be sending the report to the FRC tomorrow."

Global Indian International School said in a statement:

"This is a completely false accusation. No child was held hostage. Parent who chose to not pay the provisional fees were intimated in advance that their ward was no longer registered as a student at the school effective 1.04.2019. Despite this notice, few parents chose to leave their wards on the school premises today. When the parents were requested to take their wards home, the parents refused. GIIS is a responsible academic institution that takes the issues of safety and well-being of any child on its premises very seriously. Therefore, it is reiterated that no child was held hostage. In the face of refusal by the Parent to take their wards home, the school provided all facilities for their wards to wait in the comfort of a classroom where they were engaged by GIIS teachers with various learning and fun activities. The school also ensured these children were also served refreshments. Furthermore, the Children had the freedom of movement and were attended to by GIIS teachers who provided them care and comfort, whilst their parents chose demonstrate, rather than take care of their wards and take them home."
