From 'Chaiwala' to 'Chowkidar': Political journey of Narendra Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: AP

Narendra Modi was again the BJP's prime ministerial candidate for the 2019 Lok Sabha polls. Modi, the BJP candidate from Varanasi in the 2019 elections, has been re-elected from the constituency. He has again led the BJP to an outstanding victory in 2019. A famously good orator, he is also the most followed politician on social media. Before taking over as the prime minister in 2014, he led the BJP to multiple victories in the state of Gujarat. He had successfully spearheaded the BJP to its most impressive performance in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls.

Family and personal life

Modi was born on September 17, 1950, to Damodardas Mulchand Modi and Heeraben Modi.

Educational Qualifications

Modi has a degree in Political Science from Gujarat University.

Political journey

Modi joined pro-Hindu Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) organisation in the early 1970s. He worked as an active volunteer of RSS before taking a plunge into politics. He joined the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in 1987 and a year later was appointed as the general secretary of the party in Gujarat. He is credited with strengthening the BJP in Gujarat. The state got the first ever BJP-controlled government in 1995. The same year Modi was made the of the party's national organisation and 1998 he was chosen as the general secretary. He rose steadily in the party's hierarchy and replaced Keshubhai Patel as the chief minister of Gujarat due to Patel's poor health and falling popularity in the aftermath of massive Bhuj earthquake that killed more than 20,000 people. He fought his first election in 2002 to win a seat in the state assembly. Modi's tenure as the chief minister witnessed achievements as well as controversies. He is often praised for making Gujarat an industrial hub but at the same time criticised for not handling 2002 Gujarat riots properly.

Modi remained the chief minister of Gujarat for four consecutive terms before becoming the Prime Minister. Under his leadership, the BJP won 127 of the 182 Vidhan Sabha seats in Gujarat in 2002. Taking the string of victories further, the saffron party in the state with Modi as its charioteer again emerged victorious in 2007 and 2012. The party got 117 seats in 2007 while it garnered 115 seats in 2012. Modi's leadership skill and pro-development image helped him become the potential candidate for prime minister post in 2013.

Modi has been the BJP's star campaigner since took over the reins of the party. He led his party to a comprehensive victory in 2014 Lok Sabha elections with the saffron party winning a clear majority. The BJP won 282 of the 543 Parliamentary seats. Campaigning for the party in every state election since 2014, he has helped the BJP form governments in the several states of its own or in the coalition. As a prime minister, he has undertaken measures like demonetisation, the introduction of goods and service tax (GST) which earned him praise as well as criticism.

Modi government has been criticised for lack of job generation and farmers' crisis. Despite him holding several rallies in Hindi heartland states -Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan – for the Assembly polls in 2018, the BJP received a setback.

In the run-up to the 2019 Lok Sabha Polls, Modi had campaigned vigorously for the BJP, seeking a second term as the prime minister. He has been largely successful in keeping his allies together in the 2019 polls. In 2014, he wooed voters by presenting himself as a humble 'chaiwala' taking on the entrenched might of the Gandhi parivar. This time around, he has used Congress president Rahul Gandhi’s “Chowkidar chor hai” jibe to project himself as a 'chowkidar' – a watchman -- who will guard the nation against all ills.

Future prospects

According to the final trends in the counting, the BJP, under the leadership of Modi, has emerged as the single largest party. He is set to become the prime minister for the second time. If he manages to complete the second term, he will be the longest-serving non-Congress head of the government.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
