Nigerians ordering pizza in from London on British Airways, agriculture minister says

Nigerians are ordering pizzas from London and transporting them over 3000 miles using British Airways, the country’s Minister of Agriculture has claimed.

According to Audu Ogbeh, the African nation’s new international takeaway trend has become “annoying” and officials are desperate to bring an end to it.

Speaking at a Senate committee hearing in Abuja, the 71-year-old politician said: “They buy in London, they bring it on British Airways in the morning to pick up at the airport.

“It is a very annoying situation and we have to move a lot faster in cutting down some of these things.”

Although Mr Ogbeh did not specify which Nigerians were making the orders, his comments raised a few eyebrows and prompted a mixed reaction on social media.

The worst ever inflight meals Show all 8 1 /8 The worst ever inflight meals The worst ever inflight meals Cockroach curry A cockroach was found in an Air India breakfast meal. Twitter/Manoj Khandekar The worst ever inflight meals Apples and pears Avianca's idea of a vegetarian meal was an apple and a pear on board one flight. Twitter/Steve Hogarty The worst ever inflight meals Chicken sandwich Emirates served this disappointing Cajun chicken and cheese sandwich on a flight to Dubai Paul Carlin The worst ever inflight meals Gluten-free banana Martin Pavelka was handed this banana, complete with "gluten-free" label, as his inflight meal on an ANA service from Tokyo to Sydney. Martin Pavelka/Evening Standard The worst ever inflight meals Mushroom sandwich Oman Air's finest: presenting something approximating a mushroom sandwich on a flight to Heathrow. Nick Boulos The worst ever inflight meals Raw vegetables Aegean Airways served up some raw pepper and carrot sticks as its veggie option on one flight. musterknabe The worst ever inflight meals More cockroaches An Air India passenger wasn't impressed when she found this in the business class lounge. Twitter/Harinder Baweja The worst ever inflight meals Leftovers Not everyone turns their nose up at plane food - this Urumqi flight attendant was suspended after a video of her eating leftovers went viral. Viral Press

One person tweeted: “Dear @British_Airways, how come you didn't tell us you run a pizza delivery service to Nigeria? Is there an app for this?“

Another said: “What’s the crime there? Doesn’t the same BA flight return to London with fresh vegetables from Anambra? If people like UK pizzas what’s wrong with that?”

The minister’s remarks were in response to the Nigerian government plans to cut down on imports in a bid to stop citizens importing anything from rice to tomato paste because they think "it shows status, class, that they only eat imported things."

He claimed the habit was damaging the country’s economy.

‘Nigeria is a nation of importers. toothpick every year costs us 18 million dollars; tomato paste costs us 400 million dollars, meanwhile, a basket of tomatoes is less than N2000 (£4). “The farmers are losing money because the processors do not have enough funds to set up factories.”

The Independent has contacted British Airways for comment.
