My fight not against BJP but Shiv Sena, says Milind Deora; accuses party of insulting Jains during Paryushana

Congress President Rahul Gandhi with Mumbai party President Milind Deora | Photo Credit: IANS

Mumbai: Congress leader Milind Deora has said that his fight is not against the BJP but the Shiv Sena as the latter had insulted Jain religion by cooking meat outside temples during Paryushana.

Deora made this statement referring to Shiv Sena’s protest against the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation's (BMC) decision to shut abattoirs in Mumbai for the four days during Paryushana, a period of fasting for the Jain community.

Apart from Uddhav Thackeray-led Shiv Sena, the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) had also joined the protest. While Sena encouraged the sale of meat and chicken in the Marathi-dominated areas, Raj Thackeray-led MNS sold mutton in Dadar.

The BJP had urged the BMC to increase the extension of closure from two days to four. Paryushana, an annual event, is usually celebrated in August or September.

Speaking at Zhaveri Bazar Deora further appealed to the Jain community to ask Shiv Sena why they insulted Jain religion and Lord Mahavir during the holy month.

Meanwhile, Shiv Sena and the BJP sealed an alliance for the Lok Sabha and Maharashtra Assembly elections.

While the BJP will contest on 25 seats the Sena will fight on 23 out of the total 48 Lok Sabha seats in the state.

Making the announcement Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis said both the parties have been together for over 25 years because of their shared ideologies and spirit of nationalism.

“In 2014 elections, owing to certain reasons we had split, but later since the past nearly five years we are in alliance in Maharashtra and at the Centre," said Fadnavis.

In a major show of strength for the NDA, Shiv Sena supremo Uddhav Thackeray was also present for Amit Shah's nomination from Gandhinagar apart from Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD).

Gandhinagar had been BJP stalwart Lal Krishna Advani’s constituency but he refused to contest from the seat this time.

After Mira-Bhayandar polls, in which the BJP secured a thumping victory, Shiv Sena had threatened to complain to the state election commission about a video in which Jain leader Naypadmasagarji Maharaj was seen urging the community to vote for the BJP to create a meat-free society.

After Mira-Bhayandar polls, in which the BJP secured a thumping victory, Shiv Sena had threatened to complain to the state election commission about a video in which Jain leader Naypadmasagarji Maharaj was seen urging the community to vote for the BJP to create a meat-free society.

Ironically, the Congress had opposed the ban and Devendra Amberkar, the opposition leader in the BMC, had said that Mumbai being a cosmopolitan city where vegetarians and meat-eating citizens reside favouring a particular community is not right.

Lok Sabha elections in Maharashtra will be held in 4 Phases and the polling dates are April 11, 18, 23 and 29.
