Citizenship (Amendment) Bill passed in Lok Sabha: Understand the law in 10 points

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill will pertain to all states and Union Territories in India.

New Delhi: The Parliament of India on Tuesday passed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019 in the Lok Sabha even after the Congress staged a walkout and the Trinamool Congress claimed that the bill was 'divisive' and would disturb 'peace' in West Bengal. This came after protests erupted in Assam a couple of days ago over the Bill.

Home Minister Rajnath Singh earlier in the day said that the government is committed to ‘deal with illegal immigrants’. “I want to clarify that the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill is not for Assam alone or for the betterment of migrants coming from a particular country. This bill is also for migrants who have come from the Western borders and have settled down in Rajasthan, Gujarat, Delhi and Madhya Pradesh,” Singh said.

We have broken down the Bill into 10 points to help you understand what the government of India plans to introduce.

The Bill aims to provide citizenship to six identified minority communities such as Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists, Christians and Parsis from countries like Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh who came to India before 31 December 2014. Furthermore, those who will benefit from the Bill can find residence in any state of the country. The proposed amendment in the Bill will help migrants be eligible for citizenship, which will be provided to them only after certain levels of scrutiny and recommendations from district authorities and the respective state government. The Centre has also decided to reduce the minimum residency period for citizenship from the present 12 years to 7 years. The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill will pertain to all states and Union Territories in India. The Bill is proposed to give relief to migrants who have entered India from states along the western borders, such as Gujarat, Rajasthan, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and among others. The Home Minister has clarified that the Bill is not just confined to the northeastern state of Assam and that the burden of migrants will be shared by the entire nation, and Assam would not be dealing with it alone. The NDA assured that all possible help will be provided to the Assam government and its people, in wake of the recent protests over the Bill. The Centre granted Scheduled Tribe status to six communities of Assam – Tai Ahom, Koch Rajbongshi, Chutia, Tea Tribes, Moran and Matak. Simultaneously, all kinds of safeguards will be in place to protect the interests, rights and privileges of existing Scheduled Tribes in the state. The Home Minister also assured a separate Bill to allow Scheduled Tribe status to Bodo Kacharis in the hilly districts of Assam and the Karbi community. The 6th Schedule of the Constitution of India might also be amended to bolster the Autonomous District Councils in the region.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
