"Mamata Banerjee Speedbreaker In Path Of West Bengal's Development," Says PM

PM Modi Kolkata Rally: The fight is over Bengal's 42 seats, of which the BJP is targeting more than 20.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi took a sharp dig at West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, calling her the "speed breaker" in the path of development. "There is a speed breaker in West Bengal, who you know by the name of 'Didi'. This 'Didi' is the speed breaker of your development," PM Modi told the crowd at a massive rally in north Bengal's Siliguri from where he launched the BJP's national election campaign in Bengal. "I am waiting for this speed breaker to go so development can gather speed," he said.

Earlier in the day, PM Modi, while addressing a rally in Arunachal Pradesh, targeted Congress for neglecting the northeast for the better part of the seven decades since Independence. "Now this is a stadium where you have come in thousands. We have brought you roads -- national highways, railways, connected you to the rest of India and it's all because you believed in me. The Congress just came to power to serve themselves that's why they never bothered, he told a rally in Arunachal Pradesh's Pasighat.

The prime minister is expected to address one more rally in the state - at the historic Brigade Parade Ground Kolkata. The BJP is expecting around eight lakh people at its rally at Kolkata's Brigade Parade ground, where the opposition's Mahagathbandhan was born with a rally organised by chief minister Mamata Banerjee in January.

While the prime minister will be drumming support for his party, Ms Banerjee will be addressing a gathering at Cooch Behar's Dinhata, 170 km from Siliguri. The chief minister has tweaked her campaign schedule -- earlier meant for April 4 -- so she could have the last word in today's verbal contest.

Meanwhile, BSP chief Mayawati will hold a joint rally with Jana Sena leader Pawan Kalyan in Andhra Pradesh. They would jointly address election meetings at Vijayawada, Tirupati and Hyderabad, the Jana Sena said.

Here are the live updates of PM Modi's and Mamata Banerjee's face-off in Kolkata Election Rally:

Apr 03, 2019 15:14 (IST) Rahul Gandhi addresses rally in Assam





GST has ruined the economy. Congress will bring back real form of GST

We will give northeast special status.

India is witnessing maximum unemployment under Modi government.

Apr 03, 2019 14:05 (IST) Navjot Kaur who had applied for Chandigarh Congress ticket: Pawan Bansal ji (LS candidate) is a senior leader. I respect the party's decision and we will work towards his win. My vision was to work for the benefit of the youth in the area. Unfortunately, it could not take off. pic.twitter.com/wFwgmkBI1q - ANI (@ANI) April 3, 2019

Apr 03, 2019 13:58 (IST) PM Modi



"Didi'' (Mamata Banerjee) is speedbreaker in the path of West Bengal''s development. If poverty is eliminated, Didi's policies will be scrapped. There was a chit fund scam in West Bengal and "Didi's" ministers, officials and aides ran away with the money of my poor brother and sisters. They have looted the poor people. I am waiting for this speedbreaker to go so development can gather speed."

Apr 03, 2019 13:55 (IST) PM Modi is currently addressing a rally in Siliguri, West Bengal

Apr 03, 2019 13:19 (IST) Lok Sabha Election 2019: Same To You, Says BJP After Omar Abdullah's Jibe At Gautam Gambhir



The Omar Abdullah versus BJP duel continues on Twitter over the National Conference leader's "separate PM for Jammu and Kashmir" comment two days ago. "Stick to stuff you know," Omar Abdullah had said yesterday to former cricketer Gautam Gambhir, who had mocked him in his tweets. Right back at you, another BJP leader has tweeted, raking up Omar Abdullah's stint in the past as a hotel receptionist." The Omar Abdullah versus BJP duel continues on Twitter over the National Conference leader's "separate PM for Jammu and Kashmir" comment two days ago. "Stick to stuff you know," Omar Abdullah had said yesterday to former cricketer Gautam Gambhir, who had mocked him in his tweets. Right back at you, another BJP leader has tweeted, raking up Omar Abdullah's stint in the past as a hotel receptionist."

Apr 03, 2019 13:10 (IST) Jaya Prada files nomination in Rampur





Apr 03, 2019 12:50 (IST) BJP hits out at Congress manifesto, accuses it of attempting to weaken armed forces





By promising to amend acts like AFSPA and national security act, why do you want to dilute it? By doing so you will directly be helping "terrorist-friendly" people to get out easily.

By doing so, anyone, even terrorists can get away by saying we have been sexually assaulted and tortured. Even when it doesn't happen, they can claim so, and get away easily, as they would have to be freed.

You will weaken AFSPA, armed forces act, national security act, powers of district magistrates... this will be very harmful and will hamper the morale of the armed forces.

Why do you assume that the armed forces work against human rights?

Do you not see the sensitive state that J&K is in? We have withdrawn AFSPA from Meghalaya, Nagaland and parts of Assam.... But diluting the very act would be very dangerous.

We have shown when it can be done, we do it.

Please do aim to make it such that "bail is a norm and jail is an exception". This is both dangerous and harmful for places where people and forces have to deal with terrorists on a daily basis.

We must remember how you did nothing after the Mumbai terror attacks. But now to put in your manifesto that you will weaken the very security structure of our nation shows that you (Congress) are doing things that are going to help and aid anti-nationals, traitors and separatists.

Apr 03, 2019 12:05 (IST) Rahul Gandhi addresses rally in Nagaland



Congress would bring back the special category status and other special provisions granted to the Northeast states if it comes to power at the Centre.

Congress promises to double the allocation for Education to 6 per cent of GDP in the 5 years ending 2023-24

Apr 03, 2019 11:54 (IST) Sanjay Raut on EC notice to him on his article in 'Saamana', violating mode code of conduct: I've got a notice from EC. Our stand is clear, those who have sedition charges against them should be stopped from going to the parliament at any cost. Hasn't Hardik Patel been stopped? pic.twitter.com/4BJ0NYXfr2 - ANI (@ANI) April 3, 2019

Apr 03, 2019 11:19 (IST) Supreme Court disposes off petition of two Gorkha Janmukti Morcha (GJM) leaders Roshan Giri and Bimal Gurung seeking a direction to grant them interim protection for three weeks to allow them to participate in the general elections.

Apr 03, 2019 11:10 (IST) PM Modi on Congress manifesto

Just like them, their manifesto is corrupt and full of lies. Therefore, it should be called hypocrisy document, not a manifesto.

In their 2004 manifesto, Congress stated that every house would have electricity by 2009. However, till 2014 around 18,000 houses were unelectrified.

Apr 03, 2019 10:59 (IST) On the one hand, you've people who insult your culture and on the other, you've a Chowkidaar who accepts your culture as his own: PM Shri @narendramodi#DeshKeLiyeModipic.twitter.com/EuxNJqapkx - BJP (@BJP4India) April 3, 2019

Apr 03, 2019 10:58 (IST) "I'm a person who challenges, challenges. If I take up a task, I ensure it's completed in time. It's your love and blessings that I'm able to work day and night for the people of the country," says PM Modi.

Apr 03, 2019 10:57 (IST)

"The 2019 election is an election between the Truth and Lies, Between those who deliver and those who make false promises, Between those you can trust and those who are corrupt.

"You all have seen how Arunachal Pradesh was neglected by previous governments for decades, you all have experienced it and seen it for yourself... you have seen how you had been ignored in the past,... but you finally have someone who accepts you, your culture and your traditions. Who understands your dreams and aspirations. And who works to ensure that those are realised."

Apr 03, 2019 10:51 (IST) Every house in Arunachal Pradesh has been illuminated with electricity after 70 years of independence: PM Shri @narendramodi#DeshKeLiyeModipic.twitter.com/46pNMdJ4Yu - BJP (@BJP4India) April 3, 2019

Apr 03, 2019 10:49 (IST) I have worked day and night for you all: PM Modi

It's because of your support that I was able to continue developmental work for Arunachal Pradesh

I came here in 2014 and this place was field. In no time, it became a splendid stadium. Now, good players of football will emerge from Pasighat

Arunachal Pradesh now has rail connectivity, 2 new airports, new highways, better roads, electricity to the remotest village, new football stadium and sports facilities.

We have worked tirelessly... I have worked day and night for you all, for all my countrymen

Apr 03, 2019 10:46 (IST)

"I am here to give you accountability of what I have managed to do in the last few years... I am happy to let you all know that a significant amount of infra projects have been carried out in the last few years... Many are already complete, and some are being done at a fast pace. This would not have been possible if it wasn't for your support." "I am here to give you accountability of what I have managed to do in the last few years... I am happy to let you all know that a significant amount of infra projects have been carried out in the last few years... Many are already complete, and some are being done at a fast pace. This would not have been possible if it wasn't for your support."

Apr 03, 2019 10:41 (IST) Prime Minister Narendra Modi is addressing a rally in Pasighat, Arunachal Pradesh.

Apr 03, 2019 10:25 (IST) Lok Sabha Elections 2019: Book On Rafale Deal 'Seized' In Chennai Ahead Of Launch, Then Returned

A "flying squad" of the Election Commission swooped down on a bookshop in Chennai on Tuesday and seized copies of a book on the Rafale allegations just before its launch. The officials said the book, "Rafale: The Scam That Shook the Nation", was a violation of the code of conduct in place for the national election starting April 11." A "flying squad" of the Election Commission swooped down on a bookshop in Chennai on Tuesday and seized copies of a book on the Rafale allegations just before its launch. The officials said the book, "Rafale: The Scam That Shook the Nation", was a violation of the code of conduct in place for the national election starting April 11."

Apr 03, 2019 10:25 (IST) PM Shri @narendramodi will address mega rallies in Arunachal Pradesh, West Bengal and Maharashtra tomorrow. Watch LIVE



• https://t.co/vpP0MI6iTu

• https://t.co/E31Aljkes3

• https://t.co/lcXkSnweeN

• https://t.co/jtwD1yPhm4

• NaMo TV



Dial 9345014501 to listen LIVE. pic.twitter.com/uqu9fJYydQ - BJP (@BJP4India) April 2, 2019

Apr 03, 2019 10:23 (IST) Prime Minister Narendra Modi will address mega rallies in Arunachal Pradesh, West Bengal and Maharashtra today.
