Gilani urges IOK people to boycott upcoming sham polls

Srinagar, April 02, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, the Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Gilani, has urged the people to completely boycott the forthcoming sham Indian Parliamentary elections in the territory.

Syed Ali Gilani in a statement issued in Srinagar said, “Some argue that despite boycott, people get elected. It is agreed beyond doubt that people have celebrated 2% voter turnout, but there is hell of difference between the crown of humiliation and crown of grace. How can we afford to be part of the house where laws and resolutions are passed only to throttle and subjugate the people?”

The APHC Chairman, while commenting on the luring of voters by the pro-India politicians, said that the Kashmiri people had the habit of forgetting and following blindly the deceitful voices but the recent memories were fresh in the minds of people who still remembered the fate of autonomy, by none other than its own creators (National Conference), despite having 2/3rd majority in so-celled Assembly.

Syed Ali Gilani said that the ban on religious and pro-freedom organizations had irked and pained those who themselves not only banned these groups and locked their schools, offices and residences, but even committed atrocities in every nook and corner of the territory in 1979 – a reference to Mufti Muhammad Sayeed (late) who later founded pro-India Peoples Democratic Party.

“Humiliating remarks of milk and toffee are still echoing in the minds of people and every curb and war on the people was assigned to the dreams of her (Mehbooba Mufti’s) father. Arrogance of power was so intoxicating that in presence of mighty crutches of power, even the queries from media were not responded, but as the support withered away, they shamelessly started knocking the doors of people with a begging bowl,” he said.

The APHC Chairman pointed out that it hardly matters who wins and who loses, but no conscious, sane person should be part of anybody’s win or loss. “We humbly appeal for a complete and unanimous boycott of upcoming elections,” he said.

“Democracy here has lost its values and that is why every cunning, corrupt and mean person tries to escape from any accountability or criticism. Wearing the gown of politics and showing more loyalty to this sick system, they grow more in size and wealth. On the other hand people are threatened and caged in fictitious and false cases, but such maneuvering can never cow down the freedom loving Kashmiris,” he added.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
