ICSF - Documentation center

Punjab: Workshop held on shrimp farming practices, prevailing diseases

April 03,2019 | Source: The Tribune India

A one-day training-cum-awareness programme on “Importance of aquatic animal disease surveillance in aquaculture environment” was organized at College of Fisheries, Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (GADVASU), under the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and National Fisheries Development Board (ICAR-NFDB) funded project on “National surveillance on aquatic animal disease”. Dr HK Verma, Director of Extension Education and Dr KS Sandhu, Dean, College of Fisheries, inaugurated the training programme.



A total of 24 progressive and potential farmers from different districts of Punjab participated in the event. One of the fundamental mandates of the training was to create awareness about shrimp farming practices, current prevailing diseases and prevention protocols. Dr Verma addressed the farmers and highlighted the utilisation of inland saline and water logged areas of Punjab and motivated them to take the benefit of the land.



Dr Sandhu told about the importance of surveillance, data management and interpretation data for sustainable production. He conveyed farmers to utilise the GADVASU facilities for field related problems, especially disease diagnosis. Dr Meera D Ansal, Head of Aquaculture Department, highlighted the scope of shrimp farming in Punjab. Dr Naveen Kumar BT, Course director of the training programme explained the source of specific pathogen free (SPF) seed, role of the Coastal Aquaculture Authority (CAA) and Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Aquaculture (RGCA), and the importance of disease surveillance in shrimp farming in India.



Dr Prabjeet Singh and Dr Anuj Tyagi interacted with farmers about site selection, farm design, biosecurity measures and best management practices for sustainable shrimp farming. Dr Shanthanagouda and Dr Amit Mandal discussed about feed management and biofloc technology to increase and double the farmers’ income. Farmers and faculty members of the College interacted and shared the aspects related to shrimp farming activities, current and new technologies of farming in India, which help developing the confidence among the farmers.



In the afternoon session, farmers were exposed to onsite and point of care disease diagnostic tool (farmer-level kit) for quick detection of shrimp pathogens, and they were also demonstrated the shipment of shrimp samples for disease diagnosis in the laboratory. College of Fisheries has been organising specialised training programmes of variable duration as an entrepreneurship option for unemployed youth. In addition, the trend of aquaculture in Punjab has shown a positive sign which would potentially help in a Blue Revolution. The event concluded with vote of thanks and saying fish for health and wealth by Dr Anuj Tyagi.
