Murdered BHU student's father names chief proctor in FIR, police probe widens

Main entry gate of Banaras Hindu University (BHU) in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh [File Photo] | Photo Credit: BCCL

Varanasi: Security has been heightened at the Banaras Hindu University (BHU) which is shut today following the murder of a second year Masters of Computer Application (MCA) student on Tuesday. Gaurav Singh, aged 23, was shot dead by four bike-borne assailants outside the Birla hostel in the Varanasi-based varsity at around 6.30 pm.

In his complaint to the police, Gaurav's father has named four students along with the chief proctor of BHU for plotting and executing the attack which led to his death. Investigating officers asserted that the assailants fired ten bullets at Gaurav, three of which hit him in the stomach. Friends and bystanders rushed him to the trauma centre inside the BHU campus where he succumbed to bullet wounds to the stomach at around 1.30 am.

A first information report (FIR) has been registered in this regard based on a complaint by Gaurav's father. While the assailants are yet to be identified, police have detained four students of the university in connection with the attack and are in the process of interrogating them. Appointed in September of 2017 in the wake of widespread protests by BHU students over an alleged instance of sexual harassment, Royana Singh is the first woman chief proctor of BHU which was established in 1916 by social reformer Madan Mohan Malviya.

Varanasi: MCA student at Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Gaurav Singh, who was shot at in front of Birla hostel yesterday, has succumbed to his injuries. Anil Kumar Singh, Circle Officer, Varanasi Cantt says, "we have arrested 4 people. It was a case of personal enmity" pic.twitter.com/pqsJTg8xI1 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) April 2, 2019

Shedding light on the investigation, Varanasi police chief Anand Kulkarni said that the matter seems to be one of personal enmity but the police are probing the case from all angles. It has also come to light that Gaurav Singh was suspended by the varsity last year for his alleged role in the widespread violence witnessed by the university in 2017. Singh was accused of helping agitators set a bus ablaze during the violence which was the fallout of students voicing concerns for their safety.
