Lok Sabha elections in UP: Sitapur lad mimicks Akhilesh Yadav, wants to canvass for Dimple Yadav ‘bhabhi’ in Kannauj

SITAPUR: This 16-year-old idolizes Akhilesh ‘bhaiya’ and dreams of campaigning for Dimple ‘bhabhi’ in Kannauj . “It would be a dream come true if I get to campaign for her,” says Shivam Singh, who is awaiting his high school result, glad that his exams finished in time and he campaign for Samajwadi Party His peers, relatives, neighbours call him ‘Chhota Akhilesh’ for copying SP chief’s speech and style effortlessly. “I, first, listen to his (Akhilesh’s) speech and pick up issues raised by him. Then, I read more about them on internet, and talk to seniors to get a fair idea before I raise them in my speeches,” he said. For now, he raises demonetization, GST, unemployment, cattle menace. “Once party releases its manifesto, I will speak as per it,” adds Shivam.The young foot-soldier of SP is on the job already, campaigning in Sitapur.“I go to villages and ask people about their problems. Most villagers complain against ‘pradhans’ and how people who were not close to ‘pradhans’ did not get ‘shauchalaya’ (toilets),” he said.Shivam started working for the party last year. The only reason he chose to work for SP despite being a student of RSS-run school, Saraswati Vidya Mandir, is party president Akhilesh Yadav “I admire him and wish to be like him. He works for development. Which other politician had ever thought of giving laptops to meritorious students?,” he asks.But, despite all his hard work in last one year, he has not yet got the chance to talk to his idol. “He shook hands with me in a meeting at party office in Lucknow but did not talk. I have met him twice but it was fleeting.” Shivam is now a regular at party programmes and had even staged protest at Lalbagh crossing in Sitapur when Akhilesh was detained at Lucknow airport and stopped from going to Prayagraj.Now, he uploads all his speeches and videos on his channel that has more than 250 subscribers.
