Calcutta HC asks wife of Mamata Banerjee's nephew to appear before customs office

Abhishek Banerjee's wife Rujira Naroola was held at Kolkata airport in March for carrying 2 kg gold

Calcutta High Court has ordered West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's nephew Abhishek Banerjee's wife to appear before Kolkata customs office on April 8 over the fiasco that took place during her return from Thailand on March 16.

Calcutta High Court also said that customs cannot take any coercive step.

Abhishek Banerjee's wife Rujira Naroola was held at Kolkata airport in March for carrying 2 kg gold without any declaration.

She was let off after police intervention.

In a setback for TMC MP Abhishek Banerjee, the Calcutta High Court on Thursday ordered the MP's wife Rujira Naroola to appear before customs officials in Kolkata on April 8 over the fiasco that took place during her return from Thailand on March 16.

The court was hearing a petition by Rujira Naroola challenging a summon issued by the customs department to question her.

"The court has directed the petitioners to participate in the customs proceedings. The court has said that this is only with regards to the summon which was issued. Also, the court said that before we take any coercive action, we will have to take leave of the court," Ravi Prakash, advocate appearing for customs, said.

According to reports, Ms Naroola and another lady accompanying her were held by customs officials at the Kolkata airport on March 16 for carrying material that they had not declared.

In its complaint, customs officials have stated that they faced resistance from the two women who allegedly refused to allow their baggage to be searched.

Refuting the allegations, the TMC MP from Diamond Harbour had termed them as "baseless and politically motivated".

"Forget 2 kg, even if they could prove recovery of 2 gm of gold from my wife's bag, I will quit politics. The BJP is spreading falsehood for political mileage before elections," Abhishek Banerjee said.
