16,845 illegal Bangla migrants deported in 15 years

An exercise like the National Register for Citizens (NRC) in Assam should also be conducted in Delhi.

In August 2018, the opposition BJP staged a sit-in inside Delhi Assembly premises after their demand for a debate on illegal Bangladeshi and Rohingya immigrants in the national capital was turned down by speaker Ram Niwas Goel.

New Delhi: While there have been plethora of politics over the citizenship of illegal migrants. The Delhi Police have deported 16,845 illegal Bangladeshi since 2004 to January 2019 from the eight districts of the national capital. According to the data provided by Delhi police, a maximum of 7,023 illegal Bangladeshi migrants were deported from Northeast Delhi during the same period.

The Delhi police data shows that 6825 Bangladeshi citizens repatriated their respective country from the East district from 2004 to January 2019. One Bangladeshi citizen repatriated from the Railway unit of Delhi police. Four were repatriated from Southwest district, a total of 1648 Bangladeshi citizens were repatriated from West district, 23 were repatriated from Outer district, 1321 Bangladeshi citizens were repatriated from Central district stated the Delhi police data.

Adding to the problem is that there are many Bangladeshis who have settled down here, many of them are criminals. The lavish lifestyle of youngsters is another reason for anti-social activities, said the sources.

Delhi Police said that these illegal immigrants are also involved in crime in Delhi NCR regions and it is very difficult to track them.

The sources further added that most of these migrants have voter identity cards made at their native places and it was difficult to establish that they were staying illegally in India, adding that it was a politically sensitive issue.

Earlier in August 2018 the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party Legislators staged a sit-in inside Delhi Assembly premises after their demand for a debate on illegal Bangladeshi and Rohingya immigrants in the national capital was turned down by speaker Ram Niwas Goel.

Bharatiya Janata Party MLA O.P. Sharma alleged that illegal Bangladeshi and Rohingya immigrants were involved in criminal activities in the city.

He also added that this is an issue related to the national security but AAP government is shying away from a debate on it.

An exercise like the National Register for Citizens (NRC) in Assam should also be conducted in Delhi.

The demand has been raised by other BJP leaders, including the party’s Delhi unit chief Manoj Tiwari.

Earlier during the 2014 Parliamentary election Aam Aadmi Party alleged Bharatiya Janata Party for their double standard to deal with the African people in Goa and their hate speeches against Bangladeshi who are living in India.
