On eve of Priyanka visit, no-show by ‘busy’ Congress nominee angers villagers

The villagers waited for three hours for Dolly Sharma before leaving

Ghaziabad: A day before the Congress’ east Uttar Pradesh in-charge Priyanka Gandhi Vadra’s much-awaited visit to the Ghaziabad Lok Sabha constituency, there was palpable anger among villagers against party candidate Dolly Sharma.

Locals from Ator and neighbouring villages like Nagla, Morti, Morta and Mohanpur were left in the lurch on Thursday when Sharma, who was scheduled to meet them and hear their grouses, skipped the event after being stuck in Loni with some work and later with overseeing preparations for Priyanka’s visit, which is planned for Friday.

The villagers, mostly consisting of the elders, were left waiting for three hours, and irked by Sharma’s decision to ignore them. After several rounds of tea and pakoras, they went home without meeting her. Sharma, when contacted, said she had got stuck in Loni. She added that since the Congress general secretary was coming on Friday, she was busy making arrangements. The Congress candidate was supposed to reach Ator village at 4 pm on Thursday. The locals started gathering at the venue — an open plot at the village entry — around 3.30 pm. The number swelled to about 100 by 5 pm when the organiser, Manoj Chaudhary, a Congress worker, rescheduled the start of the event to 5.15 pm. By 6 pm, the audience started to get restless.

Braham Singh, a resident, said, “It will have a negative impact on Sharma’s prospects. How will people trust her when she is ditching them even before getting elected? Moreover, it shows a lack of coordination between party workers. People should not have been made to wait like this.”

Dilawar Singh, another resident, claimed that there is anger against incumbent MP Gen VK Singh (retd), who, he said, had not visited the village in the past five years. “The present Union home minister, Rajnath Singh, had got a road built in the village after getting elected from Ghaziabad in 2009, but Gen Singh never did anything for us. He is an outsider. A lot of people are looking for a change, and Sharma has a good chance. This is why people from the neighbouring village had also come to hear her. But her failure to come will now go against her,” he added.

Priyanka’s roadshow will start from Ghantaghar and move towards Ramte Ram Road, Dasna Gate, Jatwar and finally culminate at Maliwara Chowk.

“All preparations have been made and party workers are excited. Priyankaji’s visit is going to be historic in Ghaziabad,” Congress media in-charge Ashutosh Gupta said. In January this year, the Congress had appointed Priyanka as the party’s general secretary for the UP (East) region.

SP (City) Shlok Kumar said, “Proper police management has been made for the roadshow. Traffic diversion will also remain in place. We have not made any changes in the route plan but working on the same given to us through an application.”

Former Union minister Jyotiraditya Scindia, the party’s west UP in-charge, is scheduled to hold a rally in Hapur’s Dhaulana, which is also a part of Ghaziabad Lok Sabha constituency, on April 7.

On April 1, senior Congress leaders Ghulam Nabi Azad, Bhupender Singh Hooda and Pramod Tiwari held public meetings in Muradnagar, Loni and Shaheed Nagar to canvass for Sharma.


