Hyderabad police arrest rowdy sheeter accused of assaulting, murdering several transgenders

Banjara Hills police made the arrest on Thursday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Hyderabad: Almost six years after he first attacked members of the transgender community, a rowdy sheeter was on Thursday detained by Hyderabad police in connection with the murder of a transgender person in 2018. City police arrested 28-year-old Venkat Yadav, a native of Kakalapally village of Andhra Pradesh's Anantpur district under the Prevention Detention Act.

Officials familiar with the arrest said that the accused's real name is Kurma Venkatesh and he has 10 cases registered against him. The initial allegations against Venkatesh date back to 2014 with several non-bailable warrants against him in police stations across the city of Hyderabad. He was even detained under the same act which allows law enforcement personnel to detain a suspect without granting him bail for over a year but was let off within a couple of months.

Venkatesh caught the eye of Banjara Hills police when a complaint was lodged against him by a transgender person who accused him of attacking her allegedly over non-payment of monthly 'mamool'. A first information report (FIR) registered on the basis of her complaint accused Venkatesh of robbing the complainant of 50 grams of gold ornaments and cash amounting to Rs 2 lakh.

This is not the first time members of the transgender community in Hyderabad demanded Venkatesh's arrest. In fact, a demonstration was held outside the Banjara Hills police station in this regard by the transgender community in October of last year. A search was launched on the basis on the FIR but the accused remained on the run until this week when he was nabbed by a team of police officials.

It is being reported by sections of the media that Venkatesh along with a group of miscreants armed with stones attacked a transgender person in 2014 and robbed her of cash and mobile phones. However, police took a special interest in the accused when his name came up in connection with the murder of one Pravalika, a transgender person who was allegedly murdered in January of 2015 by Venkatesh and his accomplices after she resisted their attempt to rob her.

Deputy commissioner of police (DCP), West Zone, AR Srinivas told Deccan Chronicle that Venkat was in an extra-marital relationship with a trans-woman and had a falling out with her. The woman staged a protest outside his home in Anantpur resulting in his wife leaving him which triggered his hatred towards members of the transgender community, added the DCP.
