Raj Thackeray to campaign for Cong-NCP after backroom talks with Sharad Pawar

It's election season in India and even though unpredictability rules the roost during elections, what remains a constant possibility is politicians and parties switching loyalties. Friends turn foes and foes at times are welcomed with open arms. It happened in Uttar Pradesh where Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party have joined hands to challenge BJP. It happened earlier in Bihar when Congress, Rashtriya Janata Dal and Janata Dal (United) stitched an alliance to stop BJP's victory streak.

The latest news comes from Maharashtra where Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chief Raj Thackeray will reportedly campaign for the Congress and Nationalist Congress Party alliance. Raj Thackeray campaigning for Congress-NCP in Maharashtra gains significance because it can directly affect the electoral prospects of Shiv Sena.

In a news report, Mumbai Mirror said Raj Thackeray may not only campaign for Congress-NCP but also feature as a star campaigner.

The report said that while Raj Thackeray is "looking at this as an opportunity to pull his party out of oblivion and set the stage for making a comeback in the assembly elections due later this year, the Congress-NCP wants to use him to cut into Sena votes".

Raj Thackeray has already announced that his party-the MNS-will not contest the 2019 Lok Sabha elections and rather prepare for the state assembly elections. MNS, which once carried much political weight in Maharashtra politics, presently has negligible presence in the state.

Quoting sources, Mumnai Mirror said Raj Thackeray is scheduled to address rallies in South Mumbai for Congress candidate Milind Deora; in north-central Mumbai for Priya Dutt; in north Mumbai for Urmila Matondkar and for Sanjay Dina Patil in north-east Mumbai.

"He will stay away from northwest Mumbai where deposed Mumbai Congress chief Sanjay Nirupam is a candidate," the report said, adding that he may also hold rallies in Maval, where NCP leader Ajit Pawar's son Parth is a candidate; in Nanded, among other seats.

Mumbai Mirror said the decision to rope in Raj Thackeray as a star campaigner was approved by NCP chief Sharad Pawar.

"According to the arrangement worked out between Raj and Pawar over several rounds of meetings, the rallies the former will address will be exclusive MNS rallies - meaning the stage at these meetings will only have MNS flags. However, Congress-NCP candidates could join him on stage and the message will be stridently anti-BJP and anti-NDA," Mumbai Mirror said in the report.

Reporting on the same issue, news agency PTI in a report said Raj Thackeray is expected to address five to six rallies this month.

Thackeray is unlikely to formally join forces with the Congress and the NCP, but his campaigning will help the electoral cause of the grand alliance led by them, sources in these parties said.

The Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) is not a part of the grand alliance.

PTI said according to an MNS leader, Raj Thackeray is set to hold rallies in Solapur, Nanded, Maval, Baramati and Satara constituencies.

Congress leaders Sushilkumar Shinde and Ashok Chavan are contesting from the Solapur and Nanded seats respectively.

NCP's Supriya Sule, Udayanraje Bhosale and Parth Pawar are in the race from Baramati, Satara and Maval constituencies respectively.

Thackeray may also canvass in Nashik, Mumbai North-East (Sanjay Patil), Mumbai North-Central (Priya Dutt) and Mumbai North (Urmila Matondkar), the MNS leader said, adding that the details were yet to be worked out.

Sources in the NCP said, Raj Thackeray was unlikely to openly take sides with the party openly or share stage with them, but his campaign against the ruling combine would eventually help the grand alliance.

"In the previous election, the MNS had contested from certain seats and declared outside support to the BJP. It had polled propitious votes then, not adequate to win a sit for a candidate, but certainly something that can bridge the deficit," the sources said.

The MNS, which had unsuccessfully contested nine seats in the previous outing, had polled 7,08,010 votes -- that is 1.47 per cent of the total valid votes.

ALSO READ | North Indians, you don't have self respect because you never question your leaders: Raj Thackeray

ALSO READ | Your complete guide for 2019 Lok Sabha elections

ALSO READ | Shatrughan Sinha in 16th Lok Sabha: 0 questions, 0 debates, 0 bills but used 106% MPLAD funds

ALSO READ | Political swing song: From Robert Vadra in jail to airstrike fail, how politicians took U-turns

ALSO WATCH | Raj Thackeray gets Ram mandir rumbling again with his sensational claim about riots
