Lok Sabha polls 2019: Is BJP's dream of winning Northeast over-optimistic?

Morengtheng Sunibala, a Meitei vegetable vendor in Bishnupur, Manipur.

Veikhobhal, Kuki tribal in Kangpokpi district of Manipur.

Morengtheng Sunibala used to be a BJP supporter. Not anymore, she says.Selling fruits & vegetables at a market in Bishnupur, around 30 km from Manipur capital Imphal, the young mother from the majority Meitei community is miffed at the party’s attempt to pass the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, als o referred to as CAB, in Parliament. The bill proposes to amend the Citizenship Act of 1955 to make illegal non-Muslim migrants (Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis & Christians) from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan, who came to India before December 31, 2014, eligible for Indian citizenship.“If today we allow minorities from other countries to settle here, who will protect our identity? They will flood the state and oppress us and the coming generations,” she says angrily while holding her baby. When asked which party she will vote for in the Lok Sabha polls, Sunibala says: “I am not sure. But I will not vote for the BJP this time.”Her disenchantment with the BJP over the CAB issue echoes across the election theatre currently playing out in the eight states that make up the northeast and send 25 MPs to Lok Sabha. Five years ago, riding the wave in favour of Narendra Modi , the BJP won nine seats from the region, eight just in Assam. This time around, the party with its allies wants to increase the tally to 22.But the question is: will the BJP be able to overcome the continued voter resistance against the CAB?The controversial bill, which was passed in the Lok Sabha in January, is set to lapse on June 3, since it failed to find support in the Rajya Sabha. But ethnic communities across the Northeast, especially in BJP-ruled Manipur and Assam, remain worried.“The BJP is likely to bring back the bill after the polls. Before winning seats in the region, they will have to win the hearts of the people,” says Rosita, who is from Moreh, a Manipur town along the Myanmar border.“The bill will reduce the population of indigenous people of northeastern states and blur indigenous identities,” says Rohel, a member of the Kuki tribal community, who drives a taxi in Imphal.The sentiment against the bill appears to be the same in neighbouring Assam. Hridayanand Baishya, who runs a taxi service in Tinsukia district, says: “There were violent protests...Whoever understands the bill will not vote for the BJP in Assam this time.”The mood in Arunachal Pradesh too is sour. When PM Narendra Modi visited Itanagar to launch some projects in February, there were protests against the bill.But Manipur Chief Minister N Biren Singh sees no erosion in the BJP voter base in the Northeast.“Following protests in Manipur and other northeastern states, the bill was not introduced in Rajya Sabha. It has virtually lapsed. Hence the question of alienation of the people from the BJP does not arise,” Singh told ET Magazine. Currently, the Congress holds both the Lok Sabha seats in his state.The BJP is also hoping that the development plank should be able to quell the anger against the citizenship bill. But politically, the bill has upset its alliance matrix in the Northeast.In Assam, the Asom Gana Parishad broke its alliance with the ruling BJP (it has now been wooed back). Ally National People’s Party (of Meghalaya) is fielding its own candidates in five states and in Tripura, the Indigenous People’s Front of Tripura (IPFT), the ruling BJP’s alliance partner, too will field its own candidates in the two Lok Sabha seats, currently held by the Communist Party of India-Marxist.“For the survival of Tripura’s indigenous people, we want a separate geographical entity. So we are putting up separate candidates,” IPFT chief NC Debbarma told ET Magazine. The entity he refers to is Tipraland, a separate tribal state.Amid this BJP-IPFT divide in Tripura, old allies Congress and the Indigenous Nationalist Party of Twipra are contesting the polls together to avoid any division of votes.The anger is Mizoram is no less. “We are totally against CAB. I have told the PM on his face that we oppose it. In the assembly, we passed a resolution against the bill. There were protests when the bill was introduced in Lok Sabha. The BJP will perform poorly in Mizoram since we are a Christian state,” Chief Minister and Mizo National Front (MNF) chief Zoramthanga told ET Magazine. His party is part of the North East Development Alliance (NEDA), a regional subset of the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance.But a Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh pracharak working in the Northeast for 17 years dismisses these contentions. “Had indigenous people of the Northeast cared so much about preservation of their identity, they would not have adopted Christianity,” he says, not wanting to be named though. His jibe was at Mizoram, Meghalaya and Nagaland, where more than 75% of the population is Christian. Back in Imphal, Ram Madhav, BJP’s northeast in-charge, is portraying the bill as an act of benevolence on the part of Indians.While addressing a ‘Intellectuals Meet’ at a hotel here on March 30, Madhav said: “The Northeast need not fear CAB. India’s culture has always come to the rescue of persecuted minorities — be it Christians from Syria, Zoroastrians from Iran or Jews.”But alongside, he also made efforts to sell development work initiated by the central government in the northeast. “Remember friends, even as I speak to you here, our PM is holding a rally in Assam. Only the BJP can bring development to the Northeast.”Rajendra Kshetri, a sociology professor at Manipur University, thinks the BJP will probably bag 15 seats at most, given the mood against CAB. “No doubt there has been a paradigm shift in the development work undertaken by the BJP in the region. But the CAB row has slowed down the momentum the BJP had built in its favour,” he says.But Sanathoi Khangembam, who graduated from Modern College in Porompat town in Imphal East, is currently looking for a job and feels the BJP is ahead in the polls since the Congress has been unable to gain any political mileage from the CAB issue.However, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi has said his party will scrap the bill if it comes to power. Hence party veteran Tarun Gogoi, the former chief minister of Assam, remains optimistic about the Congress’ chances in the Northeast given the anger against the CAB. “If someone is persecuted, give him asylum, not citizenship. CAB is very much an issue in the northeast. People are not fools. Congress will win more seats here because Modi has failed to keep his promise. We do not want a chowkidar PM but a PM with a vision,” Gogoi told ET Magazine.Meanwhile, the National People’s Party, led by Mehgalaya Chief Minister Conrad Sangma , is banking on the popular sentiment against CAB even though it is part of NEDA.The NPP, which has 20 MLAs in Meghalaya, five in Arunachal, four in Manipur and two in Nagaland, will now contest the Lok Sabha polls in Meghalaya, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and Assam.“We remain committed to the people of northeast and can never support any bill that can affect their interests,” Sangma told ET Magazine.With the NPP portraying itself as a pan-northeast party, he is finding support outside Meghalaya — in Manipur.In Kuki-dominated Haipi village in the newly-carved Kangpokpi district, Sangma’s party appears to have an upper hand as compared to the BJP and the Congress.Veikhobhal, an 82-year-old who will vote in the general elections for the 11th time, wants to back the NPP. "The party and the candidate openly talk about our identity," she told ET Magazine.But a political analyst from Assam, who does not want to be identified, says the NPP's aim of cornering anti-CAB votes will end up helping the NEDA. "They haven't broken away from the alliance. With Conrad [Sangma] trying to corner anti-CAB votes, these might eventually go to BJP's kitty."Of the eight northeastern states the BJP refers to as the 'Ashtalakshmi', it leads the governments in Assam, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura. It is also part of the governments in Nagaland and Meghalaya and its NEDA partners are in power in Mizoram and Sikkim.But even as the BJP's hopes that the CAB issue will not affect the elections that much, the going may not be easy in a region where jati-matibheti (community, land & hearth) matter more than the promise of protecting persecuted minorities.Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, proposes to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955 to allow Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan, who entered India without valid documents or the validity of their documents have expired, to apply for Indian citizenship, provided they have stayed in India for at least six years.Indigenous communities fear being reduced to a minority in their homeland, outnumbered by an influx of illegal migrants from Bangladesh and other countries. Many see it as a threat to their identity.
