Panvel rehab death: inmates were punished for disobeying orders

Three directors of centre have been missing since March 30

The investigation into the murder of an inmate at an alcohol and drug rehabilitation centre in Panvel has revealed that authorities assaulted inmates who failed to obey their orders.

Three directors of Harmony Foundation at Sangurli, who were booked by the Panvel City police on March 30 for faking the cause of an inmate’s death, have gone missing. Most of the inmates have also fled from the rehabilitation centre. According to the police, there were no CCTV cameras installed in the rehab. The police are on the lookout for the directors, identified as Abhijit Patil, Haresh Gharat and Sandeep Pardeshi. They have been booked under Sections 302 (murder), 201 (causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen offender) and 34 (common intention) of the Indian Penal Code.

Senior police inspector Vinod Chavan from Panvel City police station said, “Some of the inmates came to us to give their statements and we have recorded them. The directors of the rehab are yet to be found. Most of the inmates escaped from the centre after the case was registered.”

Prashant Pawar (42), a resident of Marol who was under treatment at the centre since February last year, succumbed to injuries on March 23. The authorities at the rehab initially told Pawar’s family that he was suffering from jaundice and was in a serious condition. The police said that Pawar worked with his sister in a bank in Mumbai and his elder brother was a deputy inspector general of police in Karnataka.

Suspicious circumstances

Usha Pawar, sister of the victim, said, “At Adhaar Hospital in Panvel, the doctor told us that there was a swelling in my brother’s liver. For more than a year, my brother was at the rehab and he had not been consuming alcohol. We grew suspicious about how there could have been a swelling in his liver. He was in a bad state and we shifted him to Global Hospital in Parel. The doctors there told us that there were five fractures on my brother’s ribs. Later, we took him to Nair Hospital, where he succumbed to his injuries on March 23. We want justice for my brother’s death.”

Assaulted in cabin

Milind Sutar, another inmate who had fled from the rehab on April 3, said, “I got admitted at the centre for treatment in February this year. The quality of food served at the rehab was bad and all those who disobeyed the instructions of the directors were taken into a cabin and assaulted. We were not allowed to speak even with our families. There were 183 inmates. After the directors went absconding, a group of 50 inmates fled from the rehab on April 1. The staff members stopped reporting for work after the police told them that their statements had to be recorded. By the time I had decided to flee with another group of inmates, there were just a few aged inmates remaining in the rehab.”
