Killers of Mahatama Gandhi reign over New Delhi: Farooq Abdullah launches blistering attack on RSS

National Conference chairman Farooq Abdullah I File photo | Photo Credit: PTI

Srinagar: National Conference (NC) chairman Farooq Abdullah on Friday launched a blistering attack on the BJP and RSS, saying Mahatama Gandhi was murdered by the RSS. His killers are the ones ruling Delhi right now, he said. Abdullah was addressing NC workers who were protesting the Centre's order to close Jammu-Srinagar national highway for two days every week.

“Maarne wale kaun the usko (Mahatma Gandhi)? Maarne wale yahi RSS wale jo aaj dhandhana rahe hain saare vatan mein...Aaj Delhi mein hukumat jo kar rahe hain vo vahi hain jo Mahatma Gandhi ke kaatil hain (Who killed him [Mahatma Gandhi]? These killers are all over the country right now. They are the ones who rule New Delhi),” the former chief minister of Jammu & Kashmir said.

Yesterday, Abdullah took on Prime Minister Narendra Modi for making “false promises” and his statements on Balakot airstrike and India shooting down a Pakistani F-16.

“He promised to transfer 15 lakh rupees to every Indians bank account, which never happened. For a few seconds, he sent some jets into Pakistan and dropped some bombs in Balakot after which he claimed 300 people died. Some of his followers said 50, some claimed the number to be 700. Even if one man dies everybody hears about it, so how is it possible that 300 men died without any news,” the NC chairman said.

“They also claimed to have shot down one Pakistani F-16, just today the American government has refuted that claim stating that all Pakistani F-16 jets are accounted for. None of the Pakistani jets one has been shot down. There has to be some basis to even a lie. Why do you lie Modi ji? Did you defeat Pakistan? Did Pak stop existing? Why do you lie Modiji? Whichever government comes to power in the centre, I pray this one doesn't come back," Abdullah said.

US-based Foreign Policy magazine quoting US officials said all of Pakistan’s F-16 jets have been accounted for after a recent check by US personnel after the India-Pakistan altercation in February.

Indian Air Force maintains that it has evidence that Mig-21 Bison’s piloted by Abhinandan Varthaman, managed to shoot down a Pakistani F-16, before being shot down by a Pakistani missile.


