The Shillong Times

Protests against J&K highway ban

Srinagar: National Conference and Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) activists on Sunday protested against the ban on civilian traffic on the Jammu-Srinagar highway on Sundays and Wednesday, with one leader saying it had become a “humanitarian disaster”. The state government has banned civilian and public transport on the highway in Jammu and Kashmir on Sundays and Wednesdays to ensure safe passage to convoys of security forces. Former Chief Minister and National Conference leader Omar Abdullah and Peoples Conference President Sajad Lone demanded a review of the other. NC supporters led by retired judge Hasnain Masoodi, took out a protest at Wanpoh on the highway in Anantnag district. Masoodi is contesting the Lok Sabha elections as the NC candidate from Anantnag constituency. PDP activists carried out a protest at Athwajan on the outskirts of Srinagar city. The activists tried to march on the highway but security forces intervened. (IANS)

Arms dealer held

Mumbai: Alleged arms dealer Manish Nagori, who was arrested earlier in the Narendra Dabholkar murder case, was held again on Saturday night for violating externment rules hours after he was released on bail, police said Sunday. After being released Friday from Mumbai’s Arthur Road Jail on bail in an Arms Act case, Nagori had gone to Kolhapur despite being earlier externed from there, an official said. “He was arrested for violating externment norms and entering the jurisdiction of Kolhapur police,” Senior Inspector Sanjay More of Shahupuri police station in Kolhapur said. Nagori was held by Pune police in August, 2013 in connection with the murder of anti-superstition activist Narendra Dabholkar. (PTI)

Leopard found dead

Lakhimpur Kheri (UP): A leopard was found dead in the buzzer zone of the Dudhwa Tiger Reserve in Uttar Pradesh’s Lakhimpur Kheri district on Sunday, an official said. The leopard bore canine injuries on the head, tufts of another leopard’s hair in its claws. The presence of pug marks of different leopards indicated that the death could have been caused due to infighting, said Ramesh Kumar Pandey, field director of the tiger reserve. A team of doctors from the Indian Veterinary Research Institute and the Lucknow Zoo will conduct a post-mortem to ascertain the exact cause of death, the official added. (PTI)

PM greets citizens on World Health Day

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday greeted people on the occasion of the World Health Day and said India is home to the largest health programme, Ayushman Bharat, in the world. Taking to micro-blogging site Twitter, Mr Modi said,”#WorldHealthDay is a day to reiterate our commitment towards building a healthier society. It would make every Indian proud that our nation is home to the largest health programme in the world, Ayushman Bharat. It provides top quality & affordable healthcare to 50 crore Indians.” ”On #WorldHealthDay I pray for everyone’s good health and well-being. Salute to all those remarkable individuals & organisations working towards improving healthcare. I am proud of those working to improve cleanliness and sanitation facilities, which contributes to better health,” he added. (UNI)

Paragliding crash: Pilot, tourist die

Shimla: A Kerala tourist and a pilot died in a paragliding crash in Himachal Pradesh’s Kullu district on Sunday, police said. The tourist, Altho Bachu, died on the spot, whereas paragliding pilot Naresh Kumar succumbed to his injuries in a hospital, district Superintendent of Police Shalini Agnihotri said. The incident occurred near Dobhi village in Naggar area, 19 km from the district headquarters. A case has been registered under Sections 304A (causing death by negligence) and 337 (endangering life by rash or negligently act) of the Indian Penal Code, the SP said. Patlikuhal police station incharge Daya Ram Thakur is investigating the matter, she added. Thakur said it would be investigated whether the accident happened due to negligence. (PTI)

Liquor, weapons & drugs seized

Mumbai: Ahead of the Lok Sabha elections, the Mumbai police have seized liquor, weapons and drugs collectively worth over Rs 45,000, and arrested ten persons in this connection from the city. A statement issued by the Mumbai city district collectorate office on Sunday said, the seizures and arrests were made during various raids conducted since Saturday. Forty one litres of alcohol worth around Rs 12,054 was seized and six persons were arrested, it said. In the action against drugs, 1.5 kg of ganja was seized and one person was arrested. The substance was worth Rs 12,500, the statement added. Three persons were arrested and weapons-one knife, two country-made pistols and one bullet- collectively worth Rs 21,000, were seized from them, it said. Cases have been registered against the accused by the police. (PTI)
