West Bengal Election: Want to ensure that nobody is scared while approaching polling booths: Special Police observer

KOLKATA: “My objective is to ensure that people do not get terrified while approaching the polling booths,” Vivek Dubey, special police observer appointed by the Election Commission of India for Bengal and Jharkhand told ET. Adding that 79 companies of central police force including roughly 6000 central paramilitary personnel, have been deployed in two constituencies –Coochbehar and Alipurduar that will vote on 11 April, Dubey said he would take ‘all possible measures to make election in the state free and fair.” The central police force includes companies from CRPF, BSF and CISF.The retired IPS officer of 1981 batch, Andra Pradesh cadre arrived in Kolkata on March 31st. In a week’s time, he met all political parties, held video conferences with the district magistrates and superintendents of police of all concerned districts, held meeting with the top brass of the state administration at Nabanna including director general of police, chief secretary and home secretary. Finally, he travelled to Siliguri in North Bengal to take stock of the situation in constituencies that will vote in first and second phase. Meanwhile, he also travelled to places in Jharkhand as he has a joint charge of that state too.It was learnt, that based on his recommendation, the ECI deployed 79 companies of CPF in addition with the state police force for the first phase polling in two constituencies. According to ECI guidelines, one company of CPF that is on poll duty, must have 73 to 75 jawans. So, a strong team of 6000 central security forces will be camping in two constituencies and eventually these forces will move to the second phase constituencies – Jalpaiguri, Dareeling and Raiganj that will vote after April 11.The election commission transferred four senior IPS officers including the Commissioner of Kolkata Police and the Commissioner of Bidhannagar police and barred them from poll duty. Despite, chief minister Mamata Banerjee writing a letter to the ECI protesting against such transfer and calling the ECI decision as ‘motivated and biased’, her government complied with the ECI order. Responding to the CM’s letter the ECI further added that ‘based on the cumulative feedback from the deputy election commissioner who oversees election process in Bengal and the special police observer’ the action was taken.While asked about chief minister’s protest against such transfers, Dubey said, “I am not here to comment on that. Only ECI will revert to this.”Responding to the reports of senior TMC leaders and state ministers, in their election speeches, trying to intimidate people by saying that central force will be withdrawn after election and people have to live with the state machinery, Dubey said, “The leaders have their rights to free speech. But ECI will take strict action if such complaints are received.”About getting cooperation from the state government and the state police force, Dubey said the entire government machinery has to cooperate to conduct polls in such a big state that has 6.9 crore voters. “We are here to help them and make the poll process successful,” added Dubey.Vivek Dubey, a 1981 batch IPS officer retired as special DG, CRPF . Before moving on a central deputation Dubey held the positions of ADG in Andha Pradesh and served the state in various capacity.He also served in the CBI for several years and worked on some of the most critical and sensitive cases. Dubey is known for his investigation that led to the conviction of accused in some of these cases in CBI. As head of the CBI's special crime team in December 2003, he investigated the Bilkis Bano case in Gujrat.Dube was the officer in-charge of the case when the Supreme Court ordered the agency to take over the probe. His team of investigators had already secured the conviction of the 11 men who massacred 14 members of Bilkis Bano’s family in Gujarat's Dahod district in March 2002. The youngest of them was Bilkis Bano's two-year-old daughter whose head was smashed on a rock. A pregnant Bilkis was gang raped.Apart from working in CBI, Dubey in his earlier years was posted in Left Wing Extremism districts of Andhra Pradesh.Actions that were seen after Vivek Dubey took over as the special police observer in Bengal :1. 79 companies of CPF were deployed in two constituencies that will vote in the first phase.2. Four senior IPS officers were transferred and barred from poll duty. Two of these officers allegedly sat with the chief minister Mamata Banerjee when she started a sit-in demonstration in Kolkata protesting against alleged CBI highhandedness in the state.3. The Opposition parties hailed the recent decisions of the election commission and said that some actions were taken after he joined.
