Haryana’s farm belt won’t make it easy for Cong, BJP

Narendra Modi

Manohar Lal Khattar

Panipat

Tamil Nadu

Vote paavaan kahaan (where do we vote)?” asked Sanju Gundyana of Yamunanagar’s Gundyana village, saddled between Ambala and Uttar Pradesh’s Saharanpur, with the river Yamuna flowing between.Sanju has over a month to ponder over this question before Haryana goes to vote in the penultimate phase of polling on May 12.His is not a rhetorical question. He is asking for the farmers comprising 17 lakh households in Haryana that had ushered the Green Revolution once with neighbouring Punjab and Uttar Pradesh.“I did not vote forin 2014. But I sincerely hoped that he would bring the positive changes that he talked about in his campaign before the polls. Modi took away the belief that we had in political parties,” Sanju said.The BJP, banking heavily on Modi, is yet to release a manifesto, while the Congress, pitching to change the narrative to personality versus ideas, has come out with big promises: a separate budget for farmers, loan defaults to be treated as civil cases, not criminal ones, and loan waiver in all states.The farmers in Haryana so far are unimpressed.“In 2014, a large panchayat was held in Jind, where all the political parties were asked why farmers should vote for them. The BJP made a written commitment that it would implement the Swaminathan Commission report. Where is it? Even the Congress, whatever it is saying could turn into another set of jumlas,” said Sanju.The biggest grouse against the Congress is that although it set up the Swaminthan Commission, headed by economist MS Swaminathan, it did not implement the recommendations during the eight years of UPA-II since the last report was tabled in October 2006.The Modi government gave the nod to increase the minimum support price on kharif crops last year, bypassing the calculation method suggested by the commission. The commission’s suggestion was to base minimum support price (MSP) on input cost plus 50 per cent of the premium over it. The input cost was to be derived from sum of paid out costs, value of family labour, interest on the value of owned capital assets, rent paid for leased land and rental value of owned land. The government only considered the paid out costs and value of family labour. In February 2015, the Centre in an affidavit filed before the Supreme Court said the MSP cannot go above 50 per cent as it would “distort the market.”“But we are not getting the MSP,” said Kuldip Singh of Khadri village.Modi had promised to double the farmers’ income by 2022, for which, according to NITI Aayog, real income growth has to be at 10.34 per cent. But, in the two decades till 2015-16, the growth rate was little over 3 per cent. In the UPA years, the agriculture growth was 3.6 per cent, while in the four years under Modi it fell to 2.5 per cent.On April 3, farmers from Gundyana, Nagla Jagir and Radaur were detained in Haryana’s Bilaspur where they went to submit a charter of demands for the chief minister, visiting the town.“We were not allowed to meet because we had grievances. The police detained us till the chief minister left. A group of junior basic training teachers in Haryana had a thank you note for the chief minister so they were allowed,” said Harpal, another farmer who was detained.The farmers wanted to know why they were facing FIRs for a protest and subsequent lathicharge by the police on them on February 22, 2018. The case is still dragging on. The farmers wanted to know why they were not receiving the crop insurance compensation promised under the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana.“The Narendra Modi government announced in the budget it will pay Rs 6,000 every year in three instalments. That comes to Rs 17 per day. A bundle of beedi costs Rs 15,” said Balwan, a farmer in’s Shahjahanpur, the most fertile belt in the state.“In 1985 when Devi Lal was chief minister, we could sell basmati at Rs 4,500. Now, it doesn’t get that price, though input costs have gone up. There have been seven pay commissions for government employees, nothing for farmers. Government employees get allowance to travel. Don’t we farmers have the right to travel? Should we live with the constant worry of how to repay loan and then take more loans?” said Sukhram Pal from the same village.Mahabir, a farm labourer in Raipur who tills on leased land, has a loan of Rs 4.5 lakh.“You won’t find a single farmer, whether he owns land or not, who does not have multiple loans. A loan waiver of Rs 1 lakh does not help,” he said.The Modi government’s insistence on linking schemes to Aadhaar and introducing apps for services also has not gone down well with the farmers.“Every time we have to fill up an online form, we have to pay Rs 300-400 for the computer. If everything is linked to Aadhaar, why do we have to fill separate forms and then submit the documents?” asked Dharam Pal, a farmer from the same village.The Congress is actively wooing the Bharatiya Kisan Union (BKU) (Haryana), which has a sway over voters in four of the 10 seats—Kurukshetra, Ambala, Karnal and Hissar.“We are weighing the options. If we don’t like any of the candidates, we might go for NOTA. We will not boycott the election. We want a say in policy-making. That is why we are considering putting up our own candidates in some of the seats for the next assembly poll in Haryana,” said Gurnaam Singh Charuni, president of BKU (Haryana).The last five years have not been happy for the farmers. The disquiet in the villages has often spilled on the national highways and come to the urban doorstep in Mumbai and Delhi. In June 2017, six farmers fell to police bullets. Farmers fromon hunger strike in Delhi have decided to file nominations against Modi in Varanasi. The previous BJP state governments in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have faced the wrath of farmers.Whether the summer of 2019 will have a different outcome for Modi seeking a second term will be decided the day Sanju and other farmers find the answer to where to vote.
