Ban on civilian traffic on highway begins amid tight security, protests

Ban on civilian traffic on highway begins amid tight security, protests

SRINAGAR, Apr 7: The ban on the movement of civilian traffic on Baramulla-Srinagar-Jammu highway for two days a week began today amid tight security and protests by mainstream parties.

The ban caused lot of inconvenience to the thousands of people who had to travel on the highway but could not do so due to the ban.

However, the government officials said that passes were issued to a number of civilians to travel in case of emergency.

Two former chief ministers, Dr Farooq Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti, led separate protests along with their other party leaders against the ban.

Farooq demanded an end to the ban, while Mehbooba asked the people to defy the ban as the roads belong to people and that they do not need permission from government of India to travel.

Last night the security forces and police had taken complete control of the highway with heavy deployment. They had set up check points and also blocked the highway and placed barbed wire at different places on road.

The security convoys were allowed to move from 4 AM to 5 PM today. During the period the civilian traffic was disallowed. Drivers and passengers at several places were seen pleading with security men and police to allow them but they were being disallowed. A number of tourists and patients alleged that they could not get the emergency passes smoothly to travel. Those heading towards airport to catch flights also complained about it.

A driver said that he was carrying Malaysian tourists from Pahalgam to Srinagar airport but was stopped at Anantnag. "Some securitymen asked the tourists why did they visit Kashmir when people get killed here," said the driver. He added that after lot of efforts he could get an emergency pass.

Because of the ban, people were seen walking on foot on the highway to reach their destinations.

Hundreds of security personnel were seen carrying lathis and rifles along the highway and intersections, allowing movement of armed forces convoys only.

Meanwhile, on social networking sites the government order is being drawn compared to the Polish government order during German occupation of Poland in December 1939 that prohibited Jews from entering or using pathways, streets and public squares from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. The Polish government order has gone viral on social media networks in Jammu and Kashmir.

The Jammu and Kashmir administration and Centre had earlier this week announced that the national highway - between Baramulla in north Kashmir to Udhampur in Jammu region - will be banned for civilian traffic on Sundays and Wednesdays till May 31. No civilian traffic would be allowed during the movement of the paramilitary forces, a notification issued by state administration said.

The order follows the suicide attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama. The highway passes through important towns such as Anantnag, Awantipora, Pampore, Srinagar, Pattan and Baramulla.

The decision to block the highway for two days has been taken to facilitate the unhindered movement of security forces' convoys to eliminate the possibility of fidayeen attacks during the ongoing poll process, the notification said.

Jammu and Kashmir will go to polls in five phases from April 11 to May 6. The counting of votes will take place on May 23.
