Opposition dubs BJP manifesto promises as jumla

The opposition parties, including the Arvind Kejriwal-led Aam Aadmi Party, Mamata Banerjee’s All India Trinamool Congress and Rahul Gandhi’s Congress, have slammed the Bharatiya Janata Party’s manifesto 2019, dubbing the promised made as 'jumla’ (gimmick).

Delhi Chief Minister and AAP chief Arvind Kejriwal tweeted, "BJP unveils a fresh set of jumlas without telling the country what is the fate of its 2014 jumlas. Modi-Shah don't have the courage to speak on why demonetisation was done? What happened to two crore jobs? Why were farmers pushed towards destruction?"

BJP unveils a fresh set of jumlas without telling the country what is the fate of its 2014 jumlas.



Modi-Shah don't have the courage to speak on why demonetisation was done ? What happened to two crore jobs ? Why were farmers pushed towards destruction? Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) April 8, 2019



Meanwhile, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said, "Did PM even give a single penny for West Bengal? The person who makes such big claims must see what he has contributed towards Bengal. He was busy in foreign tours for five years and now he saw the need to come here."

Congress’ Ahmed Patel took a potshot at the BJP’s manifesto cover stating that while the BJP’s manifesto has the image of just Prime Minister Modi, Congress’s manifesto had a picture of a crowd of people on its cover.

Raising questions on the BJP’s poll promised, the Congress tweeted, "The women of India are still waiting for the many tall promises Modi made in 2014. First amongst those would be their safety and empowerment."

Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala also termed the manifesto of the ruling party as Jumla Patra, and adding that instead of helping the poor, the BJP in its tenure has actually looted them.

READ MORE: BJP releases manifesto with robust nationalist vision, major thrust on farmers, small traders, promise of Ram mandir

WATCH MORE: Decoding BJP manifesto: Lok Sabha 2014 vs 2019
