Cooch Behar SP transferred after BJP leader Mukul Roy's threat: TMC

The Election Commission on Tuesday transferred Superintendent of Police of Cooch Behar, Abhisekh Gupta, just a day before the Lok Sabha constituency is going to polls on April 11. The Election Commission has also barred him from any election duty.

An Under Secretary of the EC has written a letter to the Chief Secretary of the West Bengal government on Tuesday, saying that the Commission has decided to transfer Gupta and post Singh, SS, IB as the Superintendent of Police in his place.

The move comes three days after the EC transferred four senior policemen in West Bengal including Kolkata Police Commissioner Anuj Sharma and Bidhannagar Police Commissioner Gyanwant Singh.

A few days ago, Abhishek Gupta was threatened by Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Mukul Roy during Prime Minister Narendra Modi's North Bengal rally. Roy had publicly threatened the SP for "acting as the ruling party's stooge".

Gupta was also accused of not cooperating with the officers concerned for ensuring smooth roll out of the prime minister's political rally. He was allegedly withholding permission for the venue for PM Modi's rally.

Barely two days after, Abhishek Gupta's transfer is being projected as politically motivated. The Trinamool Congress spokesperson Partha Chatterjee said that the activities concerning transfer of some officers, two police commissioners and three SPs clearly indicate that the Election Commission was acting under the instruction of the BJP.

After the transfer of two Police Commissioners, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee wrote a letter to the Election Commission in which she said that its decision appears to have been drafted by a particular party.

The Election Commission rubbished all the "assumptions".

To protest against the transfers, TMC's Derek O' Brien and Sukhendu Shekhar Ray will stage a dharna on Wednesday outside the Nirvachan Sadan and protest against the Election Commission for "acting as per the direction of the BJP".
