Over 400 doctors gather to protest quota in PG courses

Accuse State of ‘unlawfully’ applying EWS reservation

More than 400 doctors across the city assembled at Sion Hospital on Tuesday afternoon against reservation in postgraduate medical admissions, days after aspirants of the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for Postgraduation (NEET-PG) protested at JJ Hospital for the same cause.

The protesters said the seats available for open category students have steadily declined in the last 35 years, with the government granting reservation to several classes. They said that in Maharashtra, the quota has gone beyond 78% with the Socially and Economically Backward Classes (SEBC) and Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) reservations, violating the 50% cap set by the Supreme Court. The protesters said reservation in PG courses is unnecessary as the students already hold the MBBS degree. The doctors demanded that at least the 50% cap should be adhered to while granting admissions.

They accused the State government of “unlawfully” applying the EWS reservation in spite of the Central government and Medical Council of India saying it can’t do so without increasing number of seats.

Dr. Dhruv Shah, who is doing his internship and will apply for a postgraduate course next year, said, “This year, 1,400 seats are available for postgraduate courses in Maharashtra, but only 270 are available for the 2,054 open category students qualified for admissions after NEET-PG. This concerns me as my colleagues and I may face the same situation next year.”

Dr. Saad Ahmed, a PG course aspirant, said students from the open category with good ranking will suffer because of this. “The Supreme Court has scheduled the next hearing in May. The admission process has already begun, and no seats will be left by then,” Dr. Ahmed said.

Terming reservation an election gimmick, protesters said that what is supposed to be a tool to uplift the backward classes has actually left open category students with no seats.
