Parents protest at Education office in Central Building over fee hike

Taking their fight ahead against the fee hike, parents of various schools protested at the Central Building on Tuesday, demanding that the state education department work towards vacating the stay on a writ petition filed by the school management.



While a writ petition was filed by the school management over fee hike issue, the parents claimed that the education office of the state government has failed to file a reply in the same and vacate the stay.



Parents alleged that taking an advantage of the stay, schools hiked the fees. Parents from the schools like Vibgyor, Amanora, Dnyanganga, Euro School, and MIT were present at the Central Building and complained that the officers are never available in the office and they protested inside the cabin of the Director of Primary Education.



Gunjan Mehta, one of the parents from Vibgyor said, “The school has removed a class VIII student, whose mother was protesting. He is out since four months and none of the education officer is ready to help or take action against the school. We have demanded that the education office should file their reply and vacate the stay so that the schools do not hike the fees.”



Parents complained that they have been coming to office and complaining regarding schools giving transfer certificates to students whose parents have been fighting over fee hike therefore education department should take some action regarding the matter.



Sanjay Joshi, another parent from MIT said, “We have complained to the education department regarding various issues but no action has been taken yet. We also decided to call a sitting protest in the office until the Commissioner or Director of Primary Education visit us.”



~~68800326~~

While parents have been protesting over the same problems and have now called for a sitting protest, Education Department of State Government confirmed that they have been taking cognisance of the parents.



Education Commissioner of the state Vishal Solanki said, “We have already requested for a special counsellor and as we are legally bound it becomes difficult to answer all the queries of parents every time. Other officers like the Director are also busy in various cases. Therefore no one is available at the office every day.”



Sunil Chauhan, Director of Primary Education also issued a letter to parents, while he was in Aurangabad to represent the state in the Aurangabad Bench of Bombay High Court, saying that they have started addressing issues of the parents.



Vibgyor Spokesperson said, “ Ms Pethkar had intimation well before the commencement of the Academic Year 2018-19 that the School has not granted admission to her child, due to non-payment of fees (for the Academic Years 2016-17 & 2017-18) fixed within the limit as permitted by the Hon’ble Bombay High Court. The parent being aware of the above facts has made allegations against the School which are not based on facts.”


