Drought keeps brides off Maharashtra's Solapur village

Only 38% rain in village, but drought not yet declared

SOLAPUR: Mahesh Lahoo Garad, a 28-year-old onion farmer from Ranmasale village in drought-struck Solapur , has been waiting for a bride for three years. But each time a prospective bride's family visits his home, they do not return."They see how their daughters will have to struggle to fetch water. So they don't come back to take the talks further," says Mahesh. "It looks like I will have to migrate to find a bride."The severe water crisis in Ranmasale is driving brides away from the arid village. And since most in the 5,000-strong village belong to the Garad clan from the Maratha community and are considered related, they cannot marry within the village. They seek brides and grooms from other regions."There are at least 200 bachelors in the village in the 25-35 age-group who have not found brides," states deputy sarpanch Balaji Garad. This doesn't affect the village girls though, since they marry and settle into villages outside.Locals say the problem of finding brides has worsened in the last decade owing to repeated droughts. As young men migrate in search of work, some are opting to get married in their new settlements. "Typically they leave farming behind and move to the neighbouring Mohol taluka, Pune and Pandharpur to work as daily wagers," says Satish Shinde.Laxman Sopan Garad has been trying to get his two sons married over the last year. But Abhijit (23) and Ranjit (25) are yet to find brides. “In one year, seven families came to see my sons. After visiting our home, they saw the empty field and the well which had absolutely no water. Each family said they would return and send us a nirop (message). But the message never came,” said Laxman Garad.Solapur received 38% of normal rain this year. It’s also the third year of drought in the state in the last five years. Although Ranmasale falls within a parched district, drought was not declared in this village because it does not fit into the parameters of the Centre’s drought manual. The 2016 manual sets out stringent conditions to be met before a drought can be declared, including extent of rainfall, crop sown, vegetation cover and soil moisture.“Since drought has not been declared here, we are not eligible for drought aid. Many of us have not received crop insurance. Our demand for water tankers was also ignored for one month,” alleges the deputy sarpanch. Three villagers had threatened to commit suicide by jumping into an empty well on Republic Day if the village did not receive government tankers. “We asked for tankers on December 15 last year. By January 5, we were fed up and sent a letter to the collector saying we will kill ourselves,” said Prashant Patil, whose fouracre jowar field had dried up. The village received tanker water on January 24.Solapur district collector Rajendra Bhosale said drought had not been declared in the village as two revenue circles in the North Solapur taluka received more than 75% rainfall. “However, the village is eligible for all the benefits, including water tankers, waiver in repayment of crop loans and agricultural electricity bills,” he says. The women are coping with water supplied by a single tanker. “We manage with four pots of water a day,” says Savita Garad. Her three children cannot afford to bathe every day or have their school uniforms washed. A section of the village is toying with the idea of boycotting the vote this election. But the women are not for it. “I will not let my vote go waste. If we don’t vote, how will things change?” asks Siddabai Garad.
