Chandrababu Naidu holds dharna in front of CEO office

In an unprecedented move Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister and TDP president N. Chandrababu Naidu held a dharna in front of the Chief Electoral Officer G. K. Dwivedi's office at the Andhra Pradesh Secretariat in Amravati to protest the “partisan, unilateral and undemocratic” action of the Election Commission of India.

After submitting a letter he has written to the ECI listing the partisan actions to the CEO, Mr. Naidu came out and sat in a dharna. He told reporters that the ECI's “arbitrary” action in transferring IPS and IAS officers was a cause of concern to all those who believe in democracy and autonomy of the ECI. He said a motivated complaint goes from YSRCP and within hours a police officer is transferred without giving a chance to the latter to explain his stand and the ground situation.

He said he would carry on the struggle till the ECI stops taking such blatantly unfair actions.

In his letter to the ECI, Mr. Naidu alleged that the ECI was targeting TDP at the behest of the YSRCP and the BJP. “It was a matter of deep concern that country’s apex institution entrusted with the responsibilities of conducting free and fair elections has become subservient to the dictates of the BJP Government which is protecting the YSRCP,” he wrote.

The ECI was toeing the line of the BJP-led Union government, and also assisting the political parties which were supported by the BJP, he alleged.

The Director-General of Police (Intelligence) and Superintendents of Police of Kadapa, Srikakulam and Prakasam were also shifted without giving any opportunity to clarify. The Chief Secretary who had impeccable track record throughout his career too was replaced, he said. “Thus it is evident that the ECI was acting on behalf of the YSRCP under the guidance of the BJP,” he alleged.

“I strongly protest against such tyrannical and undemocratic attitude of the ECI and I hope that it conducts its business by ensuring a level playing field to all the contesting political parties in the state and uphold the democratic values and respect the Constitution of India,” he added.
