NIA summons attempt to harass resistance leadership: Sehrai

Srinagar, April 09, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, the Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir, Mohammad Ashraf Sehrai has said that India’s infamous National Investigation Agency is humiliating and intimidating Kashmiri resistance leadership and their family members. Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai in a statement issued in Srinagar said the NIA summonses to Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and the son of Syed Ali Gilani are highly condemnable and a deliberate attempt on the part of the agency to intimidate the leadership.

He said, Mirwaiz besides being the resistance leader is also the Mirwaiz-e-Kashmir and is held by the Muslims of Kashmir in high esteem. “By summoning him, the agency and Indian government are actually going to subject him to humiliation and intimidation, only because he is also spearheading the Kashmiris’ ongoing political struggle for their birth right and demands that the Kashmir issue be settled peacefully and in accordance with the wishes and aspirations of people of Jammu and Kashmir.”

Sehrai also stated that by adopting such tactics New Delhi and its agencies would not achieve anything. Meanwhile, Hurriyat leader Mushtaqul Islam in a statement expressed deep concern and anguish over the plight of detainees languishing in and outside valley, saying they are ill-treated and humiliated for their affiliation with freedom struggle.

Democratic Freedom Party in a statement deplored that no single voice was being raised in support of the oppressed Kashmiris. “Kashmiri are being targeted on all fronts. The irony is that not a single voice is being raised in support of the oppressed people of Kashmir,” the statement added. Jammu and Kashmir Islami Tanzeem Azadi in a statement urged Kashmiri people to boycott sham Indian parliamentary elections in the occupied territory.

Jammu and Kashmir Islami Tanzeem Azadi in a statement urged Kashmiri people to boycott sham Indian parliamentary elections in the occupied territory. The organization paid tributes to social worker from Jammu, Maulana Ghulam Nabi Fareedabadi who died in Jammu, the other day. Jammu and Kashmir Freedom Movement in a statement issued in Jammu also eulogized the services of renowned social and political worker, Maulana Ghulam Nabi Fareedabadi. He also remembered his social, political and religious services.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
