No ticket to Christians leaves community leaders upset

Congress has marginalised the community, says Sangliana

Christian leaders in the Congress are feeling let down by the party for not fielding a single candidate for the Lok Sabha elections from the State.

Speaking to The Hindu, J. Alexander, former Minister and former Chief Secretary, and H.T. Sangliana, former Police Commissioner and ex-MP, expressed their unhappiness on the issue.

Mr. Sangliana, on Monday, resigned from the Congress in protest against the party’s “neglect” of the Christian community. Mr. Alexander, who had tendered resignation to the primary membership of the party, has now withdrawn his resignation after intervention of State Congress leaders and K.C. Venugopal, AICC general secretary in-charge of Karnataka.

Mr. Alexander said the party had sought at least one ticket to the community candidate in the State. The community has a sizeable number in Mangaluru, Karwar, Bidar and Bengaluru.

“The younger generation has a lot of aspirations and the feeling that the community is being taken for granted by the Congress is gaining ground among the youth,” Mr. Alexander said.

Mr. Sangliana, who was the BJP MP (2004-09) before joining the Congress, said the Congress has “marginalised” the Christian community. Though he was an aspirant, the party had denied him ticket to contest from Bengaluru Central constituency. The party fielded Rizwan Arshad.

Archbishop of Bengaluru Rev. Peter Machado told The Hindu: “We requested representation to the community. But the party leaders said representation will be given in some other form in later stages. We accepted the fact.”

On candidates meeting him and seeking the community’s support, Rev. Machado said: “We have given our blessing to all candidates.”

The Christians constitute approximately about 1.9% of the State population and 4.76 lakh population in Bengaluru (about 5.6%) and their support can be crucial in a tight political fight, say leaders.

Currently, the community is represented by Ivan D’Souza in the Legislative Council and K.J. George in the Ministry.
