What ails western Uttar Pradesh: sugarcane dues, too many cows

The two issues have been highlighted by the Opposition in this rural belt

All eight seats in western Uttar Pradesh will vote on April 11. These seats went to the BJP in the 2014 Modi wave. But this time, the anger of sugarcane farmers and the problem of stray cattle have been highlighted by Opposition parties.

Cane farming, the lifeline of the region, has influenced politics for decades.

In November 1988, Mahendra Singh Tikait led a massive farmers’ protest from western Uttar Pradesh to Delhi’s Boat Club forcing the Rajiv Gandhi government to agree to its demands – a higher price for sugarcane and waivers on electricity and water charges.

Three decades later, on October 2, 2018, a farmers’ rally marching towards Delhi but was greeted by police batons and water cannons. They were denied entry into the capital.

On January 16, a section of farmers started a 11-day sit-in in Shamli demanding their dues from a sugar mill. In May 2018, farmers had protested against dues and the closing of mills in Baghpat.

Jayant Chaudhary, the grandson of former Prime Minister and farmer leader Chaudhary Charan Singh, never forgets to remind farmers of their sugarcane misery. “Every year, your production increases by 10-20 per cent and the recovery of mills have also been increasing. It is simple that if production increases, the mills’ income increases. Payment should have been done. There’s Rs 15,000 cr in dues,” Chaudhary told a Baghpat rally.

In one of his tweets on March 31, Chaudhary wrote that “on March 31, 2017, the unpaid sugarcane dues to farmers was Rs 4,495.24 cr. Two years later that figure has crossed Rs 13,000 cr.”

On March 24, Priyanka Gandhi also tweeted a news clipping on sugarcane farmers’ dues. “Families of sugarcane farmers work day and night but UP government doesn’t take the responsibility of payment. Dues of Rs. 10,000 cr will mean their [farmers] children’s education, food, health and next crop comes to an end.”
