Naidu stages protest in front of CEO office

‘ECI’s actions are partisan, unilateral and undemocratic’

In an unprecedented move, Chief Minister and TDP national president N. Chandrababu Naidu staged a sit-in in front of Chief Electoral Officer (CEO) Gopal Krishna Dwivedi’s office at the Secretariat in Amaravati on Wednesday to protest against the “partisan, unilateral and undemocratic” actions of the Election Commission of India (ECI).

After submitting a letter he had written to the ECI listing the partisan actions to the CEO, Mr. Naidu and his partymen squatted on the stairway of the CEO’s office.

“The Election Commission should not become a laughing stock with its unilateral decisions. For the first time in history, we met the CEO. The Telugu Desam would not keep quiet if democracy is put to ridicule,” he said.

‘Struggle will continue’

“The struggle will continue till the ECI stops taking such blatantly unfair actions. The issue will be taken to its logical conclusion.” The ECI’s “arbitrary” action in transferring IPS and IAS officers was a cause for concern to all those who believed in democracy and autonomy of the ECI. “A motivated complaint goes from the YSRCP, and within hours a police officer is transferred without giving a chance to the latter to explain his stand,” he said. Mr. Naidu, in his letter to the ECI, alleged that it was targeting the TDP at the behest of the YSRCP and the BJP.

“It is a matter of deep concern that the apex institution, entrusted with the responsibilities of conducting free and fair elections, has become subservient to the dictates of the BJP government, which is protecting the YSRCP.” The ECI was toeing the line of the BJP-led Union government and also assisting the political parties supported by the BJP, he alleged. The DGP (Intelligence) and the SPs of Kadapa, Srikakulam and Prakasam were shifted without being given any opportunity to clarify. The Chief Secretary, who had an impeccable track record, too was replaced, he said. “Thus it is evident that the ECI is acting on behalf of the YSRCP under the guidance of the BJP.”

“I strongly protest against such tyrannical and undemocratic attitude of the ECI and I hope that it conducts its business by ensuring a level-playing field to all the contesting political parties in the State and uphold the democratic values and respect the Constitution.”
