Low on funds, AIIMS Bhopal set to hike treatment cost

BHOPAL: Cost of treatment at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Bhopal is likely to become costly as the institute is planning to hike user charges making it on par with other premier institutes like PGI Chandigarh . Institute’s standing finance committee (SFC) that met here on Wednesday, directed the institute to raise revenue and become self-sustaining.The meeting was headed by Union ministry of health and family welfare (MoHFW) secretary Preeti Sudan.Sources said, AIIMS Bhopal hospital budget allocation from the Union ministry has come down to about 10% compared to Rs 220 crore at the time of inception in 2012. “Current allocation can barely sustain to meet salaries and hospital expenditure. The impact on hospital services at the current level of funding could be detrimental in the long term,” said a senior consultant seeking anonymity. Over the last few days, there have been protests over delay in payment of stipend by junior doctors.Sources said that other new AIIMS established on the lines of AIIMS New Delhi have been revising hospital user charges and keeping them on par with institutes like PGI Chandigarh. A similar move is now expected to be replicated at AIIMS Bhopal. The hospital has about 600-beds and around 19 departments.Improving performance and revenue generation through MP government-funded schemes was cited by AIIMS administration during the meeting. Sources said that lack of coordination has also meant that AIIMS Bhopal received delayed payment for 109 patients who were funded for treatment through the MP CM’s relief fund. It has led to instances where patient have paid upfront for government-funded interventions and later refunded.Wednesday’s was the fourth SFC meeting, which met to approve past expenditures and debate future spending. Sources said that learning resource allowance for staff has been upgraded from about Rs 70,000 per year to Rs 1.5 lakh. Construction of additional faculty housing and other projects that need significant funding have being put on the backburner by the SFC, said sources.SFC experts pointed out that AIIMS Bhopal must become self-sustaining. It would mean that faculties would have to get externally funded projects. Sources said that institute fund generation through such projects is just over Rs one crore. Salaries account for about Rs one crore every month. It has been pointed that cost of chemicals for phlebotomy is about Rs 3 crore per month.
