From his Gujarat base, PM strikes at Tughlaq Road

PM Narendra Modi with BJP candidates from Junagadh, Rajkot and Porbandar at party’s rally in Junagadh

Junagadh/Songadh: Exuding confidence that BJP will secure a second term at the Centre, Prime Minister Narendra Modi sought a decisive mandate from people to form a government that will remain committed to national security, rooting out corruption and eliminating terrorism completely.

Kicking off the Lok Sabha poll campaign for Gujarat, Modi said there is no one but only him who can eliminate terrorism by striking at its roots in Pakistan. Addressing public meetings in Junagadh in Saurashtra and Songadh in south Gujarat’s tribal belt, Modi roasted the Congress for indulging in ‘Tughlaq Road Chunav Chanda Ghotala (election funding scam) by pocketing crores meant for the welfare of poor and pregnant women.

“Corruption is the character of the Congress and the party has been called severeal names as far as scams are concerned. Now it has got a new name and there are concrete proofs too. It is called 'Tughlaq Road Chunavi ghotala', where money meant for the poor children and pregnant women was pocketed by their own leaders. Everyone knows who lives there ,” Modi said.

The official residence of Congress president Rahul Gandhi is located on Tughlaq Road. Modi’s tirade comes in wake of the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) stating that I-T department had detected a trail of Rs 20 crore cash allegedly being moved to the “headquarters of a major political party in Delhi” from the house of an important person.

Accusing the previous Congress governments of going soft on terrorism despite series of attacks, Modi said there was no one else in the country other than him who can wipe out this scourge. “Terrorism is like cancer that was emerged and spread during Congress regimes. If the treatment is stopped midway, the victim dies. We started the treatment and there is no way it can be stopped mid-way. We have struck at its very root in the neighbouring country. Who else other than me can do it? Tell me one name,” he thundered in Songadh town in Tapi district.

He deprecated the Congress for hobnobbing with elements bent upon dividing the country and casting aspersions on the surgical strikes by demanding proof. “I want to root out terrorism, but their only agenda is to unseat me. Congress is supporting anti-national who want to divide the country by demanding separate Prime Minister for Jammu & Kashmir,” he said.

In a veiled attack on Rahul and Sonia Gandhi, Modi said that in five years his government had brought the corrupt to the doors of the jail. “If you give us five more years, they will be pushed inside,” he said.

Using the income tax department raids on close associates of Madhya Pradesh chief minister Kamal Nath to the hilt, Modi said the just like Karnataka, MP has now become the ATM for Congress. “MP is just the trailer. If Congress comes to power, the entire film (of corruption and loot) will be complete. The sole motive of Congress to gain power is to loot people,” he said.


