PM: Separatists’ allies will be jailed if BJP wins

editorial@tribune.com

Manas Dasgupta

Ahmedabad, April 10

Prime Minister Narendra Modi today issued a veiled threat to Congress leaders “looting the country and supporting separatists” that their ultimate destination would be jails if his government retained power.

Addressing public meetings at Junagadh in Saurashtra region and Songadh in south Gujarat during his first election visit to his home state, Modi devoted his entire speech, barring the last few minutes, only to Congress bashing and also criticising the “mahagathbandhan”. “Even the poor have started saying that ‘garibi’ (poverty) can be removed only if Congress is removed,” he said.

Referring to the ongoing raids on the close aides of some Congress leaders, particularly Madhya Pradesh CM Kamal Nath, Modi coined a new name “Tughlaq Road (official residence of Congress chief Rahul Gandhi) chunavi ghotala” (election scam).

“The Congress is known for its umpteen scams. In fact, the party has only looted this country whenever it has come to power. The Congress is looting the aid provided to the poor, destitute children and pregnant women to fill the belly of its leaders,” he said.

Describing the Congress manifesto as “nothing but a dhakosla patra”, Modi attacked the party for its promise to amend the sedition law providing for bail even in cases of serious crimes. “For whom are you suggesting the change? Is it to safeguard your own leaders? Have you got the inclination that the addresses of your leaders will be jails if Modi retains power? In the last five years I have brought these leaders who are looting the country on the doorstep of jails and in the next five years they will all be pushed inside,” he said.

Accusing the Congress of “pursuing one-point programme of corruption and loot”, Modi said the Congress had come to power in MP not even six months ago, but it had already emptied its coffers by looting people’s money. “After Karnataka, MP has become second ATM for the Congress and I believe the story in Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan, where too the Congress has just come to power, will be no different,” he said.

Invoking the son of the soil theory, the PM lambasted the Congress for “insulting” Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, former PM Morarji Desai and now him, “a Gujju chaiwala”. “While the Sardar, one of the architects of Congress, dedicated his life for the unification of the country, the present Congress is supporting divisive forces threatening to severe J&K’s ties with India. Will any Indian citizen demand two PMs in one country?” he said.

Describing the Congress and particularly “Nehru Gandhi family” as “anti-Gujarat and anti-Gujarati,” Modi said: “While in our track record you will see the measures taken for the security and development of the country, the Congress tape recorder has only one song “Modi hatao, Modi hatao.”
