Don’t take us for granted: Christians in Karnataka warn Congress

Bengaluru, Apr 11: Even as Muslims in Karnataka are feeling let down by the Congress, a few Christian leaders have warned the grand-old party against taking the community for granted as it had not fielded any Christian candidate for the Lok Sabha elections from the State.

J Alexander, former Minister and former Chief Secretary, and H.T. Sangliana, former Police Commissioner and ex-MP, has said that snubbing Christians during polls is not in the interest of Congress party.

Mr Sangliana, on Monday, resigned from the Congress in protest against the party’s “neglect” of the Christian community. Mr. Alexander, who had tendered resignation to the primary membership of the party, has now withdrawn his resignation after intervention of State Congress leaders and K.C. Venugopal, AICC general secretary in-charge of Karnataka.

Mr. Alexander said the community had sought at least one ticket in the State as it has a sizeable number in Mangaluru, Karwar, Bidar and Bengaluru.

“The younger generation has a lot of aspirations and the feeling that the community is being taken for granted by the Congress is gaining ground among the youth,” Mr. Alexander said.

Mr. Sangliana, who was the BJP MP (2004-09) before joining the Congress, said the Congress has “marginalised” the Christian community. Though he was an aspirant, the party had denied him ticket to contest from Bengaluru Central constituency. The party fielded Rizwan Arshad, the only Congress candidate from Muslim community in the state.

According to Archbishop of Bengaluru Rev. Peter Machado, the community leaders had requested representation to the community. But the party leaders said representation will be given in some other form in later stages. “We accepted the fact,” he said.

On candidates meeting him and seeking the community’s support, Rev. Machado said: “We have given our blessing to all candidates.”

The Christians constitute approximately about 1.9% of the State population and 4.76 lakh population in Bengaluru (about 5.6%) and their support can be crucial in a tight political fight, say leaders. Currently, the community is represented by Ivan D’Souza in the Legislative Council and K.J. George in the Ministry.
