Sporadic incidents of violence as Indians votes in first phase of poll

New Delhi: In a start to one of the biggest democratic electoral exercises in the world, as many as 91 constituencies across 18 states and two union territories went to polls on Thursday with hordes of people coming out of their homes and making their way to polling booths to cast their vote.

The first phase of national election will decide electoral fate of several sitting union ministers and veteran leaders from various political parties.

Eight Parliamentary seats of Uttar Pradesh (UP), five of Uttarakhand, four of Bihar, two each of Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir (J&K), West Bengal and Meghalaya and one each of Chhattisgarh, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Andaman and Nicobar as well as Lakshadweep went to the polls.

Besides, four states also voted in legislative assembly elections. These are Andhra Pradesh (all 175 constituencies), Arunachal Pradesh (all 60 seats), Odisha (only 28 seats) and Sikkim (all 32 seats).

At a rally in Silchar in Assam, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that he sensed a “massive Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) wave” in the country.

“Which way the winds are blowing, can be seen from your enthusiasm. Today voting is taking place in the first phase in some parts of the country. From what we know so far, a strong wave for ‘phir ek baar Modi sarkar (Modi government again)’ is visible,” the PM said.

The Opposition Congress said that there was a threat to party chief Rahul Gandhi’s life as his security was breached on Wednesday when he had gone to file nomination from UP’s Amethi.

Voters stand in a queue to cast their vote at a polling station in Kurnool district in Andhra Pradesh. Image Credit: AFP

In its letter to the Home Ministry, Congress enclosed a video of Gandhi’s media interaction which showed a spot of green light on his temple.

“This light was pointed intermittently on at least seven separate occasions in a short period; including twice at his temple on the right side of the head. It could be from a sniper gun,” the letter, signed by veteran party leaders Ahmed Patel and Randeep Surjewala, read.

Later in the day, the Home Ministry said the light was from a cell phone.

Meanwhile, Congress chief Gandhi appealed to the people to vote.

“Your vote is precious. You vote today for the soul of India,” he tweeted.

Sporadic incidents of violence were reported from Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh and UP during voting.

A Telugu Desam Party (TDP) worker died in the clashes that erupted in Andhra. The state also witnessed widespread malfunctioning of Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs).

A woman belonging to the Reang Bru tribe shows her voter ID card, before casting her vote at Mamit district of Mizoram. Image Credit: PTI An official marks the finger of a woman with ink before she cast her vote at a village near Sivasagar in Assam. Image Credit: PTI Kashmiri voters queuing up as security personnel watch over at a polling station during the first phase at Kandi Kupwara in Handwara district, north of Srinagar. Image Credit: AFP An official checks names of lambadi tribeswomen at a polling station at Pedda Shapur village near Hyderabad. Image Credit: AFP Voters outside a polling station in Noida in Uttar Pradesh proudly displaying their voting credentials during the first phase of general elections. Image Credit: PTI The zig zag of voters outside a polling station in Alipurduar district in the eastern state of West Bengal yesterday. Image Credit: Reuters View gallery as list

An Improvised Explosive Device (IED) blast was reported in Maharashtra’s Gadchiroli district as voting was underway in Maoist-affected district. However, no one was injured in the incident.

Voters came out in large numbers in Dantewada district of Chhattisgarh despite a Maoist call to boycott elections.

Voting was largely peaceful in Jammu and Baramulla Parliamentary constituencies of J & K. National Conference leader and former state Chief Minister (CM) Omar Abdullah asked people to vote against communalism.

In Uttar Pradesh, Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) of Mayawati alleged that the state police was preventing Dalit (those belonging to lower castes) voters from reaching polling booths.

In Telangana, elections were held on all 17 Parliamentary constituencies in the first phase. In alliance with Asaduddin Owaisi-led All India Majlis-e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen (AIMIM), the ruling Telangana Rashtra Samiti (TRS) is hoping to sweep the election in the state.
