Gujarat ex-MLA Jayanti Bhanushali: A politician with a chequered past, many controversies

The slain former BJP MLA Jayanti Bhanushali's public life remained always controversial. Bhanushali's name was tossed in sex racket, intimidation, illegal encroachments over private properties and other matters. The BJP leader from Kutch was shot dead after midnight on Monday when he was travelling by train from Bhuj to Ahmedabad.

A controversy involving Bhanushali in an illegal act came to light in 2018, when a lady Manisha Goswami alleged that he had raped her. Goswami earlier had also said that she had the knowledge of all illegal business deals of Bhanushali. Bhanushali had filed an FIR against Goswami for blackmailing him for several years. The police, then arrested Goswami but a compromise was made between Goswami and Bhanushali and the former was released of charges. Manisha was Bhanushali's supporter when he contested the Assembly polls in 2007 and remained his close confidant for a long time.

Bhanushali's name was echoed in the much discussed Naliya sex racket that was disclosed after the Naliya gang rape case. The victim had accused several BJP leaders from Kutch for raping her and for human trafficking to please senior state leaders of BJP.

The opposition Congress had created uproar over this by holding protests in the Assembly and in public too.

Bhanushali came to active politics in mid 80s and began his career with Panchayat polls. He was elected to Kutch district Panchayat and Taluka Panchayat for several of times. He served the five years term as Abdasa MLA during 2007 to 2012.

Bhanushali's brother Shambhu alleged that his brother's political rival and BJP leader Chhabil Patel was behind this killing. Patel is in USA these days.

Bhanushali was facing rivalry from BJP leader from same constituency Chhabil Patel. Patel who was Congress candidate, had defeated Bhanushali in 2012 assembly polls but then he joined BJP before Lok Sabha polls held in 2014. Patel was given ticket by BJP in by polls and reportedly Bhanushali worked against Patel crossing the party line and Patel lost too. This incident brought both these leaders on the edge.

Thereafter, Patel and Bhanushali were at loggerheads and his name was tossed in controversial cases like threatening, ransome and other. Bhanushali was made the vice president of BJP in 2017 before assembly polls.

Sex tapes of Bhanushali with a college student girl from Surat had also gone viral a few months back. The girl had filed FIR against the leader for luring and intimidating for establishing sexual relationship. Bhanushali had also promised her reportedly to ensure her admission in top fashion institution of Ahmedabad in exchange of sex. Bhanushali had alleged that Chhabil Patel had conspired that to defame him. Bhanushali had to step down as BJP vice president and in his resignation letter to BJP chief, Bhanushali had mentioned that he would not assume any post in public life, until he came out clean of the allegations. The girl had also approached the Gujarat high court in the case for fair probe against the BJP leader.

However, later the girl withdrew the FIR and the reports of compromise between Bhanushali and Patel also had come.

A month back Patel had filed complaint against Bhanushali for sending goons to intimidate his son with gun. As per complaint, Patel's son while travelling to Gandhinagar from Ahmedababd in his car, was stopped by some people mid way, they flashed gun and threatened to kill him and his father.

MUCH DISCUSSED
