Ah, Why Hindu Terror!

Omkar Dattatray

There is nothing like Hindu terror in Hinduism and the word Hindu terror or Saffron terror is alien to Hinduism and it is the gift of the leftists and so called secular Congress. It was the Congress and the leftists who first coined the word of Hindu terror or Hindu terrorism. Congress leader Shashi Tharoor and Randeep Surajwala used the term to defame Hindu and Hinduism in order to gain the sympathy of the Muslims and thus word Hindu terror or Hindu terrorism was used. But the fact of the matter is that a Hindu can be never be a terrorist and terrorism cannot be attributed to Hinduism in any way. Hinduism is the most tolerant religion of the world but to paint it as a religion of terror, the so called secularists are not ashamed of using the world terror with Hindus.

Therefore the tag of Hindu terrorism is the brainchild of the Congress and the leftists. Thus it is a tactic of the Congress and other so called secular satraps to denounce Hindus and Hinduism and be the darling of the minorities especially Muslims. Therefore there are no takers of the false and baseless charge of Hindu terror or saffron terror. It is used only to defame Hindus and Hinduism which is the religion of peace and tranquility and the Sanatan Dharma regards whole world as one family and also regards world as the multiplication of self. Thus the word Hindu terror and Hindu terrorism has no basis at all and has no relevance as well. Saffron terror is a neologism used to describe acts of violence motivated by Hindu nationalism usually perpetrated by members or alleged members of Hindu nationalist organizations like RSS or Abhinav Bharat.

Though, the fact of the matter is that a Hindu can never be a terrorist. It has been said by no less a person than the Prime Minister Narinder Modi. The Hindu terror tag is the coinage of Congress and so called other secular parties and leftists. It has no takers in the country. A defamation case was earlier filed against Kamal Hassan in Varanasi over Hindu terror remarks. In a column of Tamil weekly magazine the actor has accused the right wing groups of resorting to violence. A defamation case was filed against Kamal Hassan in Varanasi a day after he alleged that the Hindu right wing had started resorting to violence and terrorism.

In a column for the Tamil Weekly magazine Ananda Vikatan the actor wrote that earlier “the Hindu right wing would not indulge in violence but instead had debates.” But once this tactic failed he added “They started using muscle power instead of dialogue. BJP asked the actor to apologize. BJP said there is peace in Tamil Nadu because Hindus are in majority.” The BJP’s national spokesman GVL Narasimaha Rao said that Hassan has joined the ranks of congress leader Chidambaram and Lashar-e-Taiba chief Hafiz Saeed by making such a remark. In fact there is nothing like Hindu terror or Hindu terrorism but the word is parroted by the secularists as they have nothing to fall bank upon and thus use the world Hindu terror which does not fit into the tolerant ethos of Hinduism. While the fact is that Hinduism is tolerant, all absorbing, all assimilating and all inclusive one and therefore it is wrong to defame & denounce Hinduism and Hindus by the terror remark. There is a strange psychology in the political circles that if a Hindu protests against the denouncement of Hindu and demonstrates for their genuine rights it is labeled as Hindu terror and thus it is wrong. It seems that a Hindus being in majority in India does not have any right to protect his religion and cultivate & when he talks of his rights, he is denounced as a Hindu terrorist.

The court verdict in Samjauta Express verdict vindicated the stand of Hindus that there is nothing like Hindu terror. Congress made fake theory of Hindu terror for political benefits according to Finance Minster Arun Jaitley. Congress disrespected Hindus by coining term Hindu terror has been said by Modi at his first poll rally in Maharashtra. Modi said voters will punish Congress for Hindu terror, slur as per PM Modi. Samjhavata Verdict exposed conspiracy to defame crores has also been said by PM at wardha in vidarba. In his first campaign rally in Maharashtra for 2019 general elections, PM Narinder Modi criticized the congress for coining the term Hindu terror. He said that community will teach the congress a befitting lesson for slur.

The congress attempted to defame the crores of Indian by using the term Hindu Terror said PM Modi in Wardha in Vidarba. Alluding to the Samjhuta Express blast case which acquitted Swami Aseemanad, it has exposed the conspiracy hatched by the congress. It is totally absurd and wrong to link the community known for peace, brotherhood and harmony with terrorism. Yes in thousand years of its history not a single incident shows an act of Hindu terrorism. During the election season the word Hindu terror and Saffron terror has taken a centre stage, thanks to the raking of this non-issue but an emotional one by the congress and leftists. But the fact is that a Hindu cannot be labeled as a terrorist. It is falsification of History and denouncing of Hindu culture and it has no place in India which is tolerant nation because of Hindu culture and ethos.

(The writer is a columnist and a social activist).
