Election panel suspends two ‘negligent’ officers

Election Commission

BBMP Deputy Commissioner

By Y Maheswara ReddyThehas decided to crack down on employees who are either negligent or hesitant to take their responsibilities seriously. To send out a strong message against such negligent behaviour, the commission has recommended suspension of two employees.The EC would recommend to the authorities concerned to transfer the employees, if they are negligent towards election duty. Soon after the election, the employees would get back to their earlier postings. This time, however, the commission has decided to not let such matters go unpunished.According to Assistant Commissioner of Bengaluru South Division Harish Naik, the Election Commission has decided to be intolerant of negligence of employees on election duty. “We have suspended Manjunatha Reddy, a revenue inspector of Chandapur, who was posted as nodal officer for complaints, for failing to discharge his duties. We came to know that he remained absent for four days without prior intimation,’’ says Harish Naik.The latest incident is the suspension of Jayaram, a revenue inspector of Lakshmidevi Nagar sub-division for abandoning the election work. Jayaram was assigned to keep the electronic voting machines ready. According to the suspension order, Jayaram attended duty on April 9 to keep electronic voting machines ready for Raja Rajeswarinagar of Bengaluru Rural Lok Sabha seat. It is alleged that Jayaram left the place without permission and did not turn up after that. The suspension order has claimed that he could not be reached even though about 25 phone calls were made to him and text messages were sent by the authorities. He has been suspended under the rule 134 of Representation of the People Act 1951.(Administration) Lingamurthy G, who is on poll duty, told BM the employee found guilty could not attend duties till the elections are completed. “The suspension may be extended up to six months. We will conduct an inquiry once again after the elections are completed,’’ says Lingamurthy.
