Engg degree holders rue ‘prejudiced’ govt job drive

By Sukhada Khandge



Civil engineers from across the state demand equal opportunity in an employment drive to fill 2,000 junior engineer positions in PWD, water resources and soil and irrigation depts



Over 500 civil engineering degree holders gathered at the collector’s office on Tuesday, demanding that they be given equal opportunity in an employment drive being conducted for various government departments.



The state government has started the procedure for filling up nearly 2,000 vacancies of junior engineer in the public works department (PWD), water resources department and the soil and irrigation department. According to a government circular the candidates need to have either diploma or a diploma followed by a degree in civil engineering.



Many students are feeling cheated as mere degree holders are barred from applying for these positions and have now written letters to the authorities concerned, demanding an equal chance in the employment drive.



Students from across the state had gathered to participate in the protest on Tuesday with a question if they have been denied participation just because they are highly educated.



One such student from Nandurbar, Lalit Deore, said, “HSC and then a degree is considered higher compared to only a diploma or a diploma plus degree. It is shocking that we are not even allowed to apply for the said positions.”



Students argued that a rule from 1998 is being followed by authorities for this employment drive. At the time many students would pursue a diploma as degree colleges were few in the country. They added that an employment drive on such a scale is being conducted after nearly a decade and they are missing out due to an age-old clause.



Students said that this demand has been made since long but the government has taken no action. The state government had set up the K P Bakshi Committee in 2006 which suggested that an equal opportunity be given to diploma plus degree and mere degree holders by distributing available vacancies equally.



Gajanan Sanghevar from Nanded said, “The only other option for us to get a government job is to appear for the Maharashtra Public Service Commission (MPSC) examination which is a lengthy process. We have already invested four years of our life in getting degrees with a good score and we still have to face a problem when it comes to getting a government job. We are not demanding a special position for ourselves but the state government should at least open the doors for us and allow us to be a part of the competition.”



While the students marched from Shaniwar wada to collector’s office on Tuesday, they are also planning to protest at Azad Maidan in Mumbai if their demands are not heard by the state government.



Jayshree Katare, resident deputy collector of Pune, said, “The delegation has demanded that the application date of January 15 be extended and they be given equal opportunity for the recruitment of junior engineers. We have forwarded their request to state government for consideration and are awaiting a reply.”




