Lok Sabha elections: In 2015 rerun, RJD aims for forward vs backward fight

Reservations to be increased in proportion to population and quotas to be extended to private sector: with these two election promises, the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) has made clear its intention to polarise the election narrative as “backward classes vs others” to take on BJP.The promise to increase the quantum of quotas, and to expand the ambit, is akin to twisting the Mandal knife, given that general communities are yet to reconcile to 27% reservation instituted in the 1990s. But RJD is hoping to replicate its 2015 strategy when its “grand alliance”, including Janata Dal (United) and Congress, turned the polls into a “Mahabharat between backwards and forwards” and decimated rival BJP.In 2015, it used the statement by RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat for “review of caste reservations” to unleash Mandalite anger. Four years later, it is reaching out to backward classes by calling the 10% “upper caste quota” enacted by Modi regime as a “dilution of caste quotas”.Yet, its game plan may be hobbled by two significant changes since then. A key component of the “forward vs backward” face-off, JD(U) of chief minister Nitish Kumar , has switched camps to BJP. Besides, the face of the Mandal agitation, Lalu Prasad, is away from the scene, incarcerated in fodder scam cases.The RJD ranks, led by Lalu’s heir-apparent Tejashwi Yadav, are optimistic that the tie-up with Congress and minor outfits — Upendra Kushwaha’s RLSP, Jitan Manjhi’s HAM and Mukesh Sahni’s Vikasshil Insan Party — covers a vast arc of the caste divide which can deliver decent, if not rich, dividends. While attempting a Yadav-led OBC consolidation, the party hopes that its allies will bring in sections of Nitish-aligned “most backwards” and “most Dalits”. Congress, on the other hand, is to serve as a pan-caste glue across favourable seats.The “quota aggression”, it is hoped, would also build upon its concerted year-long bid to win over the sprawling Dalit bloc. Though Dalits are divided across competing camps, the Yadav outfit brought about a paradigm shift a year ago as it tried to forge a social compact with the community that, unlike BSP in UP, doesn’t have its “own party” in Bihar.The turning point proved to be the Dalit protests in early 2018 against the Supreme Court’s judgment allegedly diluting the SC/ST atrocities act. In a bold move, the OBC outfit, which was until then wary of, and even resistant to, an assertive Dalit agenda, participated in the now famous April 2 protests against the SC order. Days later, Tejashwi led the RJD in celebrating the Ambedkar Jayanti with gusto.To further sharpen its appeal among Dalits, RJD tried hard to rope in Mayawati’s BSP in its 2019 alliance but was rebuffed. Observers say a Yadav-Muslim-Dalit combine, coupled with some MBCs, can pose a tough challenge to the Modi-led BJP alliance.
