Patalkot in Madhya Pradesh: the ancient gateway to underworld and related stories

Ancient Indian lore talks about Patal Lok or the underworld. However, at Patalkot in Madhya Pradesh, all those stories appear to be true. As per the Hindu mythology, it is believed that Patal Lok is the home of the demons and nagas (serpents). Given that a place like Patalkot also exists in Chhindwara district of Madhya Pradesh, one might wonder if those mythical stories are really mythical after all?The dense green hills in the Tamia region of Chhindwara are inhabited by more than 2,000 tribes spread across 12 villages, wherein each village is located at a distance of 3 to 4 km! In terms of area, Patalkot is spread over 20,000 acres of land!Patalkot is populated by the Bharia and the Gond tribes for many centuries. Until recently, these tribes were cut off from civilized world due to the inaccessibility of the region; but now, there is a school and other facilities coming up in Patalkot. The Bharias hold the belief that it was at Patalkot that Ramayana’s Sita disappeared into the earth, thus forming a deep cavity. Another legend has it that Hanuman, the invincible hero of Ramayana, entered the underworld through this region in order to save Lord Rama and Lakshmana to salvage them from the shackles of demon Ahiravana.Patalkot is blessed with dense foliage and is home to medicinal herbs, plants, animals and birds of various species. The top of the valley is as high as 1,200-1,500 ft, and a bird’s eye view makes the landscape appear in the shape of a horseshoe. The only source of water for the residents of the valley is Doodhi River. Interestingly, the entire region gets enveloped by darkness after noontime, so much so that sunlight cannot reach the depth of this valley.On the surface, Patalkot may look like a deftly crafted mountain with a civilisation thriving right in its womb. Some think of it as a deep gorge, which turned into what it is due to the mythical trips of Lord Shiva to meditate in the quiet asylums of the valley. On the other hand, locals believe that Patalkot is the sole entrance to the netherworld or Patal Lok, and they voluntarily keep a steady watch as the guards of the underworld.Exploring Patalkot also includes getting to know the local tribal folk inhabiting the valley. They revere Meghnad and hold a special fair on Chaitra Poornima (full moon day in the month of Chaitra as per the Hindu lunar calendar), which generally falls in the month of March and April.Otherwise, a typical day in the life of the tribal folk involves offering prayers in Devghar. The deities worshipped by the tribals are Lord Shiva, Fire and the Sun along with some others.To make the most of your trip, visit Patalkot during the monsoon season. The cloudy sky, earth’s scent, the soothing weather—all of it enhances the beauty of this place. The time from October to February is the best for visiting the interiors of the valley, and the months from July to September are ideal for beholding the valley from its top.Patalkot lies in the hilly escapes of Tamia district and about 80 km from Chhindwara in Madhya Pradesh. Flyers can reach Patalkot by alighting at Jabalpur or Bhopal airport, and then hire a taxi from there. Train travellers can reach Chhindwara Station from Bhopal/Jabalpur via Patalkot Express. From Chhindwara, a taxi can be hired to reach Patalkot.Road trippers can reach Chhindwara either from Nagpur (125 km), Jabalpur (215 km) or Bhopal (286 km). Taxis and buses also ply from these cities to Chhindwara. After de-boarding at Chhindwara, another mode of transport can be hired to reach Patalkot.It is hard to find a decent place to stay in the valley. Yet, if you do not mind compromising on comfort, pitching a tent to experience the valley is a good option. Or else, the best accommodation can be found in Tamia or the PWD guest house.
