Congress promoted ‘ease of loot’ for 60 years, says PM Narendra Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed a massive rally on Saturday, where he hit out at the Congress on the Jammu and Kashmir and national security issues, taking it on its election promise to withdraw the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA).

PM Modi said while his government had promoted “ease of doing business” in 60 months of its rule, the Congress had encouraged “ease of loot” in its 60 years of administration.

In Bengaluru, home to India’s premier space research agency ISRO, PM Modi also said the Congress party’s tendency of keeping things secret was responsible for the country lagging behind technologically.

“Congress says they did not conduct the test (Mission Shakti) earlier as they wanted to keep it a secret. It was this approach of keeping secrets due to which India lagged behind in technology,” he said. “Today, the courage is shown by Modi and the whole world is recognising our stealth.”

PM Modi had last month announced that India’s anti-satellite weapon A-SAT successfully destroyed a live satellite on a low earth orbit, joining a group of three countries — the US, Russia and China — with such capability. His address to the nation generated a massive row, with the Opposition alleging him of violating the MCC, although the Election Commission later gave him a clean chit.

He also took on the Congress over the security aspect, alleging that the Bengaluru blasts took place during the Congress regime. “When Congress’ ‘mahamilavati’ remote government was at the Centre, didn’t blasts occur in Bengaluru? Was not the nation living under a fear of terror attacks? Did any major blast took place in the last five years of your ‘chowkidaar’s chowkidaari’? It was the power of your one vote that made it possible,” he said.

The Prime Minister also took exception to the political row created by the ruling Congress-JD(S) alliance over the recent Income Tax raids on several JD(S) leaders. “Should the law be followed or not, whether it is PM or CM or ministers? Why get scared if you have not committed anything wrong?,” he asked.
