Major setback for Tejasvi Surya

High Court

BJP’s Bangalore South candidate

Tejasvi Surya

Twitter

Facebook

Google

WhatsApp

BJP and Congress hold rallies at Yelahanka, Bengaluru. 1 5 BJP’s massive roadshow A huge number of BJP supporters were seen during the roadshow held at Yelahanka in the presence of BJP chief Amit Shah and BN Bachchegowda. The rally was carried out at several localities in Yelahanka. Photo by S Eshwar/MMCL Leaving no stone unturned Yelahanka comes under the Chikkaballapura constituency while former minister BN Bachchegowda of the BJP is contesting against incumbent MP and former chief minister M Veerappa Moily in a straight fight. Photo by S Eshwar/MMCL Power of the hand On the other hand, Congress had Rizwan Arshad, actress Khushboo Sundar and MLA NA Haris. The trio was seen waving at their supporters Just smile Congress candidate Rizwan Arshad was seen smiling at local residents who were in their balconies watching as the convoy made its way through the streets. Wooing with words Actor-turned-politician and Congress leader Khushboo Sundar was addressing people who had come out to support Congress.

says media free to report news which in its opinion, cannot be called defamatoryIn a setback to theTejasvi Surya, the High Court on Friday said that the media is not barred from publishing or telecasting any news that is not defamatory in the eyes of the media.had obtained injunction against over 40 news outlets including social media platforms likeandafter a woman had alleged online that she was abused in a relationship with him.Newspapers and TV channels, “are not prevented from publishing or telecasting any news item which is not defamatory in their opinion,” the High Court said in its judgement. A public interest litigation by the Association of Democratic Reforms (ADR) challenged the injunction granted by a lower court and said that it violated the Fundamental Right of Freedom of Speech and Expression. The advocate is “right in this submission that voters have right to know about all contesting candidates,” the HC said in its judgement.The HC order said that if after publication, Tejasvi Surya or any person finds it defamatory, they can approach the relevant court for redressal. “The impugned order has restricted the defendants from making defamatory statements against the plaintiff. What is defamatory can be decided and tested only if an act of making a statement or telecasting or programme is challenged by the aggrieved person before an appropriate forum,” the HC said.Tejasvi Surya became the surprise BJP candidate from Bangalore South instead of Tejaswini Ananth Kumar, the wife of the previous long-time MP of the constituency Ananth Kumar, who was tipped to bag the party’s candidature. Tejasvi’s surprise debut was marked with people on social media digging up his past posts and life. Surya had to delete a Tweet about his opposition to reservation for women in Parliament. The injunction by the trial court was termed a ‘gag order’ by the ADR in its PIL.
