YAD leaders allege Bains planning to grab land

Ludhiana: With the Lok Sabha elections fast approaching, numerous allegations have started surfacing against candidates from different parties. On Saturday, Youth Akali Dal (YAD) leaders highlighted the problem of dumping waste from the factory of Lok Insaaf Party (LIP) MLA Simarjit Singh Bains in the land of a family in Gill village for the past two years. They alleged Bains wanted to grab the land — belonging to six brothers — so he had dumped waste from his unit near that land.

One of the land owners, Charanjit Singh, alleged that in order to usurp the land, Bains had started parking tractor trolleys on their land about two years ago, and to take over possession completely, they had now started dumping factory waste and ashes on the land. Due to the dumping of this industrial waste, he said the land could not be used for farming, while earlier, they used to give this land on contract for farming. He also alleged that Bains had threatened to indict them in fake police cases, and later also offered to buy the land at low prices. But when they refused to sell their ancestral land, Bains made efforts to render the land barren by dumping factory waste and deadly chemical water over there.

YAD leaders also held a protest against Bains over the issue, and said ash emanated from his sewing machine factory built on the 1.75-acre agricultural land of a farmer in Gill village. YAD president Gurdeep Singh Gosha, along with the land owners — Jaswant Singh, Satwinder Singh, Charanjit Singh, Amarjit Singh, Karamjit Singh, and Harbhajan Singh — and several villagers, held a protest against the Bains brothers. Gosha appealed to the district administration and the state government to help farmers by stopping the Bains brothers from taking illegal possession of the land. They also demanded the registration of a case against Bains.

Bains, on the other hand, claimed he did not have any information about the dumping of waste on this land, and claimed family members had never contacted him for help, because if they had come to him, he would have solved the issue. He said all the allegations against him were politically motivated, and the Akali Dal was behind them.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
