Capt, Harsimrat in Twitter war over Rahul’s Golden Temple visit

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, April 13

Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh and Union Minister Harsimrat Kaur Badal have engaged in a Twitter war over Congress president Rahul Gandhi’s recent visit to the Golden Temple.

Badal, leader of Congress party’s Punjab rival Shiromani Akali Dal, said in a tweet on Saturday: “Pb CM @capt_amarinder took @RahulGandhi to Sri Akal Takht Sahib but lacked courage to ask him admit the @INCIndia's sin of demolishing Sikhs' highest religio-temporal seat with tanks & mortars. What a contrast with demand for British apology for #JallianwalaBaghMassacre!”

She was referring to Operation Blue Star, a military operation that former prime minister Indira Gandhi ordered.

Replying to the her tweet, Captain Amarinder Singh said: “Did you, your husband @officeofssbadal or his father, Prakash Singh Badal, ever apologise for your great grandfather, Sardar Sunder Singh Majithia’s lavish dinner to Gen Dyer on the day of the Jallianwala Bagh massacre? He was later knighted in 1926 for his loyalty and his deeds”.

He accused the Badals and Bikram Singh Majithia—Hamrsimrat Kaur’s brother—of playing “the charade of nationalism” to promote their vested political interests. The union minister’s remarks not only smacked of duplicity but total ignorance of the facts of his own role in the events following Operation Blue Star, he said in a statement later.

“I resigned from both, the Parliament and my party, in protest against the military action. I was, and still am, fully aware of the implications and consequences of the events of those days,” he said, quipping that Harsimrat would have been in school at that time and totally clueless of what transpired then.

“So don’t try to teach me on Akal Takht. No Badal can ever understand the pain of the Sikh community went through. They have been always too busy to self-serve their own interests. Had it been otherwise, they would have apologised for Harsimrat’s great grandfather’s anti-nation act long back,” the chief minister said.
