Chandrababu Naidu leads Opposition's attack, says ‘EC acting on BJP's behest’; demands 50% VVPAT counting

Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu and his party Telugu Desam Party on Sunday defended the inclusion of the expert, Hari Prasad Vemuru, into their party delegation which met the Election Commission on Saturday to protest against the alleged faulty Electronic Voting Machines. The EC had questioned how TDP had allowed Vemuru, who had been accused in a case of EVM theft in the past, to accompany TDP chief Naidu to attend the meeting with the poll body.

In a letter addressed to the Election Commission, the ruling party in Andhra Pradesh claimed that instead of focussing on the issue, the Election Commission was "trying to avoid it." On Saturday, the Election Commission had sent a letter to the TDP, asking it how CM Naidu could allow a person who has been accused of stealing an EVM in 2010 in Mumbai to be part of the delegation that sought a meeting with the poll body.

Responding to the EC, TDP's Rajya Sabha member and party's legal cell incharge K Ravindra Kumar said in a letter that no charge had been filed against the technical expert for the alleged theft the EVM even after nine years of the said crime. The party added that Hari Prasad's efforts and suggestions were acknowledged by former chief election commissioners SY Qureshi and VS Sampath regarding the EVMs, despite the FIR registered against him in the past.

Meanwhile, a delegation of opposition parties met in the national capital on Sunday to discuss the issue of the alleged faulty voting machines. More than 20 parties met in Delhi just days after the first phase of the Lok Sabha elections and said that they wanted at least 50 per cent EVMs to be verified against the Voter Verified Paper Trail (VVPAT) machines.

Chandrababu Naidu, who led the delegation, told reporters, “EC is acting under BJP, they are not correct, they have to act impartially which they are not doing. Also, we doubt even EVMs are under manipulation and that's why we are demanding 50% counting of VVPATs. They are not agreeing.”

The first phase of general elections took place on April 11, during which all 25 parliamentary seats in Andhra Pradesh and its 175 assembly seats went to polls. Naidu has alleged that at least 30 to 40 voting in his state did not work properly on Thursday and has demanded a re-poll in almost 150 polling booths. He also accused the poll panel of working on the instructions of the Centre.

Earlier in the day, opposition leaders, including AAP chief Arvind Kejriwal, Congress leader Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Kapil Sibal, Trinamool's Nadimul Haque and TDP's Naidu and representatives of Left and the Samajwadi Party, met in Delhi to discuss the issue of voting machines in the general elections.
