Taksal members protest Dera rally called to seek poll opinion

PATIALA: Tension gripped Banur after the members of Damdami Taksal blocked the Banur-Landran road to prevent Dera Sacha Sauda followers from holding a gathering here on Sunday.The Dera members had decided to hold 'Nam Charcha' as part of its inception ceremony but allegedly failed to take permission from the administration. Expecting a huge gathering, the Dera management had planned to hold the congregation at an open agricultural land.Sikhs in large numbers along with local Taksal head B S Parwana had arrived at the proposed congregation site. The Dera followers too had gathered there. However, police from Mohali and Banur reached the spot and vacated the Dera followers from the private land. They also issued prohibition orders over hold rallies without permission.Earlier, Damdami Taksal members had appealed to the district administration to not allow holding of the Dera rally and had given a two-hour ultimatum to take action. However, at around 1pm, the Taksal members blocked the road near Banur barrier in protest of no action being taken against the Dera followers holding the rally without permission.Mohali sub-registrar Rajpal Singh said, "The local Dera management was not allowed to hold the rally as they did not have permission in this regard. The followers were told to pack up at around 3pm. There was no tension as the Taksal members were protesting peacefully and within no time swift action was taken following which the gathering of Dera followers was not allowed."Sinder Paka, member of Dera's state political wing said, "We had already held these gathering under Nam Charcha in almost all the districts including Faridkot, Bathinda, Patiala, Muktsar, Ferozepur, Sangrur, Ludhiana and others, however, Mohali and Ropar are yet to be covered. We are only seeking opinion of the followers in which candidate or party to support in the upcoming elections."Rajpura DSP Manpreet Singh, said, "Everything remained peaceful and no case was registered against anyone. In fact, the matter was sorted out amicably after a discussion with the local Dera management who were asked to vacate the private land."
