‘Harassed’ woman, son commit suicide by jumping into canal

Ludhiana: Allegedly harassed by the authorities of a private hospital, a woman and her son committed suicide by jumping in Sirhind Canal on Saturday. Their kin came to know about it when Fatehgarh Sahib police approached them as the woman’s body was fished out of the canal.

Following this, on Sunday, the kin of the deceased staged a protest outside the hospital concerned in Model Town with the body for about one-and-a-half hours after which they also blocked the link road while demanding action against the hospital authorities.

The deceased have been identified as Jasveer Kaur (46) and her son Dhan Krishan (22) of Dashmesh Nagar, Gill Road. While Jasveer, who is a divorcee, was working as a nurse in a private hospital of Model Town, his son Dhan Krishan was working in the accounts department of the same hospital. The kin of the deceased have alleged that Dhan Krishan had made some wrong payment in lakhs, following which the hospital authorities were after him. They were reportedly asking him to pay the money, due to which the mother-son duo were in tension.

Dalbeer Singh, a nephew of the deceased woman, said, “My aunt Jasveer and cousin Dhan Krishan were living with us in the same house for the past many years. For the past some days they were really depressed as Dhan Krishan had made some wrong payment, which was in lakhs. However, I am not aware about the exact amount. The hospital authorities were pressurising them to make the payment, which was next to impossible for them. The hospital authorities were also threatening to lodge a police complaint against them.”

He added, “On Saturday, around 10am both left the house, saying that they were going to talk to the hospital authorities to find a solution. They also said that they will return home soon. However, by late evening we got a call from Fatehgarh Sahib police that the duo had jumped into the canal. The body of my aunt Jasveer was fished out by the police.”

The kin have also accused that some hospital staff members had thrashed Dhan Krishan a few days ago.

On Sunday, when the family got the body of Jasveer they staged a protest outside the hospital from 3.30pm to 5pm by keeping the body there and demanded action against the hospital authorities. Thereafter, they blocked the link road near the passport office from 5.15pm onwards.

Meanwhile, the Model Town police reached the spot and tried to pacify the agitators. A huge traffic jam was witnessed on the link road connecting the bus stand with Gill road and Cheema and Samrala chowks. On other hand, the hospital authorities could not be reached for any comment.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
