Moving towards an eco-friendly election

Cloth banners to be put up at all polling booths in Udupi

The steps taken by the district administration to promote eco-friendly parliamentary elections is showing results. This move is yet another addition to the environment-friendly steps taken by the administration in the district over the last few years.

Soon after the parliamentary elections were announced on March 10, the Election Commission of India had emphasised on having an eco-friendly election. A pro-active administration held a meeting with political parties and candidates and urged them to make the elections an eco-friendly one.

Normally, banners, buntings and flags of political parties are commonly seen during the elections. People do speculate on the results of the polls based on them.

But flex banners, cut-outs and buntings have become rare in this election. The political parties have mostly shifted to using banners and buntings made of cloth. These too were seen only in places where candidates held their meetings.

Though political parties can take permission for putting up buntings, banners and cut-outs in public places, the fact that they had not done so was noticeable.

The administration also used only paper cups for providing tea and coffee and plates made of arecanut leaves for providing lunch during training programmes for the election staff in Udupi, Kundapur, Kaup and Karkala recently. Water cans were used to serve water. This reduced garbage to a large extent.

The authorities impressed upon political parties that taking out vehicle and two-wheeler rallies would lead to air pollution. Hence, the political parties did not hold such vehicle rallies and showed their concern for environment.

Cloth banners

Going a step further, the administration has decided that no plastic items would be used in the polling booths during polling in Udupi district on April 18 (Udupi-Chikkamagaluru Lok Sabha seat) and on April 23 (Byndoor Assembly segment in Shivamogga Lok Sabha constituency). The banners at polling stations providing information to voters would be made out of cloth. The kits to be given to the polling staff at the Mustering Centres too would be of cloth.

“The cooperation given by all candidates and political parties to make the elections an environment-friendly one is commendable,” said Deputy Commissioner Hephsiba Rani Korlapati.
