The Shillong Times

Tharoor sustains injuries while performing ritual at temple

Thiruvananthapuram: Congress leader and Thiruvananthapuram MP Shashi Tharoor on Monday suffered head injuries while performing ‘thulabharam’ ritual at a temple here. According to party sources, Tharoor who is aiming for a hat-trick from Thiruvananthapuram Lok Sabha constituency, sustained injuries on his head, which required six stitches. He also suffered a minor leg injury after the hook of the weighing scale came off and hit his head, they added. ‘Thulabharam’ is a Hindu ritual in which a person is weighed against a commodity such as flowers, grains, fruits and similar articles in temples and the equal value or quantity is offered as donation. Monday being the Malayalam new year day (‘Vishu’), Tharoor performed the ritual at a Devi temple here in the morning before embarking on his poll campaign. He was accompanied by his family members and party leaders and workers including MLA, V S Sivakumar. While he was sitting on one of the pans of the weighing scale, the hook came off and fell on his head, the party sources added. He was taken to Trivandrum Medical College hospital for detailed examination, the sources said. (PTI)

Woman raped by two youths in front of mother

Muzaffarnagar: A 22-year-old woman was allegedly raped by two youths in front of her mother in a sugarcane field in Kakrauli area of the district, police said. The incident happened on Sunday when the victim along with her mother had gone to buy medicines in Kakroli police station area here. A case has been registered against the two accused, including Dilshad, and an unidentified person who were absconding, Station House Officer (SHO Jitender Kumar said, adding the victim has been sent for medical examination. According to a complaint lodged by the victim’s father his daughter was raped by the accused when she has gone with her mother to purchase medicines. They forcefully took her to a nearby sugarcane field and raped her, he said. (PTI)

Over 100 hospitalised for food poisoning

Akola (Maha): At least 107 people have been hospitalised after consuming food at a social gathering in Maharashtra’s Akola district, police said on Monday. The incident took place in Bhimtekdi in Hingani in the district on Sunday, during an event to mark the birth anniversary of Babasaheb Ambedkar, an official said. “People complained of dizziness and several of them vomited, following which they had to be rushed to hospital. At least 107 people were admitted,” he said. Several of them are stable and many have been discharged, he added. Dahihanda police have begun a probe and food samples from the gathering have been sent to laboratories for analysis, the official said. (PTI)

Silver seized from Bengal borders, 1 arrested

Kolkata: The Border Security Force on Monday seized two kilograms of silver ornaments worth Rs 58,000 from an international check post in West Bengal’s North 24 Parganas and arrested one man, the BSF said. Acting on a tip-off, the paramilitary troopers raided Panditpara village and seized the smuggled ornaments. Monotosh Chakravarty, a resident of Swarupnagar, was arrested from ICP Gobardah during manual frisking, a BSF officer said. The accused was handed over to Basirhat police station. The BSF has so far in 2019 seized silver ornaments worth over Rs 7,00,000 and arrested three smugglers from the south Bengal frontier. (IANS)

Naxals injure cop, loot his rifle

Bijapur: A policeman was injured on Monday , and his rifle looted, after Naxals attacked him with sharp-edged weapons in Chhattisgarh’s Bijapur district, police said. The incident took placeat 1:30 am when constable Venkat Rao Majji was on night patrol at a five-day Ram Navami fair in Madded town in the district, a local police official said. “Some Naxals attacked the constable in the dark with sharp-edged weapons when he was talking on the phone. Before the other security personnel there could react, the ultras looted his self-loading rifle and fled,” the official said. “The injured constable was rushed to a local hospital and then shifted to Bijapur town for further treatment. Efforts are on to nab the attackers,” he said. (PTI)

Man held with pistol, bullets

New Delhi: A 50-year-old man was apprehended at a Delhi Metro station in Ghaziabad on Monday for allegedly carrying a pistol and live bullet rounds in his bag, officials said. CISF personnel apprehended Raj Kumar, a resident of Uttar Pradesh, at the Arthala metro station around 11:30 am after the baggage scanner detected a country-made pistol and three bullets in his bag, they said. The station is on the red line of the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) and is located in Ghaziabad in the national capital region. The man was handed over to the local police by the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) personnel for further investigation, officials said. Carrying arms and ammunition in the Delhi Metro is banned by the law. (PTI)
