Congress moves EC against Satti

editorial@tribune.com

Pratibha Chauhan

Tribune News Service

Shimla, April 15

A seething Congress is gunning for state BJP president Satpal Singh Satti with the party threatening to file a criminal complaint in the High Court in case he is not removed for allegedly abusing Congress president Rahul Gandhi.

The alleged abuse hurled by Satti at a public meeting in Baddi yesterday has enraged the Congress with senior state leadership condemning the remarks and a police complaint being filed in the local sadar police station. The Congress today filed a complaint on the same issue before the Election Commission of India (ECI), seeking strong action against Satti.

The Congress plans to step up the heat on the BJP on the issue as it has decided to hold statewide protests against the insult of its president tomorrow. In the election season when the two main political parties are slugging it out in the political arena, the remarks by Satti have enraged Congress men.

“We will wait for two days for his removal failing which we will file a criminal complaint against him in the High Court,” said Himachal Pradesh Congress Committee (HPCC) president Kuldeep Rathore. He said he owes an apology for using such derogatory and objectionable language.

Coming to the defence of its chief, state BJP general secretary Randhir Sharma today said it was a doctored video, which the Congress is trying to rake up to mislead voters.

“It was while citing the example of another person using abusive language on social media that Satti urged his party workers not to use such language at a meeting,” he claimed. He said the Congress was trying to distort facts and accuse Satti falsely.

“We have given two days ultimatum to the BJP, failing which the case will be filed in the court,” said Rathore. He said despite use of such language by the party president, no BJP leader, including Chief Minister, minister or anyone else, has condemned Sattis’s remarks. He added that though the BJP and the Congress are on the opposite side of the political spectrum but a certain amount of dignity and restraint is expected from everyone.

“The RSS claims itself to be a socio-cultural organization which believes in respecting traditions but I want to ask them have they given this kind of training to use offensive language against political opponents,” asked Kuldeep Rathore.

While Congress men from Balh area in Mandi burnt the effigy of Satti at Ner Chowk today, Mahila Congress and Youth Congress has demanded removal of Satti for using such offensive and abusive language.

Strong reaction by Congress MLAs, former ministers and office bearers is pouring in from all over the state against Satti.

To gherao Satti

Solan: In a statement issued jointly by the Pradesh Congress Committee general secretary Harshwardhan Chauhan, Sirmaur District Congress Committee president Ajay Solanki and party vice-president GR Musafir, the leaders said if the BJP failed to clarify its stand on the issue, the Congress would launch an agitation and gherao Satti and senior BJP leaders.

‘Will file criminal complaint’

"We will wait for two days for his removal failing which we will file a criminal complaint against him in the High Court. Satti owes an apology for using such derogatory and objectionable language." Kuldeep Rathore, HPCC President

Video doctored, says BJP

"It is a doctored video, which the Congress is trying to rake up to mislead voters. It was while citing the example of another person using abusive language on social media that Satti urged his party workers not to use such language at a meeting." Randhir Sharma, BJP General Secretary
