Trade union strike: Rail traffic disrupted in Kerala; CPI(M) leader held in WB

The nationwide strike called by various trade unions continued for the second day on Wednesday. Stray incidents of forced shutdown and road blockages have been reported from across the country, including from West Bengal, Kerala and Mumbai.

According to the reports, public transport and banking services remain disrupted for the second day in some states.

Protesters, on Wednesday, disrupted rail traffic in Kerala. The Venad Express was delayed as protesters entered the railway track at Thiruvananthapuram. The train resumed its journey after the police took the protesters into custody. Daily commuters and passengers faced the brunt as KSRTC and private buses, along with autorickshaws and cabs, kept off the roads.

READ: Trade unions gear up for 2-day general strike on January 8-9

In Mumbai, strike by Brihanmumbai Electricity Supply and Transport (BEST) bus employees over their demands, including fixation at master grade of employees employed after 2007, merging BEST budget with ‘A’ budget of BMC and resolving the issue of employee service residences, continued on Wednesday. Meanwhile, the Central Railways has informed that the Mumbai Division will run the following extra sub-services in view of the strike.

Main line



Thane dep 13.44 hrs and CSMT arrival 14.40hrs

CSMT dep 14.49hrs and Kalyan arrival 16.15hrs

Harbour line

Vashi dep 13.44 hrs and CSMT arrival 14.32hrs

CSMT dep 14.45 hrs and Panvel arrival 16.05

In West Bengal, another trade union stronghold, two students were injured after protesters pelted stones at a bus on the Jhikira-Howrah route. Train services on Sealdah-Lakshmikantapur Namkhana and Diamond Harbour section were affected as strike supporters threw plantain leaves on overhead wire at Dakshin Barasat, Mathurapur between Nischindapur-Kakdwip, Kakdwip-Namkhana on Sealdah-Lakshmikantapur Namkhana section. The rest of the services in Sealdah division remained unaffected.



CPI(M) leader Sujan Chakraborty, along with other protesters, were detained by police as they were participating in a public protest. In Kolkata, bus drivers were seen wearing helmets as a precautionary measure while driving.

The 10 central trade unions (CTUs) which have given a call for the two-day Bharat Bandh are protesting the government's snub of their 12-point charter of demands seeking minimum wage of Rs 18,000, social security for all workers and issue related to price rise.

All India Trade Union Congress General Secretary Amarjeet Kaur told PTI that there will be a complete bandh in Goa and Bihar, while 100 per cent strike is expected in other parts of the country too.

She said that due to UGC exams, which started from Tuesday, some state transport departments would not participate completely in the strike in the interest of students. The exams are scheduled in some states on Wednesday as well. The strike had received mixed response on Tuesday. The educational institutes, rail, banking, postal and transport services are expected to witness disruption on Wednesday, too.

The workers participating in the strike will go on a protest march from Mandi House to Parliament Wednesday at noon, and similarly protests would be seen in other parts of the country as well.

(With inputs from Onmanorama)
