Tik Tok Ban India: Goole & Apple to remove Tik Tok app from Play Store & iOS App store

It's an app that's been causing a massive amount of furore for quite some time now and certainly not in a good way. With over 54 million monthly active users in India alone, Tik Tok has been facing a lot of ire because some people believe it's causing more harm than good and have taken the legal route to ensure the app is put to rest, atleast in our country.

Remember how recently the Madras High Court had passed an order directing the Centre to prohibit the downloading of the app? Turns out, post that, the Supreme Court had refused to put a stay on the order on the grounds of it being sub-judice, even though a whole lot of people protested against the same. After all, how harmful can an app that's simply meant to create short musical videos possibly be, right? While there have been a couple of casualties thanks to people's obsession with the app, a large section of the app users feel it is unfair to disregard the app as a result of those two instances. In fact, the plea that was filed in the Supreme Court (the one that was swiftly dismissed) to pass a stay on the High Court's order by ByteDance, the owners of Tik Tok, the point raised was that the app cannot be held liable for third party actions in any way.

Now, in the latest development, reportedly, the Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY) has urged Apple and Google to remove the Tik Tok app from their app stores, in compliance with the High Court's order. A source from MeitY was also quoted as saying: "The High Court asked the government to prohibit download of TikTok application. It (MeitY) is ensuring that by asking Google and Apple to delete it from the app stores. Now it is up to the companies to do it or appeal the order".

This basically means that if put into practice, this will stop new users from downloading the app on their mobile phones. However, for those who already have the app in place, they'll be able to use it without any problem.

While existing users continue to put up their Tik Tok videos on social media, those against it are still out in full force trying to sabotage the app. And the matter is far from over.

NOW READ

Madras High Court wants Tik Tok banned in India

Android Q: Here are the top 10 features we know so far

PUBG Mobile Club Open 2019: How to register, full schedule & the rules you need to follow

> More on Get Smart
