what's wrong with these people? and I don't mean the naked ones in the upper gallery...

Home » Blogs » Gus Leonisky's blog what's wrong with these people? and I don't mean the naked ones in the upper gallery... In an article The crisis of democracy and the science of deliberation in Science of 15 Mar 2019, Vol. 363, Issue 6432, pp. 1144-1146, the Science magazine presents a study by many authors on citizen deliberative democracy in which strangely enough, social media is not that bad as some people make out, considering it can help debating ideas. Gus would argue that there are many facets of social "media" that are complexly inane due to the monopolised suppliers of information leading the debate, rather than informing the debate — as well as trolls and nasty idiots hugging the medium to project their anger and ignorance as gospel. But at least the Science mag is trying to tackle the issue of democratic activity from a scientific angle rather than moralistic view point:

That there are more opportunities than ever for citizens to express their views may be, counterintuitively, a problem facing democracy—the sheer quantitative overabundance overloads policymakers and citizens, making it difficult to detect the signal amid the noise. This overload has been accompanied by marked decline in civility and argumentative complexity. Uncivil behavior by elites and pathological mass communication reinforce each other. How do we break this vicious cycle? Asking elites to behave better is futile so long as there is a public ripe to be polarized and exploited by demagogues and media manipulators. Thus, any response has to involve ordinary citizens; but are they up to the task? Social science on “deliberative democracy” offers reasons for optimism about citizens' capacity to avoid polarization and manipulation and to make sound decisions. The real world of democratic politics is currently far from the deliberative ideal, but empirical evidence shows that the gap can be closed. Declining civility in interactions among elected representatives decreases citizens' trust in democratic institutions. The more polarized (and uncivil) that political environments get, the less citizens listen to the content of messages and the more they follow partisan cues (1) or simply drop out of participating. Declining complexity in arguments means a growing mismatch between the simple solutions offered by political leaders and real complex problems. This decline combines with post-truth politics and the displacement of facts and evidence by the felt truth of “cultural cognition,” in which social identity conditions opinion, as seen clearly on climate change.

…



Here is one of the keywords in the present debates of our governments: global warming (called climate change by some to soften-muddle the concept). Even the Brexit debacle does not come near the importance of global warming and extinction of species. Can deliberative democracy make the right choice of action? We shall see... The article in Science magazine ends on sweet and sour note:

Here is one of the keywords in the present debates of our governments:(called climate change by some to soften-muddle the concept). Even the Brexit debacle does not come near. Can deliberative democracy make the right choice of action? We shall see... The article in Science magazine ends on sweet and sour note: Broader positive deliberative change can come about in several ways. The Irish case shows that faltering trust in government and public disaffection can incentivize governments to engage in citizen deliberation in order to legitimate policy change. Alternatively, massive societal protests can induce governments to offer citizen dialogues, as in the case of the “Stuttgart 21” project to rebuild a train station in the central city. These moments can pave the way for sustainable deliberative innovations; the conflicts surrounding Stuttgart 21 led to official guidelines in Baden-Württemberg stipulating that citizen deliberation is compulsory in the context of large infrastructural projects. Responding to their failure to either overcome social problems or cope with the negative effects of economic development, governments sometimes constitutionalize (in India) or promote (in China) local deliberative exercises that have the potential to further broad dissemination of deliberative norms.

It is rare that deliberative development happens spontaneously in such cases. The prospects for benign deployment are good to the degree that deliberative scholars and practitioners have established relationships with political leaders and publics—as opposed to being turned to in desperation in a crisis. Examples here include the aforementioned Irish constitutional convention and Healthy Democracy Oregon, which runs the review process we described earlier.

The citizenry is quite capable of sound deliberation. But deliberative democratization will not just happen. Much remains to be done in refining the findings of the field and translating them into political practice. That political reconstruction itself would ideally be deliberative and democratic, involving social science but also competent citizens and leaders in broad-ranging political renewal.







People can deliver but will they be allowed to? Here in Australia, the polarisation of ideas and confusion is such that though 80 per cent of people did not want a perfectly good stadium to be demolished and replaced by a “new” one, the citizenry got shafted by the (NSW) government nonetheless. And due to other factors bundled with the process of choices, the said rotten government that should have been booted out has been voted back in by the people.

The said (NSW) government also destroyed the local councils, to bypass the citizens' opposition to some wasteful infrastructure projects — and eliminated consultation altogether, apart from showing vague plans that had no resemblance to the final outcome. You could object till you’d be blue in the face, going to useless meetings and rattling the chandeliers, and I suspect the government took your name down should you protest too loud, and placed you on the black list.



And, will people want to participate at a meeting of 20,000 bods? Nuremberg rally here we come… In the West, individualism is thrown like burley, as a panacea upon the masses, by the elites, in order to avoid exactly that: deliberative associative democracy that would interfere with the elite's political bullshit. In Australia, the media is also part of the con trick, by providing false information or incomplete information, and basically not doing its job.

The problems of deliberation are numerous. How long can we afford to publicly discuss the issue of "climate change" considering that we’ve been tackling this subject for more than 30 years. On the subject of the war against Saddam, the government lied and the media did not do its job.

For example in order to save the planet from global warming (or at least reduce the damage), we need to turn to green renewable carbon-neutral energy, thus stop digging fossil fuels. This is rule #1. The why is easy to explain if we pay attention, though there is a mountainous amount of denialist bullshit muddying the acceptance of the real information — which is explain how soon we should act. Now is it. And now to the how:



Considering that our Western economies rely at least on 95 per cent on burning fossil fuels, we have a major problem with conflicting views on how and how not to. Local communities that have been relying on digging coal, one way or the other, have to find alternative employment. Basket weaving has limited appeal. Under this deliberation of what we HAVE TO DO, we could slowly (or fast enough) phase out the existing coal mines, phase out coal power, BUT NOT OPEN NEW ONES SUCH AS ADANI, in Queensland. This mine is ridiculous, but then our governments get delusions about employing people with hard hats for profit…



So far, we know that most people are against developing a mine like Adani. This makes no sense for the future — but the governments and their counterparts want this “development” (a disaster on the global warming front) as to show the biggest coal mine in the world, meaning the biggest hole in our head. It’s insane.



So, so far, China that we poopoo all the time for not knowing really the way China works (but love it because the Chinese buy our stuff) is ahead of us in deliberative democracy. So is India apparently. Meanwhile, the more informed and intelligent we think we are, the more we become confused, and we don’t know the various levels at which deliberative democracy can be corrupted by its own participants' ignorance.



The more knowledge about issues is essential, such as why we should be favouring public transport versus building tunnels for car traffic — traffic that we should be able to suspect will demand MORE awkward car parks that won’t be able to absorb nor speed up the extra traffic anyway, and this new road system will become obsolete in 30 years, as a full ban on burning fossil fuel comes into effect when the temperature of the planet suddenly jumps three degrees Celsius above our average, in a year. It could happen.



The shit will hit the fan but we don't know when. But we know we should act now. But we won’t unless there is a revolution? Is a revolution, deliberative democracy?



Heads should roll...



Image at top: mischief by Gus Leonisky. Original monkeys by Banksy and latest protest by naked people about Brexit... People can deliver but will they be allowed to? Here in Australia, thethat though 80 per cent of people did not want a perfectly good stadium to be demolished and replaced by a “new” one, the citizenry got shafted by the (NSW) government nonetheless. And, the said rotten government that should have been booted out has been voted back in by the people.The said (NSW) government also destroyed the local councils, to bypass the citizens' opposition to some wasteful infrastructure projects — and eliminated consultation altogether, apart from showing vague plans that had no resemblance to the final outcome. You could object till you’d be blue in the face, going to useless meetings and rattling the chandeliers, and I suspect the government took your name down should you protest too loud, and placed you on the black list.And, will people want to participate at a meeting of 20,000 bods? Nuremberg rally here we come… In the West, individualism is thrown like burley, as a panacea upon the masses, by the elites, in order to avoid exactly that:that would interfere with the elite's political bullshit. In Australia, the media is also part of the con trick, by providing false information or incomplete information, and basically not doing its job.The problems of deliberation are numerous. How long can we afford to publicly discuss the issue of "climate change" considering that we’ve been tackling this subject for more than 30 years. On the subject of the war against Saddam, the government lied and the media did not do its job.For example in(or at least reduce the damage), we need to turn to green renewable carbon-neutral energy, thus stop digging fossil fuels.The why is easy to explain if we pay attention, though there is a mountainous amount of denialist bullshit muddying the acceptance of the real information — which is complicated to say the least . the hard questions that arise next are when and how. The when is also easy to determine though is is less obvious to. Now is it. And now to theConsidering that our Western economies rely at least on 95 per cent on burning fossil fuels, we have a major problem with conflicting views on how and how not to. Local communities that have been relying on digging coal, one way or the other, have to find alternative employment. Basket weaving has limited appeal. Under this deliberation of what we HAVE TO DO, we could slowly (or fast enough) phase out the existing coal mines, phase out coal power,, in Queensland. This mine is ridiculous, but then our governments get delusions about employing people with hard hats for profit…So far, we know that. This makes no sense for the future — but the governments and their counterparts want this “development” (a disaster on the global warming front) as to show the biggest coal mine in the world, meaning. It’s insane.So, so far,that we poopoo all the time for not knowing really the way China works (but love it because the Chinese buy our stuff) is. So is India apparently. Meanwhile, the more informed and intelligent we think we are, the more we become confused, and we don’t know the various levels at which deliberative democracy can be corrupted by its own participants' ignorance.The more knowledge about issues is essential, such as why we should be favouring public transport versus building tunnels for car traffic — traffic that we should be able to suspect will demand MORE awkward car parks that won’t be able to absorb nor speed up the extra traffic anyway, and this new road system will become obsolete in 30 years, as a full ban on burning fossil fuel comes into effect when the temperature of the planet suddenly jumps three degrees Celsius above our average, in a year. It could happen.The shit will hit the fan but we don't know when. But we know we should act now. But we won’t unless there is a revolution? Is a revolution, deliberative democracy?Heads should roll...Image at top: mischief by Gus Leonisky. Original monkeys by Banksy and latest protest by naked people about Brexit...
