Jet Airways unemployment crisis: 'Same old story, companies get bankrupt, promoters dont'

Jet Airways aircraft parked at Mumbai's CSJM Airport (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: As many as 20,000 employees of Jet Airways are on the verge of losing their jobs after the 25-year-old airline owned by promoter Naresh Goyal went belly-up. Employees of the airline staged protests on Saturday, demanding that they are paid their due salaries. On the same day, the board of Jet Airways met and urged public sector lender State Bank of India (SBI) to infuse Rs 1,500 crore as emergency funding to revive the airline.

While experts claim that the chances of the airline returning to its former glory are bleak, the question of what will happen to the airline's employees remains to be answered. Reports have also suggested that one of the lenders US EXIM bank has recalled its Rs 2,000 crore loan to Jet Airways. Other lenders have threatened to repossess the aircraft owned by the airline whose promoter Naresh Goel has been allowed to walk scot-free without any liabilities to the public sector banks or employees of his own company.

#JetAirwaysCrisis | If #NareshGoyal had the money to buy the airline, why didn't use it to pay the debts? Did he dump India with a bad airline only to come back after the debt was restructured by SBI? Is anyone looking out for the interest of the 20,000 employees? @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/LbkyEObnSk — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 16, 2019

Speaking exclusively to Mirror Now, members of the National Aviators Guild, a pilot union body said that they had a six-hour long meeting with the chief executive officer (CEO) of Jet Airways on Tuesday. "The management is trying very hard to convince the SBI to release the funds," said one of the members adding that the board is considering suspension of operations if they fail to acquire emergency funding from lenders. As per the reports, while most of the ground staff and back office employees have not been paid their salaries for the past month, the situation is much grimmer for pilots and engineers who have not been paid their dues for the past three-and-a-half months.

.@fayedsouza asks BJP's Bhaskar Ghosh: How was #NareshGoyal allowed to leave the country? Why was he allowed to get away scot-free? Where were all the 'Chowkidars'? pic.twitter.com/D6Gh881eSH — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 16, 2019

Around Tuesday evening, the Civil Aviation Secretary put out a statement claiming that Jet Airways has requested an emergency funding of Rs 400 crore from lenders. Meanwhile, Economic Times Editor Arijit Burman told Mirror Now that this is "the same old story where companies get bankrupt and promoters don't." Former Director of defunct airline Kingfisher Parvez Damania said that no one would pay a fortune for an airline which has no slots, no flying permits, 5 ATRs, and 2 Boeings because it is easier to start a new airline.

Taxpayers' money is a bottomless pit they keep reaching into to help their 'friends'. When we talk about farm loan waivers, everybody grinds their teeth saying, 'how can we forgive loans of the poor farmers?' but fat cats like #NareshGoyal are allowed to go to London@fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/QRXTiLGptY — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 16, 2019

Meanwhile, defending the stance of the central government and the finance ministry which owns the PSUs which lent the money to Jet Airways promoter Naresh Goyal, Bharatiya Janata Party's (BJP) spokesperson Bhaskar Ghosh said that constructive steps are being taken to deal with the situation and the focus is on restructuring and reviving the airline.
