Kartarpur corridor on course, India-Pak technical meet held

vinaymishra188@gmail.com

Ravi Dhaliwal

Tribune News Service

Dera Baba Nanak, April 16

India and Pakistan today held their second technical meeting to discuss modalities for the Kartarpur corridor.

The focus was on construction of a 100-metre bridge over a sand dune on the Indian side and measures to ensure no flooding during monsoon.

The two-hour meeting was held at the Zero Line.

Ten officials from the Pakistan Frontier Works Organisation, Ministry of Religious Affairs and Foreign Ministry participated in the meeting, while the Indian side was represented by Akhil Saxena of the Land Ports Authority of India, Maneesh Rastogi and YP Jadon of the National Highway Authority of India and officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Punjab Drainage Department.

Pilgrims were not allowed to pay obeisance at the raised platform from where they can view the Kartarpur Sahib shrine across the border.

After the meeting, Cabinet Minister and Dera Baba Nanak MLA Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa said “now there was every possibility that the corridor will see the light of day before the 550th birth anniversary celebrations of Guru Nanak Dev that will commence in November”.

“Earlier, when farmers protested against the acquisition of their land, I had some doubts about the project completion. Now, I am sure the work will be put on fast track,” Randhawa added.

The coordinates of the place where two roads — one leading from Dera Baba Nanak to the International Border (IB) and the other from the IB to the Kartarpur shrine — will meet and fencing of the corridor were also discussed at the meeting.

The first technical meeting was held at the same venue on March 19. An official said 70 per cent of the work across the border had been completed.

Will be completed in time: Pak president

Amritsar: Pakistan’s President Arif-ur-Rehman Alvi has assured a Sikh delegation that work on the corridor will be executed within the time- frame. He told the Bhai Mardana Memorial Kirtan Darbar Society that large-scale celebrations had been planned on the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev.
