Posing as customers, Iranian couple loots currency exchanges in T’vm; arrested

Attingal: Iranian couple who tried to steal money from a foreign currency exchange establishment were arrested by the police the other day. Sirajudin Haider (57) and his wife Hendari Hosna (53) were arrested on for attempted robbery. They have been scamming people in many parts of Kerala including Attingal and Thiruvananthapuram.

On 17 September 2018, at around 1 in the afternoon, the couple had robbed from V.S.Associates, situated in Chirayinkeezhu Road, in Attingal under the ownership of Sunilkumar. They had reached the office asking for Indian rupees in exchange of 1000 dirhams. They stole 7500 Saudi Riyal and 75 Kuwait dinar when the employee had gone inside to get their money.

Following up on Sunilkumar’s complaint, the police found out that a similar robbery was executed on 18 May 2018, at Pixel Graphics, an establishment near Thiruvananthapuram Medical College which is under the ownership of Anilkumar. American dollars equivalent to Rs 30,000 was stolen from here. CCTV footages were collected based on which the police had investigated the case. But they weren’t able to nab the culprits. Even after putting a lot of effort into tracking them, they were nowhere to be found.

On Tuesday, the Thiruvananthapuram Rural District SP B Ashokan had received information that the foreigners were spotted in Ernakulum-Angamaly region. The Rural Shadow Team along with the Angamaly police conducted an investigation in the hotel where the couple were alleged to be found. They were arrested from there.

Saudi riyal equivalent to Rs 2.5 lakh was stolen on 19 October 2017 from Lavanya Shopping Centre which is situated opposite Angamaly private bus stand. The crime was committed by Sirajudin Haider and his friend.

For the same, Sirajudin Haider was arrested by the Kothamangalam police and was presented before the court. Hendari Hosna was taken by the police to Attingal were her arrest was registered and thereafter produced before the court.

A team under Attingal Dy.S.P Famous Varghese, including Inspector Sibichan Joseph, S.I Maaraya Shyam, Balakrishnan Aashari, A.S.I Pradeep along with senior civil police officers from the shadow team B.Dileep, Mahesh, Shinod, Udhayakumar, female C.P.O Safeej had arrested the culprits.

Sirajudin and Hendari are under remand in Muvattupuzha and Attakulangara jails respectively. It was found out that the culprits have also stayed in other places such as Goa and Mumbai. The police have informed that the culprits will be taken into custody and further investigated. They also stated that it is important to find out if they are in any way related to other similar robberies that have taken place in different places.
