Even if you bathe 100 times a day, you will remain a black buffalo: BJP leader takes a low dig at Kumaraswamy

Former BJP MLA Raju Kage. | Photo Credit: ANI

Bengaluru: A former Bharatiya Janata Party leader from Karnataka stooped to a new low after he called his state Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy ‘a black buffalo’ on Wednesday during a campaign rally in the run-up to the ongoing Lok Sabha elections.

Former BJP Member of Legislative Assembly Raju Kage also said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi is “fair and handsome” because he changes his outfits regularly.

“You say the Prime Minister changes outfits again and again. Arre, he is fair and handsome, that’s why he changes constantly. But, even if you (Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy) bathe 100 times a day, you will remain a black buffalo,” Kage said on Wednesday.

Former BJP MLA Raju Kage: You say Prime Minister changes outfits again & again. Arre, he is fair & handsome, that's why he changes constantly. But even if you (Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy) bathe 100 times a day, you will remain a black buffalo pic.twitter.com/NF4N3eBR4R — ANI (@ANI) April 17, 2019

This, however, is not the first time a racial abuse, or for that matter a scathing attack, has been hurled at Kumaraswamy. Last month, a teacher in Bengaluru was sacked for likening the Karnataka CM with an earthworm.

In its question paper for eighth standard students, the school had asked whether a farmer’s friend was an earthworm or CM Kumaraswamy. The question also gave the option of BJP leader and former chief minister BS Yeddyurappa.

HDK is also not shy from controversies. Recently, he accused the BJP of posting a false video of him and lashed out at the saffron party for trying to malign his image. The BJP had posted a video on Twitter wherein the Karnataka chief minister can be heard saying that people who do not have food to eat join the armed forces.

Voting in Karnataka is scheduled to be held in 14 constituencies on April 18, while the rest of the 14 seats will go to polls on April 23.
