Metro workers on strike for pay asked to resign

All they have been offered is a month’s pay out of the five that are due; employer Al Fara’a insists entire amount will be cleared subsequently



Contrary to their assurances, Hindustan Construction Company Ltd (HCC) and Al Fara’a Infraproject, the joint venture (JV) working on the Pune Metro rail project, has shown the door to the 100 employees protesting the non-payment of salaries in the past five months. On Thursday, the JV’s project manager asked the beleaguered workers to ac



The marching orders were issued by Anil Birajdar, the project manager, after he’d called the employees for a meeting at the Metro office (functioning out of a container) in Vallabh Nagar. While the employees were told not ask too many questions and just accept what was being offered, they were told that the predicament was the outcome of the contracted companies not getting their funds from Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation Ltd (MahaMetro).



The move is in sharp contrast to the resolution within a month, the spokespersons of both the companies talked of on Wednesday, when Mirror took up the issue for the story ‘100 MahaMetro employees protest unpaid salary of five months, strike work” (published on April 19, 2019). It is also in stark variance to the series of assurances given by the companies over the past months to the workers who cover a wide ranging job profiles.



Understandably, the cornered workers are petrified. On one hand they do not want to lose out on their dues, on the other, they are insecure that once out of this job, they may lose favour with the construction industry for which their services are tailored. Yet S Marne, one of the affected employees of HCC-Al Fara’a explained, “Most of our expertise is related to Metro work in the construction industry. If they terminate us, it is unlikely we will find employment with any other enterprise in the field. Notwithstanding this we’ve decided to stay firm on our decision to fight for our rights and retrieve all our dues immediately.”



Scoffing at what is being offered another brave-heart from the group, Abhijeet B asked, “What will a month’s salary do for us? We’ve worked hard at our job and earned the money due to us. They’re just compelling us to resign, though we are willing to come to a settlement and continue working on the Pune metro project.”



In an e-mailed response to Mirror queries, Al Fara’a spokesperson claimed, “The employee salaries for one month have been paid with immediate effect. The issue of of the remaining outstanding will be resolved within a fortnight. We are committed to pay all our employees and any rumours contrary to this position are strongly refuted. We have received requests from some workers, who wish to quit. The full and final settlement of these employees will be done as per the company policies."



Meanwhile, clearly unwilling to be drawn into the internal issues of its contractors, MahaMetro officials have washed their hands off the fate of the 100 employees who worked on the Pune Metro project for a year now. “Our role has ended having requested Al Fara’a to release the dues to the employees. That’s as much as we could do. The ultimate decision rests with HCCAl Fara’a which are responsible for the hiring and firing of these employee,” MahaMetro’s general manager (corporate communications) Hemant Sonawane told Mirror.



He added that his prime concern is the progress of the project. “If there is any kind of disruption or delay in our work and they fail to show progress we will have to terminate the contract with them and replace them with some other company. We’ve already issued such notices to them earlier over delays and will be doing so again, shortly. We have to fulfil our commitment to have the trial run rolling by end-December.” He reiterated that MahaMetro has been paying the contracted JV in advance and has no pending dues owed to them.


