Jet shares crash ahead of auction

Jet Airways Ltd shares crashed by over 32 per cent on Thursday (April 18) amid fears about whether the grounded airline would ever fly again even as banks claimed that they "are reasonably hopeful'' of selling the airline to a new investor.

Shares of Jet Airways continued to fall for the second day in a row, plummeting by as much as 32.23 per cent on Thursday to close at Rs 163.90 on the BSE.

The company's market valuation has now eroded by a staggering Rs 1,111.14 crore to Rs 1,861.86 crore in the last two days. While banks said they are "reasonably hopeful" a bidding process for an up to 75 per cent stake in the airline will end successfully, analysts are much more sceptical. "I think the bidding process is going to fall apart," said HDFC Securities analyst Madhukar Ladha.

"Slots are being given away rapidly, dues are to be repaid to lessors, lenders, staff, and everyday it is not operating, the liability adds up. In the end when you're sitting across the table with a potential buyer, the buyer doesn't know what he is buying."

A consortium of 26 lenders led by the SBI, with 51 per cent stake in the ailing airline, has invited bids from potential suitors. "The best way forward for the survival of Jet Airways is to get the binding bids from potential investors," Jet's lenders said on Thursday, adding they are "reasonably hopeful" the bid process will be successful.

Private equity firms TPG Capital and Indigo Partners, Indian wealth fund National Investment and Infrastructure Fund (NIIF), and Etihad Airways, which already owns a minority stake in Jet, are in the running, said a source involved in the process. At its peak, Jet operated over 120 planes and well over 600 daily flights.

The airline, which has around 16,500 employees, has in recent weeks been forced to cancel hundreds of flights and to halt all flights out of India as it ran out of cash and its fleet was reduced to a mere five planes.

The carrier, reeling from a humungous Rs 8,500 crore debt burden, was tottering for weeks after failing to receive a stop-gap loan of Rs 1,500 crore from banks, as part of a rescue deal agreed in late March.

Meanwhile, about 800 Jet Airways employees and their families held a march near Parliament House in New Delhi while some 200 employees gathered at the airline's headquarters in Mumbai to push its management for answers about their future.
