Person claims he was looted of Rs15L

Ludhiana: Doraha police are investigating the case of a person who has claimed he was looted of Rs15 lakh at gunpoint near Doraha. Cops, however, have found his claims suspicious, as his story and the facts — including CCTV footage — do not add up.

Satnam Singh of Lasoi village told cops that on Thursday morning, he was going to hand over the cash to a person in Jhammat from whom he had borrowed money in order to send his wife abroad. Satnam added that when he reached Tibba Road near Doraha, a Fortuner and Innova stopped near him, and the persons in it asked him the directions towards Ludhiana. When he was telling them about the directions, he said a youth got down from one of the vehicles and pointed a gun at him, asking him to hand over his money. Satnam said as he had kept Rs15 lakh cash in the dickey of his scooter, he tried to bring it out, but the person snatched away his bag and fled from the spot.

Police officials said Satnam called the police and informed them about the incident. They added that first Ludhiana police was looking into the matter, but then he approached Doraha police, as the alleged incident had happened in their area of responsibility. Doraha SHO inspector Karnail Singh said they had checked the CCTV footage of the area, and they found Satnam riding his scooter alone, with no person confronting him. The official added that Satnam’s parents told police their son had earlier disappeared with Rs32-33 lakh of theirs without their permission.

The police officer said they were collecting facts and investigating the matter, and things would soon become clearer. He added that Satnam told them that as his wife was refused a visa by the agency concerned, he was going to return the money to the person from whom he had borrowed it. The SHO said the person to whom he had to return the money, however, had recorded his statement on suspicion, where Satnam was heard saying to him that he would come and hand him a cheque, but the lender asked him not to come, and instead he would collect the same on his own. The cop, however, added that Satnam later said he was going to hand over cash to the person from whom he had borrowed the money.

Karnail said Satnam’s father expressed doubts about how his son could be carrying so much cash, when they did not have that much money lying at home. The official, therefore, said the entire matter looked suspicious, and Satnam could be fooling both his parents as well as the lender.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
