RED FM helps Dalelpur citizens to vote this General Election 2019

93.5 RED FM, one of the largest and most awarded private radio networks in India aims at creating awareness around voting this general election with its national campaign ‘Ab Watan Dabayega Button’. As a part of this campaign, Red FM reached out to the residents of an abandoned village Dalelpur which had boycotted the General Election, 2019 and convinced them to cast their vote.

The villagers rue years of ignorance by the system for lack of proper connectivity to their village and had announced to boycott the Lok Sabha election. To understand the root cause of the problem, RED FM’s Morning No.1 RJ Raunac, who is the 'Youth Ambassador' of Delhi, appointed by Election Commission of India, decided to help the villagers to be a part of the election. RED FM has arranged for transportation for the villagers on the day of the election.

Aastha, a local resident of Dalelpur village as well as a national level award winner in power-lifting, had lost all hopes as her village lacked basic necessities. Listening to her story on RED FM, supporters from all over the country joined hands to help her. Mukesh, Mr. India 2012 from Dronacharaya Institute volunteered to offer a year-long free training to Aastha and Mr. Rahul Verma from Uday Foundation offered to bear one year of food and accommodation expenses to her.

Dalelpur village which consists of 250 residents in Gautam Budh Nagar is very poorly connected to other cities.

Spreading awareness on voting, Nisha Narayanan, COO, RED FM, said, “At RED FM, we want every individual to take equal responsibility to be able to choose their leaders of tomorrow. We have partnered with the Election Commission of India to increase and encourage people to enroll themselves for the elections. RED FM has always stood up to bring a positive change in the society through its campaigns. This initiative endeavored to extend a helping hand to the people of Dalelpur and encouraged them to take part in the General Elections 2019.”

N. Singh , D.M. of Gautam Buddh Nagar said, “I thank RED FM and RJ Raunac for bringing up the issue and appreciate how RED FM played a vital role in the voter awareness campaign by encouraging Dalelpur villagers to begin voting. It was truly a remarkable job empowered with a positive and change-making thought for the nation.”

While the nation is observing massive political campaigns, RED FM has tied up with the Election Commission of India for this national initiative. The initiative 'Ab Watan Dabayega Button' aims at creating awareness around voting and helps in creating a milestone voter turnout. The initiative will specially focus on educating and resolving queries of youngsters who feel voting doesn't make a difference. The objective is to keep in mind the first-time voters - people who have just turned 18 or people who haven't voted despite crossing 18 because they think voting doesn't make a difference. RED FM will speak out loud about the fact that every vote counts in building a better and brighter future for India.
