Two NMMC hospital doctors suspended

Father of 27-year-old who died due to negligence goes on hunger strike

The Navi Mumbai Municipal Commissioner has suspended two doctors attached to the NMMC hospital in Vashi for alleged negligence that caused the death of a 27-year-old man on March 28. The man’s father started a hunger strike on Friday morning, seeking strict action against the doctors.

Municipal Commissioner N. Ramaswami said the doctors, Shareef Hussain Tadvi and Prabha Nandakishor Sawant, did not attend to the patient in time. “There was no negligence as to the quality of the treatment provided, but the doctors attended to the patient late. An internal inquiry has been initiated and as per its result, further course of action will be decided. It could be some disciplinary action or termination depending on the report,” he said.

Around 6.15. a.m. on March 28, Vicky Ingale, a Turbhe resident who worked as junior clerk with Navi Mumbai Municipal Transport (NMMT), was admitted to the NMMC hospital after feeling uneasy and vomiting.

His father, Rajendra Ingale, said, “The doctors took an ECG and said it was normal. They gave him two injections and told him he was fit to go home. By evening, his uneasiness had increased and he had chest pain, so we rushed him back to the hospital. After a few hours, we were told that he had died of a heart attack. If only the doctors had kept him under observation and checked him thoroughly, he would be alive today. He was to get married on May 19.”

Mr. Ingale, a committee member of the NMMT, had subsequently written to Mr. Ramaswami, demanding action against the doctors, failing which he would start a hunger strike at Vashi Shivaji chowk. On Friday, as he started his strike, he said, “The suspension is not enough. We want justice. They should be terminated and criminal proceedings should be initiated. This is not negligence, this is murder. They should be booked for murder. Unless the right action is taken, I will not break my strike.”

He also said the NMMC hospital should replace all existing machinery with new ones, and start a generic medical store in the vicinity. “There are many cases in which patients have died due to negligence of the doctors. The NMMC should look into all those cases and take proper action against the doctors,” Mr. Ingale said.

In his letter, he had named seven people as responsible for his son’s death, of whom the two doctors have been suspended.
