Yogendra Yadav urges city’s youth to unite in a nationwide agitation

After bringing farmers to the centerstage by organising rallies highlighting the agrarian crisis the country has been facing of late, academic-turned-political activist Yogendra Yadav now aims to mobilise the nation’s youth to strategise a new form of movement to critique the current political climate prevailing in India.While unemployment has gripped the entire nation, youths of the country have shown interest to work at various levels to address the issues of job loss, underpayment and gaps in the existing education system. Urging such youngsters to come forward and organize themselves to launch a pan-India agitation on the lines of the recently held farmers’ protests, Yadav was seen speaking to the youth population in the city.The former psephologist was addressing a young crowd from Pune and other parts of Maharashtra, employed as teachers, government officials, cops, etc., at SM Joshi Auditorium on Friday. The dialogue was organised by Swarajya Sena and backed by other youth organisations working in fields such as teachers’ recruitment drive, competitive examination and looking into problems of engineering graduate students. The event saw a turnout from youth organisations such as Maharashtra Public Commission Service (MPSC) Students Right, Diploma in Teacher Education (DTEd) and Bachelor of Education Association, AAP youth Association, among others.Elaborating on the issue, Yadav said, “While at least 22 lakh position in central and state government jobs are vacant, the government has given a stay on the recruitment drive. Percentage of complete unemployment in our country has increased from 1 per cent to 6 per cent in the last few years. Launching an agitation akin to the farmers’ protests is the only option left.”Yadav also commented on the current election scenario. He said, “The elections are announced just as a ritual. The Election Commission of India is not presiding over the elections but the election management of India, which is at work.”He also mentioned that apart from unemployment, the second major issue to plague the country is the current education system.He said, “The government is just worried about few central institutes, wherein only 5 per cent of the entire youth population studies. Government schools are shutting down and private enterprises are taking their places. The condition of state universities is also deteriorating by the day. Till now, students from all strata were able to receive education in government-run institutes, but that format is slowly being erased.”Mahesh Bade from MPSC Students Right said, “Every Indian state has its students fighting the flawed system, that sees delay in conducting exams and stay on recruitment drives. We are planning to gather all these groups of youths across states and launch a pan-India agitation. This will help the youth to come together and exercise their power.”Santosh Magar from Teachers’ association said, “Our agenda is to bring the youth together. Every state is cowing under the pressure of unemployment and looking for better educational opportunities.”Parmeshwar Ingole, an aspiring teacher, said, “The budget allotted to farmers was raised from Rs 45-50 crore to Rs 75,000 crore after they voiced their protests. This shows how powerful united voices can be.”Yadav also pointed out that while agitation is important, generating employment and knowledge are equally imperative for sustainable and permanent solution for these social evils.
