Incarcerated Kashmiri leader Yaseen Malik critically ill, hospitalized in Delhi

Srinagar (Web Desk) - The illegally detained Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, Muhammad Yasin Malik, was admitted in a hospital in New Delhi in a serious condition after his health deteriorated during hunger strike in the custody of India’s infamous National Investigation Agency.

According to Kashmir Media Service, this was revealed by Yasin Malik’s family members at a press conference in Srinagar, today. They said that the JKLF Chief was on hunger strike since 10th April and was admitted to a hospital in a serious condition four days ago but they were informed about the same, today. Yasin Malik is in NIA’s custody in New Delhi in connection with a false case registered against him.

A JKLF spokesman in a statement issued in Srinagar, today, said that Yasin Malik’s counsel was to meet him today as per Delhi court orders but was yester night contacted and informed by the NIA officials that the proposed meeting was cancelled. However, he said, today in the morning, the counsel was again contacted by the officials and asked to come to Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital in Delhi where he found that Yasin Malik in a serious condition. He said that the JKLF would stage a five day long sit-in from 28th of April outside the Indian High Commission in London, to register protest against the NIA’s callous attitude towards Yasin Malik.

Meanwhile, spontaneous strike was observed in Maisuma area of Srinagar, today, soon after the news about the deterioration of the of Muhammad Yasin Malik spread.

The Joint Resistance Leadership in a statement in Srinagar expressing serious concern over the deteriorating health of Muhammad Yasin Malik said that entire Kashmiri population was worried over the condition of JKLF Chief and that it was the responsibility of Indian government to ensure his treatment, wellbeing and safety. The Chairman of Hurriyat forum, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, in a statement said that the well being of Muhammad Yasin Malik was the responsibility of the Indian authorities under whom he was detained and slapped with draconian law, Public Safety Act. The Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, and the Chairman of Muslim Conference, Shabbir Ahmed Dar, in their statements also expressed deep shock over the declining health of Muhammad Yasin Malik in NIA custody.

On the other hand, protests erupted in Trehgam town of Kupwara district, today, after Indian Army soldiers thrashed a shopkeeper and damaged a vehicle. The family members of a missing youth, Riyaz Ahmed, of Tral area of Pulwama have sought the help of the people to trace him. Riyaz has been missing for the past several days.

The High Court of occupied Kashmir quashed the detention orders under draconian law, Public Safety Act, issued against three Kashmiri youth of Bandipora and directed the authorities to release them forthwith.
