Now or never for Ranes in Konkan

Ratnagiri-Sindhudurg constituency

Narayan Rane

Nilesh Rane at a rally in Sawantwadi with a refrigerator, which is his party symbol

Narayan Rane’s name is akin to a political party in, but his family is neck and neck with the Sena on several important issues; both claim they have the backing of young first-time voters.The poll fight in the Ratnagiri-Sindhudurg Lok Sabha constituency is set to be ‘makeor-break’ for former Chief Ministerand his family. Rane’s son Nilesh is fighting the polls from his father’s Maharashtra Swabhiman Party (MSP) against the sitting Shiv Sena MP Vinayak Raut. The Congress is in the fray as well and has fielded the controversial candidate Navinchandra Bandivadekar. A prestigious seat for the family, a loss here could spell the beginning of the end for Narayan Rane and give the Sena a boost.The two districts of Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg constitute the southern part of the Konkan region and were once the stronghold of Narayan Rane, who was the chief minister in the Sena-BJP government in 1999. He later joined the Sena and then became a minister in the Congress-NCP government. Now a BJP-nominated Rajya Sabha MP, he is a strong critic of the Sena and is banking on his son Nilesh to retain the hold in the constituency, where five of the six Assembly seats are currently with the Sena and one is with Nitesh, Rane’s younger son who contested from a Congress ticket.One of the key issues in the constituency that may favour the Sena is the scrapping of the Nanar refinery project. Just before the elections, the Shiv Sena formed an alliance with the BJP and scrapping of project in Ratnagiri was one of Sena’s conditions for offering support. There are also the issues of unemployment, lack of tourism infrastructure and mechanised LED-assisted fishing that has hit the local fishing communities in the two coastal districts.While the Sena is banking on Hindutva and the Modi factor, Rane is banking on his personal network of aides and former party workers. Rane, in fact, has made the elections a personal contest. For close to a month, he and his sons have been campaigning in the region, holding sabhas and meetings. For Sena’s candidate Vinayak Raut, Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray and Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Thackeray have held rallies in a show of strength. While Uddhav held a meeting in Devrukh on Wednesday, Aaditya held a meeting in Vengurla on Saturday. Narayan Rane’s final poll rally was held on Saturday in the family bastion of Sawantwadi.Political analyst Alimiya Kazi said that while the Sena will benefit from the Modi factor, Narayan Rane’s personal clout and influence has kept his son in the race. “There is clearly no Modi wave at all, but one can’t deny that Modi factor might still play a role. The people are divided and not really enthused. Over the last 50 years, the elections have been fought over the same issues. The Nanar project has been scrapped but many fear that it will make a comeback in some way or the other after the elections,” Kazi said.Vinayak Raut, however, is also pitching to fight against unemployment in the region. “We have a lot of young voters. Now not many youngsters are immigrating to Mumbai for work, as there are a lot of local employment opportunities. We are also working on bringing new industry here but not at the cost of the environment and the will of the people. Looking at the increasing area under sugarcane cultivation, a sugar mill is the need of the hour. We are also working on building coastal and eco-tourism for the region. The people of Konkan won’t promote politics of fear and will vote for the Sena,” Raut said.While Raut has campaigned across the region, focussing on the Sena’s network of functionaries, Rane has set up a team of personal aides and is monitoring the election from booth to booth. Across the region, offices of the MSP are seen with photos of the Rane family.Nilesh said that the sitting MP had a disastrous performance and that people want change. “The sitting MP hasn’t done anything in the last five years. He hasn’t done anything but catching elephants. We have earned the respect of the people of Konkan. No one can remove the Ranes from the Konkan,” Nilesh said, raising an emotional pitch at a rally in Sawantwadi.At the rally, Narayan Rane also hit out at the Sena. “The Sena chief doesn’t say anything about development. He didn’t even know how many people live here and what they need. They have 25 years of power in the BMC. Why didn’t they make Mumbai into Shanghai? He has no vision,” Rane said.According to observers, these elections would be a turning point for the Rane family. “This is perhaps the most important election for the Ranes. It’s a neck and neck fight and will go down to the last booth. The Sena seems to have an edge in Ratnagiri, but the Ranes are looking to make up in Sindhudurg. If they don’t win, their political obituary will be written and the loss will have a big impact on the state assembly elections for them. The Rane factor has been for long a main part of the political lexicon here. This year will decide if it will remain in Konkan’s political dictionary or not,” said Pranav Polekar a local journalist.
