Congress used to give loans to its billionaire friends through phone banking: PM Modi

New Delhi:

PM Modi will hold public meetings in Maharashtra and Rajasthan. Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi will hold public meetings at Raebareli. Congress president Rahul Gandhi will hold rallies in Amethi, Tiloi and Salon. BJP chief Amit Shah will campaign in Bengal today.

Here are the LIVE updates:

23:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi: Boxer Vijender Singh to contest from South Delhi Lok Sabha seat as Congress candidate.

21:29 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) fields Gautam Gambhir from East Delhi, Meenakshi Lekhi from New Delhi.

21:28 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Samajwadi Party (SP) releases a list of two candidates for Lok Sabha Elections 2019. Sanjay Chauhan to contest from Chandauli and Shalini Yadav to contest from Varanasi Lok Sabha constituencies.

20:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In West Bengal: Election Commission registers 2 FIRs against Union Minister and BJP candidate from Asansol Babul Supriyo for continuing to play campaign song despite denial of permission by EC and for snatching the camera of an EC official who was video recording his rally

18:43 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi: Prominent Hair Stylist Jawed Habib joins Bharatiya Janata Party, says 'Aaj tak main baalon ka chowkidar tha, aaj mein desh ka chowkidar ban gaya hoon'.

18:34 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In AAP candidate Atishi files nomination from East Delhi constituency. Delhi Deputy CM Manish Sisodia also present.

17:26 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The previous government used to give loans to their billionaire friends through phone banking and our government is giving loans to the poor, tribal and self-employed youth: PM Modi.

17:18 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Youngsters who are voting for the first time in this 21st century elections also have the responsibilty of raising glory of our Mother India: PM Modi in Udaipur.

16:18 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress releases list of candidates for 3 Parliamentary constituencies in Uttar Pradesh. Yogesh Shukla from Prayagraj, Chandresh Upadhyay from Domariyaganj and Bhal Chand Yadav (in place of Parvez Khan) from Sant Kabir Nagar.

16:08 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Union Minister Harsh Vardhan and AAP's Pankaj Gupta file nominations from Chandni Chowk constituency in Delhi.

16:08 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Odisha: Biju Janata Dal (BJD) candidate from Pipili assembly constituency, Pradeep Maharathy arrested by police in connection with an attack on election flying squad at his residential premises yesterday.

14:47 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Mamata didi has sensed her defeat in first two phases and with this frustration she is making false accusations on election commission and opposition. Irony is that the Mamata didi who never respected democracy is now talking about democracy, says Amit Shah.

13:52 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Ram Charitra Nishad to contest Lok Sabha polls from Mirzapur on Samajwadi Party ticket.

13:39 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In "Democracy here is in danger due to TMC's hooliganism and anarchism. Youth here is unemployed and no one wants to invest here as whenever someone tries to invest, TMC goons harass them," says Yogi Adityanath.

13:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP government snatched whatever we gave to India, says Rahul Gandhi in Amethi.

13:12 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Former BJP MP from Hamirpur, Suresh Chandel joined Congress in presence of party President Rahul Gandhi.



13:11 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Actor-dancer Sapna Chaudhary during election campaigning for Manoj Tiwari: I have not joined the party (BJP), I'm here because Manoj Tiwari ji is a good friend of mine.



Actor-dancer Sapna Chaudhary during election campaigning for Manoj Tiwari: I have not joined the party (BJP), I'm here because Manoj Tiwari ji is a good friend of mine. pic.twitter.com/V2si0m1Xpb

— ANI (@ANI) April 22, 2019



13:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi on response to terror attacks: They (UPA) cried, we hit terrorists in their den.

13:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Some experience electric current the moment I talk about dynasty, national security: PM Modi.

13:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Politics is done not only to become MP or MLA, it is done to take country on path of development: Rajnath Singh.

12:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi BJP chief Manoj tiwari with Sapna Choudhary before filing for nomination from North-east Delhi on Monday.



12:43 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP Lok Sabha candidate from North East Delhi, Manoj Tiwari holds a roadshow in Delhi. Union Minister Vijay Goel and actor-dancer Sapna Chaudhary also present.



BJP Lok Sabha candidate from North East Delhi, Manoj Tiwari holds a roadshow in Delhi. Union Minister Vijay Goel and actor-dancer Sapna Chaudhary also present. pic.twitter.com/aFXJDQuTKA

— ANI (@ANI) April 22, 2019



12:27 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Bua Bhatija think that Bengal is their property, says BJP chief Amit Shah.

12:27 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Mamata increased allowance of the Imaams. Why isn't she giving the allowance to the priest. This is nothing but a discrimination: Amit Shah.

12:27 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In First we will bring Citizenship Amendment Bill and will give citizenship to the persecuted minorities. Then, we will flush out the infiltrators. No refugee has to fear: Amit Shah.

12:17 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Jaya Prada on remarks by Abdullah (SP leader Azam Khan's son): Can't decide whether to laugh or cry, like father like son. Hadn't expected this from Abdullah. He's an educated man. Your father says 'I'm Amrapali' & you say 'I'm Anarkali,' Is that how you see women of society?

12:14 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In CPM and Congress can't fight TMC. Voting for either of them means voting for the TMC. If you vote for BJP, we will remove Mamata from West Bengal, says BJP chief Amit Shah.

12:13 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi is addressing a public meeting in Dindori, Maharashtra.

12:12 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Union Minister Dharmendra Pradhan: Naveen Babu allocated coal mine to a fake company after taking bribe of crores, it is mentioned in CBI chargesheet. Naveen Babu was enquired. That is an issue. Will Odisha stand on its feet or not, that is an issue.

12:10 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Rahul Gandhi was born in India and he holds an Indian passport, he never took citizenship of any other country. His passport, Voter-ID, and his income tax, everything is of India: KC Kaushik, lawyer of Rahul Gandhi on objections raised on Rahul's nomination.



Rahul Gandhi was born in India and he holds an Indian passport, he never took citizenship of any other country. His passport, Voter-ID, and his income tax, everything is of India: KC Kaushik, lawyer of Rahul Gandhi on objections raised on Rahul's nomination



ðŸ“¸: ANI pic.twitter.com/3AveXpiGu1

— News Nation (@NewsNationTV) April 22, 2019



12:06 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress President Rahul Gandhi files his response in Supreme court in connection with a contempt petition filed by BJP MP Meenakshi Lekhi over his statement on Rafale verdict. The Supreme Court will hear the matter on Tuesday.

11:58 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Sheila Dikshit, Former Delhi CM & Congress candidate from (NE) Delhi: I'll do my best to fulfill the responsibility given to me. I've contested from here earlier, I know the people here and they know me. We had started Metro from here, our reputation is of working for the people.



I'll do my best to fulfill the responsibility given to me. I've contested from here earlier, I know the people here and they know me. We had started Metro from here, our reputation is of working for the people, says @SheilaDikshit



ðŸ“¸: ANIhttps://t.co/kLTEbfZAZZ pic.twitter.com/9OMp7p1nAu

— News Nation (@NewsNationTV) April 22, 2019



11:55 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Dharmendra Pradhan: BJD can feel the ground slipping under its feet, so it's resorting to violence. BJP Mandal President was shot dead. BJP's MLA candidate for Bhubaneswar-Central was attacked thrice. Even Election flying squad that went to check BJD MLA's residence was attacked.

11:42 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Jannayak Janata Party fields Digvijay Chautala from Sonipat against former Haryana CM Bhupinder Singh Hooda.

11:34 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Democracy has ceased to exist in Bengal. Law and order have also failed: Amit Shah at press conference.

11:33 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Sri Lanka blasts: 2 JDS workers, vacationing in Colombo, killed in Easter tragedy. They have been identified as KG Hanumantharayappa and M Rangappa.

11:32 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Election Commission submits its report in sealed cover before the Supreme Court on Vivek Oberoi starrer biopic 'PM Narendra Modi'. SC posts the matter for further hearing on Friday, April 26 & directs that report be served to petitioner (producers of the movie).

10:55 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Narada, Saradha and Syndicate Raj corruption has marred the present day scenario in Bengal: Amit Shah.

10:54 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Mamata Banerjee says this is not Bengal’s election but Delhi’s. Yes, that’s true but it's most important for the people of Bengal: Amit Shah.

10:54 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In No possibility of PM contesting from Bengal, says Amit Shah.

12:06 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress releases list of candidates for 6 out of 7 Parliamentary constituencies in Delhi. Sheila Dikshit will be fighting from North East Delhi, Ajay Maken from New Delhi, JP Agarwal from Chandni Chowk, Arvinder Singh Lovely from East Delhi, Rajesh Lilothia from North West Delhi and Mahabal Mishra from West Delhi.

10:50 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress has fielded Sheila Dikshit against BJP's Manoj Tiwari from the North-east Delhi constituency.

10:25 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Citizenship Amendment Bill will come first, all refugees will be given citizenship, after that NRC will be made. Refugees shouldn't worry, only infiltrators should. First the CAB will come then NRC, NRC will not be for just Bengal but for the whole country, says Amit Shah in Kolkata.

10:15 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Tamil Nadu: TTV Dhinakaran-led Amma Makkal Munnetra Kazhagam has announced Mahendran as its candidate for Thiruparankundram assembly constituency in Madurai and Shahul Hameed from Aravakurichi assembly constituency in Karur. By-polls in the state will be held on May 19.

10:11 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Scared Mamata Banerjee targetting Election Commission, BJP: Amit Shah in Kolkata.

10:06 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In If someone can restore Saraswati pooja and Durga pooja again with respect, it is only the BJP: Amit Shah.

10:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) President Amit Shah in Kolkata, West Bengal: The refugees who have come from Bangladesh, be it Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, Jains, or Christians, BJP has clearly signaled in its 'sankalp patra' that we will give them citizenship.



07:47 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Poll authorities have given a permission to Raj Thackeray-led MNS to hold a rally in Mumbai South Lok Sabha constituency next week. Authorities had reportedly denied permission to the rally earlier.

07:25 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Supporters of CPI candidate from Bihar's Begusarai Lok Sabha seat Kanhaiya Kumar and agroup of locals clashed on Sunday, after the former JNUstudents' union president was shown black flags here during aroadshow, police said.

06:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi will hold public meetings at Raebareli.
