RJD Leaders Burn PM's Effigy on Lalu's Discharge from AIIMS

Patna: Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) state President Ram Chandra Purvey took part in the burning of an effigy of Prime Minister Narendra Modi to protest against the discharge of party President Lalu Prasad Yadav from All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in New Delhi where he had been receiving medical care for heart and kidney related ailments.

"There is a clear-cut conspiracy by the Narendra Modi government to get rid of our leader Lalu Prasad Yadav who was prematurely shifted from Delhi's AIIMS to Ranchi Institute of Medical Science (RIMS) despite suffering from heart and kidney issues along with hypertension and diabetes. He was in condition to be shifted to Ranchi since the Ranchi hospital is not equipped to deal with serious heart and kidney problems. The order to remove him from AIIMS obviously came from the Prime Minister who wants Shri Yadav dead," the RJD leader said.

Purvey further stated that the doctors at the Ranchi hospital had found infection in Yadav's kidney and that is why he was rushed to the nation's capital for proper treatment.

"The Modi government asserted pressure on the AIIMS officials to declare Yadav healthy so he could be sent back to Hotwar jail in Ranchi," he said adding if something happened to his boss, the NDA government at the Center will have blood in its hand.

As reported, Yadav is serving time in Ranchi jail after being convicted in a host of criminal cases related to the multi-crore rupees fodder scam in Bihar in the nineties. However, after being in the prison for only a few weeks, Yadav complained of heart and other problems and was transferred from his jail cell to the hospital in Ranchi.

His stay at the Ranchi hospital also proved temporary as doctors there suggested him shifted to Delhi's premier AIIMS for further treatment.

Yadav was brought to Delhi on March 29 and was admitted in the VVIP section of the AIIMS.

The decision to discharge Yadav came just hours after Congress President Rahul Gandhi paid a formal visit to Yadav at the AIIMS last Monday.

Opponents of the RJD chief have maintained that Yadav was using his health as an excuse to remain out of jail and camp in Delhi so he could hold meetings with Congress and other party leaders to strategize for the upcoming state and national elections.

Meanwhile, the youth wing of the RJD also burnt an effigy of Narendra Modi at the Income Tax Roundabout in Patna on Wednesday accusing the Prime Minister of trying to 'murder' the former Chief Minister of Bihar.
