Lok Sabha elections 2019 highlights: Olympian boxer Vijender Singh is Cong candidate from South Delhi

Olympian boxer Vijender Singh is Cong candidate from South Delhi

Olympian boxer Vijender Singh is Congress candidate from South Delhi constituency.

Navjot Sidhu banned from campaigning for 72 hours

The Election Commission on Monday evening banned Punjab minister Navjot Singh Sidhu from campaigning for 72 hours for his speech in Bihar’s Kathihar where he is accused to have sought votes on religious lines. The commission said it condemned the comments made by Navjot Sidhu and censured the state minister for his speech. The commission rejected Sidhu’s defence that he had been misquoted.

The Election Commission said it had seen the video recording of his speech and was convinced that he had made an “objectionable speech” which has the tone and tenor to aggravate existing differences or create mutual hatred between different religious communities”.

Former Cricketer Gautam Gambhir is BJP candidate from East Delhi

Ex-cricketer Gautam Gambhir is BJP candidate from East Delhi, sitting MP from New Delhi, Meenakshi Lekhi will again contest from New Delhi region.

BJP chief Shah urges West Bengal to vote for Modi govt

CPM and Congress can’t fight TMC. Voting for either of them means voting for Mamata Banerjee. If you vote for BJP, we will remove Mamata from West Bengal, said BJP party chief, Amit Shah.

Mamata Banerjee spreading lies about NRC: Amit Shah

Mamata Banerjee is spreading lies about the NRC, claiming all the refugees will have to leave India. First, we will bring Citizenship Amendment Bill, and then we will give citizenship to the persecuted minorities. Then, we will flush out the infiltrators, said Amit Shah.

State afflicted with problems like extortion, cow smuggling: Amit Shah

Bengal is afflicted with problems like extortion, cow smuggling and infiltration: Amit Shah

Amit Shah attacks ruling Trinamool Congress

People of Bengal voted for TMC for a change, but the Mamata Banerje-led party also disappointed people like the CPM did, said Shah.

BJP party chief Amit Shah addresses rally in West Bengal

In five years, our government has carried out many pro-poor welfare schemes in the country, said Amit Shah during his public meeting in Bardhaman.

PM Modi attacks Rahul Gandhi over farmers’ loans

In Rajasthan they had made promises to waive off farmers’ loans, but immediately after winning the elections the ‘namdaar’ have disappeared.

PM attacks Congress during his Udaipur rally

For seven decades, Congress cheated India. If you hadn’t brought us in power in 2014, then they would still be cheating the country.

Your ‘chowkidar’ works with strong intentions, not by promises: PM Modi

Your ‘chowkidar’ works with strong intentions, not by promises, said Prime Minister Narendra Modi

In past five years number of tourists coming from abroad increased: PM Modi

In the last five years, the number of tourists coming from abroad in India has increased, revenue from tourists has increased, the people of Rajasthan have got direct benefits, said Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Number of passport increased under Modi-led govt

More than 300 passport offices have been constructed across India, said Prime Minister Narendra Modi during his Udaipur public rally.

‘Farmers crying in distress, public being deceived’: Priyanka Gandhi

“The people of Amethi are not fools. Everybody can see that the farmers are crying in distress, the public is being deceived,” said Priyanka Gandhi.

Rahul Gandhi’s nomination papers from Amethi accepted

Rahul Gandhi’s nomination papers from Amethi have been accepted, EC officer rejects objections about citizenship, reported news agency PTI.

‘Will order enquiry into Rafale deal, when Congress comes to power’: Rahul Gandhi

“When Congress comes to power, we will order an enquiry into the Rafale deal,” said Rahul Gandhi in Amethi.

Youth will not need any license to start business: Rahul Gandhi

Once the NYAY money reaches you, the production in industries can start which will give a boost to the economy.

The youth will not need any license to start business. They will need to take necessary permissions three years after setting up business,” said Rahul Gandhi in Amethi.

‘Justice, overcoming damage by note ban visions behind Nyay’: Rahul Gandhi

“There are two thoughts behind ‘Nyay’, one being nyay (justice) and the second is to overcome the loss incurred due demonetisation. Because of demonetisation, the people stopped purchasing things, which is why the manufacturers stopped manufacturing material, which in turn disturbed the economy of the country,” said Rahul Gandhi in UP’s Amethi.

Increased defence production under ‘Make in India’: PM Modi

Congress destroyed HAL, we increased defence production under ‘Make in India’, said PM Narendra Modi.

‘We entered the ‘terrorist factory’ and destroyed them all’: PM Modi

“Hundreds of people were killed in Sri Lanka blasts yesterday. They were offering prayers on Easter but those innocents were killed in the blasts.

Before 2014, there were multiple blasts in different parts of the country, all Congress and NCP did was cry in front of the world about how Pakistan has been troubling the country, but we overcame their cowardice attitude, entered the ‘terrorist factory’ and finished them all, said PM Modi in Maharashtra.

PM Narendra Modi addresses poll rally in Maharashtra’s Dindori

PM Narendra Modi is currently addressing a poll rally in Maharashtra’s Dindori.

‘CPI(M) and Cong can’t face Mamata’: Amit Shah in Bengal

“CPI(M) and Congress can’t face Mamata Banerjee, only BJP can. If CP(M) or Congress win, the power will still remain in the hands of Mamata didi”, said Amit Shah while addressing a poll rally in Bengal.

Amit Shah addresses rally in West Bengal’s Howrah

BJP national president Amit shah is currently addressing a public meeting in West Bengal’s Howrah.

Congress releases list of candidates from six Delhi seats

Congress on Monday released the list of candidates from six Delhi seats. Congress has fielded Sheila Dikshit from North East Delhi Lok Sabha seat and Ajay Maken from New Delhi .

First the CAB will be implemented then NRC: Amit Shah

“Citizenship Amendment Bill will come first, all refugees will be given citizenship, after that NRC will be made. Refugees shouldn’t worry, only infiltrators should. First the CAB will be implemented then NRC, NRC will not be for just Bengal but for the whole country,” Amit Shah in Bengal.

‘Pragya Thakur given clean chit after false case against her’: Shah

“Sadhvi Pragya Thakur was given clean chit after a false case was filed against her,” said Amit Shah in Kolkata.

Amit Shah on NRC

“The refugees who have come from Bangladesh, be it Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, Jains, or Christians, BJP has clearly signalled in its ‘sankalp patra’ that we will give them citizenship,” said Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) President Amit Shah in Kolkata.

Calling BJP a terrorist group reveals the state of mind of TMC: Amit Shah

“Calling BJP a terrorist group reveals the state of mind of TMC,” said Amit Shah TMC calling BJP a terrorist gang for admitting Sadhvi Pragya Thakur in the party.

No crowd at Mamata’s rallies now: Amit Shah

“After the two phases of voting, Mamata has understood what is going to be the result and so fears defeat. She doesn’t telecast any of her public rallies now because there aren’t any people to attend it and she will stand exposed, if the number of people attending her rallies are revealed. She is now holding rallies by walking on foot,” said BJP chief Amit Shah.

By 2022, everyone will have a house: Amit Shah

“In our manifesto we have promise that by 2022, there’ll be no one ho won’t have a house, gas connection, water facilities, and toilets,” said BJP national chief Amit Shah in Kolkata.

Mamata didi now fears defeat: Amit Shah

“After two phases of voting, Mamata didi now fears defeat, which is why she is so baffled’, said BJP national chief Amit Shah.

‘There’s internal democracy in NDA-govt’: Shah

“We are the only ones who have internal democracy in the NDA-government, but parties that do not have internal democracy aren’t fit to strengthen the nation, said Amit Shah in Kolkata.

Zero tolerance towards terrorism: Amit Shah

Under PM Modi’s leadership, government has ensured zero tolerance towards terrorism, said BJP national chief Amit Shah.

BJP chief Amit Shah addresses press conference in Kolkata

BJP chief Amit Shah is currently addressing a press conference in Kolkata.
