Earth Day 2019: 4 healthy habits that will make the planet a better place to live

Earth Day 2019: 4 healthy habits that will make the planet a better place to live | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: Earth Day, celebrated on April 22 every year, is now a global event, where millions of people from across the world took to the streets to protest the negative impacts of industrial development. It is also an opportunity of all of us to reflect on how we can make our Earth a better, healthier place to live. Mounting evidence shows that biodiversity was in decline as a result of the heavy use of pesticides and man-made environmental changes. Deaths by pollution-related causes are rising at an alarming rate.

Researchers have found that every year, more than 6 million people in the world are dying prematurely due to air pollution - this includes some 1.6 million annual deaths in India. This indicates that long-term ambient ozone (O3) exposure is a major risk factor for human health. Perhaps, the Earth Day is a great day to come together and honour the earth by adopting new, environmentally friendly habits that conserve the resources, save energy and promote healthy living. Here are five simple and healthy tweaks you can add to your everyday routine that will also help make the Earth a cleaner, better place to live.

Add Plants and greenery to your space

Plants and greenery aren’t just great for decorating homes, they can also help regulate the temperature through the moisture they release into the air, of the many benefits. This means adding plants to your home could reduce the amount of energy required to heat and keep your place cool. There are many houseplants that can help purify your indoor air as they release oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide. In fact, studies have shown plants can help reduce stress, sharpen focus, and even shorten the recovery time for certain health conditions.

Unplug at night or while going outside

Try getting into the practice of powering down your electronics overnight or while going out (at least) by totally unplugging your television and other devices. It may be noted that these electronic devices consume and waste energy even when they’re not turned on. This habit will not only help maximise your energy efficiency but also cut your electricity bill.

Practice yoga outdoors

Doing yoga outdoors can benefit you in numerous ways, from improving your health and well-being to reducing your energy consumption. As per a study in the International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, spending time in a forested setting could promote feelings of vigor and vitality. Also, field studies, published in Environmental Health and Preventative Medicine, suggest that individuals who were exposed to a forest environment had a lower concentration of the stress hormone cortisol, compared to those living in an urban environment.

Avoid or cut back on meat

Research has shown that going vegan could be the best way to save the planet. One study, published in the journal Nature, found that the environmental pressures of the food system could increase by up to 90% by 2050 due to population growth and the continued consumption of Western diets high in red meats and processed foods. This could result in dangerous levels of climate changes and higher occurrences of extreme weather changes.

Studies have linked consumption of animal products to an increased risk of many chronic and debilitating conditions, including heart disease. On the contrary, eating a diet rich in plant-based foods has been associated with many health benefits, including a lower risk for type 2 diabetes, obesity, heart disease, and an increase in lifespan.
