JRL calls for shutdown today in Occupied Kashmir against ill-treatment to Yaseen Malik

JRL calls for shutdown today in Occupied Kashmir against ill-treatment to Yaseen Malik

In occupied Kashmir, the Joint Resistance Leadership has called for a valley-wide shutdown, today [Tuesday], against the ill-treatment meted out to the ailing and incarcerated Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, Muhammad Yasin Malik by India’s infamous National Investigation Agency in New Delhi.

According to Kashmir Media Service, the resistance leadership in a statement in Srinagar, today, said the strike is also against the ongoing aggression against Kashmiri resistance leaders, activists, relatives and businessmen by NIA and Enforcement Directorate.

Muhammad Yasin Malik in his message from the hospital, said he is ready to spend his whole life in jail, kiss gallows, endure torture but would never surrender before the humiliating, callous, undemocratic and illegal behavior of the Indian state.

It is worth mentioning here that Muhammad Yasin Malik was arbitrarily shifted to Delhi from Kot Bhalwal jail, Jammu, where he was lodged under draconian Public Safety Act.

The NIA treatment forced him to go on hunger strike, which entered 12th day, today. On deterioration of his health, the authorities had to secretly shift him to a hospital in New Delhi.

Meanwhile, the people have been urged to boycott the third phase of Indian parliamentary elections in Islamabad constituency, scheduled to be held tomorrow.

Syed Ali Gilani in a statement in Srinagar also called for a complete strike in the poll-bound areas of the constituency, tomorrow.

Protests broke out at the University of Kashmir in Srinagar when hundreds of students raising anti-India and pro-freedom slogans marched on the streets during an event organized by the administration in the university campus. The administration had to cancel the event in view of students’ protest.

Traders associated with the trade across the Line of Control today staged a protest in Srinagar to demand resumption of the business between parts of the divided Kashmir.
