TR-CLASHES-SITUATION CORR

Tripura clashes: Prohibitory order clamped at Madhabbari

(Eds: With edits throughout)

Agartala, Jan 9 (PTI) Prohibitory order under Section

144 CrPC has been clamped for an indefinite period at

Tripura's Madhabbari and adjacent areas, where at least seven

persons were injured when Citizenship Bill protesters clashed

with police on Tuesday, according to a police official.

Sub-divisional police Officer (SDPO) Prankrishna Das

said the police launched a search operation at Madhabbari and

Dasharambari in Jirania police station of West Tripura

district since Tuesday night during which one country made gun

and a machete were recovered.

"The situation is completely under control now," the

SDPO told PTI.

SMS and mobile Internet services remained suspended

throughout the state till Wednesday while broadband services,

though available, was very slow.

The home department in a notification had suspended

the services for two days since Tuesday apprehending law and

order problem after the clashes.

Superintendent of Police Ajit Pratap Singh said on

Wednesday that an FIR has been lodged against three persons on

the charge of rioting, but so far no one has been arrested.

Assam Rifles and state police personnel were also

patrolling the areas to avoid any untoward situation, the

SDPO said.

The seven injured, some with gunshot wounds, in

Tuesday's incident included a Tripura State Rifles (TSR)

personnel and six Twipra Student Federation (TSF) members who

had blocked the Assam-Agartala National Highway at Madhabbari

area to oppose the Bill, the SP said.

The TSF member, identified as Sumit Debbarma, who

received bullet injury on his back would be shifted to Kolkata

due to deterioration of his condition, Dr Sulakkhana Mitra of

the Trauma Care Centre in G B Pant Hospital said on Wednesday.

"Five injured, including one TSR jawan, are admitted

at G B Pant Hospital and one other is being treated at a local

hospital in Jirania subdivision," Mitra said.

NESO, a joint platform of eight student organisations,

including the TSF, had called for 11-hour Northeast bandh on

Tuesday to protest against the move of the central government

to introduce Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016 in Parliament.

The bill that seeks to provide Indian citizenship to

non-Muslims from Bangaldesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan was

passed by the Lok Sabha on Tuesday. PTI JOY MM

MM MM
