No rally by top leaders of parties in urban areas of South Gujarat

SURAT: The feel and tempo of general election of Lok Sabha have remained absent in the urban areas of South Gujarat this time. However, the rural areas were marginally better as three top national leaders from the two main political parties chose to hold their political rallies there after the Lok Sabha election had been announced. Prime Minister Narendra Modi held a rally in Songadh to campaign for BJP and Congress president Rahul Gandhi addressed a political meeting at Bajipura of Tapi district. They were campaigning for their respective party candidates contesting from Bardoli Lok Sabha constituency. One rally was also addressed by BJP president Amit Shah in Dharampur of Valsad.Gandhi and Modi had addressed one rally each in Valsad’s Dharampur, but it was before the election was announced.Surat had recorded lowest voter turnout in South Gujarat in 2014 general election. Only 63.78 per cent voters had exercised their right to vote as against 74.73 per cent in Bardoli constituency. Similar was the scenario in Navsari constituency under which a large part of the city falls. Only 65.78 per cent people came to vote. In Valsad, the voter turnout was 74.09 per cent while it was 74.54 per cent in Bharuch.“No major political rally was held by any party in Surat due to which the enthusiasm for election was missing. Urban areas were targeted largely through social media by the parties,” Prashant Raj, a textile unit owner, who closely follows political leaders on social media, said. A few small public meetings, though were held in Varachha area of the city.Local issues remained absent from the agenda of political parties. There was not much mention of issues relating to business, economy and infrastructure either by the parties during the electioneering.“No political leader or a party supporter had approached me or my family this year asking us to vote for their candidate. However, many youths like me follow their favourite leaders or party online,” said Pamir Shah, a martial art trainer.
