Coastal Road protest voice reciprocated in the BMC

The fury of the public over the Coastal Road work from Breach Candy to Worli Koliwada was voiced at the headquarters of the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC), with corporators from respective areas and other places raising the issue.

Corporators across party lines demanded the administration's stand over the Coastal Road project. The corporators asked the administration to give a written response about the issues raised by the citizens in the past one month.

The BMC started its ambitious Coastal Road project in November 2018. The work of a 10 -kilometre-long road — from Princess Street flyover to the southern end of the Bandra-Worli Sea link — at a cost of more than Rs 12,000 crore will take four years to be completed.

The locals at the coastline of the city started opposing this project as soon as work was started. But, the work has been going on in full swing until the High Court ordered a stay on the project. Six to eight Public Interest Litigation (PIL)s have been filed in the Bombay High Court (HC) against the Coastal Road design. The PILs mainly include a change in the design of the interchanging point at Breach Candy. Even local fishermen from the Koli community in Worli protested against the project to protect their livelihood.

Asif Zakaria, a Congress coporator raised the issue in the standing committee meeting on Wednesday. "We have raised several issues in the meeting when the municipal commissioner presented the project. People are asking the same questions now. The High Court ordered a stay on the work," said Zakaria. He demanded a special meeting after the elections to clear all doubts of corporators.

Rais Shaikh, group leader of the Samajwadi Party backed him. "The BMC administration is giving information in parts. How can you change the principle design, how will you get an NOC are questions that remain unanswered," Shaikh pointed out. Ravi Raja, leader of opposition land Vishakha Raut, a Shiv Sena leader also raised doubts over the implementation of the project without taking citizens in confidence. Yashwant Jadhav, chairman of the standing committee asked the administration to submit a written response.

FAST CHECK

BMC started its Coastal Road project in Nov 2018. The work of a 10 km road, from Princess Street flyover to southern end of the Bandra-Worli Sea link, will take four years to be completed
