What is Citizenship Amendment Bill? Here is all you need to know

Piloting the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019, Home Minister Rajnath Singh told the Opposition that the bill was not against the provisions of the Constitution and would give succour to persecuted minorities in the three neighbouring countries.

The bill provides for according Indian citizenship to the the Hindus, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Parsis from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after six years of residence in India instead of 12 years currently even if they do not possess any document.

As per Home Minister Rajnath Singh who had introduced the Bill : “The Bill seeks to facilitate acquisition of citizenship by six identified minority communities namely Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists, Christians and Parsis from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh who came to India before 31st Dec., 2014.”

The Act is not confined to the State of Assam. The Bill will apply to all States and Union Territories of the country. The beneficiaries of Citizenship Amendment Bill can reside in any state of the country.

The burden of these persecuted migrants will be shared by the whole country. Assam alone would not have to bear the entire burden and Government shall give all help to the State Government and people of Assam. While introducing the bill, Rajnath Singh highlighted the discrimination and religious persecution faced by these communities in these countries. They have no place to go to, except India, he said. The Act will provide relief to persecuted migrants who have come through western borders of the country to States like Gujarat, Rajasthan, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and other States The proposed amendment will make these persecuted migrants eligible to apply for citizenship. Citizenship will be given to them only after due scrutiny and recommendation of district authorities and the State Government. The minimum residency period for citizenship is being reduced from existing 12 years under the present law to 7 years. Opposition is protesting against the bill saying that it would effect the security and safety of the region. As per Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge, “the bill does not address the Assam Accord”. If the proposed amendments come into force, then the Centre has to nullify the Assam Accord under which anyone entering the state illegally after March 1971, should be declared foreigner and deported. The bill has sparked protests in north eastern states and opposition parties have termed the proposed law "divisive" and "flawed". Rajnath Singh said, full safeguards will be provided to protect the interests, rights and privileges of existing Scheduled Tribes of Assam. A separate Bill will be brought to grant ST status to Bodo Kacharis in Hill districts of Assam and Karbis in the rest of Assam, he said Government has given approval to move the Bill in parliament granting ST status to six communities of Assam namely Tai Ahom, Koch Rajbongshi, Chutia, Tea Tribes, Moran and Matak. Government has waived the requirement of Cabinet approval. A Bill is being introduced in the current session of Parliament.

The Citizenship Amendment Bill was tabled in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday and was followed by strident protests by opposition leaders causing the House proceedings to be adjourned for half-an-hour. Opposition parties led by Congress created ruckus over the Citizenship Amendment Bill and some of them even trooped into the well of the House protesting against the bill. They were supported by TMC members who moved into ailes. The controversial bill was passed by Lok Sabha on Tuesday.
