Telangana Congress demands judicial probe into discrepancies in Inter exam results

Telangana Congress demands judicial probe into discrepancies in Inter exam results

Ever since the results of intermediate first year and second year were announced on April 18, blunders in valuation of papers have come to light in Telangana.

news Education

The Telangana Congress on Monday demanded a judicial probe by a sitting High Court judge into the alleged irregularities committed by officials of the Telangana State Board of Intermediate Education (TSBIE) and Globarena Technologies in announcing the results of the state’s Intermediate examinations.

Addressing a press conference at All India Congress Committee (AICC) Headquarters in New Delhi, AICC Spokesperson Dr Sravan Dasoju said, “The blunders committed by the TSBIE in the exam results have caused serious agony to thousands of students and their parents. Therefore, state government should immediately suspend the TSBIE officials including its Secretary Dr. Ashok and others for their callous and allegedly corrupt practices.”

Calling stating Education Minister Jagadish Reddy 'Munnabhai MBBS', he also demanded that Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao sack him from his cabinet.

"Not only the students, but their parents and entire family members are in deep distress. Nearly 25 students are reported to have killed themselves due to the faulty results published by the TSBIE. Now who should be held responsible for those deaths?" he asked, demanding that the families be paid an ex-gratia of Rs 25 lakh each.

In a letter to KCR, the Congress leader demanded that help centers be set up in every district so that students and parents can report their issues rather than coming to TSBIE’s headquarters in Hyderabad

“Instruct TSBIE to take up recounting and re-evaluation free of cost rather than charging Rs 100 and Rs 600 per paper respectively. Also, students should be allowed to write improvement exams for free, if any. It is improper to penalise the students for the mistake committed by TSBIE and the Globarena Technologies,” Sravan said.

“Provide necessary infrastructure at the TSBIE evaluation centres and ensure that proper standards are followed in terms of number of papers given per day to the examiners,” he added.

Ever since the TSBIE announced the results of intermediate first year and second year on April 18, blunders in valuation of papers, awarding marks and preparation of mark-sheets have come to light.

In perhaps the biggest blunder, a student was given zero mark in Telugu subject in intermediate second year. G. Navya of Mancherial district was shocked to see the result as she was one of the district toppers with 98 marks in the same subject in the first year.

When a leading Telugu daily carried her story, the BIE officials swung into action and after re-verification gave her 99 marks.

But others were not lucky like her.

Many students along with their parents were seen outside the BIE office on Monday but there was nobody to address their grievances as the premises were out of bounds due to series of protests by opposition parties and student groups, which alleged that the government was playing with the future of the students.

Amid the continuing protests, BIE Secretary Ashok on Monday said there were few technical errors at the local level. He said those who committed the mistakes would be issued memo and penalty would be imposed on them.

He said the board was working in a transparent and efficient manner but some people were spreading falsehood about it.

Meanwhile, taking a serious view of the happenings, the government on Monday ordered an inquiry into the alleged lapses in the system deployed by Globarena Technologies, whose services were hired by BIE to conduct the exams.

A three-member committee will find out whether there were any errors in publication of results on account of any systemic errors of the agency and submit its report in three days.

A total of 9 lakh students had appeared in the intermediate exams held in February-March. The pass percentage in the first year was 60.5 while in the second year 64.8 per cent students passed the exam.

IANS inputs
