Protest in Chennai against plastic ban in Tamil Nadu by trade union members

Protest against the plastic ban in Tamilnadu

Thousands of trade union members of Tamil Nadu gathered near Kalaivanar Arangam in Chepauk in Chennai on Tuesday to start a rally towards secretariat opposing the State government’s decision to ban some plastic products in Tamil Nadu from January 1, 2019. The Union has alleged that the ban will affect a few thousand entrepreneurs in small scale production of plastics in the state who already have difficulty in paying back their bank loans.

They have also asked the government to postpone the decision until the Central Government takes a policy decision regarding plastic ban to save more than 10 thousand families involved in working in those plastic manufacturing industries and write off the bank loans of the small scale manufacturers in the industry.

Tamil Nadu trade union and plastic manufacturers association together blocked the Chennai High Court demanding the same issues a day before. Thousands of the protesters, in turn, got arrested and were kept in a society hall near Puduppet, Chennai and later released by evening. Tamilnadu trade union president Vikramaraja on press stated after the protest that "the intention of the government is not to protect the environment but instead it is to destroy the small and tiny industries in Tamil Nadu. In the name of 'environment-friendly', it becomes 'corporate friendly'. Hence through this, it will handover this vital segment to external citadels of the Industry."

The Tamilnadu Plastic owners association also claimed that closing of these thousands of industries in the state will lead to opening up of them in nearby states and result in the Government losing more than Rs 1,000 crores revenue. It also alleged that the entrepreneurs who took up loans to buy machinery will be left helpless since they need to sell it for a scrap price and finally meet a huge crisis to repay the loans.

And not only the owner of the industry but also the employees depending on them for their survival will be left in the wilderness and become refugees on their own soil. Moreover, the Tamilnadu trade union requested the government should take immediate action or else they all decided to indulge continuously in protest and closing of all shops demanding to lift the ban after the upcoming Pongal festival next week.
