live love laugh deepika padukone: 'Mental Hai Kya' is being called out for its problematic title. Bollywood, are you listening?

It is time we put an end to the use of words, imagery and/or the portrayal of persons with mental illness in a way… https://t.co/ddVgAdFueA — TLLLFoundation (@TLLLFoundation) 1555757187000

Many millions who suffer with mental illness in India already face tremendous stigma. Therefore,it is extremely imp… https://t.co/dzf6gvcDuH — TLLLFoundation (@TLLLFoundation) 1555757216000

At a time when Bollywood is slowly warming up to the concept of showing 'real' films and beating the stigma surrounding mental illnesses, a soon to release film starring Rajkummar Rao and Kangana Ranaut is facing flak from netizens and doctors on the internet for its problematic title.The film, which is slated to release in June, is titled 'Mental Hai Kya'. While the plot details are still under wraps, the title itself has irked mental health experts, who have called it 'ignorant' and blamed it for adding to the stigma regarding the mental health conditions in the country rather than breaking it.Calling the title derogatory and unpleasant, doctors have criticized the film for making sarcastic, unwelcome comments at the people battling mental health problems. Apart from this, people have also pointed out at the posters of the film which show the two main characters indulging in irrational behavior.A still released from the film on social media shows the two actors trying to balance a razor blade between their tongues and even stubbing a cigarette butt on their forehead. This description is quite problematic and stigmatizes mental illness further.The Indian Medical Association (IMA) has written to the Board protesting against the same and asking to revise the content. Experts added,"The title 'Mental Hai Kya?' is clearly derogatory to people fighting with their mental maladies. It is sarcastic and ridicules persons in pain. The best term to describe the sufferers is a person with mental illness."This term clearly communicates that mental illness is not a criterion to reject a person as a whole. The fact is that this sensational imagination is a perfect example of pathological risk-taking behavior."But the title of the film loudly ridicules persons with mental illness which is not only unethical and inhuman but also illegal," Santanu Sen, National President, IMA, said in a statement.Amongst those who have also protested include actress Deepika Padukone's mental health awareness foundation, Live Love Laugh, which has called the title extremely insensitive and asked the film fraternity to exercise some thoughtfulness.The tweets mention,It is time we put an end to the use of words, imagery and/or the portrayal of persons with mental illness in a way that reinforces stereotypes. (1/2)Many millions who suffer from mental illness in India already face tremendous stigma. Therefore, it is extremely important to be responsible and sensitive to the needs of those suffering. (2/2)A lot of people who battle mental health conditions have been ridiculed, called names and blamed for ruining their own sanity.We live in a time when, sadly, a lot of people believe that mental health symptoms can be easily done away if the patients "simply tried enough", the film further adds to the stigma.The title of the film not only dehumanizes people who suffer from severe mental health illnesses but also portrays them in a bad light, showing them as 'crazy' or 'deranged' people.Instead of adding to the existing taboo, the makers should break the stigma and work towards striking a conversation in a positive manner. Mental health conditions should never be shown as something to be ashamed of.Bollywood, are you listening?
