Telangana Intermediate results: Education Min accuses Opposition of politicising issue

Telangana Intermediate results: Education Min accuses Opposition of politicising issue

Jagadish Reddy claimed that the politicisation of the issue is causing panic among students.

news Controversy

Education Minister G Jagadish Reddy hit out at Opposition leaders alleging that they are 'politicizing' the issue of intermediate results and said that Opposition parties are behaving 'irresponsibly' and are causing panic amongst the students.

Ever since the intermediate results were announced on Friday, there have been mass allegations by students against Telangana State Board of Intermediate Education (TSBIE) complaining of discrepancies by the board. Jagadish Reddy is facing strong criticism as the Education Minister and many have sought his resignation.

Due to alleged blunders committed by the board, several toppers have failed to clear the exams. Around 18 students in the state have allegedly committed suicide as they couldn't pass the exams.

A three-member committee has been appointed to probe the allegations.

Leaders from Congress and BJP, as well as activists like professor K Nageshwar Rao, have been protesting over the issue. Professor K Nageshwar was detained by the police in Hyderabad on Tuesday for protesting over the alleged blunders in the results of Intermediate exams.

Reacting to the agitation by political parties, Jagadish Reddy said, "A committee has been formed to probe whether there were technical problems and if so, who is responsible. Before the committee could establish if there was any discrepancy, politicians are making a hullabaloo which is causing panic amongst students. This is not correct. Because of your politics, people are being affected."

The minister said that the committee will most likely disclose their findings on Wednesday.

He also said that they are probing whether this controversy cropped up due to an ‘internal conflict’ among officials. Assuring the students of justice, he said, "Students need not worry. The systems of re-verification is in place. If any student has any suspicion about discrepancy they can re-verify. The board is also providing relief."
