UP Board result 2019: UPMSP awaiting government's order to release Class 10, 12 results

New Delhi :

The Uttar Pradesh Madhyamik Shiksha Parishad (UPMSP), which conducts the UP Board class 10 and class 12 examinations, is awaiting government’s order to announce the results. According to sources, UP Board Secretary Nina Srivastava and all five additional secretaries of five regional offices have already prepared results and ready to release it on government’s order.

According to persons privy to the development, the result will be declared at least four days after the official date for its announcement is decided. If dates are announced today i.e. on Tuesday, the results would be declared not before April 26. The results for both the exams - Class 10 and 12 is likely to be announced on the same day.

This year, around 58 lakh students appeared for the examination. The Class 10 exams were conducted by the Uttar Pradesh Board from 7 to 28 February and the board exam for the Class 12 students was held from 7 February to 2 March, 2019.

"A total of 5,89,622 candidates had registered for Class 12 and Class 10 exams. Out of which, 6,69,860 students skipped the boards, as per the official data. Last year, 26.54 lakh students, including 1.79 lakh private examinees registered for the Inter exams out of which 11 lakh were absent in exams," a report by The Indian Express said.

Soon after the formal declaration of the results, the scorecards will be available on the official website of the board i.e. https://upmsp.edu.in.

Alternatively, the candidates can check their results on this page as we will be activating the result link after the announcement. The Uttar Pradesh Board is one of the biggest boards in India. With lakhs of students accessing their results simultaneously, the official website might face some technical glitches. If such situation arises this year, we request the students to check their results here.

For the convenience of the candidates we have mentioned the process through which the candidates can download the UP Board results:

Step 1: Visit english.newsnationtv.com/board-results and click on the UP Board result page

Step 2: Find and enter your roll number and other details.

Step 3: Click on the submit button.

Step 4: Your UP Board 10th Result 2019 or UP 12th Result 2019 will be displayed.

Step 5: Check your UP Board Result 2019 on the screen.

About the Uttar Pradesh Madhyamik Shiksha Parishad

The Uttar Pradesh Madhyamik Shiksha Parishad (UPMSP) is the apex school-level educational body that looks after the development, promotion and regulation of school education in the state. The Board of High School and Intermediate Education Uttar Pradesh conducts the annual UP Board High School Exam for Class 10 students and UP Board Intermediate Exam for Class 12 students. Every year, approximately 60,29,252 candidates appear for the Class X and Class XII Board Exams.
