Lok Sabha election: PM Modi set to file nomination papers from Varanasi on April 26

Speculation is rife that Congress will field Priyanka Gandhi Vadra against Modi in Varanasi. Gandhi is the general secretary and in charge of East UP for the Congress.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will file his nomination papers for the Varanasi Lok Sabha constituency on April 26. Modi will also hold a rally in Varanasi on April 25, which will be attended by senior. In a press conference held in Varanasi, BJP President Amit Shah confirmed the prime minister’s candidature from Varanasi and said: “Once again Modi Ji will contest from Kashi, he will file his nomination on the afternoon of April 26. He will also participate in a roadshow in Kashi on April 25.”

Top leaders from the parties part of NDA will be present during the nomination filing process. Some of the leaders who will attend the filing process are Sukhbir Singh Badal, Nitish Kumar, and Uddhav Thackeray. BJP’s top ministers will also join the PM’s rally at Varanasi. Voting in Varanasi will be held during the fifth phase of Lok Sabha elections on May 19.

In the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, Prime Minister Modi had won the elections from the Varanasi seat. He defeated Aam Aadmi Party leader Arvind Kejriwal by a margin of 3.37 lakh votes. Modi had also fought the elections from Vadodara in the 2014 elections and had won that seat too.

Speculation is rife that Congress will field Priyanka Gandhi Vadra against Modi in Varanasi. Gandhi is the general secretary and in charge of East UP for the Congress.

Tej Bahadur Yadav, a BSF soldier who was dismissed for posting a video about the poor quality of food being served to the soldiers on social media, will be fighting the elections from Varanasi as an independent candidate against PM Modi. While announcing his candidature, Yadav had said that this time there will be a fight between real and fake chowkidar.

Justice Karnan will also be contesting from Varanasi for the Anti Corruption Dynamic Party. Karnan is a former judge of Kolkata High Court and Madras High Court and was the first High Court judge to be sent to jail.

The results of the Lok Sabha Elections 2019 will be out on May 23.
