Freelance offers pour in for Raj Thackeray from BJP rivals

Maharashtra Navnirman Sena chief Raj Thackeray, who is grabbing headlines for his attacks on Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP president Amit Shah, has emerged as the darling of the Opposition. BJP's rivals have invited Thackeray to hold rallies in many poll-bound states beyond Maharashtra, sources have told DNA.



Thackeray has received invitations from the Congress, Janata Dal (Secular), Haryana Vikas Party and a couple of community organisations in Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, Rajasthan and Karnataka to address rallies, said sources. His hard-hitting style and use of videos to substantiate claims have been the pull factor behind these invitations.



Despite his violent agitations against North Indians in the past, Thackeray's speeches have gone viral, especially in the JD(U)-BJP ruled Bihar, where some community organisations have translated them in Maithili for local consumption. His focus on national issues over outsider-insider politics is also considered as one of the factors for their popularity.



An MNS leader, who is engaged in the organisation of Thackeray's rallies, told DNA, ''Invitations are pouring in from different parts of India. Interestingly, parties that had objected to Thackeray's son-of-the-soil rhetoric want him to address rallies to mobilise support against the BJP.'' However, he said Thackeray has expressed his inability to address rallies due to time constraints and also because of logistic issues.



Thackeray, whose party is not contesting the Lok Sabha elections in Maharashtra, has so far addressed eight rallies despite not openly campaigning for the Congress, NCP and their allies. However, his subtle message has been "defeat BJP and Shiv Sena". Thackeray will address two rallies in Mumbai, one each in Panvel and Nashik this week.



The MNS chief has maintained that his support to Congress-NCP shouldn't be taken for granted. His has insisted that his aim is to defeat PM Modi and Amit Shah politically even if it means benefiting the Opposition.



''There are two men who are a threat for this nation. They are Amit Shah and Narendra Modi. I am going to fight them. If the Congress-NCP benefit, so be it," has been a constant line at his rallies.
