Greens rue lack of supervision as BMC initiates tree pruning drive

With the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) initiating pre-monsoon tree pruning exercise all over the city, environmentalists allege that despite its tall claims, trees continued to be trimmed in absence of supervision of civic officials.

DNA on Tuesday found trees being pruned on the PB Road near Doordarshan sans any safety measures for the labourers as well as people travelling through the road. Apart from that, thick branches of few trees were being chopped by the labourers in absence of tree officials and the contractor, who claimed to have gone for lunch. However, civic officials who reached the spot later affirmed that the drive was being monitored and some of the bigger branches were being trimmed to give trees a proper balance.

When contacted activist Zoru Bhatena, he said that trees are pruned regularly for its good health but there has to be a scientific guideline for pruning, it cannot be carried out randomly. "Trees in the city are tall when ideally they should be shorter and with a good round canopy cover. BMC's unscientific approach to chop the branches on the lower portion is to blame. It needs to take a leaf out of international cities' books which follow proper guidelines for pruning," he said adding that ge gets complaints from all across the city about unscientific tree trimmings.

Environmentalists have been emphasising on the need for more supervision and scientific pruning keeping in mind the fact that its harmful for tree health. People end up trimming around 25 to 30 per cent of a tree, which is becoming a major threat to Mumbai's already reducing tree cover.

"BMC is worried that if they do not trim trees, they will face the flak in case of tree collapse incident. Quite a few trees and branches collapsed even though they were trimmed. BMC has to understand the importance of scientifically driven pruning," Bhatena shared stating that Mumbaikars also need to understand that BMC cannot be blamed for every tree falling in the city.

A senior official with the tree department said all the trimming work is being monitored and photos both before and after pruning are being taken as a record. "The portion that has to be pruned are explained to the contractors after two to three surveys. Using ladders and cranes during day time is not possible everywhere as traffic police doesn't allow to block traffic movement," said the official.

What should you do if you see any tree or branch being cut in Mumbai?

1) Ask for a copy of BMC Tree Authority's permission

The permission will include the tree number, type of tree and size (girth and height). It will also mention whether the tree has to be cut or transplanted

If the permission is for tree trimming, it will mention the girth and length of each branch to be cut (random branches cannot be cut without permission)

2) Application for cutting/payment towards cutting is not the same as permission granted. Permission letter will specifically state that permission has been granted

3) If the officials deny to show you a copy of permission (or if you are too shy to ask for it), call 100 and inform cops. They will arrive on the spot and stop the work if found illegal

4) Tweet a picture of tree cutting work-in-progress, with postal/google address to @MumbaiPolice Do not hesitate or delay. A tree takes just a few minutes to get cut

5) If you tweet to Zoru Bhathena (@Zoru75), a whistle-blower and environmentalist, it will be followed up
