Look, who tried to catch falling knives on Dalal Street in Q4

Stock Analysis – Know before investing Stock score of Reliance Communications Ltd moved down by 2 in 3 months on a 10-point scale. Subscribe Now Exclusively for

Stock Analysis Stock score of Reliance Communications Ltd is 1 on a scale of 10. View Stock Analysis »

NEW DELHI: March quarter saw both retail and high net-worth individuals (HNIs) try to catch falling knives: they lapped up stocks that kept bleeding amid debt woes, deteriorating fundamentals and corporate governance issues.Jet Airways,(RCom) and Dewan Housing Finance Corporation (DHFL) all witnessed brisk buying by the two categories of investors during January-March.Data showed of the 24 BSE500 stocks, where retail and HNI shareholding went up substantially during the quarter, 14 fell up to 85 per cent during the same period. Only two have managed to beat Sensex’s 8.5 per cent return so far this calendar.These individual investors hiked stakes in the troubled telecom operator RCom by 14.4 percentage points to 37.2 per cent in March quarter from 22.8 per cent at the end of December, even as a few lenders sold pledged shares.and Axis Trustee Services sold some 15.6 per cent stake that had been pledged with them as collaterals against loans.Promoter Anil Ambani's stake in the firm dropped to 21.97 per cent during the quarter from 53.08 per cent at December-end.Reliance Infrastructure, another Anil Ambani-led Reliance Group (ADAG) stock, has lost two-thirds of its market value year to date. Yet small investors raised their stake in the firm by 4.7 percentage points to 14.4 per cent at the end of March quarter from 9.7 per cent at the end of the previous quarter.The infrastructure firm was among listed ADAG group companies where L&T Finance and Edelweiss Group invoked pledged shares during the quarter. ET in February reported that the group reached an understanding with some lenders to avoid selling any of the pledged shares until September 30.DHFL, another stock that witnessed severe battering amid liquidity woes, also caught investors’ fancy. HNIs and retail investors together raised their holdings by 6.4 percentage points in the housing finance company. They held 27.8 per cent stake in the NBFC at the end of March against 21.4 per cent at the end of December quarter. Data suggests FPIs sold 4.6 per cent stake in DHFL during the quarter.“Most investors suffered as the scrip crashed substantially. Before the stock fall, we too held the view that the company was good in terms of its business model and retail assets that it held. But the market punishes companies that are not known to have good corporate governance standards,” Mahantesh Sabarad, SBICap Securities, told ET Now.Sabarad, however, has a brighter outlook for the company as he feels “nothing really has been disturbed on the business front.” The stock is down 35 per cent so far this year.Jet Airways saw continuous depletion in fleet strength through the quarter amid funding delays, eventually leading to complete halt of operations last week. Yet hopes that the lenders would find a solution to the ongoing crisis pushed up retail holding in the airline by 120 basis points to 12.2 per cent at the end of March quarter.Shares of electrode makers HEG and Graphite India fell 41-45 per cent in March quarter, but individual investors hiked stakes in these stocks by 1.8-3 percentage points.Macquarie in a March note said quarterly average prices of graphite electrodes slipped 10-15 per cent below December quarter levels, and June quarter price indications implied a 25-30 per cent correction from peak levels.Among others, Sterlite Technologies,, SREI Infrastructure Finance. Max India, Phillips Carbon Black, Nalco and Nocil also saw retail investors holding go up by 100-240 basis points stake despite the scrips falling up to 32 per cent year-to-date.
