Protests continueover 'goof up' in declaration of results of

Protests against the "goof up" in the Intermediate exam results, continued for the third day Wednesday with students and their parents assembling near Telangana State Board of Intermediate (TSBIE) office here, demanding justice for those declared 'failed' in recent exams.

Attempts by Students' Federation of India (SFI) to besiege Pragathi Bhavan, the official residence complex cum camp office of Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao, as part of the protest call were foiled, and as many as 24 members were taken into preventive custody, a police official told PTI.

Similarly, scores of activists of Progressive Democratic Students Union (PDSU) and DYFI were also detained, when they tried to stage demonstrations near the TSBIE office.

The protesters raised slogans against the Telangana government and Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao and also demanded resignation of Minister G Jagadeeshwar Reddy.

They also sought ex-gratia for 16 students, who committed suicide after the results were declared.

The exams were conducted during February and March this year and the results were announced on April 18.

Many students and parents have been agitating against the TSBIE alleging goof up in the paper valuation.

Since Saturday last, they have been demanding a thorough re-verification of the papers of those who had failed.

The state government has already constituted a three-member committee to look into the allegations of irregularities in the declaration of the results.

As parents and political parties hit the streets protesting alleged bungling in publication of intermediate exam results, the Telangana government Monday set up the committee.

The panel would probe among other aspects if the Globarena Technologies, which provided technological and software support to TSBIE, carried out its functions as mandated in the agreement.

A large number of worried students and parents stated that they were unable to apply for re-verification, revaluation or recounting of answer sheets online as the website was not functioning.

Some parents said their children are meritorious and expressed shock that they failed in the Intermediate exams or had scored very less marks.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
