No let-up in protests over 'goof up' in declaration of results by TSBIE

Police constables don the role of counsellors

Protests over irregularities in Board of Intermediate Education (BIE) examinations results rocked parts of Hyderabad for the third consecutive day on Wednesday.

While members of students groups and political parties tried to barge into the BIE office, Nampally, Communist Party of India (CPI) members staged dharna opposite Globarena Technologies Pvt Ltd office in Banjara Hills on Wednesday morning, demanding justice.

The firm was given contract for data collection and processing of results by the board.

A day after the Intermediate examination results were announced, students alleged that there were irregularities in paper evaluation. Some students said they were marked absent though they took the exams.

A few students who had the record of securing top marks in Intermediate first year, failed in a few subjects in second year.

Agitated students expressed doubts over the evaluation.

To file complaint against the exam fiasco, hundreds of parents and students have been gathering in front of the BIE office to meet the officials for the past three days.

They wanted to know how they could be marked absent and fail in some subjects, in spite of appearing for the exams.

One among them, Abdul Saleem said that though his brother took Intermediate English examination, he was marked as absent. “We want to see the answer sheets,” said Saleem.

Yeoman service

Apart from evicting protesters who tried to storm the BIE office, police constables are donning the role of counsellors.

Amidst the chaos and summer heat, they have been pacifying anxious students who wanted to pour out their woes.

Since scores of people from student groups and political parties staged protests, barricades were placed before the BIE office.

As BIE officials did not post anyone to answer queries, police have become the main point of contact. Ask any police woman and man posted there, they will list out range of doubts, complaints that parents and students have. They were also collecting applications for revaluation and recounting and passing it on to the BIE staff.

Standing behind the four-feet tall barricades, the police personnel have been trying to calm down students who were agitated over the errors in evaluation, attendance.

For instance, an emotional student Abdul Muqeeth Khan who was stammering while seeking information related to re-verification, a constable Md Rasheeduddin patiently heard him out completely. After giving the information, Mr Rasheeduddin urged the student to relax and not to become anxious.

Similarly, standing at the other end of the barricade, another constable K Naresh too tried to pacify the students.

"No one asked us to pass the information or collect the applications. We too have come through this stage. So we can understand the pain one experiences if they fail in exams,” Mr Naresh said. He was deployed there for the past three-days.
