Aditya Thackeray's face missing from Poonam Mahajan's campaign banner; Yuva Sena skips rally in protest

Yuva Sena is upset with BJP's Mumbai North Central candidate Poonam Mahajan for not having Aditya Thackeray's face on the hoardings. (Photo: Pankaj Upadhyay)

Shiv Sena's youth wing Yuva Sena is upset with BJP Mumbai North Central candidate Poonam Mahajan. This time the reason is Shiv Sena leader Aditya Thackeray's picture not being present on hoardings at her Kurla rally.

Yuva Sena leader Rahul Kanal took to Twitter and said, "Fail to understand why does (sic) our MP Poonam Mahajan ji gets out of this but as a Yuva Sainik I can just request you to follow the protocol and your backdrop at Kurla should have Aditya Thackeray ji's picture, when you put your leaders then why not our leader... what stops [you]"

Rahul Kanal who is also a Core committee member of Yuva Sena told India Today TV that the Yuva Sena was very upset. "For us the respect of our leader is paramount. She is a repeat offender. She should abide by the protocol of the alliance. We will take this matter to the higher level again." he said.

Just last month Poonam Mahajan had landed herself in controversy as the Yuva Sena declared that they would not support her campaign as pictures of Aditya Thackeray were missing from various hoardings in her constituency. The uproar was such that Poonam Mahajan reportedly visited Matoshree (the residence of the Thackeray dynasty) and apologised.

When India Today TV had quizzed Poonam Mahajan on the issue she had maintained that there was no controversy and the media was being speculative.

Rahul Kanal alleged that this is being done 'on purpose'. "How often has she visited Matoshree before? It was only to apologise. She's done this again. Picture of our leader is missing again. But the issue is if our leader Aditya Thackeray's picture is there during PM Narendra Modi's rally, why does it go missing during her campaigns?"

To lodge a protest over Aditya Thackeray's missing picture, the Yuva Sena didn't attend Poonam Mahajan's rally. The youth wing shared pictures of the near empty ground at Kurla -- the venue of Poonam Mahajan's rally. "BJP was forced to remove chairs from her rally as there was no power of Yuva Sena," asserted Rahul Kanal.

When India Today TV reached out to Poonam Mahajan, she shared a picture of Aditya Thackeray being present in the hoardings at the rally. But Yuva Sena maintains that "picture was placed well after the Yuva Sena decided to skip the event."
