2012 riot accused rues Sadhvi Pragya Thakur's candidature

The clamour over Pragya Singh Thakur's comments on 26/11 martyr Hemant Karkare and the BJP's subsequent silence is growing.

Abdul Qadir Mohammed Younus Ansari's (who was arrested and did time after vandalising the 26/11 memorial outside Azad Maidan after a 2012 Raza academy protest turned into a riot) family has asked why there are different standards applied to him and the BJP's Bhopal candidate Pragya Thakur. This comes a day after Tuesday's gathering of activists and citizens' protest over "the humiliation" of 26/11 martyr Hemant Karkare at the memorial outside Marine Lines' Police Gymkhana.

When DNA visited the 26-year-old Abdul Qadir's home in the Seetawadi slum colony in Jogeshwari East he was away at his in-laws' in Bihar's Sitamadhi. His 29-year-old elder brother Abdul Rahim (both the brothers and their father are local madarsa teachers) told DNA: "We've been following that 2008 Malegaon blasts-accused Pragya Thakur said Karkare falsely implicated her and died because of her curse. I expected her candidature will be withdrawn and she'll face censure from her party which never tires of giving lessons on patriotism to others. But they've chosen to defend her. If this is not double standards what is?" and added, "While my brother was misguided and egged on by instigators, this is someone contesting elections and a respected religious figure known to speak in measured tone and language."

When DNA made contact with Abdul Qadir on his cellphone he too remembered the national outrage against the 26/11 memorial desecration. "Where is that anger when Pragya Thakur insults martyr Hemant Karkare? Or is outrage reserved only for Muslims?"

Back in the Seetawadi slum, Ansaris' neighbour Maulana Abdul Kuddus said: "If no action is taken against Pragya Thakur by the courts and Election Commission it will send a signal to minorities that the law only works against them."

This view found an echo in retired High Court judge Justice Abhay Thipsay who was present at Tuesday's protest. "It is shameful that Pragya Thakur has taken campaigning to a new low. I was very hurt at how a martyr was insulted and felt it was necessary to be at this protest."

While repeated attempts at reaching Pragya Thakur drew a blank, BJP spokesperson Madhav Bhandari insisted she had been granted bail after the prosecution could not prove any of the charges against her. "There cannot be any kind of equation of Abdul Qadir and Sadhvi Pragya Thakur," he said avoiding mention of Karkare or his martyrdom.

CASE BACKGROUND

Abdul Qadir Mohammed Younus Ansari was arrested and did time after vandalising the 26/11 memorial outside Azad Maidan after a 2012 Raza academy protest turned into a riot
