Protests continue to rock State

Hyderabad: Telangana State is on the boil over Intermediate results fiasco. Student organisations and political parties staged protests across the State, including at Telangana Bhavan in New Delhi, Chief Minister's official residence at Pragati Bhavan here, Board of Intermediate Education, the outsourcing agency, Globarena office, and Ministers' residences. As part of intensifying the agitation, Telangana State Congress called for protests at all district Collectorates on Thursday.

A group of SFI students tried to barge into the Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao's camp office at Pragati Bhavan. Police foiled their attempt and arrested them. As a pre-emptive action to avert any untoward incidents, a large number of security personnel were deployed at the Chief Minister's official residence.

A group of ABVP activists stormed the residence of State Health Minister E Rajender in Karimnagar, protesting against the alleged indifference on the part of the State government in resolving the grievances of the students.

Ever since the announcement of the Intermediate results a week ago, the students' unions and parents were staging series of protests at the Board of Intermediate Education, demanding that the State government take stringent action against those involved in the announcement of the results with errors.

"Is this Bangaru Telangana," asked a protestor. "Down down KCR and Intermediate Board." "We want justice".. these are some of the slogans echoed against the Telangana government and against the Chief Minister on Wednesday in front of the Board of Intermediate Education. Congress senior leader V Hanumantha Rao also joined the chorus.

K Ramchander from Amberpet, a parent of Manasa, who failed in Maths and P Aruna Devi from Yousufguda demanded that the Board reconduct the exams if they failed to provide the scanned answer sheets. They said their children would show their talent by securing distinction in the exams.

They alleged the entire process of conducting the exams, correction and revaluation and the fiasco due to the negligence of the Board brought their children and them on to the roads. Some of the parents said if this is the situation it is better for their children to join in ITIs rather than sending them to higher education. They all demanded a speedy revaluation and clarifications on the marks as soon as possible to move ahead.

CPI activists took to the streets in the city and staged a sit-in in front of Globarena consultancy which was entrusted with the responsibility of preparation of mark sheets and processing of the applications. The agitating leaders were bundled into the police van and shifted to nearby police stations.
