Suspected Maoists loot guns from forest office in Nayagarh district

BHUBANESWAR: Suspected Maoists on Tuesday night looted four country-made guns from the Banigochha-East range office under Mahanadi wildlife division near Dasapalla in Nayagarh district Forest officials said the rebels, dressed in olive green, came in a group of five and entered the range office at around 9.30 pm. A lone forester was present there at the time while others, including the range officer, were on night patrolling in the forest. The range office is around 10 km from Dasapalla town. The rebels allegedly terrorized the lone forester and asked for the arms “Since we had deposited the official arms allotted to us to the police in view of the elections, there were only four country-made guns that we had seized from poachers. The rebels asked for the arms and forced the forest officer to hand them over to them. After getting the arms, they disappeared into the forest,” divisional forest officer (Mahanadi) Anshu Pragyan Das said.The suspected rebels also ransacked the range office on their way out. An FIR has been lodged in Dasapalla police station for further investigation. “We are not sure whether those who raided the range office were Maoists. It is still under investigation. However, the way the raid has been carried out doesn’t seem to be the handiwork of Maoists. Although a paper was found there which mentioned the CPI (Maoist), we are not fully convinced,” inspector general (Central Range) Soumendra Priyadarshi said.Principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) Ajay Mohapatra, though, disagreed with the police. “From the description given by the forest personnel present during the raid, it seems, the group came to loot arms. Prime facie it seems to be the handiwork of Maoists. Police investigation will reveal the truth,” Mohapatra said.Forest officials suspect the Maoists may have been driven towards Nayagarh after combing was intensified in Kandhamal following the killing of a poll personnel. Nayagarh is close to Kandhamal and the Maoists may have used the contiguous forest cover to escape.It must be mentioned that in 2008, Nayagarh had witnessed a major Maoist offensive. A police armoury was looted by the rebels and 14 policemen were killed in the incident.
