Raucous protests against helmets at crematorium

PUNE: In a mockery of the law, and the rituals performed after death, members of Helmet Sakti Virodhi Kruti Samiti on Tuesday conducted the ‘ last rites ’ of a helmet at Vaikunth crematorium.Led by city Shiv Sena leader Mahadev Babar, the members shouted slogans and criticized the police administration for implementing the helmet rule. They had gathered on the premises of Vaikunth crematorium in Navi Peth where three families were conducting the last rites of their deceased kin.The angry families said the crematorium was not the place for such demonstrations and the sanctity, dignity and respect for rituals must be maintained. One mourner said, “It is an election stunt. Instead of protesting against the helmet mandate, these people should construct toilets here. That will bag them more votes.” Another man said, “Helmets must be used. People who do not use them will come here, prematurely.”The anti-helmet compulsion protesters placed a cervical collar and a wig on the helmet before laying garlands. The security guard at the crematorium said, the protesters blocked the entrance and then walked to the courtyard and laid the helmet on a ceremonial stone shelf.They followed some cremation rituals for the helmet. The leaders including Babar, NCP leader Ankush Kakade, BJP leader Sandeep Khardekar, activist Vivek Velankar, former corporator Shiva Mantri, others criticized the implementation of the helmet mandate and its withdrawal.Kakade said they tried to seek permission on Monday from the police for an agitation outside the commissioner’s office or at Tilak statue at Mahatma Phule Mandai “We were denied permission and hence we decided to protest at Vaikunth,” he added. Khardekar said Punekars do not want the mandate. “Other rules and laws are not being implemented by the Pune police,” he stated.Babar said, “Punekars, the protesters here and Shiv Sena do not want the helmet mandate. If the helmet mandate is not withdrawn and the government doesn’t step in, citizens will not vote for them in the upcoming elections. We are against the helmet mandate and anyone implementing the mandate. Several members of the police force do not want the mandate, I cannot name them or they will be suspended,” he said.Velankar added that the police are implementing the helmet rule as catching helmet-less riders is an easy task compared to implementing other traffic rules.Speaking to TOI about the demonstration at Vaikunth crematorium, sanitary inspector Kishor Thorat said, “As far as we know, no permission was taken for the protest. It is wrong to hold a protest here.”Ashish Mahadalkar, assistant municipal commissioner of Kasba-Vishrambaugwada ward office, said permission for any such demonstration was not sought by anyone. “ We had spoken to the police authorities to prevent protesters from gathering at Vaikunth. Such demonstrations are not allowed here and we will complain against them,” he added.
