5 midcaps where FPI stake has hit all-time high; worth a look?

Stock Analysis – Know before investing Stock score of JM Financial Ltd moved down by 2 in an year on a 10-point scale. Subscribe Now Exclusively for

Stock Analysis Stock score of JM Financial Ltd is 6 on a scale of 10. View Stock Analysis »

NEW DELHI: In their brisk buying spree through much of February and March, foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) hit a peak in shareholding in five midcap companies.At the end of the quarter, they held over 10 per cent stake in each of them. What’s more, they have been raising shareholding in these firms for at least four quarters now.Let’s have a look at these stocks.FPIs held 23.76 per cent stake in this small lender as of March 31, up 137 basis points from 22.39 per cent at December-end. Analysts are largely neutral-to-positive on the stock. The bank has demonstrated its ability to create economic moats across segments and, with a strong management team, it is best positioned among SFBs, Nomura India said in a note.“But we think the Street’s optimistic expectations and demanding valuation of 27 times FY21F EPS leaves no room for error,” it said.In the publicly available Reuters database, there were five ‘hold’ recommendations on this stock against four buy, one outperform, one underperform and one sell ratings of April 23.FPIs hiked stake in this firm by 275 pts sequentially to a fresh all-time high of 24.36 per cent at the end of March quarter. Analysts cited improving margin outlook and sustained mid-to-high single-digit volume growth in the past five quarters for their optimism on the counter.Sharekhan believes the existing city gas distribution areas will deliver a 7 per cent volume CAGR over FY2019E-FY2021E. Besides, a ramp-up of Raigad district with the forthcoming international airport in Navi Mumbai and Trans-Harbor link would result in sustainable volume growth for MGL in the medium to long term.Ashika Institutional Equities noted that Shell is planning to exit MGL when its lock-in period gets over in July. It expects the overhang to get over once Shell exits.As per publicly available Reuters data, the scrip had 9 ‘buy’, 11 ‘outperform’, 2 ‘hold’ and just one ‘sell’ ratings as of April 23.feels the company’s near-term operating performance could be healthy due to a low base, while intrinsically weak business construct makes the stock less compelling as an investment theme. The company on Tuesday reported a 49.70 per cent drop in consolidated net profit for March quarter at Rs 35.99 crore.Kotak Institutional Equities sees value and promise in the TGBL story, but believes the pace of progress keeps lagging expectations. While recommending a cautious stance on the stock, the brokerage trimmed our margin expectations and cut FY2020-21E EPS by 2-4 per cent. “TGBL remains a story of hope with several parts of the SOTP worth owning. Challenge is consistency in performance,” the brokerage said.The stock has been trading at 26 PE, which is below its five-year average of 30. The Street view looks neutral with two ‘buy’, one ‘outperform’, 2 ‘hold’ and 1 ‘underperform’ ratings in the publicly available Reuters database as of April 23.At 44.1 per cent, FPI holding in this stock was at its highest at the end of March quarter. The NBFC’s non-gold AUM growth is expected to exceed annual targets in terms of contribution to total loans. NII is seen rising 15-20 per cent for March quarter while profit growth is expected to be in excess of the 25-30 per cent range.Nirmal Bang Institutional Equities, which met the company’s management recently, said the NBFC has managed to cut cost for customers due to the advent of online gold loans. Besides, the safety of the locker is proving to be a big draw for women clients. This brokerage has revised its price target for the stock to Rs 154 from Rs 141 earlier, valuing the stock at 2.4 times FY20E and two times FY21E and P/BV. Edelweiss Securities said while the gold portfolio’s asset quality has been steady, there has been stress in MFI, CV and 2W segments, which needs to be watched. As per publicly available Reuters data, the stock had six buy, three outperform, 1 hold and no sell ratings s of April 23.FPI holding in this stock hit an all-time high level of 11.9 per cent at the end of March quarter, but analysts are not so bullish on the near-term outlook for this stock amid softening aluminium and alumina prices.The scrip is down 38 per cent in last one year. Global major Alcoa ’s March quarter Ebitda was lowest since December quarter of 2016. Emkay Global is expecting the company to report a 6 per cent drop in sales to Rs 2,691.7 crore for March quarter, and just 1 per cent rise in profit at Rs 253.20 crore.In an interview to ET Now, Nalco CMD TK Chand said the cost of production of the company may come down a little because of the slackening prices of caustic soda and other materials. “But it will critically matter how the fuel and coal behave because power accounts for 40 per cent of the company’s expenditure,” he said. This scrip had 5 ‘buy’, 3 ‘hold’ and 1 ‘underperform’ calls in the Reuters database on April 23.
