Telangana farmers contesting against Modi are TRS workers, BJP leader alleges

Telangana farmers contesting against Modi are TRS workers, BJP leader alleges

Arvind claims that the TRS chief’s daughter Kavitha is fielding the candidates as her ego was hurt when over 200 farmers filed nominations against her in the Telangana LS polls.

news Lok Sabha 2019

After filing mass nominations in Nizamabad, turmeric farmers in the state along with farmers of Tamil Nadu had decided to field hundreds of candidates against Prime Minister Narendra Modi from Varanasi. However, the BJP claims that this is an orchestrated campaign supported by the TRS.

Nizamabad Lok Sabha candidate from the BJP, D Arvind Kumar, alleges that Kalvakuntla Kavitha, daughter of chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao and sitting MP of Nizamabad, is behind the campaign because of ‘sheer frustration’.

Turmeric farmers from both Tamil Nadu and Telangana have been demanding a National Turmeric Board, which would ensure a steady price for their produce. As part of the protest, 50 farmers from Nizamabad have decided to contest from Varanasi, and ten have already announced their names. However, Arvind alleges that these ten persons, who are part of the Telangana Turmeric Farmers Association, are associated with the TRS party.

Speaking to TNM, Arvind says, “These ten people have some association or the other with the TRS. They are not non-political persons.”

The BJP leader alleges that some nominees are not even farmers and that they do not have any land. “These ten persons did not even contest from Nizamabad.”

Arvind claims that Kavitha’s ego was hurt when, during the recent Lok Sabha election in the state, over 200 farmers filed nominations against her at Nizamabad constituency as independent candidates.

During the election in Telangana held on April 11, 174 turmeric farmers had contested in the elections as a protest to highlight their plight.

Interestingly, Kavitha had then alleged that the campaign against her was supported by the BJP and the Congress.

“The campaign against Kavitha was organic, farmer associations themselves pooled in money, and issued a diktat that nobody should drop their nomination later. But who is funding these people to contest from Varanasi?” Arvind asks.

Arvind substantiates his allegation referring to the press statement released by the farmers, who stated that Kavitha had fought tirelessly to establish the board.

Reacting to the allegations, Tirupathi Reddy, Telangana Turmeric Farmers Association, Nizamabad president, says, “Yes, Kavitha had fought for farmers, she wrote several letters to the Centre and even spoke to Nirmala Sitaraman and other leaders.”

“We all have political associations, but this campaign is not supported by anyone. It is condemnable that Arvind is making accusations that are insulting to the farmers.”

Responding to Aravind's allegation that these 10 members of the association did not contest in the Lok Sabha polls in Telangana, Reddy says, “It is true, we didn’t contest. But we supported the struggle. There’s nothing suspicious about us contesting now."
