NTR Kathayanayakudu Movie Review: Balakrishna flawless as his father, the biopic not quite

Director Krish Jagarlamudi's NTR Kathanayakudu opens on a tragic note, but soon, we delve deep into the life of the iconic actor-politician Nandamuri Taraka Rama Rao (NTR). An aged Basavatarakam (Vidya Balan) and Harikrishna (Kalyan Ram) are reminiscing old times by flipping through an album which contains childhood photos of NTR.

From the word go, NTR (Balakrishna aka Balayya) is shown as a boisterous man who is against corruption. He quits his government job in the blink of an eye as the employees loot money from the poor. That is when NTR comes to Madras (Chennai) to pursue his passion, which is cinema.

His good looks, body language and dialogue delivery bring him many roles and how his passion transcends cinema is explored in the first instalment of the two-part series. In a nutshell, NTR Kathanayakudu is about the rise of the Patala Bhairavi actor as the people's politician.

Balakrishna, in many frames, is a spitting image of his father. Though he has aced his role, there are times where the usual Balayya peeks in with his animated expressions and exaggerated body language. In his role as NTR, Balayya, who takes pride in being a Telugu lad, has thrown his lot behind the film and it is quite vivid in every frame.

The hero of NTR Kathanayakudu is director Krish. The film gets a pedantic treatment but still manages to stay afloat because of the fascinating story that unfolds on screen. However, Krish shows NTR as a man who never falters and is always capable of taking the right decision. Agreed, that it is the biopic of an legendary actor-politican, but the film would have been a tad bit original had they showcased NTR's struggles and mistakes.

There are several whistle-worthy moments that are sure to give you goosebumps. For example, two producers doubt the director's choice of casting NTR as Lord Krishna. When he dresses up as the God and comes to the set, the workers see him as a God and break open the coconut in his hands.

Another important scene is when NTR announces his political entry amid a horde of followers. Right from the dialogues to its setting, everything is on point with the climax.

NTR Kathanayakudu also explores how he was always game for trying everything new in cinema. In one episode, the team struggles to showcase him as the ten-headed Ravana in Seetharama Kalyan. You just stare at the screen in awe, at the execution of the scene.

There are cameos aplenty, so much that after some point, the story feels stretched. However, the cameos played by Sumanth (as Akkineni Nageswara Rao) and Rakul Preet (as Sridevi) deserve a special mention.

Rana Daggubati, who plays N Chandrababu Naidu, has minimum screen time in the first part, but it does change the course of the film. In a scene from the parliament, a minister asks him if NTR will enter politics. Rana says, "He will always tell the world after he makes a decision. He never discusses his decisions with anyone." This statement beautifully sums up who NTR is.

Vidya Balan perfectly cast as Basavatarakam. She is NTR's backbone even though she never gets a say in any of the big decisions he takes. She is the ideal 'patni' who stands by her husband, no matter what.

Composer MM Keeravani's score does a great job in creating the essential mood for the important scenes. Also, cinematographer VS Gnanasekar's maturity with the camera seeps into every frame, making them look grand.

NTR Kathanayakudu could have been flawless had it spent more time on the leader's struggles instead of concentrating on his achievements. The stage is now set for NTR Mahanayakudu, and we will have to see whether the second part lends a human touch to the star.

NTR Kathanayakudu, Krish Jagarlamudi-directed biopic on legendary actor-politician NT Rama Rao, is the tale of a superstar who valued people's opinion. However, the biopic falls short of becoming the best, leaving the star dehumanised, says our review.

3 out of 5 stars for NTR Kathanayakudu.

ALSO SEE | Kathanayakudu: Vidya Balan reveals her look from NTR biopic
