Five NMMC hospital doctors quit

Protest colleagues’ suspension; no one left to treat patients

Altogether five doctors from NMMC hospitals in Navi Mumbai have resigned in protest against the suspension of two doctors in the Vashi hospital on charges of negligence, leaving the hospitals with no doctors.

While four doctors are from Vashi, one works at the NMMC’s Mother and Child Hospital at Nerul. The Vashi hospital had just six doctors, four of whom have resigned and two suspended. The Nerul Mother and Child Hospital had only one physician, who has also resigned.

“We have resigned to show solidarity with the two doctors from Vashi hospital. The 2D echo test of the deceased patient, for which the doctors were suspended, were normal. While treating a patient, we go by reports, and the reports were normal. He was discharged after being under observation for six hours. It is unfortunate that he died later, but it is not due to negligence and in such a situation, it is not fair to suspend a doctor,” said a doctor.

On March 28, Vicky Ingle was admitted to the NMMC hospital after complaining of uneasiness and was discharged the same evening after the reports turned out to be normal. At night, Mr. Ingle suffered from chest pain and was admitted to the hospital again. He died despite attempts to revive him and his father, Rajendra Ingle, wrote to the NMMC Commissioner seeking action against doctors.

Dr. Shareef Hussain Tadvi and Dr. Prabha Nandakishor Sawant were suspended following investigations.

According to the sources, five doctors were already attending to the patient, and Dr. Tadvi had left for half a hour citing personal reasons. The doctor who resigned said Ms. Sawant, who is a head of department, does not check patients. “She is responsible for looking after the functioning of the department and the machinery. She doesn’t look after the patients, and yet, has been suspended. Dr. Tadvi had left the campus with permission at 8.10 p.m. that day and was suspended. For absence, a show-cause notice is issued or a day’s salary is deducted but suspension is injustice,” the doctor said.

N. Ramaswami, NMMC Commissioner, said that he had conducted a meeting with the doctors who resigned and told them that they will have to join duty from Monday till an alternative is found. “It is established that there was no negligence in treatment. The suspension was for the doctors’ absence. We verified the absence with CCTV footage. Dr. Tadvi, after leaving the hospital, came back only by 10.30 p.m. and there was no permission taken to leave the premises,” he said.

While the doctors who were suspended were NMMC employees, the ones who resigned are on contract. “We are looking at hiring more doctors for the hospital and after an election, permanent posts too will be filled,” Mr. Ramaswami said.
