Beating students from government and private schools, BMC students strike gold at all-India Olympiad

BMC school students

gold medals

BMC

Olympiad exams

Quality Education Cell

Cambridge University

Beating students from government and private schools across India, 24have wonat a national-level Olympiad called the Primary Olympiad of Math, Science and English. This is the first such victory on the national stage for civic schools in the city.Of the 24 medals, 14 students won gold in English, six in Science, and four in Math. These 24 bagged gold out of the 700 students who qualified for the national round from all over the country in an exam held in March. Plus, nearly a fourth, or 176 of 700 students, were fromschools. A total of 12,500 students appeared for thepan-India.“This is the first time that BMC students have won gold medals at an all-India Olympiad. We get students from the poorest groups, who have competed with students from private schools and international boards. Last year, we did not get any medal, but this year it is raining medals. Even the number of students who qualified for the nationals is huge. This negates the notion that BMC students are weak,” said Prakash Charate, BMC’s deputy education officer, who started the initiative of training students for the Olympiad two years ago as head of theThe Primary Olympiad is conducted by Firefish, an education services company, in collaboration withPress India Pvt Ltd for primary students from Classes I to VIII. Students are selected for the national levels from exams conducted at the school and regional levels.“We are not just surprised; we are shocked at the performance of the BMC students. They have really worked hard,” said Shikha Bansal, senior project manager, Primary Olympiad.As part of the initiative, teachers, principals and school inspectors were first trained on a separate set of books given for the purpose. In the first year of the project, that is 2017, 300 students appeared for the first qualifier round. In 2018, 6,334 students took the first test at the school level, Rachana Shinde, project coordinator at BMC, said.
