Ban on hijab in college: Muslim girl writes to DC

MANGALURU: A student has complained to the district administration that she was denied re-admission to second-year PU to a college in the city after she refused to attend classes without the hijab headscarf ). However, the college principal said the student was told several times that wearing the hijab in college wasn't permitted.In a complaint to the district administration, Fathima Fazeela, who completed first-year PU from St Agnes College, said the college authorities had not informed her about the rules on wearing the hijab when she was admitted to first-year PU. She has sought action against the college authorities."Last year, I attended classes wearing hijab," Fathima said. "Recently, I received notification of admission to the second year. When my mother and I went to complete the formalities, they refused to admit me because I wear a hijab. My parents and I have repeatedly requested the college management to allow me to wear the hijab and continue my studies in the college, but they have refused. I asked them to give it writing, but they are not willing to do that."Fathima said she and her parents have bee n running from pillar to post for the past three days, seeking admission in the college. "I asked them to give the reason in the TC (transfer certificate), but they are refusing," said Fathima.However, St Agnes College principal Norine D'Souza said "uniformity" is part of the college rules and regulations."PU admission is for one year," D'Souza said. "We evaluate students' character, their conduct and discipline. Based on that, we re-admit them (for the second year). In the case of Fathima Fazeela, we have issued reminders again that students should follow uniformity inside classrooms, but she refused. During re-admission, we told her that if she does not abide by the college rules, she will not be allowed to continue her second PUC in our college. This is a rule of the college."Last year, a student who had held a protest demanding Muslim students be allowed to wear the headscarf, tendered an apology to the college.
