PM Modi in Varanasi: Five quotable quotes from his speech

The city will go to polls in the Phase 7 of the 2019 Lok Sabha election on May 19.

Varanasi: Before filing his nomination papers, Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave a rousing speech to his supporters and booth level workers in the holy city of Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh today. The city will go to polls in the Phase 7 of the 2019 Lok Sabha election on May 19.

During his address, PM Modi was flanked by UP chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and other senior BJP leaders. On Thursday, PM Modi held a road show and performed Arti at Assi Ghat in the presence of senior party leaders and BJP chief Amit Shah. Prime Minister arrived in the city yesterday afternoon.

During the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, Varanasi was one of two seats that PM Modi contested apart from Vadodra in Gujarat.

This time around PM Modi is contesting against Congress nominee Ajay Rai. In the three-cornered contest, Samajwadi Party has fielded Shalini Yadav.

Meanwhile, amid chants of 'Modi, Modi' by supporters, Prime Minister Narendra Modi began his address by chanting 'Har Har Mahadev'.

Here are five quotable quotes of PM Modi’s speech

1) "After filing nomination papers, we have to do nothing to fight this election as Ganga Maiyya will take care of it. But my polling booth worker shouldn’t lose. I won’t be happy even after winning this election if any of the booth is lost. Your attention should focus on winning the polling booth.”

2) “Political pundits will be left scratching their heads as it’s is for the first time after independence that there is pro-incumbency wave in the country”

3) “Create a list of all the first-time voters and motivate them to vote. He should feel that he is now 18 years of age and going to vote for the first time. We should also not discuss his choice of votes”

4) “No matter how much one abuses Modi, you should not worry. Whether I win or lose is not significant, what is important is that democracy should win.”

5) "Earlier governments were formed, but in the past five years, people saw a government run. I never said I am the Prime Minister and refused anybody a meeting. I never refused to meet a single worker. I never let the worker in me die. I am aware of my duties as PM, as well as an MP"
