Protestors demand justice for Raichur victim at Town Hall in Bengaluru

Protestors demand justice for Raichur victim at Town Hall in Bengaluru

Protestors hoped that the Raichur case would gather the required attention from the state government.

news Protest

A crowd of protestors dressed in black took to the steps of Town Hall in Bengaluru on Thursday to protest the handling of an investigation into the death of a 23-year-old engineering student in Raichur. People of all age groups gathered to protest and demand justice for the victim who was found dead under mysterious circumstances last week.

Protestors raised placards carrying strong messages against sexual harassment and on the importance of consent, while voicing their demands for justice. Twenty organisations across the state had gathered to protest the inaction of the police, who have maintained that it was a case of suicide after the victim was found hanging from a tree. However, after massive protests in Raichur, the police were forced to register a case of rape and murder.

The program began at 5 pm and saw the crowds slowly swell as people assembled at the Town Hall. Protestors hoped that the Raichur case would gather the required attention from the state government.

Dr Brinda Adige, a women and child rights activist who was present at the protest, condemned the lack of action taken by the authorities and wanted the government to be held accountable. She also demanded that the college administration be held responsible as well. “People in positions of power are usurping the procedure of justice and that should not have happened,” said Brinda.

Signatures were collected from those present, and the organisations plan to present this along with a memorandum to the Chief Minister and Home Minister. They intend to convey their message of seeking a free and independent trial and immediate justice for the victim.

The protestors, while expressing solidarity, hoped that there would be no political interference in the investigation. A protestor said, “Let this demonstration be our message that we are there for the people and silence will not be accepted as the answer.”

The accused in the case, Sudarshan Yadav, is currently being questioned by the CBI for his alleged role in the crime. Anjaneya, a police officer and Sudarshan’s uncle, was allegedly in possession of the victim’s phone a day before her body was found.

Read: Raichur student death: Policeman had victim’s phone before body was found
