Rahul Gandhi`s plane suffers engine trouble, DGCA begins probe

Home >> Delhi Rahul Gandhi`s plane suffers engine trouble, DGCA begins probe

Congress president Rahul Gandhi` s flight to Patna was forced to return to Delhi on Friday after experiencing "engine trouble". Aviation regulator DGCA has started a probe in the incident of the plane carrying Congress President Rahul Gandhi suffering engine trouble.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi`s flight to Patna was forced to return to Delhi on Friday after experiencing "engine trouble".

Rahul Gandhi wrote this on his twitter and posted the video.

"Engine trouble on our flight to Patna today! We’ve been forced to return to Delhi. Today’s meetings in Samastipur (Bihar), Balasore (Orissa) & Sangamner (Maharashtra) will run late. Apologies for the inconvenience."

Engine trouble on our flight to Patna today! Weve been forced to return to Delhi. Todays meetings in Samastipur (Bihar), Balasore (Orissa) & Sangamner (Maharashta) will run late. Apologies for the inconvenience. pic.twitter.com/jfLLjYAgcO — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) April 26, 2019

Rahul Gandhi is on an election campaign and he was scheduled to hold rallies in Bihar, Odisha, and Maharashtra.

Aviation regulator DGCA has started a probe in the incident of the plane carrying Congress President Rahul Gandhi suffering engine trouble

The senior Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) official said the Hawker 850 XP aircraft VT-KNB returned back to Delhi after take-off due to a technical snag.

"DGCA has initiated an investigation as per the laid down procedure," he told PTI.

The aircraft landed safely in Delhi at 1020 hours. There were ten people on board including two crew members, the official said.

This is not the first time that Rahul Gandhi`s plane has experienced troubles.

On April 26 last year, a plane carrying Gandhi and some others from Delhi to Hubballi airport in Karnataka for campaigning for assembly polls developed a technical problem and tilted heavily on the left side.

The plane dipped steeply with violent shuddering, but soon recovered and landed safely.

Aviation regulator Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) had come out with its 30-page report on that incident in which it pinned the blame on the pilots for the near-crash of the Congress president`s chartered plane.
