Mamata Banerjee Promises Rosogullas For PM, But There's A Twist

Mamata Banerjee said she will send "rosogollas" to PM Narendra Modi - but there's a twist

Highlights Mamata Banerjee said she will send rosogollas made of mud and stone chips

This come days after PM Modi said he gets gifts from Mamata Banerjee

Mamata Banerjee had earlier said she may give gifts but won't give votes

Prime Minister Narendra Modi should be wary of biting into the next bunch of 'rosogollas' that Mamata Banerjee sends him.

Responding to his revelation that she sent him gifts of Bengali sweets and hand-picked 'kurtas' once or twice each year, Mamata Banerjee today said she will still send Narendra Modi rosogollas from Bengal but not the soft, melt-in-your-mouth variety.

"I will send him rosogollas made of mud with some stone chips thrown in -- like cashew nuts and raisins are used in laddu. One bite and it will break the teeth. That's the kind of mithai I will send," the Chief Minister said at a campaign rally at Asansol, the same town where PM Modi had mocked her on Tuesday saying the "PM's chair is not for auction".

The bitter exchange over sweets started when PM Modi told filmstar Akshay Kumar, "I don't know if this will politically hurt me but Mamata Didi sends me a couple of handpicked kurtas every year. And after she heard that Sheikh Hasina, the prime minister of Bangladesh, sent me special Bengali sweets, Mamata Didi also started sending me sweets from Bengal once or twice a year."

The same day, Mamata Banerjee responded to the Prime Minister's comment saying, it was Bengal's culture to welcome guests with sweets and gifts. "He will still get rosogollas, but not a single vote," she said, a mild retort, watchers of the Modi-Mamata showdown felt.

Today, she fixed that impression with a vengeance.

In Asansol on Tuesday PM Modi had attacked the Trinamool chief with his sharpest words for her yet: "Our didi, contesting a handful of seats, is dreaming of becoming Prime Minister. If the PM's post could be auctioned, then the Congress and didi would come with whatever they have looted through corruption."

"Didi, yeh PM pad auction mein nahi hai jo Sharda, Narada ke paiso se kharida jaa sake (this post is not on auction that it can be bought from the money from Sharada and Narada). One needs the blessings of 130 crore Indians to get to the post."
