New year, new beginning: 2 women finally pray at Sabarimala, protests erupt across Kerala | 10 points

The Sabarimala shrine, located northeast of Pathanamthitta in a tiger reserve, is dedicated to the Hindu deity Ayyappa. (Photo: Reuters)

Two women devotees, below the age of 50 years, entered the Sabarimala temple on early Wednesday morning. Bindu, 44, from Perinthalmanna and Kanaka Durga, 42, from Kannur, began their climb towards the abode of Lord Ayyappa at midnight and reached the shrine only after 3.45 am on Wednesday.

Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan confirmed the reports and said, "Yes, it's true, the women have had the temple darshan." The two women were accompanied by a group of policemen in civil uniform.

The jubilation, however, did not last long. As soon as the news broke out, protests erupted across Kerala, with the Sabarimala Karma Samithi (SMS) calling for a state-wide shutdown on Thursday (January 3). The shrine was shut down for an hour for "purification rituals".

Here’s all that happened today:

1 The two women, Bindu and Kanakadurga, had tried to visit the shrine late last month too but failed amidst massive protests. The women were then blocked by protestors some two kilometres away at Appachi medu.

2 While speaking to India Today TV, the two women said that they represent lakhs of woman devotees and the fight for gender justice. “Apart from people with a political agenda, the others aren't protesting against us," said Bindu. She said "Naamajaba [chanting mantras] and BJP people" were protesting against them "in small ways".

3 Following the entry of two women at the Sabarimala, the chief priest decided to shut it for the “purification rituals”. The shrine, which generally closes at 12:30 pm, was closed at 10:30 am for the rituals. The shrine was again opened in the afternoon after completion of the ritual.

4 Fearing protests, police have provided security to the two women at their houses.

5 As the news spread, Sangh Parivar outfits took to the streets across the state. The outfits blocked traffic, burned tyres as a mark of protest against the entry of two women.

6 Stone-pelting was reported in Kozhancheri, where a bus was damaged, and in Karunagapalli, where the police were attacked.

7 BJP state president PS Sreedharan Pillai also called for protests and said that the entry of the two women into the Sabarimala temple was "a conspiracy by the atheist rulers to destroy the Hindu temples".

8 Rahul Easwar said the protests taking place across Kerala were "great," but appealed to protesters to eschew violence. "Violence is anti-spiritual," he said.

9 Opposition Congress and the BJP lashed out at Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan after two women in the hitherto banned age group entered the Sabarimala and said that it hurt the sentiments of the Lord Ayyappa devotees.

10 BJP RSS activists forcefully stopped vehicles and closed shops at Punalur in Kollam district. They were later taken into custody.

With agency inputs

Also Read | Protests, stone-pelting follow 2 women's visit to Sabarimala

Also Read | Exclusive: We fight for gender justice, says woman who entered Sabarimala temple
