Elections in States; polling begins in Bombay; brisk voting in labour areas

The Hindu taps into its 140-year rich archives to bring you glimpses of Mumbai’s eventful past, and, lest we forget, remind us all how we got to where we are today

Bombay, January 3, 1952

Bombay City went to the polls this morning exactly at the stroke of eight to elect 28 representatives to the State Assembly and four to the House of the People.

Polling concluded peacefully at 8 p.m. without any untoward incident thanks to efficient official arrangements made at the 1,380 polling stations spread over an area of 90 square miles and also the fine sense of responsibility shown by the contending parties. About 60 per cent of the 15.3 lakh voters exercised their franchise. At every polling booth voting was steady and periods of dullness were few and far between.

Late up to mid-night, ballot boxes were pouring into the central polling stations from the polling booths in the constituencies. From information collected up to midnight. It could be said that about 56 to 60 per cent of the electorate had cast their votes; but the percentage ranged from 35 to 80 in the various constituencies. There were a dozen cases of impersonation. Some 12 persons were arrested on various grounds.

Heavy polling was witnessed in the thickly populated labour areas of the city where 30 to 40 per cent of the electorate cast their votes in the first four hours of polling in Buleswar and Kalbadevi areas, one of the busiest localities in Bombay, brisk voting was reported. The polling officer for this area said that nearly 60 per cent of the electorate had exercised their franchise. Other areas to report good polling were Mazagon-Ghodepdeo, Girgam-Khetwadi, and Agripada-Madanpura.

To-day’s polling embraced most of the cities and towns of the State — Greater Bombay (with its 28 Assembly constituencies comprising three House of the People constituencies); Ahmedabad, the second city of the state, with eight Assembly constituencies: Poona City, with four assembly constituencies, Baroda, Surat, Nasik, Sangli, Miraj, Satara, Dharwar, Hubli, Bijapur and Karwar. A notable exception was the industrial city of Sholapur, which polls on January 11.

In Bombay City, with one and a half million voters, a little over 55 percent was estimated to have actually voted. Polling was exceptionally heavy in the working class areas in the industrial north including Worli. At some of the polling booths in this area over 30 per cent had voted by 2 p.m. In a booth near Kamgar Maidan — the venue of the city’s biggest workers rallies — 900 voters out of 1,040 had voted by 4 p.m.

Despite the drop in the day’s temperature and an unusual cold spell which was experienced this morning, people evinced great enthusiasm, and came out in good members to cast their votes. The representatives of THE HINDU, who went around the various wards of the city this morning, saw keen enthusiasm in the Chakla, Mandvi, Chinch Bunder, Umarkhadi, Donri and Wadi Bunder constituencies where a large number of Muslims live. At one booth the polling officer told him that the interest shown by Muslims was praiseworthy. A good many Muslim women, some in purdah, were seen at the booths. In the Carnac Bunder constituencies, where dock workers live, polling was peaceful. Polling was not brisk in the Fort area, where leading Firms and commercial houses are situated. At some of the booths, voters were coming in twos and threes. In Colaba, voting was fair and in two polling booths in this area, nearly 500 voters out of 1,500 had exercised their franchise.

In the suburbs of Bombay, good polling was reported. Voters in the Matunga-Sion-Koliwada constituency with a highly educated electorate, formed long queues in front of the booths as soon as the sirens blared the commencement of polling. Another feature of this constituency was the participation of South Indian women in large numbers. At one booth in Brahmanwada road, nearly 90 per cent of them cast their votes. In other areas also, large number of women took part in the election.

Counting to start to-day

Counting of votes for the Assembly will start at the central stations in the various constituencies to-morrow afternoon and results will be declared later in the day. Counting for the House of the People will begin on Monday. Eight thousand officers and men of the Bombay Police helped by the city Home Guards supervised the booths and maintained order. A fleet of police vans fitted with wireless constantly patrolled the city.

A high official of the Bombay Government, who returned to the central polling station after visiting 45 polling booths told reporters that polling was satisfactory and no untoward incident had been reported. He praised the various parties participating in the elections on the way they had been conducting themselves.

Blind students cast vote

The first voter in the new Bhatia Mahajan Wadi polling booth in Central Bombay was a blind man. He had been waiting for the booth to open and a polling officer conducted him to the ballot box of his choice, in terms of the regulation which provides for such help for the blind, the sick and the maimed. At Tardeo, about 100 blind students of the Victoria School for the Blind marched in a procession, each leading the other and singing songs, to exercise their franchise. A presiding officer at a polling booth in the Fort area was baffled when a middle-aged man asked him: “For whom do I vote?” The officer told him the choice was his.

The polling staff had to break open the lock of a polling station as the Government contractor who had the key with him did not arrive in time. At a few other polling stations, voting began a few minutes late, in one case, by as much as one hour owing to late arrival of staff or difficulties in sealing the ballot boxes.

A loudspeaker-van, so familiar to Bombayites in the past few weeks, was seized by the police for blaring out propaganda slogans, which is prohibited near polling booths. Polling officers in many stations asked men and women going to poll to remove party symbols, which some them sported on their shirts and sarees.

Monkey enters booth

A rose flower placed by some unknown voter on the Congress ballot box in one of the stations at Bulsar was removed when an agent of an opposing candidate objected to it. Objection was also raised to Mr. Morarji Desai accepting flowers offered to him when he went round the polling booths in Bulsar.

A red-faced monkey terrified the voters in thickly populated Buleshwar in the heart of Bombay City. Sharply at 8 a.m., he swung his way into the first floor polling booth in the Cotton Piece-Goods Merchants Association hall as if he claimed to be an adult man with a right to vote. He jumped right on to the table of the presiding officer as the small knot of voters, who were queueing up scattered in panic. The polling staff ran out of the room as the simian visitor menacingly grimaced at them. It took about 10 minutes to drive the imposter out and a police sub-inspector stood near the booth with a revolver in hand for some time to make sure he did not return.

Men and women queued up in an orderly way in the predominantly middle-class areas of Matunga, Dadar, Shivaji Park and Girgaum. In a few booths here, the queues were still stretching in 50’s and 100’s at 6 p.m. when polling ended. Nearly 70 per cent polling was reported in these parts. Over 60 per cent was the estimate from most of the suburban stations extending up to Borivli and Thana in the north. In the predominantly Muslim area of Bhendy Bazar polling was comparatively poor, but Muslims, both men and women, were conspicuous in other mixed areas of the city.

In striking contrast to the hectic scenes in the middle class and labour areas, Malabar Hill, Walkeshwar and Napean Sea Road where Bombay’s elite and millionaires live, wore a quite appearance. Polling in these areas did not exceed 30 percent Fashionable Marine Drive did better, but still below the city’s general average. The queue-conscious Bombay man and woman did not present any problem to the polling officers. Women mustered strong at the polling booths, particularly in the working class and middle class areas. Their dress representing every saree style in the country, the Punjabi salwar and the chic frocks of the Anglo-Indians and Christians reflected the city’s cosmopolitan population. Many had babes in arms and quite a larger number of Muslim women came in burqa.

Mr. Kher casts vote

Among the first to vote this morning was Mr. S. K. Patil, who is contesting the House of the People seat from the Bombay South constituency. He voted in the Brabourne Stadium. Mr. B. G. Kher and his family stood in a queue at a polling booth in Malabar Hill and waited for about 20 minutes for their turn. Behind his family were two of his peons, who exercised their franchise. Chief Justice Chagla and his wife voted at Malabar Hill at noon. Mr. K. M. Munshi cast his vote at Napean Sea road. They were preceded by Mrs. Jayashree Raiji, Congress candidate for the Bombay Suburban constituency for Parliament. Mrs. Kamaladevi who is contesting the same seat on behalf of the Socialists voted in Gamdevi. Mr. Asoka Mehta, Socialist candidate for Parliament from Bombay north, cast his vote in Dadar. Six sick voters came to a booth in Matunga on stretchers. One of them had come from a hospital with the permission of the doctor.

A polling officer in the Matunga-Sion-Koliwada constituency told a voter who claimed to be Mr. Manilal Dongarsey, that according to his list, Mr. Dongarsey was dead. The voter insisted that he was still alive and kicking; but the officer did not yield, even when Mrs. Jayashree Raijee, the Congress candidate for the House of the People from this constituency testified to the identity of the man. The officer said he was helpless, but recorded the voter’s complaint.

A voter who had neither legs nor hands was brought into the polling station at Kalachowki in Bombay City. The presiding officer helped him to cast his vote. At Madanpura, an old man of 90 defied his age and fatigue and came to the booth assisted by his grandsons. He fell unconscious in the booth and had to be removed in an ambulance.

There were a few instances of voters who declined to vote protesting against the smearing of the indelible ink. The presiding officer at Bulsar in Gujarat had to protest against a Harijan voter trying to perform puja by offering flowers to one of the ballot boxes.

Eight hundred workers belonging to BEST at King’s Circle walked out as a protest against the management’s decision not to give them a holiday to exercise their franchise on elections day. Later on, the management revoked their earlier decision and granted a holiday.

Repoll ordered in three booths

Ballot boxes were found to have been tampered with at three polling booths in the Assembly constituencies of Mazagaon-Ghorapdeo, Tank-Pakhadi-Byculla (West)-Kalachowki (West) and Kurla-Bandra (East), says a Press note issued by the Director of Publicity, Government of Bombay, to-night. The Press note adds that repolling will be ordered in those three polling booths and there will be no counting of votes in the three constituencies to-morrow. The date of repolling will be notified later.
