Political heavyweights clash in Mumbai North Central

Priya Dutt, a two-time Congress MP, will be keen on reclaiming the seat from sitting MP Poonam Mahajan of the BJP

Of the six constituencies going to the polls in the city on Monday, Mumbai North Central features a star-studded battle between political heavyweights.

Priya Dutt, a two-time Congress MP, will be keen on reclaiming the seat from sitting MP Poonam Mahajan of the BJP. While Ms. Dutt is the daughter of legendary actors Sunil Dutt and Nargis Dutt, and the sister of actor Sanjay Dutt, Ms. Mahajan is the daughter of late Pramod Mahajan, BJP stalwart and former Union minister. After her father’s demise in 2005, Ms. Dutt contested from his constituency, Mumbai North West, and won.

No longer safe seat for Congress

In the 2009 elections, she contested from Mumbai North Central against Mahesh Ram Jethmalani of the BJP and won by a margin of 1.74 lakh votes. The constituency was till then considered a Congress bastion and the safest seat for the party in Mumbai. However, in 2014, the BJP fielded first-time candidate Ms. Mahajan, and riding the Modi wave, she trounced Ms. Dutt by a margin of 1.86 lakh votes. In 2016, Ms. Mahajan rose in the BJP ranks and was appointed the president of the Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha. She is now hoping to consolidate her base and win a second term as MP.

Ms. Dutt resigned from her position as the secretary of All India Congress Committee (AICC) on September 26 last year. She soon declared that she would not be contesting in the next Lok Sabha elections.

‘Save Constitution from divisive forces’

But Ms. Dutt re-entered the fray and said she would be focussing her campaign on the need to ‘save the Constitution from divisive forces’. She is also banking on the star power of her brother, who accompanied her when she filed her nomination papers and has been part of her campaign rallies.

Meanwhile, Ms. Mahajan is projecting the achievements of the Modi government and her work in the constituency in the past five years. While Chief Minister Fadnavis held a rally in support of her in Kurla on Thursday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed a rally in the State on Friday endorsing all BJP candidates. However, Ms. Mahajan’s fracas with Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Thackeray might work against her. A fight had broken out between the Shiv Sena and Ms. Mahajan after Mr. Thackeray’s photo was found missing from her posters and election pamphlets.

Stepping out of fathers’ shadows

Though their rivalry is being projected as a battle between two political dynasties, both Ms. Mahajan and Ms. Dutt have affirmed that they have stepped out of their fathers’ shadows. The women contenders face competition from Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi’s Dr. A.R. Anjaria, who calls himself a ‘anti-terrorism crusader’. He is likely to garner support from Dalit and Muslim voters in the constituency after he accused mainstream parties of marginalising the communities. Sneha Kale, the first transgender person to contest as an Independent in the Lok Sabha elections this year, is also making her presence felt in the constituency. Ms. Kale, who works as a social worker and resides in Ghatkopar, has pledged to work for the rights of the transgender community.

Even though the contest is primarily between a Marathi and a non-Marathi candidate, Marathi identity has not become a poll issue yet. The constituency is made up of six assembly segments — Bandra East, Bandra West, Santacruz, Vile Parle, Kurla, and Chandivali — of which, two are held by the BJP, three by the Shiv Sena and one by the Congress. While most of these areas are residential, the constituency has the largest commercial district in the city: the Bandra-Kurla Complex.

Pressing civic issues

The voters are largely made up of Maharashtrians, Gujaratis, north Indians, Christians and Muslims, and the pressing civic issues include encroachment by hawkers, lack of fire safety in restaurants, traffic jams owing to Metro work, illegal construction, and unauthorised parking and traffic. Lakhs of residents living in ground-plus two buildings in areas adjoining the airport in Vile Parle have been struggling for decades now over runway funnel zone height restrictions.

Jitendra Gupta, an activist from Kurla, said, “Neither Ms. Mahajan nor Ms. Dutt have been actively campaigning in Kurla. Nothing has changed here in the last five years. The rejuvenation of Mithi river has been completely neglected. The phase one — cleaning — was a sham and phase two — building a retaining wall — has not been completed yet. Besides, public transport is also a major issue in this area.”

Madhu Poplai of Pali Hill Residents’ Association said, “Ms. Mahajan and BJP city chief Ashish Shelar have been accessible to us. However, Ms. Dutt has not visited Pali Hill at all this time despite being a resident of Pali Hill. I think Ms. Mahajan might have an edge over Ms. Dutt.”
