‘We’re seeing politics of blackmail’

VBA chief Prakash Ambedkar says PM has coerced Congress into keeping quiet

Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi (VBA) leader Prakash Ambedkar hit out at the Bharatiya Janata Party government for fielding Pragya Singh Thakur, and the Shiv Sena for not criticising her statements against the late Hemant Karkare, former chief of the Anti-Terrorist Squad.

Mr. Ambedkar was addressing an election rally at Nehru Nagar in Kurla (East), which is in the Mumbai North Central constituency.

Karkare, who died on duty during the terrorist attacks in the city on November 26, 2008, had arrested Ms. Thakur in connection with the Malegaon blasts case. Ms. Thakur had said Karkare had falsely implicated her, and because of her curse had lost his life.

Mr. Ambedkar said, “For all their bluster about representing Maharashtrians, why hasn’t the Sena protested against the statements made by Pragya Thakur about Hemant Karkare? How can you now vote for the BJP? How can you support the party that insults our heroes?”

Last rally in State

The rally was to be the last in the State and scheduled to be also addressed by Asaduddin Owaisi of the All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul-Muslimeen. Mr. Owaisi skipped it after attending another joint rally at Bhiwandi.

Mr. Ambedkar called Prime Minister Narendra Modi a blackmailer who coerces not only the Congress into keeping quiet but also the Shiv Sena. He said, “What hasn’t happened in 70 years is happening now. The politics of blackmail is occurring. He has blackmailed not only the Congress but also the Sena to such an extent that they have kept silent despite Pragya’s insults.”

‘Power in hands of few’

Mr. Ambedkar criticised Prime Minister Modi for “lying about the Balakot strikes.” He also hit out at the government for their paltry allocation to education, and said politics in Maharashtra had turned into a spectacle in which, regardless of who you vote for, a few families continue to be in power.

The rally was attended by all six Mumbai candidates of the VBA. During the course of the rally, the generators failed twice, plunging the ground in darkness. The spirited VBA supporters flashed their mobile torches and shouted slogans till electricity was restored.
