Yoursay: Will fall in popularity be a wake-up call for Harapan gov’t?

YOURSAY | ‘While ratings dip is normal after honeymoon period, certain mistakes have made it worse for Harapan.’

Poll: PM sees massive dip in approval rating, down to 46pct

Abasir: Not surprising, is it?

When was the last time any one of the Pakatan Harapan leaders articulated a clear vision for a New Malaysia?

When did any one spell out the details of their much-vaunted “reform agenda” and an implementation roadmap?

Why did every single one of them maintain a stony silence and feign ignorance when injustice and lawlessness came to light regarding the police’s role in the abduction of citizens?

What does stand out over the last one year of bungling, U-turns, and outright stupidity are as follows:

PKR president Anwar Ibrahim’s “don’t spook the Malays” comment; Prime Minister Dr Mahathir Mohamad’s embrace of controversial Islamic preacher Zakir Naik; minister Mujahid Yusof Rawa’s subsequent inspiration by a known bigot and alleged money launderer; the bigotry on parade following the Seafield saga; Bersatu supreme council leader A Kadir Jasin’s sporadic sniping at the cabinet of “clowns” (his words); and the pronouncements by Education Minister Maszlee Malik.

One can go on and on and on.

What is clear, to me at least, is that the country is hopelessly sandwiched between a corrupt, racist regime and an incompetent, cowardly, and equally racist one.

Transformation of the kind expected by a corruption-weary electorate requires a combination of exemplary courage and clear vision, bound by uncompromising ethics and constant, credible communication.

Harapan has not demonstrated any of that. Which is why it continues to be a misnomer.

Love Malaysia 2: Mahathir himself said last year this would happen, and it is normal in politics.

However, certain mistakes have made the fall worse. Poor communication skills, failure to stimulate a public debate based on facts about hot-button issues, and a perception that reforms do not benefit the general public all contribute to fall in popularity.

The government needs to be more professional in issuing statements, and also needs to engage the general debate through the presentation of facts in an easily understood manner.

KS: There's another perspective. Reform is tough, and Mahathir is the best person to take the heat and criticism for it.

Despite blaming its own lieutenant's errors on the royalty, Mahathir is doing a good job of biting the bullet, undertaking tough negotiations with China, and balancing reform with reality.

Those entrapped in the bumiputera mentality are the problem. Those who are short-sighted, and who want quick results and the strongman approach are the problem.

But democracy works best with weak and deliberate politicians, not enthusiastic authoritarians. Mahathir is now mellowed enough to walk the tight line.

Ex-Wfw: There are simply too many naive people who thought the scenario could be changed by the press of the bell. This just tells us how bad the situation is.

When people have been indoctrinated to fear their own shadows, and expect manna to fall from the sky, you think you can change them overnight? Hardly.

Most parents seem oblivious to the fact that their children cannot find a job, even with their degrees, and they are still not bothered about what happened. This is what Malaysian society has succumbed to. Indeed, Harapan has a real challenge in hand.

Caripasal: Harapan missed the opportunity to reform after May 9 when Mahathir decided to continue with his Malay agenda and to ensure the survival of his race-based Bersatu.

He allowed the proliferation of Umno-PAS racism (without taking action against Umno-PAS politicians). The Icerd protest by the Malays, orchestrated by Bersatu or otherwise, perhaps was intended to tell DAP-PKR to delay the reform of New Malaysia.

Malays refused to vote for him even with what he had done for them after May 9. He is also losing the support of the non-Malays, fast and furious, for his refusal to implement meritocracy.

Too much money is spent to ensure the survival of the race-based institutions and the continuation of race-based programmes, to the extent that the Harapan government does not have enough money to revive the overall economy

Apa Ini: Change takes time - and the challenge now is to wait for Mahathir to fulfil his handover promise.

Meanwhile, fingers crossed, Anwar has learnt well from the two-year transition and is fighting fit for that moment when he does take over. There are plenty of saboteurs in the wings.

On the Other Hand: Fulfil your promises, Harapan, and don’t break them for the sake of pleasing those who voted against you. It's not rocket science.

Kunta Kinte: It is natural to have a dip once the honeymoon period is over. More importantly is when it is nearer to the time of the general election.

If a government is popular all the way, something is very wrong. Look at Prime Minister Narendra Modi in India, he also suffered a dip.

Fair Play: Look at the bright side. This is a wake-up call to the Harapan government. The rakyat placed you there, they can also remove you.

Mission Accomplished: Harapan, take heart. You have lots of areas to improve on, lots of promises to keep, and lots of time to make good on our disappointment.

If Harapan fails to produce the goods, we will make sure you sit on the opposition bench. Fair?

N1: It is hard to see how Harapan can improve its ratings when they have failed to fulfil most of the important election promises.

By not honouring their election pledges in trying not to antagonise the different races, they are chasing away those who had voted for Harapan. All the boy scout ministers also failed to bring significant improvement to the life of the rakyat.

Another Komentar: People are fickle-minded. Changing the government last May is not the end in itself.

The future of the nation, its economy and the wellbeing of the people must be built on equity, sound governance and justice for all.

It’s not just a cosmetic makeover that many who voted to change expected.

Patathewoonie: Care less about the survey. Even if you scored 100, it would not mean anything if the government didn't implement any drastic reforms.

Please focus on lowering the costs of living, improving social security, wiping out and curbing all corruption, increase the skills of civil servants, and, last but not least, revive the economy. Once the people experience the changes, they will surely vote for you in the next election.

Don't spend too much time on issues regarding race, religion, and royalty, it doesn't help.

'Despite taking a big hit in approval ratings, we must stay the course'

The above is a selection of comments posted by Malaysiakini subscribers. Only paying subscribers can post comments. Over the past one year, Malaysiakinians have posted over 100,000 comments. Join the Malaysiakini community and help set the news agenda. Subscribe now.

These comments are compiled to reflect the views of Malaysiakini subscribers on matters of public interest. Malaysiakini does not intend to represent these views as fact.
