Lok Sabha Elections 2019 HIGHLIGHTS: Everyone believes SP-BSP ‘gathbandhan’ will win majority, says Mulayam

Lok Sabha Elections 2019 HIGHLIGHTS: Congress president Rahul Gandhi addressed an election rally for Balasore Lok Sabha seat, at Remuna block in Balasore on Friday. (PTI)

Lok Sabha Elections 2019 LIVE updates: PM Modi filed his nomination from Varanasi Lok Sabha constituency on Friday, a day after holding a mega road show in the city. He was flanked by top leaders of the National Democratic Alliance who sought to present a picture of unity and strength. Modi asked voters not to take the bait when people say it is alright not to vote since he (Modi) has already won. “You must cast your vote to strengthen democracy and form a strong government,” he said. The Prime Minister also addressed rallies in Mumbai and Madhya Pradesh later in the day.

Rebutting allegations that the recent Income Tax Department searches on premises of opposition party leaders or their aides were politically motivated, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday said in Sidhi, Madhya Pradesh, that the law is equal for all Indians, and raids should be carried out at his home, too, if he has done anything wrong.

Meanwhile, a Delhi court Friday issued notice to the Delhi Police and sought to know whether any action was taken or an FIR has been registered on a complaint against Congress president Rahul Gandhi for allegedly making derogatory statements against Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Samar Vishal directed Delhi Police to submit their “action taken report/if any FIR has been registered” pertaining to the statements in the aftermath of the 2016 surgical strikes. The judge listed the matter for further hearing on May 15, and also questioned the complainant, advocate Joginder Tuli, on why he has come to the court in 2019, when the speech is from 2016.

The complaint referred to the Congress leader’s speech delivered at a public meeting in Delhi. On October 6, 2016, Rahul, while addressing the meeting after completion of his ‘Kisan Yatra’ in Uttar Pradesh, had said: “You (Modi) are hiding behind the blood of soldiers in Jammu and Kashmir and those who carried out the surgical strikes for India. You are exploiting their sacrifices, which is very wrong.”

The complaint said that the words used in Rahul’s speech amounted to shaming the country. It sought directions to the Delhi Police to register an FIR under IPC section 124A (sedition) or other sections of the law.
