Jet Airways employee commits suicide in Maharashtra's Palghar

It was the first suicide of an employee since Jet Airways suspended operations. (Photo: Reuters)

A senior technician with Jet Airways committed suicide in Maharashtra's Palghar district due to depression as he was suffering from cancer, police said on Saturday.

Shailesh Singh (45) jumped off the terrace of his four-storeyed building in Nalasopara East on Friday afternoon, an officer said. The police said they have not found a suicide note as of yet.

A police officer said, "Singh was suffering from cancer for the last three years. He had stomach cancer. On Friday, he got discharged from the hospital. However, there was no relief from pain in his stomach. Singh was frustrated a lot due to the pain. Even after getting discharged from hospital his pain was unbearable. Doctors had suggested further chemotherapy."

As per functionaries of Jet Airways Staff and Employees Association, however, Singh was facing "financial constraints" as employees of the grounded airline have not got salaries for a long time.

"He was suffering from cancer and was undergoing chemotherapy. Prima facie, it seems he was suffering from depression due to the ailment," the officer said.

"On the same day, Singh left his home and went to one of the building's terrace. He went to Sai Pooja apartment, Oswal Nagri in Nalasopara East. He sat on the parapet (wall above the window) for a while. Meanwhile, people who saw him asked him to come down. However, moments later he jumped off from the building," the officer added.

According to the police, he was rushed to Alliance hospital but was declared dead before arrival.

Photo of Singh just before committing suicide sitting on the parapet.

"For the last three months, his financial condition was very bad. He had spent a lot on chemotherapy and other treatments. Also, his pain was getting unbearable, therefore he had gone in depression. His family has said that he was on leave without pay. However, what made him to commit suicide is still part of the investigation. We are waiting to take statements of the family members. There have gone out of town for rituals. No suicide was found," A police officer investigating the case said.

It was the first suicide of an employee since the airline suspended operations, these functionaries claimed.

The deceased's son is also working in the operations department of the airline, they added.

Singh is survived by his wife, two sons and two daughters.

An accidental death case has been registered and a probe was underway into the incident, the police official said.

(With inputs from Saurabh Vaktania)
