Challenge the idea of terrorism, not just the terrorists

Mumbai: People stage a demonstration to condemn the Sri Lankan suicide bombings on Easter Sunday | Photo Credit: IANS

The horrible attacks at several churches and hotels in Sri Lanka this Easter Sunday, is by far the biggest carnage in a counter that battled terrorism and insurgency for more than a quarter century, until 2009, when it thought, that it had finally seen the last of this scourge that affects so many countries today. And though the initial finger of suspicion – that has later now been affirmed – pointed to radicalised Muslims within that Island country for these horrible attacks, the role of global terror networks like ISIS and AQIS couldn’t be ruled out, since the attacks had the imprint of these hard line Islamist groups. But their efforts to make a dramatic impact outside of Syria, Iraq or Afghanistan, led them to a marginalised pockets of Muslims in Sri Lanka -who make up about 10 percent of its population- that were at the receiving end of anti-Muslim riots there in 2018.

Thus, while terror groups seek out local allies in far flung lands – the ISIS calls them Vilayats – here the case was probably the opposite, as the IJT, now the prime accused, but until recently not seen as a threat by Sri Lanka, had probably reached out to the ISIS to help them use terror as a tool to make their grievances known! This could be a major reason for the complacency and the intelligences failures that led to this shocking fiasco, apart from the political rivalry between the Sri Lankan President Maithripala Srisena and his Prime Minister, Ranil Wickremesinghe. This had led to the marginalisation of the PM and thus a discoordinated national security set up, whereby decision making was delayed. Even then, all intelligence and security agencies are expected to act, when high alerts are given to them, in this case, many of these till the day of the attack, by Indian officials.

And while Terrorists use mostly religion to recruit their foot soldiers, terrorism has no religion. In fact terrorism is as old as conflict itself. And as this horrible attack on Colombo has shown, that terrorists aim to terrorise innocent people arguing that ‘bombings are the only effective tactics we have against our enemy’. But much of our policy since 9/11 has mistaken a technique of conflict for a type of conflict: confusing an age-old tactic of many wars with a new species of twenty first century war. In fact, terrorism now not only shapes our security agenda, and not vice versa anymore. And with the information revolution having reached homes across the world, bomb making is not anymore the privilege of Ordnance factories – it is all there on the internet- and moreover terrorists of all persuasions now learn from each other. Terrorism is both an ultra-modern, and a very traditional, conspiracy. Suicide bombers are revered before and after their deaths, bound into the act with celebrity status, and a promise of paradise.

The most effective techniques are well-publicised across the global web. No image can be effectively suppressed, no declarations squeezed out of the system. The propaganda of the deed itself is ever-present speciially now though social media platforms, and no terrorist deed is a failure if s/he attains immortality in cyberspace! Not least, with the excessive media coverage of such events – one out pacing the other for viewership or readership - there is a global dimension in the glamour and fashion that attaches to terrorism in the present era. It attracts recruits from all backgrounds and circumstances, after the effective radicalisation of marginalised groups. India, despite decades of its battles against those who are radicalised, hasn’t yet found a suitably effective model to contest this challenge.

In India, we have lost much valuable time over the last several years as we have been fixated on what the terrorists can do- like the LeT and JeM - than what they stand for. Sti Lanka made this mistake of looking out for signs of any revival of the Tamil movement. We could be making the same mistake of looking at Paliztan based cross border threats when there could be a new set of problems brewing within. In a multi-cultural society as like India, there has been a great reluctance to challenge the narratives that terrorists create and feed off. Elaborate conspiracy theories do the rounds, and our leaders don’t really know where to start. All that they do is to dismiss the wickedness of the individuals rather than challenge the legitimacy of their ideas.

Maroof Raza is a guest contributor. Views expressed are personal.
