Why protests are raging across the Northeast over Citizenship Bill: 10 things to know

Protests continued to rock the Northeast, especially Assam, a day after the Citizenship Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha. Protestors blocked roads and railway lines at a number of places, and carried out marches with their shirts off against the controversial legislation.

The Bill proposes granting eligibility of citizenship to minorities who have fled persecution in Pakistan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka.

Here are 10 things to know about why the Northeast is against the Citizenship Bill:

1. The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016, which was passed by the Lok Sabha on Tuesday was a change to 1955 law governing Indian citizenship. The law grants citizenship to all non-Muslims - Hindus, Sikhs, Parsis, Buddhists, Jains and Christians - fleeing persecution in Muslim-majority Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan, and Buddhist-majority Sri Lanka. The amendment extends the qualifying date for eligibility for citizenship from March 24, 1971 to December 31, 2014.

2. The amendment also lowers the bar for eligibility with regard to the length of residency in India. It shortens the 12-year residency requirement to six years. The changes to the law were among the BJP's poll promises ahead of the 2014 Lok Sabha election, which saw Prime Minister Narendra Modi take power.

3. The Bill is not the law yet. It will become law only if it is passed in the Rajya Sabha, where the government does not have a majority.

4. The Bill was passed in the Lok Sabha over the strong opposition from the Congress, TMC and CPM, who can jam it up in the Upper House.

5. Citizenship is a hot button topic throughout the Northeast, with clear overtones of language and culture rather than religion. Illegal immigration from Bangladesh, by Bengali-speakers irrespective of their religion, have for decades been a strong point of contention, especially in Assam. The long and porous international border has contributed immensely to people crossing over into India not just in the run-up to the creation of Bangladesh but also afterwards.

6. The Assam Accord of 1985, which in large measure contributed to the peace in the region, assures March 1971 as the end-date for the eligibility of immigrants for Indian citizenship. The Citizenship Bill which was passed in the Lok Sabha is essentially an abandonment by the Centre of that point of agreement.

7. In Assam, the presence of large number of Bengalis - irrespective of whether they are Muslim or Hindu - especially in the southern districts has been the point of concern for Assamese groups, irrespective of religious affiliations. They have long argued that the influx of Bengali-speakers threatens Assamese culture and messes with the language dynamics. Similar concerns affect neighbouring Meghalaya.

8. Other Northeastern states such as Mizoram, Nagaland and even Bengali-majority Tripura have strong movements opposing immigrants. In these regions, it is mostly the perceived threat to the language and culture of various tribal groups and clans that drive the sentiment. In Arunachal Pradesh, it is the influx of Tibetans and Chakmas that is the focus of opposition.

9. The protests are not just limited to the ground. Political repercussions have already begun taking shape across the region. The Assam BJP's own spokesperson, Mehdi Alam Bora, quit all party posts in protest. BJP allies are on the warpath. The Asom Gana Parishad has already dumped the BJP in Assam. In Meghalaya, the ruling National Peoples Party has not ruled out a similar move. Mizoram's ruling Mizo National Front is also unhappy, and supported Tuesday's bandh by hundreds of organisations across the Northeast.

10. The winter of discontent in Assam has been harsher in Assam considering the controversy over the final draft of the National Registry of Citizens (NRC) which was released on July 30, 2018. The names of 40 lakh residents were reported missing, again leading to protests and rage.
