Shah promises withdrawing Article 370 from J&K

BJP national president Amit Shah on Saturday said that the BJP will withdraw Article 370 from Jammu and Kashmir, if the party is voted back to power. Addressing a rally in Daltonganj’s Shivaji Maidan for party candidate and former DGP, VD Ram, he said, “The people of this country have not forgotten, how our soldiers were killed and beheaded by Pakistani army during the UPA tenure 2004 to 2014. The Government at that time used to send only dossiers to Pakistan.”

Shah was refereeing to January 2013 incident when Pakistani rangers had killed and beheaded an army man. In January, 2013 Lance Naik Hemraj of 13 Rajputana Rifles, was killed and later he was beheaded by Paksitani rangers in Poonch sector of Jammu & Kashmir. The BJP, then in Opposition, and its prime ministerial candidate had picked the issue targeting Congress for having a soft approach of terrorism.

The BJP national president, who has been carrying out rallies across the country, was holding the first rally in State. Shah was soliciting support for BJP candidate VD Ram who is pitted against RJD’s Ghuran Ram.

Slamming National Conference (NC) leader and former chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir, Omar Abdullah for his remark seeking separate Prime Minister for Jammu and Kashmir (J&K), Shah said that Kashmir is inseparable part of country. He said, “For India Kashmir is like a crown and nobody can snatch the crown from country’s head.” He said, “As long as BJP exists, Jammu and Kashmir will remain integral part of India. The problem in Kashmir lies with Article 370, through which the State has got some special rights. Once the Article 370 is removed the entire problem in Kashmir will go.”

Shah, who is known for reading the mood of public in the rally, questioned, should there be two prime ministers for one country? The question evoked a deafening ‘no’ from the crowd.

The BJP national president also mentioned about the Pulwama terrorist attack and later surgical strike carried out by Indian Air Force in Balakot. He said, ‘When the entire nation was rejoicing with distributing sweets following February 26, Balakot air strike a pall of groom descended on the Congress and Pakistan.”

Shah also attacked the Congress and Mahagathbandhan leaders alleging them that whenever they are in power they had indulged in massive corruption and even made an Independent MLA (Madhu Koda) chief minister of Jharkhand in 2006.

Shah also questioned Congress and Mahagathbandhan partners about their PM candidate mocking that on every day there different Prime Minister as Congress and Mahagathbandhan leaders will chose the PM on rotation basis with Sunday being holiday.

According to BJP sources as electioneering in Jharkhand progress after April 29, Shah’s will regularly visit State. Shah’s next rally is on May 3 at Harmu Maidan in Ranchi.
