PPP, PML-N have made a fool of people of Pakistan: MQM-P





KARACHI: Muttahida Qaumi Movement-Pakistan (MQM-P) leaders on Saturday criticised the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) and Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and said they are making a fool of the people of Pakistan.



Addressing a rally in Karachi, MQM-P leader Khalid Maqbool Siddiqui said, “We are fortunate that we got independence but we are unfortunate that we did not value it. We value those things that we care about and we did not value the 20 million those who sacrificed their lives.”

“Never in the history had there been such a mass migration,” he added.

Siddiqui said after independence Pakistan went into the hands of those who received Pakistan for free.

“A resolution was passed against me in the Sindh Assembly,” he said, adding, “You have divided Sindh. If you want to bring a resolution, then submit a resolution against those who approved of the quota system.”

The MQM-P leader further said that we have to think if Pakistan was better before the ’70s or after. “The 70s Pakistan was afflicted with the PPP disease. First, they broke the country and then they destroyed it,” he lamented.

“Those who made Pakistan were kicked out of their jobs and instead of struggling for Pakistan, the country was handed over to the feudal system,” he added.

'PML-N, PPP have made a fool of public'

MQM-P leader Khawaja Izharul Hassan while addressing the crowd said the people of Karachi and Hyderabad have trust in MQM-P. “In the last 11 years whatever has been happening is in front of everyone. Instead of being united, the federal government and the provincial government have been protesting against the wrong matters,” he said.

Hassan added, “They tried to make MQM-P weak, but here’s a message to those in power, if Karachi progresses, Pakistan progresses.”

“Only MQM-P owns the streets of Karachi,” he asserted.

Hassan continued and said that the 18th amendment does not stop the federal government from working in Karachi, but it is PPP and PML-N which have made a fool of the people and now both of them have become very close.

“The prime minister was [given the office] with our help. Even with seven seats, I will say that the prime minister is ours. I would like to see a prime minister without us.”

‘People of Karachi were shown fake results'

Senior MQM-P leader Faisal Subzwari said the people of Karachi were shown fake election results and were told that MQM-P was done in Karachi.

“Our fight is not against some timely power, but it is against those who have destroyed Pakistan,” he said. “Those who made the constitution have made it difficult to form a province. PPP ruled from the federal to the provincial government and ruined the country.”

“Jobs in Sindh instead of being giving on merit, were sold and now there are cases against PPP leaders for selling jobs,” Subzwari added.
