Ailing jail inmate dies in police custody in Kota, family cries foul

Two policemen sent to lines as disciplinary action after protest

An ailing jail inmate died in police custody at a hospital in Rajasthan’s Kota town on Friday night after the police guards accompanying him for his treatment allegedly assaulted him. Two of the policemen have been sent to the Police Lines as disciplinary action after family members of the deceased staged a protest outside the mortuary.

Mohammed Ramzan, 60, a resident of Baran district’s Mangrol town, was serving a sentence in the Baran District Jail following his conviction under Section 347 (wrongful confinement to extort property) of the Indian Penal Code, after the Rajasthan High Court rejected his appeal. He was shifted to the New Medical College Hospital in Kota for treatment of liver diseases, including hepatitis, when he complained of pain.

Shifted from Jaipur

Ramzan was admitted to Sawai Man Singh Government Hospital in Jaipur from April 21 to 25 for treatment when his condition deteriorated. The family, which met him once in Jaipur, was informed that the patient had been transferred back to Kota, where he died in the ward for prisoners at the New Medical College Hospital.

A video, which surfaced before Ramzan’s death, shows him telling that three police guards had beaten him with metal pipes. He said in the video, recorded by a family member during his treatment in Jaipur, that the guards were inebriated and would thrash him when he cried in pain.

The family members alleged that the jail authorities did not give proper medical treatment to Ramzan when he fell sick. The deceased also faced communal slur, according to the family.

After the family members, accompanied by the Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) members, staged a protest and refused to accept the body, Kota Superintendent of Police Deepak Bhargava assured them of an inquiry by a Judicial Magistrate. The post-mortem was conducted by a medical board and the body handed over to the family.

PUCL petition

The People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) has shot off a petition to the National Human Rights Commission with the demand for registration of FIRs against the police guards allegedly involved in custodial violence that led to Ramzan’s death. It also sought an inquiry by the hospital into the violence in the prisoners’ ward and payment of compensation to the family of the deceased.
