‘Rural Maharashtra may not trust BJP totally as the party hasn’t kept the promises it made’

Maharashtra, part of today’s fourth phase of polling, is next only to UP in importance on account of its 48 seats. Political analyst Shrikant Patil speaks to Sugandha Indulkar about the lay of the land:

Will BJP be able to retain its dominant position in Maharashtra in the Lok Sabha elections?

BJP’s aggressive Hindu agenda may attract a few voters, but is likely to put off many thinking voters and may deflect poll results in favour of other parties. Prime Minister Narendra Modi is seen voicing a torrent of policies and announcements, which often feel far-fetched and unrealistic. Probably, only the work of minister Nitin Gadkari is tangible and visible to the masses. For the 2019 elections, urban voters are the ones who show a shimmer of trust towards BJP; in rural areas the wave is more towards other parties.

Despite a balanced government in the state, voters of rural Maharashtra may not trust BJP totally as compared to 2014 as the party hasn’t kept the promises it made. Farmers are unhappy and employment generation is low. Chief minister Devendra Fadnavis has tackled various outcries of dissent quite tactfully, yet the government has acted defensively.

Some villages in Maharashtra have decided to boycott the Lok Sabha elections. To what extent will farm distress affect the upcoming elections in the state?

Villages boycotting elections is definitely a bad sign for a democracy. In the arid plains of western Maharashtra, water scarcity has worsened farmers’ plight. Loan waiver schemes haven’t succeeded everywhere and there is visible discontent among the farming community. The state government has not been able to reach out to the average farmer in Marathwada and Vidarbha. People of the region are suffering heavy financial losses. These factors will see an adverse effect on polling outcomes.

Rural distress is the biggest issue. What are the top three decisions of the ruling party which have gone wrong in the past five years?

First and foremost, unplanned and poor implementation of loan waivers for poverty stricken farmers of the state will be held against BJP in the upcoming elections. The schemes which look good in their advertisements, fail to reach the affected farmer because of lack of internet access, poor technological know-how, etc.

Second, demonetisation. It took farmers in rural areas over two years to balance the losses caused by demonetisation. They were duped in several ways and some faced severe cash crunch for months post-demonetisation. Sale of their agricultural produce is the only sustenance for these farmers. When that fails because of a severe cash crunch in the market, their whole economy collapses. This was a serious debacle. The cascading impact of demonetisation was seen in all sectors and throughout the state.

In Maharashtra, over 1,67,312 small and medium sized enterprises were affected due to unplanned implementation of GST. Its effect was evident in the labour market in both organised and unorganised sectors.

Where did BJP succeed?

Some rare areas of success that BJP achieved were primarily because of individual proactiveness displayed by some of their leaders. For instance, in Chandrapur, Sudhir Mungantiwar, as guardian minister introduced rural youth to some new skills like diamond cutting, setting, etc. These youths were offered new jobs and are proving their newly acquired prowess in this industry.

PM Modi’s Skill India mission needed more focussed implementation across the state. Several initiatives announced by the centre like Make in India did not create the kind of effect that was expected because of lack of individual leadership by many of the party leaders and politicians.

Will the recent Pulwama attack and the counterstrike at Balakot affect choice of voters in Maharashtra?

National security is one of the prime duties of the central government. The Pulwama attack should have been averted before it ever occurred. All said and done, the government’s defence strategies are surely worth reckoning and quite commendable. Young urban voters may be affected by this, however in rural areas, farmers’ distress and unemployment will dominate the polls.

Maharashtra’s assembly elections are due this year. Will it be influenced by Lok Sabha elections?

If BJP wins Lok Sabha elections, this will create a favourable scenario for assembly elections as well.

What will be the impact of VBA (Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi) led by Prakash Ambedkar?

In a few areas like Solapur and Hingoli, VBA is garnering good support and this goes against Congress. But victory will not be easy for VBA in both places. Due to the presence of VBA, BJP is getting an opportunity to focus on smaller voter groups. VBA is clearly eating into Congress’s share of the pie, which will eventually go in favour of BJP.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
