Social media platforms inspired many to vote in this election

VADODARA: Is the fad of posting selfie with an inked finger playing a role in inspiring urbanites to come out and vote in more numbers? The young generation that has cast vote in last couple of elections say that the desire to post a selfie with an inked finger is definitely ensuring that more youngsters come out to vote. On the day of Lok Sabha polls in the state, all social media platforms were flooded with such selfies, mostly of youngsters. Youngsters, who have voted in a couple of elections, said there is a craze to cast vote and then post a selfie with an inked finger on social media. In fact, the urge to show that they are a responsible citizens on social media too is ensuring that more youngsters and professionals come out to vote“Social media is increasingly one of the most significant factors creating impact on democratic process by creating awareness about the rights of the citizens. During the polls, social media helps in weaving participation of the masses into the electoral process,” said Rutvi Dattani, a student of Faculty of Journalism and Communication, MSU, who voted for the first time in this LS polls.“Those posting selfies with an inked finger want to instill a sense of responsibility towards the country among others. Also, the trend to post selfies on poll day at least ensures that people talk about politics and candidates,” Dattani told TOI.“Social media is helping in boosting voter turnout , be it by posting selfies or by election awareness posts. The youngsters aren’t just voting but demonstrating it on social media which in many ways pushes other youngsters to vote. Call it peer pressure but it works well for the betterment of our democracy,” said Rahul Kaduskar, 23 who works in a manufacturing firm.“People are posting photographs of inked finger after voting as social media tends to make us copy others for validation. But this is working out as a positive thing for democracy. In a way, social media has become a campaigner during the polls,” said Punyadhara Doshi, a MSU student, who voted for first time at her hometown in Ahmedabad. She added that even owner of pani puri stall, which she visits frequently had posted his inked finger on his Facebook account after voting this year.Many professionals and senior citizens too have begun posting their selfies with inked finger and taken to social media for appealing to their friends and relatives to vote.
