Noida fails to clean road, residents do it themselves

GREATER NOIDA: Unhappy with the response of the authorities concerned, 25 residents of Noida Extension took to the streets on Sunday to clean up their muddy roads. The residents said their pleas to the Greater Noida Authority and the Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board have fallen on deaf ears, and hence they have taken the responsibility upon themselves, even digging into their own funds.At 6 am, the residents started work on the service lane in Sector 16B and cleaned the roads with shovels and earth moving equipment.“We have been cleaning this road for the last two weeks. There’s so much mud on this road that it we will need one more week to make it mud-free. We have hired excavators, trucks and water tankers with our own funds and facilitated this cleaning. All the mud from the road has been transferred to a distant plot which is at present water-logged,” Abhishek Kumar, the president of the Noida Extension Flat Owners Welfare Association (Nefowa) said.He said the service lane of Sector 16B was the worst-affected with commercial construction taking place in the vicinity.“Since people now live in apartments in the neighbourhood, such high exposure to coarse dust every day is hazardous. So, we decided to take action,” said Kumar.People have started moving into the new flats of Noida Extension over the past two to three years. At present, it has a population of over 50,000.“While we have cleaned the Sector 16B service lane, most service lanes of Noida Extension are covered in dust and mud at the moment. People complain of breathing problems here. It is high time this was cleaned,” Manish Kumar, a resident of Arihant Arden, said.“We have decided to carry out this exercise every week so that we can clean up the entire Noida Extension over the next few months. We will do this every weekend from here on,” Ajay Singh, a resident of Panchsheel apartments, said.According to the residents, the daily cost of hiring water tankers and excavators comes to Rs 5,000, which they have spent from the Nefowa funds.Last week, representatives of Nefowa had met the chief executive officer (CEO) of Greater Noida authority to raise several issues, including sweeping of internal service roads.
