Sukhbir busy in Ferozepur, Majithia pitches in

editorial@tribune.com

Perneet Singh

Tribune News Service

Bathinda, April 28

Former Akali minister Bikram Singh Majithia aka Majhe da Jarnail is leading the party’s charge in the high-profile Bathinda constituency in Malwa region.

Camping in Bathinda for the last over one week, Majithia has been in the thick of action, strategising and garnering support for his sister and two-time sitting MP Harsimrat Kaur Badal, who is pitted against Congress Gidderbaha MLA Amrinder Singh Raja Warring. Majithia has been regularly holding meetings and addressing small public meetings.

Incidentally, this is not the first time that he has been playing a crucial role in his sister’s election campaign in Bathinda. He was instrumental in ensuring her win in the 2009 and 2014 elections, although in 2014, he was a bit tied to Amritsar, which witnessed a high-stakes battle between Capt Amarinder Singh and Arun Jaitley.

It would be different this time, as the brother-sister duo will have to largely carry the party’s campaign in Bathinda on their shoulders. The reason being that SAD patriarch Parkash Singh Badal isn’t campaigning much due to health issues, while party chief Sukhbir Singh Badal is contesting from Ferozepur. Besides, Sukhbir will also have to address rallies in other constituencies.

Replying to a query regarding Warring building a narrative of “commoner versus mighty”, he said everyone was free to dream and build his own narrative. “I wish everybody has been a commoner like Warring who moves around in a Land Cruiser and has assets worth crores,” he said. Majithia accused the ruling Congress of raking up the sacrilege issue against the SAD, as it has done nothing that might prompt the people to vote for them. “The people can see through their designs and won’t fall for it,” he claimed.

Black flags shown

SAD candidate from Bathinda Harsimrat Kaur Badal was shown black flags over sacrilege issue by residents at Harraipur village on the Bathinda-Amritsar highway during a campaign on Sunday.

Activists of the Dastar Federation and Ek Noor Khalsa Fauj protested against her by showing her black flags.

Pargat Singh Bhodipura, national president, Dastar Federation, said "We have shown black flags to the SAD candidate because the Akalis took no action in sacrilege and police firing incidents. Moreover, they are now trying to influence probe by getting an honest officer transferred out of the SIT”.
