Telangana Inter results fiasco: Opposition demands Education Minister's resignation

With no concrete action yet against the Telangana State Board of Intermediate Education (TSBIE) for the intermediate results fiasco, protests demanding the removal of Education Minister Jagadish Reddy gained chorus on Monday. Opposition parties comprising Congress, TDP and CPI had given a call to lay siege to the Board’s office in Nampally in Hyderabad. However, the police foiled their plans and took them under preventive custody before they could reach the venue.

Police also blocked the roads leading to the TSBIE office preventing the protesters from gathering in the vicinity. However, before that could happen several student representatives from the DYFI, and Left organizations protested at the venue. They were swiftly herded into police vans and taken to police stations.

At least 20 students in the state have taken their lives allegedly over failure to clear their exams. There are allegations of mass discrepancies in the exam results as well.

CPI General Secretary Chada Venkata Reddy told the media, “The Education Minister Jagadish Reddy has to resign as he failed to fulfill his duties. Several students died because of his failure.”

Senior Congress leader Geeta Reddy, TJS President M. Kodandaram, TDP state chief L Ramana and senior leader R Chandrashekhar Reddy were among those arrested by the police.

Police also arrested ABVP activists as they tried to stage protest at Pragati Bhavan, the official residence of Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao in Begumpet. Holding ABVP flags and raising anti-government slogans, they tried to barge into the building but were arrested by police. A couple of protesters fell unconscious when they were being physically removed and shifted to police vehicles.

Congress leaders Anjan Kumar Yadav, V Hanumantha Rao, Srisalilam Goud were kept under house arrest in Hyderabad.

Opposition leaders in the districts were either arrested or kept under house arrest to prevent them from heading to Hyderabad.

The BJP also intensified their protest with their state party president K Laxman launching an indefinite hunger strike seeking justice for the intermediate students. Speaking at the protest, he said that the government is stifling the voice of the Opposition leaders by arresting them. He sought to know why Globarena – the firm which did the evaluation process for the intermediate exams – was given the contract despite it lacking the experience.

Lashing out at the TRS-led government, Laxman questioned why the state government wasn’t responding when so many students had taken their lives over the exam results. “This is the most irresponsible government,” he said.

He added that Jagadish Reddy had failed in his responsibilities as Education Minister by not thoroughly reviewing the Intermediate examination results before announcing them. "The TSBIE Secretary Ashok should be immediately suspended," he said.

Calling the three-member committee formed to probe lapses in the results a 'sham', Laxman asked, “What are the findings of the committee? Who are the culprits?”

The three-member committee which recently submitted its report remained vague; though it suggested that both the TSBIE and Globarena were at fault. “There have been some errors. However, its magnitude, scale and nature does not vitiate the results as a whole,” the panel had said in its report.

With IANS inputs


