Allahabad: Robbers kill elderly woman, flee with cash, valuables

ALLAHABAD: Around half-a-dozen armed robbers killed an elderly woman and looted valuables from the house of a retired government employee at Sudnipur village under the limits of the Sarayinayat police station early on Wednesday. The robbers also stabbed two other family members when they tried to save the woman. The robbers targeted the family members after locking the owner of the house in another room.Senior police officers including SSP (Prayagraj) Nitin Tiwari along with sleuths from crime branch and forensic experts have launched a probe into the incident."Two police teams have been formed to solve the crime. The unidentified robbers barged into the house of Thakur Prasad Mishra at around 3am and killed his wife Durga Devi (80) while executing the crime. The robbers also injured woman’s son Sharda Prasad Mishra (60) and his wife Kusum Devi (60). Both the injured have been admitted to a hospital,” the SSP told TOI.The family members told the police that the robbers attacked the house when all the family members were asleep. The accused locked the room of Thakur Prasad from outside and thrashed the woman with a stick. They later hacked her to death with a sharp-edged weapon when she raised an alarm.In the meantime, Thakur Prasad's cousin, who was sleeping in another room, woke up after hearing cries and called neighbours for help. The police team rushed to the spot after being alerted by the villagers.By then, the robbers had escaped with booty, including jewellery and cash.Police said that a few boxes looted from the house were recovered on Wednesday morning near railway tracks. The family is yet to submit the list of looted jewellery and cash to the police.Meanwhile, villagers told police that they had noticed the movement of suspicious people and claimed that it might be handwork of ‘kachcha-baniyan’ gang. The sleuth of crime branch have also been asked to assist the Sarayinayat police to investigate the incident.
