We want coolers: Students of Jamia Millia Islamia J&K Girls’ hostel stage midnight protest – WATCH

Students of Jamia Milia Islamia University's J&K Girls' Hostel staged protests demanding coolers from college authorities on Monday night

New Delhi: Students of Jamia Millia Islamia University staged a massive protest outside the university’s Jammu and Kashmir Girls’ hostel on Monday night, seeking the facility of coolers for relief during the summer season. The girls demanded the college authorities equip the hostel with coolers as temperatures soared in the national capital during summers.

The students gathered outside the hostel premises at around 10 pm and asked to be heard by the authorities. A video from the protest showed students assembled in the courtyard of the hostel premises and loudly banging the building gate. Another video showed the girls chanting slogans such as “We want coolers” and “Down with tyranny”.

As per reports, the protest went on till 2 am on Tuesday morning.

On Twitter, a netizen requested the Ministry of Human Resource Development and HRD minister Prakash Javadekar to look into the matter, stating that many students were falling sick in the summer heat due to lack of coolers.

“J and K hostel Jamia Milia Islamia University is torturing students by not allowing (them) to avail (the) cooler facility. Students are falling sick everyday and that too during exams time. Please help us!!!” Twitter user Pragati Mishra tweeted on Monday. Tagging the official Twitter account of the HRD ministry, Mishra also tweeted, “J and K hostel Jamia Millia Islamia University- torturing students with insensitive denial of availing our own cooler. They think Delhi's summer is manageable. We are getting sick everyday. Please help the students.”

The girls' hostel for Jammu and Kashmir students was inaugurated in the national capital in 2017. Ministry of Home Affairs had funded the construction of the hostel, with the Jammu and Kashmir government signing a MoU with the Jamia Milia Islamia University and the Union Home Ministry in 2012 for the construction of the 400-bed hostel exclusively for students from the state.
