PM Modi: PM Narendra Modi betting big on nationalism, UP & Bengal

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has held 87 public rallies and three big roadshows over 31 days in the first four phases of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, and they reveal some clear patterns in his messaging and focus areas.Modi has been persistent with a strong nationalism pitch, calling the opposition alliance a “maha-milawat”, and now making claims that he is coming back to power. And 50% of all his rallies and roadshows so far have been held in just five states – Uttar Pradesh West Bengal , Maharashtra, Odisha and Gujarat. In contrast, the PM held only eight rallies across four major southern states of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kerala.Phased polling in some of the states – Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have it in seven phases – has helped Modi maximise his appearances in these states.ET has gone through the prime minister’s schedule and speeches made in the first four phases when 374 constituencies went to polls, to identify his campaign’s focus areas.The most consistent theme in Modi’s speeches has been the focus on nationalism and fallout of the surgical strikes carried out in Pakistan. He talked about these things at almost all his rallies, projecting himself as a strong leader and putting the opposition, from Congress to Mamata Banerjee to SP-BSP combine in the dock for questioning the strikes and asking for proof.Lately, in his latest speeches in UP and Bihar, Modi has also incorporated the recent terror attack in Sri Lanka, claiming that the country need his strong leadership to thwart such dangers. He has also, like in a rally in Darbhanga on April 25, said the opposition has stopped raising such questions.That said, certain issues have disappeared from the PM’s speeches too. For example, he has now almost stopped mentioning Congress’ ‘Nyay’ minimum income promise. In his first rally in Meerut last month, Modi had criticised the scheme saying those who could not open bank accounts of people for decades were now talking about putting money into their accounts. The prime minister now simply says “Congress cannot finish poverty”.Modi has also been quick to turn opposition’s attacks against him into his advantage. After BSP leader Mayawati termed him a “fake backward”, Modi responded by saying he is proud to be of the most backward caste. BJP is looking to dent the strong caste alliance of SP-BSP combine in UP.Modi has labelled the opposition alliance as one of corrupt leaders backing Pakistan. He had also raised the Hindu terror issue and Rahul Gandhi contesting from a ‘minority-dominated’ seat of Wayanad earlier this month in his public speeches.The prime minister also seems to be growing in confidence. “The country is in a festive atmosphere and is saying ‘Phir Ek Baar Modi Sarkar’,” he said in Varanasi three days ago. “People have made up their mind. This is a pro-incumbency election.” In Bihar last week, Modi raised the opposition attacks on EVMs to say they have already found a scapegoat for their defeat.Going by the frequency of his rallies so far, the prime minister’s focus is clearly on two states – Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Twenty out of his 90 public appearances in the first four phases took place in these two states where half the seats are still to vote. This is in line with the political wisdom of this election that BJP needs to make up its losses in UP, due to the SP-BSP alliance, from West Bengal. NDA had won 73 out of 80 seats in Uttar Pradesh in 2014 while it could win only two out of 42 seats in West Bengal.Modi held 12 rallies and a roadshow in UP in the first four phases when 41 seats mostly in western UP went to polls. He is now expected to increase the frequency of his rallies in the state, and is scheduled to address six rallies in eastern UP this week alone. A senior BJP leader confirmed to ET that PM will end up doing more than 30 rallies and roadshows in UP alone. “East UP will be our stronghold this time,” the leader said. “The opposition chickening out on Varanasi, (which) will have a ripple effect in favour of the BJP in entire East UP and PM will cash in.”In West Bengal, the PM has held seven rallies in the first four phases when 18 constituencies voted. He addressed two more rallies in the state on Monday, and is expected to ramp up the frequency of his rallies there. BJP leaders told ET that the PM could do over 15 rallies in West Bengal by the end of the polls. BJP is looking to give a strong fight to Mamata Banerjee’s Trinamool Congress that won 34 out of 42 seats in the state in 2014.Modi also put in a big effort in Odisha, having held eight rallies and a roadshow across its 21 Lok Sabha seats that completed polling on Monday.In Maharashtra, which too completed polling on Monday, Modi attended only nine rallies across its 48 Lok Sabha seats.Seven-phase election in UP, West Bengal and Bihar has helped Modi spread his campaign the most in these states.In Bihar, the PM has held only five rallies so far, but 21 out of 40 seats in the state are still to vote. Also, BJP has an alliance with chief minister Nitish Kumar’s JD(U), and the latter is star campaigner for NDA. Modi is expected to address at least two rallies apiece in the state in the last three phases.Similarly, BJP has been able to utilise the PM most effectively in UP and West Bengal given the long-drawn out polling schedule.This was not the case in states such as Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kerala where the elections were held in single phase. In fact, Modi held only two rallies apiece in these four states that together send 101 members to the Lok Sabha. Political observers also point out that BJP does not fancy its chances much in these states.The prime minister is also spending time in Hindi-belt states of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh where polling started only in the fourth phase, virtually after it was over in south India. Modi held four rallies in Rajastan for the fourth phase and is now slated to do as many more as the state will finish polling in the next phase on May 6. Modi is also expected to now focus on Madhya Pradesh where only six out of the 29 seats have voted.
