Lok Sabha elections: Worli Koliwada residents vote against coastal road, nearly half of the 41,000 voters either stayed away or hit NOTA

Worli Koliwada

South Mumbai Lok Sabha constituency

Milind Deora

POLL LIGHTS

Vivek Lahu Patil

Nearly half of the 41,000 voters either stay away or hit NOTA.Upset that none of the candidates seeking their votes was paying any heed to their problems, thousands of residents fromaffected by the coastal road project boycotted polling on Monday.According to rough estimates, around half of the 41,000 registered voters living in Worli Koliwada didn’t turn up to vote, and many of those who did chose the option of NOTA (none of the above). Those leading the fight against the coastal road which, they claim, will destroy the livelihood of the hundreds of fishermen said that candidates from both the Shiv Sena and the Congress had turned a deaf ear to their problems. Worli Koliwada falls in the Worli assembly segment of. Here, Shiv Sena’s Arvind Sawant is pitted against the Congress’s“We had already declared that we will boycott the elections since neither of the two main contenders took up the cause of the fishermen who will be directly affected by the construction of the coastal road. Those who own fishing boats didn’t go to vote all. And many others chose NOTA,” said Vedant Katkar, a local resident and former secretary of Worli Koliwada Nakhwa Matsya Vyavsay Sahakari Society.Last week, fishermen had put up boards in Marathi informing that they had decided to boycott the polls.Local MNS functionary Santosh Dhuri, who is supporting the fishermen’s cause, said that leaders from all parties were misleading voters of Worli Koliwada.“Residents of Worli Koliwdaa had to take the extreme step of boycotting the elections since candidates from the Shiv Sena and the Congress failed to address their concerns. But a section of them exercised the option of NOTA. They had even shown black flags to Sena leaders,” Dhuri said.This is the same community which has filed a petition in the Bombay High Court challenging the ongoing coastal road project. The court restricted the BMC from carrying out land reclamation for the coastal road.According to residents, about 157 boats belonging to the residents of Worli Koliwada have been parked at shore for the past two months. These fishermen are out of work ever since the BMC started the construction of a jetty for the coastal road at Worli.About 450 families from Worli Koliwada directly depend on fishing to earn their livelihood.Approximately 1,500 families are dependent on allied businesses such as stitching nets, providing ice for fish preservation, drying fish in the sun and selling their produce in the market. More than 150 boats from the village venture into the sea to catch fish daily.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------A groom went to vote in his wedding attire at a polling station in Kole Gaon village of Kalyan constituency. Vivek Lahu Patil, 28, had decided that he would join his baaraat only after casting his vote. Vivek said his wedding was fixed four months ago. He said, “When I came to know that the polling dates coincided with the wedding, I tried to change the wedding date, but my family members were not ready. They said it was an auspicious day for my wedding, according to my kundali.” Vivek said he made his family members promise that they wouldn’t stop him from going to cast his vote on the day of the wedding. And so he kept his date with democracy.
