YES Bank’s plunge came after fastest quarterly rise in FII stake in two years

Mumbai/New Delhi: In the quarter ended March 31, foreign institutional investors’ (FIIs) raised stake in YES Bank at the fastest pace in two years.The private lender reported a shocking maiden loss for the quarter on Friday and the stock sank 26 per cent on Monday.FIIs held 40.33 per cent in the bank at the end of March quarter, up 418 basis points from that in the preceding quarter. The was the fastest growth in FII holding in the private lender since March quarter of 2017. In fact, during the quarter they increased stake in the bank for the first time in eight quarters.The stock witnessed a free fall on Tuesday, the first trading session, after the bank reported a Rs 1,507 crore loss for March quarter on Friday. It had posted Rs 1,180 crore profit for the year-ago period.YES Bank shares fell nearly 30 per cent on Tuesday to Rs 167.20, eroding around Rs 16,500 crore of its market capitalisation, as panic set in among investors.“It’s a long haul now. FIIs are selling the stock heavily,” said Ajay Bodke, chief executive and chief portfolio manager at brokerage Prabhudas Lilladher.“There are a lot of questions. What is the trajectory for slippages, provisioning and asset quality,” Bodke said, expressing concerns that the process of cleaning up may go on for 4-6 quarters.The lender counts Government Pension Fund Global, Vontobel Fund, Vanguard, WF Asian, T Rowe Price, among others, among its overseas investors. India’s top institutional investor LIC, with a 8.90 per cent holding, was among the biggest DIIs in YES Bank as of March 31.“Many people brought YES Bank shares as a growth stake. Those investors are very unhappy now. Improvement in return ratios is pushed back,” Bodke said, adding that people should wait for some time before taking the plunge.The bank reported its maiden loss due to manifold rise in provisions against bad loans as its first non-founder CEO Ravneet Gill , who took over on March 1, began a clean-up act.Gill forecast credit cost to remain elevated this financial year. Nearly 13.4 per cent of its outstanding loans are to vulnerable sectors, such as real estate and NBFCs (non-banking finance companies), he said.In an interaction with ETNOW, he however said the bank will continue to grow and that remains the basic DNA of the bank. “The only thing is that the growth that we will pursue now will have to be of higher quality. It needs to be much more granular and we should be able to demonstrate to the market that it is much more sustainable, much more predictable and much more scalable.”“We have multiplicity of businesses and the underlying technology to be able to deliver on that. The general feeling was that we would get to a RoA of 1 per cent in four years, which is not correct. The fact of the matter is in March 2021, we will be a 1 per cent RoA bank, then going up to 1.5 per cent from there on,” Gill said.The bank made total non-tax provisions of Rs 3,662 crore, more than nine times the Rs 400 crore reported a year earlier and nearly seven times the Rs 550 crore reported in December 2018, even as gross NPAs (non-performing assets) rose to 3.22 per cent of loans from 2.10 per cent in December.A slew of downgrades hit the stock, leaving it with very few buy ratings. Macquarie Capital Securities downgraded the private lender by two notches to ‘underperform’ and cut the target price by 40 per cent to Rs 165, saying it underestimated the risks in structured finance.A few believed the stock might have turned attractive post Tuesday’s correction.“The next couple of quarters are going to be extremely crucial for the stock. We believe it has corrected and is looking attractive now,” Hemang Jani, head of advisory, Sharekhan by BNP Paribas , told ETNOW.“The stock had corrected in August from about Rs 404 to trade at Rs 150 or thereabouts in November. Now it is on a revival course. What remains to be seen from our perspective is how the new management adapts to its business model,” said Jani.
