Karnataka SSLC results: Mysuru’s pass percentage declines; slides from 11th to 17th in state-wise ranking

Historic first for Hassan

MYSURU/ HASSAN: The results of the Secondary School Leaving Certificate ( SSLC ) examinations held in March have thrown surprises galore. Coastal districts Udupi and Dakshina Kannada have been dislodged from the top of the pile, and it is Hassan that has risen to the summit, registering a pass percentage of 89.33. However, the Malnad district’s neighbour Mysuru, however has not witnessed a similar surge. On the contrary, Mysuru has witnessed a slide in the rankings, falling from 11th to 17th, accompanied by a drop in the pass percentage from 83.3% in 2018 to 80.32% in ’19.In keeping with the historical trend, girls continued to outshine boys in both the districts. While 84.45% of the girls managed to clear the SSLC exams in Mysuru, the corresponding figure for boys was 76.85%. Of the 645 schools in the district, 70 managed to register 100% pass percentage, of which 29 were state-run institutions. Periyapatna taluk registered the best result in the district with 90.59 pass percentage, while Mysuru North education block and T Narasipura taluk brought up the rear of the table.Deputy director of public instruction (DDPI), Mysuru Panduranga was dismayed with Mysuru’s slide in the rankings. “We are shocked. We conduct a slew of programmes from the first day of the academic year to boost our pass percentage. This was completely unexpected. We even provided learning material to students, including tools to help those weak in English. Parents must also play a more active role in their children’s education. While parents in urban centres are actively involved, it is not the case in villages,” Panduranga told TOI.Meanwhile, Chamarajanagar district managed to improve its performance, rising from 24th position in 2018 to 15th – two slots clear of Mysuru – this year. Chamarajanagar DDPI Manjula said that the officials in charge had introspected carefully following its dismal show in the examination last year. “The programmes we rolled out to boost our pass percentage have yielded good results,” she said.A wave of delight swept across Hassan as reports of the district having scaled to the top of the SSLC rankings in the state started doing the rounds. It is the first time that the Malnad district has achieved the feat, with 89.33% of the students managing to clear the exams. In all, of the 19,709 students who appeared for the SSLC exam this year, 17,689 managed to clear them.Besides the ranking, Hassan also registered an impressive increase in its pass percentage compared to 2018. The previous year, Hassan slotted in at seventh position in the state-wise rankings, with a pass percentage of 84.68 – both figures have altered for the better this year. Performance of students from English-medium schools was markedly better than their counterparts in institutions where Kannada or Urdu was the medium of instruction. The officials in the department of public instruction will also be pleased with the overall performance of government schools, which cumulatively recorded a pass percentage of 89.03%, which is better that the performance of aided schools (86.88%), although unaided schools continued to lead the pack with 94.05% of their students clearing the exams.Hassan district in-charge minister HD Revanna congratulated the students, teachers and officials who had worked tirelessly to propel the district to the top. “We have managed to revolutionise education during our tenure,” Revanna said.
