UT status key issue in Ladakh

vermaajay1968@gmail.com

Arteev Sharma

Tribune News Service

Jammu, April 30

With just six days left for voting, poll campaign has intensified in Ladakh region with political parties and Independent candidates making last-ditch efforts to woo electors in the sparsely-inhabited region.

Ladakh, which is country’s largest parliamentary seat geographically, has an electoral strength of just 1,74,618 voters. Of them, as many as 86,752 are males, 85,064 females, 2,799 are service voters and three transgenders. The seat is going to polls in the fifth phase on May 6.

Ladakh comprises two districts-Buddhist-dominated Leh and Shia Muslim majority Kargil. Kargil district has two assembly segments Kargil and Zanskar while Leh district includes Nubra and Leh Assembly segments.

The seat is set for a quadrilateral contest. Apart from two key national players — the BJP and Congress, two Independents, including a Congress rebel, have joined the electoral race. In 2014 Lok Sabha polls too, there were only four candidates in the fray.

The BJP has fielded 33-year-old incumbent Chief Executive Councillor of Leh Council Jamyang Tsering Namgyal while the Congress has posed trust on its senior Buddhist leader and two-time CEC of Leh Council, Rigzin Spalbar (61).

Given the religious differences between two districts, the Congress rebel from Kargil, Asgar Ali Karbalai (54), and NC-PDP’s consensus candidate Sajjad Hussain Kargili (37), have been contesting as Independents against two Buddhist candidates of the BJP and Congress from Leh. All the four candidates are trying their luck for Lok Sabha berth for the first time.

Even as the Governor’s administration has granted divisional status to Ladakh region, two major issues including demand for Union Territory (UT) status to the region and round-the-year road connectivity have again taken the centerstage in the poll campaign launched by the BJP and Congress. However, two Independents have limited their poll campaign to “developmental issues”.

Given the tough geographical terrains and sparsely inhabited population, there are some polling stations where the number of voters is just seven to 12. Keeping in mind the previous close contests on the seat, the Election Commissioner of India (ECI) has made all efforts to ensure that no voter is left behind from poll process.

The ECI has established two polling stations in Leh (Gaik) and Nubra (Washi) segments having seven voters each while as polling station with the highest number of voters (1301) has been set up at Leh (Shynam).

SEAT STATS

Assembly segments : 4

: 4 Voters: 1,74,618

1,74,618 Polling Stations: 559

559 Candidates: 4

Factfile
