A day after EC clean chit, PM Modi set to hold four rallies including one near Ayodhya

Follow us on Image Source : PTI (FILE) PM Narendra Modi will address election rallies in UP, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan today.

Just a day after Election Commission of India gave him a clean chit in alleged violation of Model Code of Conduct case, Prime Minister Narendra Modi is set to address four election rallies. Of these, two will be in Uttar Pradesh. Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan will host the other two.

At 11 am this morning, PM Modi will address a public rally at Ambedkar Nagar in Uttar Pradesh. Ambedkar Nagar parliamentary constituency will go to polls in phase 6 of Lok Sabha elections. Ambedkar Nagar is very close to Ayodhya District. Ram Mandir-Babri Masjid dispute in Ayodhya has come to influence national politics in the last few decades. PM Modi's speech in this particular rally will hence be closely watched in across the country.

The PM will then head to Kaushambi and hold a rally at around 1 pm. Kaushambi is due to go for polls in phase 5 of Lok Sabha elections

After Uttar Pradesh, Prime Minister will visit Hoshangabad in Madhya Pradesh. Hoshangabad will go to polls in the next, that is 5th phase of Lok Sabha elections. PM Modi's rally is scheduled to start around 4.30 pm

It will be a very busy day for the PM indeed as he will fly to Rajasthan after Hoshangabad rally. He will land in Jaipur, which goes to polls in phase 5 of Lok Sabha Elections. The rally is scheduled to start at around 8 pm.

PM Narendra Modi got a shot in the arm after Election Commission gave him a clean chit in a case of alleged Model Code of Conduct violation.

Congress has demanded action against PM Narendra Modi over his speech in Wardha in Maharashtra. The Congress had alleged that PM Modi delivered a "divisive" speech there.

"The matter has been examined in detail in accordance to the extant guidelines/provisions of the Model Code of Conduct, the Representation of the People Act and the report of the Chief Electoral Officer, Maharashtra. Accordingly, the commission is of the considered view that in this matter no such violation has been noticed," an EC spokesperson said on Tuesday.

Also Read | No poll code violation: Election Commission's clean chit to PM Modi
