AI rescinds decision to promote controversial pilot amid protests

The elevation of Arvind Kathpalia, who had earlier tested positive for alcohol in two breath analyser tests, was severely criticised.In the face of protests from Air India pilots’ association, the national carrier was forced to hold its decision of elevating controversial pilot Arvind Kathpalia to the post of Regional Director (Northern Region) in abeyance.The attempt to promote Kathpalia, whose flying licence was suspended in November 2018 after he failed preflight alcohol tests, met with stiff resistance on Tuesday when an AI notification said: “Consequent to the retirement of Mr. Pankaj Kumar, Regional Director (Northern Region) after the close of the working hours of April 30, 2019, Capt. Arvind Kathpalia will take over the charge of the post of Regional Director (Northern Region) with effect from May 1, 2019.”Indian Commercial Pilots Association (ICPA), which represents the pilots flying the narrow body aircraft of Air India, “strongly” condemned his appointment. It said, “Top officials are bending backwards to elevate a tainted official. He’s been made in-charge of NR (Northern Region) where he will be able to intimidate people who had given statements in police enquiry. Disciplinary action against commanders come under RD-NR. It’s ethically wrong.”The ICPA also said: “A person who has broken the law and a charge sheet pending against him cannot take disciplinary action against other employees. ICPA strongly condemns this. We need justice. It’s yet again proven people with strong political connections can get away with any crime.”Before the end of Tuesday, the airline issued a fresh announcement: “The notification...assigning charge of the post of Regional Director (North region) to Capt. Arvind Kathpalia is kept in abeyance till further orders. This is issued with the approval of CMD.”On November 11 last year, Kathpalia had tested positive for alcohol in two breath analyser (BA) tests before he was to fly Air India’s New Delhi-London flight. The next day, aviation regulator Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) suspended his flying licence for three years, and on November 13, the Ministry of Civil Aviation issued an order to remove him from the position of Director, Operations. However, a week later, he was posted as Executive Director by the Airline.Kathpalia was taken off flying duties earlier too. In February 2017, when he was working as executive director of operations, his flying licence was suspended for three months on charges of skipping a preflight alcohol test. Consequently, he was removed from the post of executive director of operations. However, in March 2018, he was posted as Director of Operations.Rule 24 of the Aircraft Rules prohibits crew members from partaking any alcoholic drink 12 hours prior to the commencement of a flight, and it is mandatory for him/her to undergo an alcohol test both before and after operating a flight.
