Lok Sabha Election 2019: ‘My opponents even sought help from Pak to get me removed’

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said on Tuesday his political opponents were so rattled by his government’s aggressive action against black money and corruption that they had now ganged up against him, with some even having visited Pakistan to take ‘help’ for the purpose.

He also said when bomb blasts were carried out in Ayodhya, Mathura and Kashi (Varanasi) and the rest of the country looked vulnerable, the non-BJP parties failed to instill confidence among the people.

“Do these parties have any plan to instill confidence. Remember that a nation which can’t safeguard its interests doesn’t get respect globally,” he said adding his government’s diplomatic initiatives had helped expose Pakistan as a den of terror.

Modi didn’t elaborate on his Pakistan remark even as he tore into BSP chief Mayawati, SP chief Akhilesh Yadav and the Congress accusing them of corruption. Addressing a public meeting in Barabanki, he also listed his government’s tough measures against corruption, including the one against benaami property as proof.

He ridiculed the opposition saying even those who were contesting in so fewer seats that they would not even be able to become opposition leaders were also lining up to get a Prime Minister’s dress stitched.

However, he said, the “kaun banega PM (who will be PM) enthusiasm of the opposition had died down after four phases of polls after which, he said, the opposition leaders had started playing ‘hide and seek’.

“The kind of action we have taken against black money and corruption has forced the opposition to gang up with the ‘Modi hatao’ slogan and some even visited Pakistan to take help on this,” he said.

Claiming that after the fourth round of Lok Sabha polling, leaders of his rival parties have lost their sleep, Modi said, “those engaged in ‘maha milawat’ (grand adulteration) are spending sleepless nights.

“My government has brought in tough anti-corruption measures and seized about 2000 benaami properties valued at several crores of rupees. Now, you tell me those whose properties are seized, whose costly cars are seized ... would they want to spare me? Would they not abuse me and not want to remove me at all costs?” he asked.

“But this is Modi. With the blessings of the poor I act fearlessly and won’t come under any pressure. My government closed 3.5 lakh fake companies,” he said adding country’s standing has gone up globally.

Modi who is scheduled to hold a rally in Ayodhya region on May 1, began his address in Haidargarh with “Ram Ram”.

The region where Modi held his rally in Haidargarh was strategically located to maximise the impact as it shares its boundary with Lok Sabha constituency of Rae Bareli, Mohanlalganj, Sultanpur and Amethi.

“There was the NRHM scam, meaning your health was compromised. Then there was the memorial scam meaning those great leaders in whose name Mayawatiji seeks votes too were not spared. Then there was the sugar mill scam followed by the power scam in which costly power was purchased to make leaders of both BSP and later SP, rich,” Modi said in Haidargarh, part of Barabanki reserved seat where BJP’s Upendra Rawat is up against Ram Sagar Rawat of the Samajwadi Party and Tanuj Punia, son of Congress veteran PL Punia.

Modi upped the ante against SP chief Akhilesh Yadav too, describing him as ‘babua’. “Our babua ushered in such socialism that there was scam in sand and brick and even didn’t spare the ‘toti’ (tap),” he said adding that the Congress was the master of them all.

Addressing a rally at Biswariya village on Bahraich-Nanpara road on Tuesday for BJP candidates from Bahraich, Kaiserganj Shrawasti and Gonda parliamentary constituencies, Modi said after the results on May 23, the alliance partners in UP will tear each other’s clothes.

Continuing his attack on the SP-BSP alliance, Modi said in previous governments power supply was not provided to the areas where SP or BSP vote bank did not exist. Modi said purpose of the election was not that who will become Member of Parliament, minister or the Prime Minister, but to decide the place of India before the world in the 21st century.

(With inputs from Shariq Rais Siddiqui)

SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON
