Body of minor girl found at popular tourist spot in Bhopal, police suspect rape

Bhopal police have detained three people for questioning (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Bhopal: Less than a week after the rape and murder of a minor girl sparked widespread protests in Telangana, a similar instance has emerged from the state capital of Madhya Pradesh. Officials with the Bhopal police told media outlets that the body of the 12-year-old girl was found on Wednesday morning. The latest reports suggest that three people, including the victim's aunt, have been taken into police custody and are being questioned.

The girl's body was found at Manuabhan in Lalghati, a small hillock which is also a popular tourist spot. Director Inspector General (DIG) Irshad Wali has revealed that scratch marks were found on the victim's body, adding that rape is yet to be confirmed awaiting a post mortem report. A search was launched for the minor after her parents approached Koh-e-Fiza police station on Tuesday evening claiming that she had not returned home after her tuition classes.

Madhya Pradesh: Body of a 12-year-old girl who was raped before being killed, was found in Bhopal, early morning today. DNA report is awaited to ascertain as to how many people were involved in the crime. — ANI (@ANI) May 1, 2019

An official familiar with the investigation said that city police have detained the girl's aunt and two youngsters who live in the same neighbourhood as the victim and her family. DIG Wali added that the two boys were acquaintances of the girl's aunt. Former Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan and other local leaders expressed their sadness on hearing about the brutal crime.

Earlier this week, a serial killer went on a spree in Rachakonda district. Yadadri Bhuvanagiri district resident Marri Srinivas Reddy was arrested on Tuesday after a special investigation team (SIT) formed to investigate brutal crimes in the region found evidence indicating that Reddy was responsible for the rape and murder of three minor girls. The first of these instances came to light on April 26 when a team of locals and police personnel discovered the body of a minor girl inside an abandoned dried well near Hajipur village. Distraught locals took to the streets in protests against delay in nabbing the culprit and even blocked the Yadadri Highway.


