Telangana marks goof-up: Congress, BJP ratchet up protests

The goof-up in marks led to a spate of suicides by students since the Telangana State Board of Intermediate Education (TSBIE) announced the results on April 18.

Candlelight marches on Wednesday followed by a state wide shut down on Thursday are part of the intensified protests by political parties against the examination valuation bungle.

The goof-up in marks led to a spate of suicides by students since the Telangana State Board of Intermediate Education (TSBIE) announced the results on April 18. A major software lapse had led to large-scale mismatch between roll numbers and declared results, wrong totalling of exam paper marks and much else.

Both, the Congress and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), are determined to embarrass the ruling Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) and chief minister K Chandrashekar Rao (KCR) for the state’s apathy to the loss of lives of 22 students.

The Opposition parties are also protesting the delay in acting on the need to rectify the glitches in the flawed marking system in which a student scoring 99 marks was given zero.

Charter of demands

The state BJP president K Laxman who was arrested for staging a protest is continuing his indefinite fast for the third day at the Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences in Hyderabad demanding action against the officials responsible for the bungle and justice to the affected students.

Other demands include the ordering of a judicial probe, in the light of the findings of an official three-man team, into what went wrong.

Another call of theirs is for the resignation of the state education minister G Jagadish Reddy owning moral responsibility for the state’s failure in checking the veracity of the claims of competence and credentials of the information technology (IT) company that ran the evaluation software system.

It reflected a failure rate of 33.67 per cent in the exam, as 3.28 lakh students, of the 9.74 lakh students who took it, did not make the grade.

Congress spokesperson Sravan Dasoju has alleged that the TRS government was circulating a tampered and fake report to hush up the role played by Globarena Technologies, the controversial IT company, and the TSBIE in the discrepancies in valuation.

He also alleged that the education minister, Principal Secretary (Education) B Janardhan Reddy and TSBIE Secretary Ashok were directly responsible for the entire goof-up and therefore, they must be punished.

Sravan claims that the three-member committee, headed by Telangana State Technology Services (TSTS) Managing Director GT Venkateshwar Rao, has submitted a comprehensive report of 110-pages. He said all pages of the report were signed by the committee members.

Read the report

The report has exposed several flaws in the valuation process and also made several recommendations. However, Sravan says only a 10-page unsigned report was circulated in media circles to hush up the original findings of the committee. This report was presented by the same people who should be made accused for large-scale discrepancies in the results.

Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao has ordered free re-verification of answer sheets of all the intermediate students who failed in the examinations. The state is to bear that cost totalling to more than Rs.15 crore.

But the protests for a fuller probe into the bungle continue. The demand of some of the protestors is the TSBIE should review all the papers and make them available to candidates for scrutiny without any fee to restore public confidence in the examination system.

Sravan said that the three-member committee had recommended revaluation and recounting under the supervision of an independent agency. While setting aside this recommendation, the state government has assigned the job to the same Globarena Technologies which has emerged as the main culprit in current fiasco.

Helping the students

Further, the committee has suggested setting up of a helpline with interactive voice response (IVR) features and an online form on the TSBIE website. It has also advised setting up a dedicated server for intermediate results.

Instead, efforts are being made by the government to shield the private firm. Sravan claims that the TSBIE has awarded the contract of crores of rupees to Globarena Technologies without even having a proper or legal agreement. This was clearly disclosed in the report submitted by the committee.

But the TRS government appears to be in no mood to take action against either the TSBIE officials or Globerana Technologies and come clean with the facts.
