Locals protest against 'preferential treatment' meted out to rape-accused by Bengaluru police

Members of Forum for Solidarity staged a protest and demanded for justice for for the Raichur Rape and Murder Victim in Bengaluru (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Bengaluru: Residents of Narayanswamy Layout in Bengaluru took to the streets in protest on Tuesday, accusing the police of meting out 'preferential treatment' to a 50-year-old man who has been arrested for the alleged rape of a nine-year-old girl. As many as a hundred men, women, and young girls on Tuesday blocked traffic on the JC Road as a mark of protest aimed at the Bengaluru city police.

The matter came to light on Monday evening when the girl's parents filed a complaint with the police, alleging that their minor daughter was raped by an elderly man when she went to play at her friend's residence who is the accused's granddaughter. She came home and complained of pain in her private parts which is when we took her to a hospital where the doctor examining her told us that she had been sexually assaulted, said the parents adding that this is when they decided to approach the police.

In the wake of the complaint, locals and family members of the girl reached the accused's residence in order to assault him. The accused, identified as Mohammed Anwar fled the spot and surrendered to the police on Monday, claiming that he was innocent. A case was then filed against him and he was arrested, reported The New Indian Express.

However, protestors on Tuesday alleged that the rape-accused was being meted out 'preferential treatment' by police who gave him tea and biscuits while in custody. A resident of the area told the national daily that "police officials in the area are known for taking money and letting people accused of crimes go scot-free". However, the accused's son claimed that his father is not the kind of person who would misbehave with a girl. My father is a heart patient and rarely goes out of the house, he added.
