BJP breathes fire on government, says will step up agitation

Hyderabad: BJP national general secretary P Muralidhar Rao on Wednesday mounted a vitriolic attack on the State government and Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao for turning the State into a police state for the last three days.

Addressing media here, the BJP leader said, " police is seen crushing and cracking down on the protests staged by all political and social organisations, besides parents and students demanding justice for the students in the Intermediate results fiasco. The political leadership and government administration have gone missing in the State."

He said the casual attitude of the State government on such a serious and sensitive issue left the students demoralised and they felt insecure resulting in student continuing to commit suicide. Asking the Chief Minister not to underestimate the gravity of the situation concerning the future of 9.5 lakh students, he said, "the insensitive and casual approach to the issue is the reason and the chief minister and his government will be held responsible for the students' suicides."

Reiterating that the party would continue the agitation in a do or die spirit until the State government met its demand, Muralidhar Rao said, "the State government has been mounting pressure on State BJP president K Laxman to end fast at NIMS. However, Laxman will continue the fast. Besides, the party will organise the State-wide bandh on May 2, despite the police resorting to largescale arrests of the party leaders and cadre across the State.

Despite the State is reverberating with protests, demanding action against the TSBIE officials and the Globearena, there was no response from the government. On top of it, those who were responsible for the intermediate results fiasco continued to be the judges in their own case.

This further gave credence to the suspicions and apprehensions that "there is someone important was involved in handing over the contract to the Globigerina. He appealed to the people, educational institutions, business and traders to extend their cooperation to the May 2 bandh.
