A judicial imbroglio

The latest judicial crisis involves allegations of sexual harassment against the Chief Justice of India (CJI) by a Supreme Court employee who claims victimisation in her dismissal. Has this crisis been handled well given that on April 30, the employee walked out of the Committee hearing?

Courts in crisis

Many crises in the past were managed with sagacity. The first ever crisis was when Jawaharlal Nehru wanted to appoint MC Chagla the CJI in the early 1950s. All the then judges offered to resign. Nehru pulled back the offer. In the early 1960s, Justice Syed Jaffer Imam was in line to be CJI but was mentally incapacitated. Nehru and the judges resolved the crisis. In 1973, Justice Ajit Nath Ray superseded three judges to become the CJI. The government of the day wanted judges 'committed' to socialism. The superseded judges resigned to remind the executive not to interfere.

In 1977, when Justice MH Beg superseded Justice H R Khanna to become the CJI, the latter resigned. In 1978, it was alleged that PM Morarji Desai personally appointed a distant cousin superseding three judges from Gujarat. The judges took responsibility and confirmed they made the selection. In the case of Justice V Ramaswami (1991), the Supreme Court formed a committee to consider whether to deprive the judge of work before the impeachment proceedings. The committee denied this as a power leaving it to the judge.

Following agitation by Bombay lawyers against Chief Justice AM Bhattacharjee, in a judicial decision in Iyer's case (1995), the Supreme Court created an in-house procedure to resolve the crisis keeping the controversy out of the public domain and to stop the Bombay Bar Association's agitation. Success in the 1990s was possible because judges like Justices MR Venkatachaliah and JS Verma were around to find solutions.

The Supreme Court, in 1993 and 1998, took over the judges' appointments, retaining it in 2015 by striking down the National Judicial Appointments Commission (NJAC) Act, 2014 and 99th Constitutional Amendment Act, 2014.

One solution was to transfer judges, like Indira Gandhi did during the Emergency. This is an objectionable method, but regrettably this is the law. It obviously does not apply to Supreme Court judges. CJI Sabharwal, a distinguished judge, remained clear of unworthy controversy. Later some judges like Justice PD Dinakaran of Madras and Karnataka resigned because of impeachment proceedings. One does not believe that the Supreme Court handled the Justice Karnan controversy, doing injustice to him and itself.

Present controversy

The present CJI controversy revolves around five issues. The first was to, reportedly, dismiss an officer working in the CJI's office, who had protested her transfer, sought help from the employees' association and was absent for half a day with partial consent. The second was the Secretary-General issuing a public statement that the "lady's complaint to 22 judges was 'scurrilous and scandalous.'"

Contempt could have been issued against her. But truth is a defence in an open hearing. The court did not want such a public hearing. The third: Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi constituted a bench for Saturday, April 20, which asked the media to cooperate by self-censorship. The fourth was to pass the baton for Justice SA Bobde to form a committee. If constituted along the lines of the Iyer case (1995), it could only have been advisory, reporting to CJI Gogoi or Justice Bobde or some junior judge. The fifth is continuing the Saturday hearing case on the basis of an affidavit by a lawyer (HS Bains) alleging a conspiracy by corporates to compromise the Supreme Court and the CJI.

The case

Under the Supreme Court's Sexual Harassment Rules, 2013, a lady employee cannot invoke those rules against her bosses in the registry or the judges. Lady lawyers and others are protected, but not lady employees in the registry. The only way to resolve this problem was to create a sexual harassment committee for the registry and judges. Instead, Justice Bobde created a Committee comprising himself and Justices Ramana and Indrani Banerjee. After some protest, Justice Ramana resigned to be replaced by Justice Indu Malhotra who also chairs the non-employee committee. It is unclear what this committee will do. If it is based on the Iyer judgment of 1995, who will it report to? Is this committee's report persuasive or to quell controversy?

What could have happened? The full court should have sat to devise a sexual harassment committee for employees albeit against judges also; This should be permanent abd have a permanent chairperson. Justice Indu Malhotra is chair of the non-employee panel; Full due process should be permitted even if hearings are in-camera; The panel could follow preliminary proceedings to frame issues and charges if required; The report be examined by the full court and its findings made public; and then the CJI could take a call.

(The writer is a Supreme Court lawyer. The views expressed are personal.)
