DMK cannot come to power even after 25 years: EPS

COIMBATORE: Taking a jab at DMK treasurer Duraimurugan for promising to bring the opposition party to power in 25 days, chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami said that the DMK cannot come to power even after 25 years.Commencing his campaign for V P Kandasamy, the party’s Sulur by election candidate, at Jallipatti on Wednesday, the chief minister said the efforts of the opposition parties to weaken his government would be foiled. “A few days back, Duraimurugan said in Sulur that he would bring the DMK to power in 25 days and make MK Stalin the chief minister. Who is Duraimurugan to make Stalin the chief minister?’’ he asked. “Not just 25 days, even after 25 years DMK cannot come to power,’’ he said.Accusing Duraimurugan of attempting to make his son MP from Vellore, he said the public should question the DMK on the source of money that was seized from a DMK man’s place in Vellore.Reiterating that Stalin and TTV Dhinakaran were hand in glove, EPS questioned the rationale behind the DMK president opposing the assembly speaker issuing notice to three AIADMK MLAs. “They are AIADMK MLAs and since they were found to indulge in anti-party activities, a complaint was given to the speaker through the party whip. Why should Stalin oppose that?’’ he asked. It is clear from Stalin’s actions that he was behind the disqualification of 18 AIADMK MLAs who rebelled against the party, EPS said.EPS alleged that the opposition party was instigating public protests against AIADMK rule. His government was the one to face as many as 35,000 protests in the last two years after he became the chief minister. “But we resolved every protest amicably,’’ he said.Listing out the welfare schemes of the state, Palaniswami said that he launched the Rs 2000 dole for all below the poverty line. It was because of Stalin’s complaint to the election commission that the scheme had to be stopped, he said. “Are you going to support a party that stops such welfare schemes?’’ he asked.While AIADMK works for the welfare of the public, DMK’s focus was only on the welfare of the family, he alleged.
