Masood Azhar: UN names Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar a global terrorist; BJP claims credit

Today is a day that would make every Indian proud! I thank the global community and all those who believe in huma… https://t.co/jIkL9WIWHQ — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1556727094000

NEW DELHI: The United Nations designated Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar a global terrorist after China removed its technical hold within the 1267 Al-Qaida Sanctions committee on Wednesday, resulting in a major diplomatic victory for the government in the middle of the election season.“Today is a day that would make every Indian proud! I thank the global community and all those who believe in humanitarian values for their support. India’s fight against terror will continue. We will work towards peace and brotherhood in our planet,” PM Narendra Modi tweeted.China’s technical hold on March 13 was a favour to “iron brother” Pakistan as it stalled a renewed effort to corner Azhar after the Pulwama attack. But India managed to rally support of other UN Security Council members against China’s move.“Big, small, all join together. Masood Azhar designated as a terrorist in @UN Sanctions list. Grateful to all for their support,” India’s permanent representative to the UN, Syed Akbaruddin , tweeted after the decision.The BJP was quick to claim the political dividend, calling it a “diplomatic surgical strike” ahead of the next three phases of the general election.Welcoming the decision, Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said, “The 1267 Sanctions Committee’s decision to designate the leader of Jaish-e-Mohammad, Masood Azhar, as a UN proscribed terrorist is a step in the right direction to demonstrate the international community’s resolve to fight against terrorism and its enablers... This is in accordance with India’s position and in line with the information that India has shared with the members of the Sanctions Committee regarding terrorist activities of Masood Azhar and the Jaish-e-Mohammad.”The decision by China to lift its technical hold was achieved after intense negotiations across global capitals since March 13 when for the fourth time it put a hold on the proposal to list Azhar under 1267 at Pakistan’s behest.However, the US moved a draft resolution to the UNSC, which would have forced a vote on the issue and then the only way China could have blocked the process was by a veto.Azhar is linked to terrorism for “participating in the financing, planning, facilitating, preparing, or perpetrating of acts or activities” carried out by JeM.While the US was backed by the UK and France in its endeavour, India engaged separately with China to strengthen its case during its foreign secretary’s visit to Beijing last month. Russia, the other P-5 member, played a quiet role by urging China to accede to India’s request in the backdrop of Pulwama terror attack to earn India’s goodwill.Indonesia as chair of the 1267 designation committee also a played a key role.“All members of the UNSC worked to safeguard the credibility and unity of 1267 committee, resulting in the listing of Masood Azhar…Indonesia's credibility is built on its reputation as a bridge builder, founder of the non-alignment, and friend of all, putting it in a unique position to gain the trust and confidence of all parties in the 1267 Committee,” Indonesian ambassador to India Sidharto Reza Suryodipuro told ET.China had to make a tough call because of its all-weather relationship with Pakistan, its long-term investments in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor and the possibility of becoming a target of the JeM following this decision.Reliable sources told ET that China feared getting isolated globally if it failed to act against Azhar given the consensus against terrorism. China on Tuesday indicated that it was considering a shift.“Regarding the listing issue in the 1267 Committee, we have expressed our position many times and I just want to stress two points. First, we support the listing issue being settled within the 1267 committee through dialogue and consultation and I believe this is the consensus of most members. Second, the relevant consultations are going on within the committee and has achieved some progress. Third, I believe, with the joint efforts of all parties, this issue can be properly resolved,” the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson stated on Tuesday.“After careful study of the revised materials and taking into consideration the opinions of relevant parties concerned, China does not have objection to the listing proposal,” Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said in a statement, according to news agency PTI.France had moved a resolution in the United Nations 1267 sanctions committee, after the February 14 Pulwama attack, to list Masood Azhar as a terrorist.“For many years now, French diplomacy has been relentlessly pleading for sanctioning Azhar, head of the terrorist group responsible, notably, for the Pulwama attack last February…This decision taken at the United Nations Security Council signals the successful realisation of our efforts,” according to a French government statement issued after the listing.The French proposal was supported by the US and the UK. Russia had also supported the move besides all other 10 non-permanent members of UNSC. However, China put a technical hold on the proposal.There have been four attempts through a UN sanctions committee to add Azhar to the blacklist. China blocked three previous requests and put a technical hold on the latest one.
