Chennai Metro Rail employees call off strike, to resume duties from Thursday

Chennai Metro Rail employees call off strike, to resume duties from Thursday

The employees called off the strike after the Chennai Metro Rail management agreed to reinstate the terminated employees.

news Chennai Metro

Almost 48 hours after sitting on an indefinite strike demanding the reinstatement of terminated employees, the employees of the Chennai Metro Rail Limited (CMRL) called off their strike on Wednesday night.

The decision to call off the strike was taken after the second round of meeting between the CMRL Employees Union, the management of CMRL and the state labour department ended in success on Wednesday.

According to T Senthil, the General Secretary of CMRL Employees Union, the 250 employees who had boycotted work till Wednesday night will resume regular duty from Thursday morning. “The management has asked the Union to write an appeal to them requesting the authorities to reinstate the eight terminated employees following which they will be reinstated,” he told TNM on Wednesday night, after the meeting.

The meeting was part of the second round of talks between the three parties in as many days. The employees were on a strike against the alleged unfair termination of eight employees for forming an employees union in CMRL on Monday. The strike had caused disruptions of train services on one line on April 29. The CMRL had attributed the disruption to the sabotage of the signalling system by at least two employees of the company in support of the strike.

On Wednesday, CMRL suspended three employees – two traffic controllers and a depot controller – for the alleged sabotage. In Wednesday’s meeting, a decision was arrived to subject the three suspended employees to a fair probe and then take a call on their reinstatement.

Earlier, CITU President Soundararajan had also spoken to TNM and said that the CMRL was lying about the sabotage and engaging in false propaganda against the employees. According to reports, he also said that the signalling systems were semi-automatic, mostly controlled by software and thereby questioned CMRL’s claims of sabotage.
