Podcast | Decoding 2019: The story of the first general election in India

Rima M | Rakesh Sharma

“No people whose word for 'yesterday' is the same as their word for 'tomorrow' can be said to have a firm grip on the time.”

So said Salman Rushdie in Midnight's Children, and sure, it is often hard to have a sense of time and where we stand today as a Republic and as a democracy over seven decades after independence. Are we being pulled back towards the faultlines of the past or are we moving towards the future? These are questions we are forced to address more and more today.

As the largest democracy in the world trundles into the last phases of the national elections, it may be a good idea to look back and remember in this edition of Digging Deeper, the very first time the country went to the polls. And to cut past the WhatsApp fallacies that reinvent history via mass forwards to rephrase just how India chose its leaders for the first time.

The story of this "leap of faith" or "biggest gamble in human history" or "the greatest miracle of democracy," with me Rakesh Sharma, right here on Moneycontrol.

When India began its tryst with destiny

It goes without saying that freedom was hard won and trivia obsessed Indophiles will tell you how in 1952, the tribals of Odisha came to the voting booths with their bows and arrows, while the Nagas trekked the hills for days. They knew what they were voting for. A country that would include the rights of all Indians, without bias or exception.

Today, as various fact files will tell you, India has nearly 900 million voters but are they mindful of what a hard won privilege it is to vote? That is possibly a conversation for another day but today we will recall just how idealistic and inclusive was the concept of a universal adult franchise where , all adults regardless of their social and economic standing, their religious beliefs, their caste or gender or literacy levels, had the right to vote.

That India could choose its own leaders via a nationwide elections seemed an incomprehensible idea to most of the western observers. Especially because for the longest time, India had been painted by their erstwhile British masters as an unruly, illiterate congregation of uncivilised natives who did know how to govern themselves.

It seems incredible that at a time when the idea of voting was alien and a large segment of the 173 million voters, was poor, illiterate, and rural, India dared to dream of self-governance. To counter the bane of illiteracy, election symbols on ballot boxes were introduced. The world watched disbelievingly as the Indian elections commenced over a span of four months from 25 October 1951 to 21 February 1952.

The universal adult franchise, granted all those twenty-one years of age or older, the right to vote.

The world press veered from calling the experiment a "leap of faith" to "a leap in the dark" .

General Claude Auchinleck reportedly wrote in 1948, "The Sikhs may try to set up a separate regime... and that will be only a start of a general decentralisation and break-up of the idea that India is a country, whereas it is a subcontinent as varied as Europe. The Punjabi is as different from a Madrassi as a Scot is from an Italian. The British tried to consolidate it but achieved nothing permanent. No one can make a nation out of a continent of many nations."

But the Constitution, formulated on 26 November 1949, had already set the ground rules for the country to move beyond its strife ridden past into the future by making a provision for an Election Commission. A Chief Election Commissioner was to oversee the elections independently of the executive or the parliament or the party in power.

How disparate multitudes were organised

A house-to-house survey was undertaken to register the voters.



A million officials were assigned duties to supervise the proceedings.



Nearly 620,000,000 ballot papers printed.



Over 224,000 polling booths.One assigned almost to over 1000 voters.



2 1/2 million steel ballot-boxes and counting. One box for each candidate.



17,500 candidates from over 14 national and 63 regional or local parties. A large number of independents.



489 seats for the Lok Sabha .



3,283 seats for the state assemblies.



98 seats in the Lok Sabha and 669 seats in state assemblies reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.



And just consider the staggering numbers for a country going for the first time to the polls:

Countering the challenge from parties like Jan Sangh and CPI, Jawaharlal Nehru traversed nearly 40,000 kilometers to impact nearly thirty-five million people.

The voter turnout was a healthy 45.7%.

The Indian National Congress (INC) swept into power, winning 364 of the 489 seats and 45% of the total votes polled. Jawaharlal Nehru became the first democratically elected Prime Minister of the country.

Looking back in wonder

Excerpts from Ramachandra Guha's book on India's history India After Gandhi, carried by The Outlook in 2007, recalled how the world described the fledgling nation's first elections as the "biggest gamble in history" and how obituaries have been written repeatedly for Indian democracy. It has been said, time and again, that a poor, diverse and divided country cannot sustain the practice of (reasonably) free and fair elections. Even nine years after the first election, Aldous Huxley, the great writer of Brave New World declared, " When Nehru goes, the government will become a military dictatorship—as in so many of the newly independent states, for the army seems to be the only highly organised centre of power."

It's 2019, and we have not become a military dictatorship.

Quoting Guha, "In those first general elections, voter turnout was less than 46 per cent. Over the years, this has steadily increased; from the late 1960s about three out of five eligible Indians have voted on election day. In assembly elections, the voting percentage has tended to be even higher. When these numbers are disaggregated, they reveal a further deepening. In the first two general elections, less than 40 per cent of eligible women voted; by 1998, the figure was in excess of 60 per cent. Besides, as surveys showed, they increasingly exercised their choice independently, that is, regardless of their husband's or father's views on the matter. Also voting in ever higher numbers were Dalits and tribals, the oppressed and marginalised sections of society. In North India in particular, Dalits turned out in far greater numbers than high castes. As the political analyst Yogendra Yadav points out, "India is perhaps the only large democracy in the world today where the turnout of the lower orders is well above that of the most privileged groups."

He describes just how much India loves voting including the peasants in Bihar who go to the polls despite threats by Maoist revolutionaries. We quote, "Likewise, in parts of the Northeast where the writ of the Indian state runs erratically or not at all, insurgents are unable to stop villagers from voting. That elections have been successfully indigenised in India is demonstrated by the depth and breadth of their reach—across and into all sections of Indian society, by the passions they evoke, and by the humour that surrounds them. There is a very rich archive of electoral cartoons, poking fun at promises made by prospective politicians, their desperation to get a party ticket, and much else. At other times, the humour can be gentle rather than mocking. Consider the career of a cloth merchant from Bhopal named Mohan Lal, who contested elections against five different prime ministers. Wearing a wooden crown and a garland gifted by himself, he would walk the streets of his constituency, ringing a bell. He unfailingly lost his deposit, thereby justifying his own, self-inflicted sobriquet of 'Dhartipakad', or he who lies, humbled, on the ground. His idea in contesting elections, said Mohan Lal, was "to make everyone realise that democracy was meant for one and all"."

If that is not a triumphant articulation of a healthy democracy, we don't know what is.

Guha also states that considering the size of the electorate, it is overwhelmingly likely that more people have voted in Indian elections than voters in any other democracy.

He writes, "India's success in this regard is especially striking when compared to the record of its great Asian neighbour, China. That country is larger, but far less divided on ethnic or religious lines, and far less poor as well. Yet there has never been a single election held there. In other ways too China is much less free than India. The flow of information is highly restricted—when the search engine Google set up shop in China in February 2006, it had to agree to submit to state censorship. The movement of people is regulated as well—the permission of the state is usually required to change one's place of residence. In India, on the other hand, the press can print more or less what they like, and citizens can say exactly what they feel, live where they wish to and travel to any part of the country."

This was of course, his view in 2007. It would be interesting to know, if some of his opinions about the freedom of the press and democratic freedoms have been modified since then.

But even then, he had struck a cautionary note.

Why we must safeguard democratic software

Says Guha, "If one looks at what one might call the 'hardware' of democracy, then the self-congratulation is certainly merited. Indians enjoy freedom of expression and of movement, and they have the vote. However, if one examines the 'software' of democracy, then the picture is less cheering. Most political parties have become family firms. Most politicians are corrupt, and many come from a criminal background. The percentage of truly independent-minded civil servants has steadily declined over the years, as has the percentage of completely fair-minded judges.

Is India a proper democracy or a sham one? When asked this question, I usually turn for recourse to an immortal line of the great Hindi comic actor Johnny Walker. In a film where he plays the hero's sidekick, Walker answers every query with the remark: "Boss, phipty/phipty." When asked what prospect he has of marrying the girl he so deeply loves, or of getting the job he so dearly desires, the sidekick tells the boss that the chances are roughly even, 50 per cent of success, or 50 per cent of failure.

Is India a democracy, then? The answer is well, phipty-phipty."

He says, it mostly is, when it comes to holding elections and permitting freedom of movement and expression. It mostly is not, when it comes to the functioning of politicians and political institutions.

Can India be one nation?

The history of independent India, says Guha, has amended and modified theories of democracy based on the experience of the West. However, it has even more frontally challenged ideas of nationalism emanating from the Western experience.

He wrote then, "Behind every successful nationalist movement in the Western world has been a certain unifying factor, a glue holding the members of the nation together, this provided by a shared language, a shared religious faith, a shared territory, a common enemy—and sometimes all of the above. Thus, the British nation brought together those who huddled together on a cold island, who were mostly Protestant, and who detested France. In the case of France, it was language which powerfully combined with religion. For the Americans, a shared language and mostly shared faith worked in tandem with animosity towards the colonists. As for the smaller East European nations—the Poles, the Czechs, the Lithuanians, etc—their populations have been united by a common language, a mostly common faith, and a shared and very bitter history of domination by German and Russian oppressors."

What baffled observers is how democracy would work in a country of so much diversity.

Guha wrote then, "The Indian nation does not privilege a single language or religious faith. Although the majority of its citizens are Hindus, India is not a 'Hindu' nation. Its Constitution does not discriminate between people on the basis of faith; nor, more crucially, did the nationalist movement that lay behind it. Gandhi's political programme was built upon harmony and cooperation between India's two major religious communities, Hindus and Muslims. Although, in the end, his work and example were unsuccessful in stopping the division of India, the failure made his successors even more determined to construct independent India as a secular republic. For Jawaharlal Nehru and his colleagues, if India was anything at all, it was not a 'Hindu Pakistan'.”

And as always the success rate of well-intentioned ideas has been phipty/phipty.

Like Guha explains, " Like Indian democracy, Indian secularism is also a story that combines success with failure. Membership of a minority religion is no bar to advancement in business or the professions. One of the richest industrialists in India is a Muslim. Some of the most popular film stars are Muslim. Three Presidents and two Chief Justices have been Muslim. At the time of writing, the President of India is a Muslim, the Prime Minister a Sikh, and the leader of the ruling party a Catholic born in Italy. Many of the country's most prominent lawyers and doctors have been Christians and Parsis.

On the other hand, there have been periodic episodes of religious rioting, in the worst of which (as in Delhi in 1984 and Gujarat in 2002) the minorities have suffered grievous losses of life and property. Still, for the most part, the minorities appear to retain faith in the democratic and secular ideal. Very few Indian Muslims have joined terrorist or fundamentalist organisations. Even more than their compatriots, Indian Muslims feel that their opinion and vote matters. One recent survey found that while 69 per cent of all Indians approve and endorse the ideal of democracy, 72 per cent of Muslims did so. And the turnout of Muslims at elections is higher than ever before."

These were words from 2007. And again, if 2019 Guha will change anything in these statements now is a question we will address some other day. But even then he was prescient as he wrote, "Building democracy in a poor society was always going to be hard work. Nurturing secularism in a land recently divided was going to be even harder. The creation of an Islamic state on India's borders was a provocation to those Hindus who themselves wished to merge faith with state. My own view—speaking as historian rather than citizen—is that as long as Pakistan exists there will be Hindu fundamentalists in India. In times of stability, or when the political leadership is firm, they will be marginal or on the defensive. In times of change, or when the political leadership is irresolute, they will be influential and assertive."

Pluralism in India’s first election

According to Guha, the pluralism of religion was one cornerstone of the foundation of the Indian republic. A second was the pluralism of language. Here again, he says, the intention and the effort well predated Independence. In the 1920s, Gandhi reconstituted the provincial committees of the Congress on linguistic lines. The party had promised to form linguistic provinces as soon as the country was free. The promise was not redeemed immediately after 1947, because the creation of Pakistan had promoted fears of further balkanisation. However, in the face of popular protest, the government yielded to the demand.

We quote, “Linguistic states have been in existence for 50 years now. In that time, they have deepened and consolidated Indian unity. Within each state, a common language has provided the basis of administrative unity and efficiency. It has also led to an efflorescence of cultural creativity, as expressed in film, theatre, fiction and poetry. However, pride in one's language has rarely been in conflict with a broader identification with the nation as a whole.

The three major secessionist movements in independent India, Guha says—in Nagaland in the 1950s, in Punjab in the 1980s and in Kashmir in the 1990s—have affirmed religious and territorial distinctiveness, not a linguistic one.

For the rest, as he puts it beautifully, “it has proved perfectly possible—indeed, desirable—to be Kannadiga and Indian, Malayali and Indian, Andhra and Indian, Tamil and Indian, Bengali and Indian, Oriya and Indian, Maharashtrian and Indian, Gujarati and Indian and, of course, Hindi-speaking and Indian."

Even the denominations on the Indian currency note were given not just in Hindi and in English but in all Indian languages.

The elections successfully negating the cynicism of Washington Post's Bernard Nossiter who once wrote, " India is a land of Babel with no common voice. From its birth the Indian nation had been plagued by particularist, separatist tendencies and the continuing confusion of tongues...can only further these tendencies and puts in question the future unity of the Indian state".

As Guha observes, had Hindi been imposed on the whole of India, the lesson might well have been: 'One language, 22 nations'.

A pluralist democracy vs a majoritarian one

Right from the first election, we have however seen a conflict between that India that arches to include diversity and an India that according to some must reclaim its linguistic and religious majoritarianism.

Guha recalls that a popular slogan of the original Jana Sangh was 'Hindi, Hindu, Hindustani' and the obvious attempt was to make Indian nationalism all about persuading or making—all Indians to speak the same language and worship the same gods.

We quote, "In time, the bid to impose a uniform language was dropped. But the desire to impose the will of the majority religion persisted. This has led to much conflict, violence, rioting and deaths"

Back to the future

But back to where we started, the first Lok Sabha Elections in India. In March 1950, Sukumar Sen, a member of the Indian Civil Service then serving as chief secretary of West Bengal, was appointed chief election commissioner. The following month, Parliament passed the Representation of the People Act, which set the voting age at 21 and gave the right to vote to every Indian who had resided continuously in a constituency for 180 days or more.

Says Guha, “It is a pity we know so little about Sukumar Sen, an unsung hero of Indian democracy. Sen left no memoir and, it appears, no papers. Born in 1899, he was educated at Presidency College and at London University, where he was awarded a gold medal in mathematics. He joined the Indian Civil Service in 1921 and served in various districts and as a judge before taking up his post in West Bengal in 1947. No Indian official had ever before been presented with such a stupendous task. The mechanics of the elections, which were finally scheduled for the first months of 1952, presented a "problem of colossal proportions.”

Over 16,500 clerks were needed to type up and collate the electoral rolls. About 380,000 reams of paper were used to print the rolls. 224,000 members of the police would be required to prevent violence and intimidation. The electorate was spread out over an area of more than a million square miles, and in places the terrain made the exercise horrendously difficult, says the writer.

We quote, “Bridges had to be specially constructed across rivers to reach remote hill villages; naval vessels would be required to carry the rolls to the voting booths on small islands in the Indian Ocean. A second problem was social rather than geographical: many women in northern India, where social practices were more conservative, were reluctant to register under their own names, wishing instead to identify themselves as A's mother or B's wife. Sukumar Sen was appalled by a practice he called a "curious senseless relic of the past," and directed his officials to correct the rolls by inserting the names of the women. Nonetheless, some 2.8 million eligible women voters who refused to cooperate.”

To prevent individuals from voting more than once, voters' hands were marked with a special indelible ink, developed by Indian scientists, which would not fade for a week. Nearly 3.9 million phials of this ink were used in the 1952 elections

Sukumar Sen spoke of the forthcoming election as "the biggest experiment in democracy in human history.” Guha also recalls C. R. Srinivasan, a veteran Madras editor, who demurred. "A very large majority [will] exercise votes for the first time: not many know what the vote is, why they should vote, and whom they should vote for; no wonder the whole adventure is rated as the biggest gamble in history.”

Sharing this skepticism was Penderel Moon, a scholar of Oxford's All Souls College and an ex-Indian Civil Service official who wrote to his father that "a future and more enlightened age will view with astonishment the absurd farce of recording the votes of millions of illiterate people.” Even Nehru, Guha says, had periodic misgivings. In December 1951, he took a brief leave from campaigning to address a UNESCO symposium in Delhi. And said that though he believed democracy was the best form of government, he wondered whether "the quality of men who are selected by these modern democratic methods of adult franchise gradually deteriorates because of lack of thinking and the noise of propaganda. He [the voter] reacts to sound and to the din, he reacts to repetition and he produces either a dictator or a dumb politician who is insensitive. Such a politician can stand all the din in the world and still remain standing on his two feet and, therefore, he gets selected in the end because the others have collapsed because of the din.”

Euphoria post the elections

Post the elections, reports Guha, The Times of India held that the polls had "confounded all those sceptics who thought the introduction of adult fran- chise was too risky an experiment in this country." The Hindustan Times claimed that "there is universal agreement that the Indian people have conducted themselves admirably in the largest experiment in democratic elections in the history of the world..”

Most foreign observers were exultant too, rather than alarmist. Guha cites a British couple, he a former member of the Indian Civil Service and she a reporter for the Manchester Guardian, who pointed to the very low level of violence and said: "Indeed the entire tone of the elections, even on the Communist or Hindu Mahasabha platforms, was reminiscent of Hyde Park on a rainy day.”

A visiting Turkish journalist focused on the content rather than its form. He ad mired Nehru's decision not to follow other Asian countries in taking "the line of least resistance" by developing "a dictatorship with centralisation of power and intolerance of dissent and criticism." Yet the "main credit," he wrote, "goes to the nation itself.

We quote, “176,000,000 Indians were left all alone with their conscience in face of the polling box. It was direct and secret voting. They had their choice between theocracy, chauvinism, communal separatism and isolationism on the one side; secularism, national unity, stability, moderation and friendly intercourse with the rest of the world on the other. They showed their maturity in choosing moderation and progress and disapproving of reaction and unrest.”

How will India vote this time and whether it will remember the lessons from the first election, is a question that will be answered soon.

In the meanwhile , Shyam Saran Negi, the Indian who has voted in all the general elections so far told the The Print, recently that it is his “duty to vote and strengthen the democratic spirit”.

“Aaj tak maine apna vote barbaad nahi kiya. Ab toh last time hai life ka. Vote daalne jaroor jaunga (I have never wasted my vote. Now in the last days of life, I will definitely go to vote),” he said.

And he truly symbolises the resilience of Indian democracy. Leaders will come and go but the Indian citizen will survive the good, the bad and the ugly to vote in one more election. And then another.

And will keep proving the writers of the likes of London Times wrong who wrote in 1967, “The great experiment of developing India within a democratic framework has failed. (Indians will soon vote) in the fourth—and surely last—general election.”
