BJP mismanaged water resources to win Pune, Baramati: Congress

While Pune thirsts for water, Guardian Minister diverted potable water to rural areas, says opposition party

As Pune stares at a water crisis, the opposition Congress on Thursday alleged that the leaders of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) deliberately ‘mismanaged’ the situation for political gains in the Pune and Baramati Lok Sabha (LS) constituencies.

Soaring mercury levels in the past weeks have caused water reserves in Pune’s dams to plummet dangerously, triggering fears of imminent water cuts. In this backdrop, senior leaders like Mohan Joshi, the Congress-Nationalist Congress Party (NCP)’s candidate for the Pune Lok Sabha seat, and Arvind Shinde, leader of the Congress in the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC), have alleged that Pune’s Guardian Minister Girish Bapat deliberately diverted potable water from the city’s share to outlying areas in Daund and Indapur in order to enable the BJP to win the all-important Pune and Baramati Lok Sabha constituencies.

Both Daund and Indapur are important segments of the Baramati LS seat, where NCP MP Supriya Sule faced the BJP’s Kanchan Kul in the elections on April 23.

“Mr. Bapat was careful not to introduce water cuts when the electoral contest was in full swing for the Pune Lok Sabha seat. Furthermore, the potable water sorely needed for Pune city has been diverted to the outlying areas Indapur and Daund [part of the Baramati Lok Sabha seat] to ensure Kanchan Kul’s victory,” said Mr. Joshi. He also accused Mr. Bapat of diverting potable water meant for Pune for irrigation and running sugar mills in the district’s outlying areas.

Mr. Shinde too said while there protests over the acute water scarcity in several parts of urban Pune, rural areas in Pune district were not complaining. “It is interesting to note that not a single factory in Bhigwan or Patas [in Daund] or other sugar factories there have been affected while Pune thirsts for potable water,” Mr. Shinde said.

However, the ruling BJP, which controls the PMC, has dubbed the Congress’ allegations as “utterly baseless”. “There is not an iota of truth in the Congress’ allegations against Mr. Bapat that water was diverted for political gains… we promise that the city will not face any water cuts till the start of the monsoon season on July 15,” said Shrinath Bhimale, the BJP’s leader of the House in the PMC.

Other BJP leaders pointed to the weak showers in September 2018, which, compounded by rising mercury levels, had resulted in reduced water stocks in Pune’s major dams.

According to PMC authorities, the cumulative water stocks in the four major dams that constitute the city’s potable water lifeline: Khadakwasla, Panshet, Varasgaon and Temghar, are down to a perilous 6.62 TMCft as opposed to a reserve of 10 TMCft same time last year.

The Congress has further alleged that the PMC, which is controlled by the BJP, has failed to ‘stand up’ to the Irrigation Department as it kept tapping into the city’s ‘water quota’ to supply outlying areas in Pune district at will.

In September last year, a massive discharge of excess water from the Khadakwasla dam, apparently authorised by the Irrigation Department, caused the right wall of the Mutha canal to cave in, leading to massive water wastage while damaging hundreds of homes and slum areas along the riverfront.

“2.5 TMC was released from the Khadakwasla dam in September last year. Now, another 2.5 TMC has been diverted from there since April 15 to Daund and Indapur… There is no accountability whatsoever in these decisions,” said Right to Information activist Vivek Velankar, observing that it was strange that the city was facing acute scarcity despite experiencing good rainfall in 2018 when all four dams were filled to capacity.
