Chennai region records 92.93 pass percentage in CBSE Class 12 results

Early announcement of results comes as a surprise

Taking students and teachers by surprise, the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) announced the results of the Class 12 board examinations on Thursday.

Chennai region, with an overall pass percentage of 92.93, was second overall, behind Thiruvananthapuram which recorded a pass percentage of 98.20. The results were expected only around mid-May.

Last year, Chennai region, which encompasses Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Goa, Puducherry, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Daman and Diu recorded a pass percentage of 93.87. Two students have secured 499 marks, three students have secured 498 marks and 18 students have scored 497 marks from schools across the country. Two students from Chennai — G. Karthik Balaji from PSBB Senior Secondary School in K.K. Nagar and Shreyansh Amit Shah from Kola Saraswathi Vaishnav Senior Secondary School in Kilpauk — found a place in the national list of toppers.

A total of 82,719 students from 1,153 schools in the region took the board examinations, held in March and April.

In the Chennai region, girls recorded a pass percentage of 95.06% while it was 91.18% for boys. Nationally, 94,299 students scored above 90% and 17,693 students scored above 95%.

Barring a marginal dip in the Mathematics scores, most schools said that the students had done extremely well and that they were happy with the results.

The early declaration of results also brought relief for many students in Tamil Nadu as the CBSE results are generally declared much after the State board results. This would have entailed a wait for many before initiating the college admission process.

Tushar Nair, a student of DAV Public School in Velachery who scored 94%, said that despite many of them finding Physics tough, they had scored well in it. “An extra effort to understand concepts from the NCERT textbooks is what should be prioritised over extra material. This will help students score over 90%,” he said.

Students also stressed the importance of time management during exams. “For papers like English, it is best to begin with Section B which requires a lot of creativity and end with Section A which requires lesser time,” said H. Nikita, a student of Chettinad Vidyashram who scored 494 marks in the Humanities group. Several revision examinations that schools conduct facilitate better preparation, she added.
