Mangaluru City Corporation ready to prevent floods in city during monsoon

Protest

MANGALURU: Though the city is reeling under a drinking water crisis , it is expected to be solved with the arrival of the monsoon . However, a major task before the Mangaluru City Corporation (MCC) is to prevent artificial flooding in the city.The continuous rain that lashed the city on May 29, 2018 had resulted in artificial flooding due to lack of proper drainage. People in Kodialguthu East, Kodialguthu West, Kudroli, Kodical, Kottara Chowki, Bangra Kulur, Kadri Kambala, Panjimogeru, Adyar, Yekkur and surrounding areas were affected due to flooding. In MCC limits, 16 houses were damaged completely due to heavy rain. Meanwhile, 18 houses were partially damaged causing a loss of nearly Rs 41.38 lakh.The situation is no different this year too. Most of the rajakaluves are blocked due to silt and garbage, making it difficult for rainwater to flow. The possibility of repeat of the 2018 floods in many parts of the city cannot be ruled out if the city corporation does not take measures.MCC commissioner B H Narayanappa told TOI that the city corporation is all set to prevent flooding during the rainy season. “We have already commenced the desilting and cleaning of all stormwater drains in the city. Keeping in mind the floods that happened in 2018, we have planned to take necessary precautions this year. We have identified 14-15 major areas in the city where possibility of flooding is more. We have invited tenders and the work of desilting of such major drains has already begun. Work has begun in Bangra Kulur and Kottara Chowki,” he said, adding that the work will continue in all areas.It may require more than Rs 1 crore to desilt all stormwater drains in the city, he said. “We have taken up desilting at those places in the city, where flooding occurred last year. Work will also be taken up in all other areas,” he added.MCC Civic Group, a group of civic activists and like-minded people, have decided to hold a protest in front of the MCC office at 4.30pm on Friday, urging the authorities to expedite development work, especially the clearing of stormwater drains.“We have been facing many civic issues which need to be solved before the monsoon. Cable laying works are incomplete and repair works have not been taken up at many roads. Incomplete drains and cleaning of drains are major issues. To put pressure on the authorities to take action on these matters, we have decided to hold a protest,” said Gerard Towers, member of the MCC Civic Group.
