Ex-ITBP officer, who joined BJP in uniform, to face action

editorial@tribune.com

Lalit Mohan

Tribune News Service

Dharamsala, May 2

Om Prakash, a retired Assistant Commandant from the ITBP, who had joined the BJP in the presence of Chief Minister Jai Ram Thakur in full uniform in a rally on April 26, will face action.

On clarification sought by the state election commission, the ITBP authorities have stated that as per norms retired officer cannot wear uniform. The state election commission has forwarded the ITBP reply to SP Kangra for further action.

SP Kangra, Santosh Patial, when contacted, admitted that he had received the information sent by ITBP authorities that a retired official cannot wear uniform. He said that the police would take action against Om Prakash but failed to state as to what action would be taken.

Though Om Prakash had retired from the ITBP, he came to the BJP rally in full dress wearing stars on his shoulders and medals on his chest. Om Prakash, when asked, had maintained that he had not broken the rules by wearing full uniform while joining a political party. He said he had obtained permission from the Chief Minister in this regard.

However, Om Prakash’s action attracted criticism from the Congress. The CLP leader Mukesh Agnihotri had said that it was against the rules for any paramilitary force officer to join a political party in full uniform. In fact, after retirement the officials of the paramilitary forces are not allowed to wear full uniform with stars indicating their rank. The Congress had later filed a complaint with the state election commission seeking action against Om Prakash for violating the model code of conduct for elections.

The Congress had also complained against the VC of Central University Himachal Pradesh (CUHP) Kuldeep Chand Agnihotri who had published a book ‘Modi Hone Ka Arth’ (means of being Modi). In reply to the complaint, the VC had stated that the book is not a biopic of any political personality or individual and he has just narrated/described the political scenario and an indepth analysis of problems or political happenings confronting India and anthology of write-ups written in the last 15 years. It is not wholly political.

The cover page of the book has been designed by the publisher and it is his prerogative, the VC has stated in his reply to the Election Commission.
