Pak Has to Demonstrate Action Against Masood Azhar at Next FATF Plenary: India

New Delhi: India is hoping that Pakistan will demonstrate action against Jaish-e-Mohammed’s Masood Azhar at the next plenary session of anti-money laundering watchdog Final Action Task Force (FATF) in June.

The Pakistani foreign ministry issued a notification on Thursday following the listing of JeM chief Masood Azhar with the UN Security Council’s 1267 sanctions committee. The notification by the foreign ministry basically lists all the sanctions against the proscribed individuals for freezing of assets, embargo on arms and travel ban.

Pakistan had been put on the ‘grey list’ of countries with inadequate control over terror funding in June 2018. During the February plenary, Pakistan was not removed from the list and given another three months reprieve.

At a briefing on Thursday, MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said that the press statement of the February 2019 FATF plenary mentioned that one of the Action Plans requires Pakistan to demonstrate effective implementation of targeted financial sanctions against all 1267 and 1373 designated terrorists.

“At the next FATF Plenary in June, Pakistan will be obligated to take action as per FATF procedures,” said Kumar.

Also Read: Masood Azhar Listed by UNSC Panel as Global Terrorist, Subject to Sanctions

Meanwhile, he asserted that Pakistan was making claims over the listing to divert attention from the “huge diplomatic setback” it has suffered.

The Pakistani foreign ministry had claimed that it agreed to Azhar’s listing after all “political references”, including attempts to link him to the Pulwama attack, were removed from the proposal to designate him a global terrorist.

“The designation is not based on a specific incident, but on the basis of evidence which we have shared with members of the UN’s 1267 Sanctions Committee, linking Azhar to several acts of terrorism,” Kumar said at a media briefing.

“Elements are being introduced by Pakistan to divert attention from this huge diplomatic setback,” he added.

Asked whether India offered something to China for Azhar’s listing, he asserted that India doesn’t negotiate on matters related to national security. “Our objective was to ensure designation of Masood Azhar as a global terrorist,” he said.

Welcoming China’s support to Azhar’s listing, Kumar however demurred from saying that it will be the only contribution to better Sino-Indian ties. He said there have been improvements in a number of areas and it would be tough to pick one move.

In March, China put a technical hold on the proposal to designate Azhar. This was China’s fourth block since 2009. On Wednesday, China lifted its hold on the proposal.

(With PTI inputs)
