Rs 150 crore profit in four months. These stocks helped ace investor Anil Goel make quick bucks

Representative image

New Delhi: Ace investor Anil Goel, who is known for his acumen in identifying potential small and mid-cap stocks, has already made Rs 150 crore profit for this calendar year. The Economic Times citing data from corporate database Ace Equity said that as of April 25, his portfolio value was Rs 970 crore up from Rs 815 crore at the beginning of the year.

Ace Equity data showed that Goel was holding at least 35 small-cap stocks in his portfolio as of March 31. Select companies from sugar, auto ancillary, consumer food, textile and steel sectors helped him make 20% gain in the first three months of 2019, during which the Sensex gained 7% and the BSE Midcap index fell by nearly 2%. The BSE Smallcap index gained marginally by 0.5% during this period.

According to the ET report, the ace investor increased his stake in Avadh Sugar & Energy, Triveni Engineering & Industries and Uttam Sugar Mills in March quarter. It may be noted that these stocks gained up to 42% in this year so far.

Government measures and projections of lower sugar production in Brazil mainly supported the sugar counter during the February-April period, analysts say.

Another stock that helped Goel in making quick bucks is Majestic Auto, which more than doubled in the first four months of this year. Goel held 1.92% stake in this company as of March 31, 2019.

Basmati rice processing company KRBL delivered him 24% in four months. Goel held 4.12% stake in it as of March 31 against 4.13% at December end.

His other holdings include Uttam Sugar Mills, Dhampur Sugar Mills, Mazda, Dwarikesh Sugar, Avadh Sugar Industries, Sanghvi Movers, KG Denim and Vardhman Special Steels. These stocks have risen between 4% and 42% so far in 2019, the business daily reported.

But not all of his stocks gained this year. The stocks which eroded his wealth by up to 30% during this period are Omaxe, Panama Petrochem, Cosmo Films, Ador Fontech, South India Paper Mills, Swelect Energy Systems, JBM Auto, Shivam Auto, Austin Engineering, Sterling Tools, Thirumalai Chemicals, Star Paper Mills, Sarla Performance, IG Petrochemicals.
