Shah Faesal quits job to join politics, Omar welcomes

‘I resigned to protest against unabated killings, Kashmiri lives matter’: Faesal

Srinagar, Jan 09: An IAS officer from Kashmir, Shah Faesal on Wednesday resigned in protest against what he called ‘unabated killings’.

Reports said Faesal has sent a letter, seeking volunteer retirement from Indian Administrative Service (IAS) to Department of Personnel & Trainings (DoPT).

“For acceptance of the voluntarily retirement it takes some time for routine processing till its acceptance by the competent authority,” reports said.

Meanwhile, National Conference Vice President and former Chief Minister Omar Abdullah welcomed Shah Faesal for quitting bureaucracy and tending to join politics.

“The bureaucracy’s loss is politics’ gain. Welcome to the fold @shahfaesal,” Omar tweeted.

Faesal has just returned to India from a stint as a Fulbright fellow at the Harvard Kennedy School. He topped the civil services exam in 2009, becoming the first Kashmiri to top the test.

After joining the IAS, he remained active on social media expressing his opinions having controversial political overtones. He was facing an enquiry against him for his remarks on rampant rapes in south Asia. Criticizing the rape culture in the region, Faesal had referred to south Asia as “Rapistan”.

Confirming his resignation, he wrote a detailed statement on his Facebook page and claimed that he resigned to mark a protest against the “unabated killings” in Kashmir, and absence of any credible political initiative from Union Government, saying the lives of Kashmiris matter.

Giving to vent to his community feelings he expressed, “The marginalization and invisiblization of around 200 million Indian Muslims at the hands of Hindutva forces reducing them to second-class citizens; insidious attacks on the special identity of the J&K State and growing culture of intolerance and hate in the mainland India in the name of hyper nationalism.”

“I wish to remind the regime of the day that subversion of public institutions like RBI, CBI and NIA has the potential to decimate the Constitutional edifice of this Country and it needs to be stopped. I wish to reiterate that voices of reason in this country cannot be muzzled for long and the environment of siege will need to end if we wish to usher in true democracy,” he said.

However, he said his important tasks here-after would be training and guide aspiring civil servants to help them in achieving this dream. He will address a press conference on Friday to share his future plans.

For JK Civil Servants Faesal’s quitting won’t make any difference

Srinagar, Jan 09: IAS and IPS officers have said that Shah Faesal’s quitting IAS, the country’s elite service, won’t make any difference as there are thousands of IPS and IAS officers who work for the public welfare and maintain political neutrality in discharge of their duties.

When contacted Athar Aamir, who bagged second position in the IAS examination few years back but was allotted Rajasthan cadre, told KNS, “I know Shah Faesal. He is a good friend of mine, but can’t comment on his decision. He must have taken the decision after giving a serious thought to the idea of quitting of IAS. He could contribute immensely as an IAS officer but he could contribute a lot as a politician also. I wish him best of luck in his future endeavors.”

A senior IPS officer of J&K cadre Vijay Kumar told, “Shah Faesal’s quitting IAS won’t make any difference to the people who are in IAS and IPS services as there are thousands of IAS and IPS officers working with dedication and commitment for the public welfare across the country.”
