UPA failed to get Azhar designated as global terrorist: Swaraj

JAIPUR: Union external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj on Friday said the UPA government not only failed to get Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar designated as a global terrorist, but also couldn’t isolate Pakistan internationally after the Mumbai attacks.While addressing a Vijay Sankalp Samvad here, Swaraj further said owing to Modi government's diplomatic pressure, Pakistan has not only been isolated globally, but India also got back its respect at the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC), by settling scores of the insult meted out in 1969.“They (UPA government) had made an appeal in 2009 to designate Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar a global terrorist. But they couldn't do it till 2014. But this time, India ensured securing consensus of all the 15 countries including China to designate Azhar as a global terrorist. Pakistan has been isolated again. If the country is secure, it is only under the Modi government,” said Swaraj.She also said the UPA government missed the golden opportunity to isolate Pakistan globally after 26/11, as 166 had died in the attacks, of which 40 were foreign nationals. “But, Modi government conducted surgical strike after Uri attack and air strike after the Pulwama attack to teach Pakistan a lesson. We were also able to garner support of the international community and isolate Pakistan.”The minister said India has also been able to isolate Pakistan among the the Islamic nations at the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).Swaraj said: “In 1969 when OIC was formed, India was invited to its first conference. The then foreign minister of India, Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed , had accepted the invitation and had gone to Morocco. But, when Pakistan's the then President, Yahya Khan , got to know that Indian delegation had arrived, he protested and threatened to boycott the conference. Following this, Ahmed was asked to stay out of the conference, which he refused. Later, they held the conference even without letting Ahmed get an inkling about it. They made all the announcements, which was an insult to India.”“However, in Modi's India, the scenario is different. On the 50th anniversary of the same OIC, which was held in Abu Dhabi, the foreign minister of UAE invited me. The conference was held on March 1, just after the Pulwama attack and the air strike. Pakistan protested and again threatened to boycott the conference. But, this time the UAE foreign minister categorically told Pakistan foreign minister that they will not cancel the invitation to India. Later Pakistan didn't attend. But, India was present at the conference,” she said adding ‘Modi hai toh Mumkeen hai’ amid loud cheers.“After 50 years, under Modi's leadership, India took the revenge of that insult,” she added.
