Congress step ahead of BJP in campaigning for Kundgol

BJP candidate meeting ZP, TP leaders

HUBBALLI: Winning the Kundgol byelection to be held on May 19 has become a matter of prestige for both Congress and BJP . Campaigning is gaining momentum with every passing day.Congress, which was successful in convincing all its rebel candidates to withdraw their nominations on Thursday, has been quick to swing into action to woo voters.During the Lok Sabha campaign, Congress had lagged in reaching out to voters due to the delay in announcing tickets in some constituencies. The party has now started on an aggressive campaign without wasting time after the nomination was filed in Kundgol. Congress candidate Kusumavati Shivalli has started a door-to-door campaign. She is also approaching each family in her constituency to help her realize her husband C S Shivalli’s dream of developing Kundgol in to a modern urban centre.On Friday, Congress officially kicked off its campaign in Kundgol by holding a public rally. Former chief minister Siddaramaiah, KPCC president Dinesh Gundurao, minister D K Shivakumar and others sought votes for Kusumavati. All senior Congress men are now camping in Kundgol to retain this seat at any cost.Congress will hold a crucial meeting of all in-charge ministers, MLAs, MLCs and others who are involved in the by-election in Hubballi on Saturday.Dinesh Gundurao will interact with all leaders and chalk out comprehensive plans to defeat BJP. He will also campaign in Kundgol for some days while Siddaramaiah will campaign for 4-5 days from the second week of May. Ministers R V Deshpande, D K Shivakumar, Satish Jarkiholi, Zameer Ahmed and others will also campaign from Saturday, said district rural Congress committee president Anilkumar Patil.BJP’s campaign is yet to take off as its candidate S I Chikkangoudar is still busy meeting senior party leaders including TP and ZP members to take them into confidence. BJP is planning to launch brisk campaigning from Sunday. Senior leaders including party state chief B S Yeddyurappa, Govind Karjol, Jagadish Shettar, Pralhad Joshi and others will campaign in Kundgol. They will address a meeting of booth level workers and involve in brisk campaigning, said BJP Dharwad spokesperson Hanumantappa Doddamani.
