Mangaluru: Civic group holds unique protest against water rationing, bad roads

MANGALURU: MCC Civic Group held a unique protest in front of the Mangaluru City Corporation (MCC) office against water scarcity and other major civic issues that residents face on a daily basis. Civic activist Gerard Towers arrived partially nude along with a group of members holding a bucket , mug, soap and bath towel in their hands to express their anger symbolically against water scarcity. Meanwhile, other members shouted slogans against the MCC for not supplying water regularly. They expressed dissatisfaction over the introduction of water rationing in the city. The activists alleged that the city corporation is hand-in-glove with the tanker lobby.“It is a shame that the MCC have introduced water rationing in the city even though we have water resources available. People, especially those in foreign countries, will laugh at us knowing that water rationing is in place in the city, which is going to be a Smart City. We have planned a novel protest after discussing the issues related to water and other civic issues on social media,” said Gerard Towers.On participating in the protest by wrapping himself in a bath towel and without wearing a shirt, Towers said, “There is no water for people even to take a bath. Hence, I have come here to take a bath.”Activist Padmanabha Ullal said, “The city is facing a water crisis even though we are living close to the Western Ghats. We have brought the issue of water scarcity to the notice of district minister U T Khader, deputy commissioner S Sasikanth Senthil and officials of the MCC. Though the city faces a drinking water crisis for three months every year, the city corporation has not taken initiatives to rejuvenate water resources like tanks and open wells.”Activists also brought to the notice of the district administration and MCC about various other problems residents face. Bad roads, leaking underground drains, clogged stormwater drains, lack of footpaths, incomplete development works, lack of cleanliness and other issues were brought to the notice of authorities through a memorandum.
