Two Indian Diplomats Harassed at Gurdwara in Pakistan

New Delhi: In one of the gravest acts of harassment of Indian diplomats by Pakistani intelligence agencies in recent times, two Indian diplomats were locked in a room in Gurdwara Sacha Sauda Sahib in Farooqabad near Lahore on April 17.

The two Indian diplomats were also threatened and asked never come to the area again.

The incident took place when the two Indian diplomats were in Farooqabad with regard to consular work to facilitate the travel of Indian Sikh pilgrims. India on April 25 issued a demarche to Pakistan through its diplomats in New Delhi to protest against the incident.

According to sources, about 15 men of Pakistan’s intelligence agency accosted the Indian diplomats, searched their bags and took them to a room in the gurdwara where they were locked in for over 20 minutes. They were also asked about their role and duties in Indian High Commission in Islamabad.

Thereafter, the men released the Indian diplomats, and told them to never visit the area or to speak to any Indian pilgrim.

“They were asked to not enter shrine again,” sources said. Pakistani sleuths also recorded the entire episode, sources added.

Also read: After Indian Diplomats Complain of Harassment, Pakistan Protests Unfair Treatment of Its Officials

It may be recalled that Indian diplomats were also mistreated at the same place in November last year and were prevented from meeting Indian pilgrims visiting Gurdwara Sacha Sauda Sahib.

While the harassment of Indian diplomats in Pakistan is almost a regular issue, so far it has been limited to vehicles being followed and other means of intimidation. The last major incident that occurred was in 2013 when Indian police officer Rajesh Mittal posted in Indian High Commission in Islamabad was brutally beaten up by Pakistani agencies.

Also read: Charges of Intimidation of Diplomats, Families Roil India, Pakistan Relations

This latest episode comes at a time when Pakistan prime minister Imran Khan is indicating to the world that he wants to reach out to India. Pakistan and India are also working together to open the Kartarpur corridor.
