Lok Sabha election: big guns fire delhi battle

The political temperature of Delhi has increased as the national capital is all set to vote on May 12. The political parties are leaving no stone unturned to woe the voters. This year it is all about large leaders attending the elections rallies and all the meetings.

To strengthen the air in favour of the BJP candidates, star campaigners including Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath among other senior leaders and many actors are set to hold poll rallies in Delhi. BJP president Amit Shah has already conducted a campaign rally in the Capital.

Bhojpuri superstar Pawan Singh will hold a rally in support of BJP candidates at Ganesh Nagar Chowk in East Delhi on Sunday; and in Vikaspuri and Nangali on Monday.

Bhojpuri star Dinesh Lal Yadav also known as Nirhua, who is a BJP candidate from Azamgarh and is contesting against former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Akhilesh Yadav will hold poll rallies in Shiv Vihar, Nangali and Qutub Vihar on Monday. Bhojpuri superstar is being projected as a part of the BJP because the number of people in Delhi has more than 35% Bhojpuri people, and if they vote for the BJP, it will be difficult for other parties to defeat the saffron party.

Manoj Tiwari is believed to be made the Delhi BJP president ahead of the elections so that the BJP gets votes of the Purvanchalis. Union minister Rajnath Singh will also hold a rally in Dwarka on Monday to urge people to vote for Pravesh Verma, who is a BJP candidate from the West Delhi Lok Sabha constituency. Union minister Sushma Swaraj will conduct a rally on Tuesday.

MODI AND RAHUL LEAVE NO STONE UNTURNED

Even PM Modi will also hold a poll rally in Delhi on Wednesday. After the PM's rally, Adityanath will hold a rally in the national capital on May 9 and Union minister Nitin Gadkari will hold a meeting the same day. Uttarakhand chief minister Trivendra Singh Rawat will be in Tughlaqabad extension on Saturday On Saturday, Congress president Rahul Gandhi also addressed his first poll rally in Haryana for the Lok Sabha elections. The Congress has fielded Ajay Singh Yadav from the Gurugram parliamentary seat.

AAP'S PRAKASH RAJ AND ELECTION MANIFESTOES

Actor-turned-politician Prakash Raj on Saturday started campaigning for AAP candidates contesting the Lok Sabha polls in the Capital. He said, "I'm very happy and proud. It is good to be with the AAP. I'm not from the party, but I'm one of those aam aadmis who look up to the ideology and the work done by this party."

The 54-year-old started his political journey with #justasking on Twitter after his journalist friend Gauri Lankesh's assassination in September 2017. He is contesting the 2019 general elections as an independent candidate from the Bengaluru Central Lok Sabha constituency.

He began campaigning on Saturday and held a meeting in support of AAP candidate Dilip Pandey at Baburpur area in the East Delhi Lok Sabha constituency.

"This is my gesture and my belief that different people have different thought processes, but their love for the country come together to reclaim our republic which is on the verge of losing. We may lose with the onslaught of communal and hatred politics of the government which is very active at the moment," he said. He will also campaign in the New Delhi and East Delhi constituencies on Sunday.

Meanwhile, AAP spokesperson Saurabh Bharadwaj on Saturday announced that its Lok Sabha candidates will declare their constituency-wise manifestoes this week.
