The Guruji who can win big without holding poll rallies

DUMKA: Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM) does not put up too many hoardings and barely any posters. It doesn't need to. In rural pockets of east Jharkhand, all election talk revolves around one word: 'Guruji.' Eight-time MP from Dumka, which goes to the polls in the final phase on May 19, and three-time CM Shibu Soren did not ask a question, participate in any debate or introduce any bill in his latest stint as member of the 16th Lok Sabha. He is in the winter of his political career. Yet he is the sole custodian of his party's political capital."Here, Modi can do nothing to us," the 74-year-old JMM president tells TOI. "The only way to prepare for an election is to go among people, meet them. Nothing else matters," he adds. He throws his house open and meets people twice a day. Cyclone Fani has just made landfall, and public announcements urging people to stay indoors fill the air. But at least 100 people have turned up at his doorstep.His political standing defied a resurgent Indira Gandhi in 1980 and the Modi wave of 2014 - even as BJP won 12 of 14 seats in the state, JMM won two of the three in tribal-dominated Santhal pargana. In between, he became the face of tribal leadership in Delhi, got charged with and acquitted of murder, and made friends (or rivals) on both sides."Guruji is more than a political leader. He gave tribals a voice," says Vinod Pandey, general secretary of JMM. It is under Pandey's watchful eyes that the few public meetings addressed by Soren are convened. Soren does not oversee party functioning any more. He does not address meetings for longer than a few minutes. Party functionaries repeatedly refer to his "health" and "need to rest". He is present at party events, but is mostly quiet.So, is he preparing to hang up his boots? Soren responds with a resounding 'no.' "I will keep contesting elections as long as I'm alive," he says.His son Hemant explains the tribal stalwart's low-key appearances this time. "It's about how you treat your own people. BJP has created a cold storage for its senior leaders - the 'Margdarshak mandal.' Not us. For decades, Guruji sought votes and made leaders of us. This time, we thought we should go out and seek votes for him," he says.Hemant is the accidental heir; he greets those who have turned up to see Soren, meets them one by one and gives them a patient hearing. "I entered politics by chance. My elder brother (Durga) was actively into politics, but he got killed. Father fell ill around the same time. Everything was crumbling. Things moved fast and, before I knew it, I became an MP (in Rajya Sabha). It takes years for people to ascend the political steps I did in a short time," says the 43-year-old JMM working president and leader of opposition in the Jharkhand assembly.Also a former CM himself, Hemant feels Soren's political legacy cannot really be inherited, even by endorsement. "No one has the power Guruji does. I will find out now if some of that power has been transferred to me," he notes.Soren had styled JMM as a tribal party, leading "antioutsider" movements in his early days. Hemant has a different vision. "JMM works for the marginalised, the oppressed, not just for tribals. Under BJP, many communities have been targeted. We stand by them," he says. BJP candidate Sunil Soren had put up a tough fight against Shibu Soren last time, losing by just over 39,000 votes."JMM created him (Sunil was with the party till 2004). Every leader who's made a mark in Jharkhand was created here. It won't make a difference," Soren said.
