Widespread clashes erupt in south Kashmir on poll eve

SRINAGAR: Massive clashes erupted at about a dozen places in Shopian and Pulwama districts on Sunday, a day before polling in the twin south Kashmir districts, forcing security forces to use teargas shells and pellets. Several persons, including polling staff, were wounded while many government buildings were set ablaze. Election officials remained the prime target of the miscreants at all the places.Official sources said that a youth, Sohail Ahmad Dar, suffered pellet injuries during clashes in Palpora area of Shopian. The injured was hospitalized and his condition was stated to be stable, they said.Some youths also pelted stones on polling staff at Zawoora in Shopian and they dispersed after security forces used teargas shells. There were reports of stone pelting upon vehicles ferrying polling staff at Pinjoora, Meemander and Narwaw in Shopian district Election officials were also attacked by angry youths at Narpora Shopian when they were on way from Shopian to Keller. Security forces fired teargas shells. In the ding-dong, some officials and miscreants received injuries.Stone pelting upon polling staff was reported near Goal Masjid Tral where window panes of an SRTC bus were damaged. Clashes also erupted near Mir Mohallah Shadab Kareewa Shopian after some youths pelted stones at passing vehicles. Here also, window panes of an SRTC bus got damaged. Government forces fired teargas shells to disperse the protesters.Security forces fired teargas shells and pellets, and resorted to aerial firing after election officials came under heavy stone pelting at Devpora and Mashwar Shopian, sources said. The presiding officer of a polling station of Pastoona Tral, Nazir Ahmad, and a trooper of SSB were injured in stone pelting at Lurgam area of Tral. Both the injured were hospitalized.Sources said that stones were also pelted upon polling staff at Koil Pulwama, following which forces fired teargas shells while army’s 55RR patrolling party fired a few aerial gunshots. There were no reports of injury to anyone in these clashes, they said.According to reports, at 7.30am, unknown persons set ablaze the middle school at Tumpora Keller Shopian. Fire and emergency sleuths swiftly acted and brought the blaze under control.Meanwhile, miscreant also set ablaze Panchayat Ghars at Chandpora Rajpora and Drubgam Pulwama. They set on fire the building of the revenue department (Pathwar Khana) at Rajpora too. Besides, a building of Government High School at Qasbayar in Rajpora Pulwama was also set on fire.While confirming these incidents, a government official said that fire tenders were immediately called in and the situation was saved.Clashes were also reported from Saraf Kadal in Srinagar down town as youths pelted stones at 23rd Battalion CRPF. The security forces fired teargas shells and pellets due to which at least four persons got injured.
