Candidates sweat it out as poll campaign enters last leg

editorial@tribune.com

Nitish Sharma

Tribune News Service

Kurukshetra, May 5

With campaigning for the Lok Sabha elections entering the last leg, senior leaders of political parties and their respective candidates are sweating it out to make an impact on voters in Kurukshetra.

From getting selfies clicked to slamming their opponents, candidates have been making efforts to woo the voters. They are also making the most of the social media to reach out to the electors. They have been keeping their supporters updated about their schedule on Facebook.

Saffron party candidate Nayab Singh Saini started his campaign early and has covered over 50 per cent of the constituency. He has been covering nearly 12 to 13 villages a day. While the BJP is focusing on rallies and public meetings, the INLD, Congress and the JJP-AAP candidates who entered the fray a little late have to make extra efforts to cover the entire constituency.

Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar has held a ‘vijay sankalp’ rally and corner meetings for Saini. Besides the Chief Minister, sitting MLAs of Thanesar, Ladwa and Shahabad constituencies have also been campaigning for Saini.

On the other hand, Congress candidate Nirmal Singh is getting support of former Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda, former MP Naveen Jindal, and AICC spokesman Randeep Surjewala. Chitra Sarwara, Nirmal’s daughter and All-India Mahila Congress general secretary, is also holding corner meetings for her father. Nirmal, while holding public meetings, recalled his bond with the people of the constituency.

Meanwhile, INLD’s Arjun Chautala, who is contesting his first election, is trying to make a personal contact with the voters. In addition to holding routine meetings in villages, he visits stadiums and parks to interact with youngsters and old people. Having a farming background, Arjun strikes an emotional connection with farmers. Besides INLD leaders, Arjun’s mother Kanta Chautala and aunts have also been campaigning for him.

DD Sharma, JJP-AAP candidate, is not far behind. He is going village to village, addressing people and seeking their support. JJP leader Dushyant Chautala and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal also held a roadshow in Kurukshetra for him.

While the BJP’s campaign seems to be losing enthusiasm owing to the fact it was started early, the campaigns of other parties is gaining momentum. A rally by Prime Minister Narendra Modi is likely to make the last impact.

All-out efforts
