Three societies in Thane allege their ground is being turned into cemetery; parishioners say some people trying to create tension

Pokhran

Thane Municipal Corporation

Eknath Shinde

cemetery

The issue of a plot of land in Thane proposed as the site of a new burial ground for Christians, which also had a playground, reached a flashpoint over the weekend. On Sunday, residents undertook a protest after claiming that five crosses had been illegally installed on the land on Saturday, and that the playground equipment had been removed.However, the Christian community said no burials were conducted at the site, and the crosses had been put up by families of deceased parishioners as a mark of protest against a dearth of burial spaces.Around 500 families from Ravi Estate CHS, 250 families from Suresh Park and 1,000 families from Cosmos Horizon will be affected by the burial ground proposed in their residential zone at Our Lady of Mercy Church,Road, Thane.In March, an FIR was filed against 11 parishioners after a 95-year-old former armyman, Jesiah Rayan, was buried in church premises, in protest against the dearth of burial spaces available to the area’s Christian community.The parishioners had moved the Bombay High Court, and the court had ordered the TMC to consider regularising the grave within four weeks. The TMC is expected to give its decision in the burial ground matter today.On Sunday, Nishikant Sawant, secretary, of Ravi CHS, B Wing, told Mirror that 15 days ago, the equipment from the playground had been removed. “In almost all cities, we have little open space for playing. This plot is reserved as a playground. When we opposed the proposed burial ground adjacent to this ground, they removed the playground equipment. Every space is designated for a purpose. How can a playground be turned into a burial ground? Where will children play? The ground belongs to the, according to official papers, and the TMC had put up a “PG” board on the plot. But when they removed the playing equipment, the board declaring it a playground was also removed,” Sawant said.He claimed that in the past, residents had also objected to a proposal to build a Hindu crematorium in the area. “The proposal was approved by the TMC but we rejected it. Guardian Minister of Thane,, had supported us, despite that proposal being passed on paper. Now, five new crosses have come up on the proposed burial ground, because burials have taken place there. If you respect the court, putting up crosses there is a violation.An attempt is being made to upset communal harmony in the area. Even Christians in my society are objecting to this as the burial ground is right in front of our society, just a few feet from our boundary wall. We have senior citizens in the society who live alone – when they look out of their balconies, they feel like they are watching a horror movie.”Sawant also claimed there would be no buyers for flats in their area if the burial ground came up next door. “People are selling flats fearing the proposal. Also, there is a large well on the plot and the groundwater will be contaminated if there are bodies decomposing just a few feet away,” he said.Mahesh Nadkarni, from Ravi Estates, H Wing said, “We found five crosses on the plot, which means five burials were carried out here, which is illegal. If no burials were conducted, why are the crosses on the site? This burial ground is within 28 m of our society. This creates a morbid atmosphere.”Clara Alva, a parishioner from Our Lady of Mercy Church said, “We got a call at 11.30 pm on Saturday to go to the church, as there was a ruckus. The church gates were open and residents were present inside. There were also some goons from a political party. They were making inflammatory statements against our community and trying to create communal tension. We don’t conduct burials at night, but only till 6 pm. We don’t know who put the crosses on the plot, but no burials were carried out there. We will bury our dead there only after seeking permission.Besides, this is our land; don’t we have the right to our graveyard?” Melwyn Fernandes, another parishioner and secretary, Association of Concerned Catholics, told Mirror, “This is a 450-year-old church, and the neighbouring societies were built only nine years ago. Roman Catholics have a tradition of burying our loved ones near the church. The families of parishioners who have passed away installed five crosses on the plot as a mark of protest. We have moved the high court to get permission for a burial ground inside the church compound. The TMC is to decide on the registration of theon Monday.“After last night’s attack on our parishioners, we have sent a letter of complaint to the police against officebearers of Ravi Estate and Suresh Park,” Fernandes said.
