British entrepreneur Jason Unsworth claims SBI has allowed him to bid for Jet Airways

British entrepreneur Jason Unsworth claims SBI has allowed him to bid for Jet Airways

Unsworth, CEO at Atmosphere Intercontinental Airlines, a startup he founded four years ago, evinced interest in investing in Jet Airways a few days ago.

Money Jet Crisis

British entrepreneur Jason Unsworth, who has evinced interest in investing in the now grounded Jet Airways, has claimed that the lenders' consortium leader State Bank of India (SBI) has asked him to formally submit a bid for the airline.

Unsworth is the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) at Atmosphere Intercontinental Airlines, a startup he founded four years ago.

An unverified Twitter account of Unsworth said that state-run SBI has confirmed that he can still submit a bid for the airline.

That’s not the information I received today, and also we have been told that our present bid, can be jointly done on the EOI already submitted by Future Trend... https://t.co/sSOGdBDYSR May 6, 2019

The development comes days after the British entrepreneur evinced interest in investing in Jet Airways.

Last month, Jet had advised the British entrepreneur to formally engage in the matter through the ongoing bidding process.

The airline revealed its advice to Unsworth after domestic stock exchanges sought clarification from the temporarily grounded airline regarding a report which cited a British entrepreneur's offer to take control of the cash-strapped airline.

In its reply, Jet Airways had said: "Please note that an unsolicited e-mail communication was received by the company...and the sender has been advised to formally engage with SBI Caps Ltd, which is leading the bidding process under the resolution plan initiated by the consortium of domestic lenders led by the State Bank of India."

At present, the domestic lenders of the temporarily grounded airline have called for binding bids from potential investors by May 10 to sell a sizeable stake in the company.

A group of frequent flyers too, showed interest in bidding for the airline and wrote to the consortium of lenders.

Meanwhile, one employee union, which is believed to be Shiv Sena affiliated Bharatiya Kamgar Sena has threatened industrial action at the Mumbai airport if the airline's employees are not paid their due salaries. According to the union, the financial plight of Jet's employees has forced it to stage a protest at the Mumbai airport starting Monday.

"Please note that looking at the woos of Jet Airways employees, our members employed at Mumbai airport are extremely agitated and if no justice done to these employees, may resort to industrial action on their own accord and will lead to adverse impact on the aviation industry," said Suryakant Mahadik, President of Bharatiya Kamgar Sena, in a letter to the senior Union Ministers.

Currently, the airline's employees, lessors and vendors face daunting financial challenges due to non-payment of salaries and dues.

"To add (to) their miseries, with effect from May 1, 2019 their mediclaim facilities have also been withdrawn with option given to them to take personal mediclaim."

Last month, Jet was forced to announce a temporary suspension of all flight services as it was unable to maintain even bare minimum operations.

Prior to temporarily suspending all flight services, Jet had already folded up most of its operations due to grounding of around 90 per cent of its fleet by lessors, as its consortium of lenders refused to extend loans to the airline.
