Pamela Anderson visits Julian Assange in prison, ‘picture in picture’ revealed in world famous painting, and other news in pictures

6.30 pm

Julian Assange’s life is in danger, says Pamela Anderson

Former Baywatch star and now animal rights campaigner Pamela Anderson spoke emotionally after meeting WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange in a London prison on May 7, warning that his life was in danger.

"It's been very difficult to see Julian here and to make our way through the prison to get to him was quite shocking," said Ms. Anderson, who visited Assange several times when he lived as a fugitive inside Ecuador’s embassy.

"He's a good man, he's an incredible person. I love him. I can't imagine what he has been going through," the U.S. actress and former Playboy model said outside Belmarsh prison, wearing a large cape with slogans calling for the defence of free speech.

"We need to save his life. That's how serious it is," she said, adding: "We just have to keep fighting because it's unfair. He's sacrificed so much to bring the truth out".

British police arrested Assange at the embassy last month after Ecuador withdrew his asylum after seven years.

He had sought refuge there to escape extradition to Sweden where he had been accused of rape and sexual assault.

Assange is now serving out a 50-week sentence for jumping bail and is contesting an extradition request from the United States where he is wanted for hacking.

6 pm

Picture in picture in Johannes Vermeer’s painting revealed

In 1979, an x-ray image of the work revealed a completely overpainted ‘picture in the picture’ showing a naked Cupid on the wall of the room in the background. Today, new laboratory tests have conclusively determined that the overpainting was not by Johannes Vermeer's hand. On this basis, the Gemaeldegalerie Alte Meister decided in the course of the current restoration of the work to remove the overpaint.

Restorer Christoph Schoelzel explains his work during a press preview of a conservation project of the internationally well-known and venerated painting “Girl Reading a Letter at an Open Window” by Johannes Vermeer (1632-1675) in the Gemaeldegalerie Alte Meister in Dresden, eastern Germany on May 7, 2019. | Photo Credit: AP

5 pm

Russia buries its World War II dead

Members of volunteer search teams gather around coffins with the remains of Soviet soldiers killed during World War II, during a reburial ceremony at the Sinyavino Heights memorial near the village of Sinyavino, 50 km east of St. Petersburg on May 7, 2019. | Photo Credit: AP

Hundreds of people came to a World War II battleground outside St. Petersburg to bury the remains of 714 Soviet soldiers recovered by volunteer search teams. Forty one crimson coffins containing skulls and bones were solemnly buried at the Sinyavino Heights memorial as Russian war songs played and an honour guard fired a salute.

Russia will celebrate the 74th anniversary of the 1945 victory over Nazi Germany on May 9. The parade will take place at Moscow’s Red Square.

Russian Sukhoi Su-35 and Su-34 military aircraft fly over the Russian national flag on the Kremlin palace in Moscow on May 7, 2019, during a rehearsal for the Victory Day military parade. | Photo Credit: AFP

4 pm

Akshaya Tritiya gets off to a good start after three bad years

After languishing for the past three years, this year’s Akshaya Tritiya got off to a good start Tuesday with jewellers reporting higher footfalls.

A saleswoman shows a gold necklace to customers at a jewellery showroom in Mumbai on the occasion of Akshaya Tritiya. | Photo Credit: Paul Noronha

Consumers have been thronging to jewellery shops to buy token gold items and also to take delivery of their pre- booked jewellery.

3 pm

'Computer Baba' prays for Digvijaya's win

Namdeo Das Tyagi, also known as Computer Baba performs 'hatyoga' for the victory of Congress candidate Digvijaya Singh, in Bhopal, on May 7, 2019. | Photo Credit: A.M.Faruqui

Namdeo Das Tyagi, better known as 'Computer Baba' performed special yagna called 'hatyoga' to seek divine intervention for Congress candidate Digvijaya Singh's win in the upcoming General elections.

Mr. Singh is facing BJP's Praya Singh Thakur in Bhopal.

The Babu himself was a minister in Shivraj Singh Chouhan's Cabinet, but switched sides to Congress later.

Mr. Singh and his wife Amrita Rai also took part in the prayers.

2 pm

Sri Lanka’s bombed church reopens

A Sri Lankan Christian devotee prays outside the St. Anthony's church after it was partially opened for the first time since Easter Sunday attacks, in Colombo on May 7, 2019. | Photo Credit: AP

Sri Lanka’s St. Anthony’s church partially opened for worship on Tuesday even as renovations are underway.

The faithful were allowed into a section of the church to pray before a statue of Saint Anthony, said Father Edmond Tilakaratne, spokesman for the Archbishop of Colombo, Cardinal Malcolm Ranjith to AFP.

Three policemen and three women frisked pilgrims lined up to enter the shrine while heavily armed navy personnel and police kept watch outside.

St. Anthony’s was among the three churches attacked by jihadi suicide bombers in coordinated attacks that also targeted three luxury hotels in Colombo on April 21.

11 a.m.

Women protest outside Supreme Court

Heavy deployment of police for women’s demonstration outside Supreme Court, against CJI being cleared of sexual harassment charges, New Delhi, Tuesday May 7, 2019 | Photo Credit: Shinjini Ghosh

Women gathered outside the Supreme Court in New Delhi for a demonstration after CJI Ranjan Gogoi was cleared of charges of sexual harassment on Monday. The Justice S.A. Bobde in-house committee has found “no substance” in the sexual harassment allegations levelled by a former Supreme Court staff member against Mr. Gogoi. The complainant said she was “highly disappointed and dejected” to learn that the in-house committee had found no substance in her complaint.

10 a.m.

Myanmar journalists released from prison

Reuters journalists Wa Lone, left, and Kyaw She Oo wave as they walk out from Insein Prison after being released in Yangon, Myanmar Tuesday, May 7, 2019 | Photo Credit: AP

Two Reuters journalists jailed in Myanmar after they were convicted of breaking the Official Secrets Act walked free from a prison on the outskirts of Yangon on Tuesday after spending more than 500 days behind bars, witnesses said.

9 a.m.

Philippines elections

Philippine troops stand at attention during a send-off ceremony for the May 13 midterm elections Tuesday, May 7, 2019 at Camp Aguinaldo in suburban Quezon city, northeast of Manila, Philippines. | Photo Credit: AP

Philippine troops stand in attention during a send-off ceremony for the May 13 midterm elections at Camp Aguinaldo in suburban Quezon city, northeast of Manila, Philippines. More than 200,000 police and Philippine troops along with thousands more teachers and government workers are mobilized for the midterm elections that would elect 12 senators, congressmen and local leaders in the country.
