Ram Mandir nahi toh Modi nahi, says Computer Baba as he campaigns for Congress’ Digvijaya Singh in Bhopal

Computer Baba campaigned for Congress leader Digvijaya Singh in Bhopal | Photo Credit: ANI

Bhopal: In a bid to counter BJP’s Bhopal candidate Sadhvi Pragya’s Hindutva campaign, Congress candidate Digvijaya Singh roped in 7,000 saints to campaign for him for the ongoing Lok Sabha elections. The senior Congress leader on Tuesday participated in a havan along with wife Amrita Rai, in the presence of Computer Baba, who was granted the status of a minister in the BJP government.

Computer Baba, who has camped in Bhopal along with thousands of sadhus to undertake Hat Yoga, urged voters to vote out the Narendra Modi government and support Congress leader Digvijaya Singh. The saint slammed PM Modi and accused him of failing to fulfil his promise of building the Ram Temple in Ayodhya.

Speaking to reporters, Computer Baba said, “BJP sarkaar 5 saal mein Ram Mandir bhi nahi bana paayi. Ab Ram Mandir nahi toh Modi nahi ( BJP government could not even build the Ram Mandir in five years. Now, if there’s no Ram Mandir, then there’ll be no Modi government).” Earlier, while announcing that the sadhus would pray for Digvijaya’s victory on Tuesday, Computer Baba had claimed that PM Modi had “lied and looted Hindutva.”

He had said, “The Sadhu community will pray for his (Digvijaya Singh’s) victory. I would like to appeal to the people of the nation that the time has come - Modi is a liar and he has used saffron for looting the country. Our slogan is ‘Ram Ram abki baar, badal ke rakh do chawkidar.’ 7,000 saints are holding a three-day havan in Bhopal.

Bhopal: Congress leader Digvijaya Singh performs 'pooja' in the presence of Computer Baba, at the venue where he is camping along with thousands of sadhus to undertake Hat Yog. pic.twitter.com/8LfhAedzaW — ANI (@ANI) May 7, 2019

The nomination of Sadhvi Pragya, who is out on bail in connection with 2008 Malegaon blasts case, has sparked a massive controversy, with opposition parties targeting the BJP for fielding an accused in a terror case for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. However, the BJP has defended their decision, with PM Modi calling Sadhvi Pragya the face of “Hindu asmita”.

"Nominating Sadhvi Pragya was an absolutely right decision. The allegations against her are baseless," BJP chief Amit Shah had stated earlier.


