CJI sexual harassment case: Section 144 outside SC after protests against clean chit to Gogoi

Most of the protestors have been detained and put in a police vehicle. Security has also been increased outside the top court’s premises.(Photo: Reuters)

Police on Tuesday imposed Section 144 outside the Supreme Court a day after an in-house panel gave a clean chit to Chief Justice of India (CJI) in a sexual harassment case against him.

A group of lawyers and women activists took part in the protest since morning.

However, things soon started going out of control as the police tried to disperse the gathering; some journalists who went to cover the proceedings were also detained by police personnel.

While the journalists covering the protest have been released, over 30 women activists have been detained by the police at Mandir Marg Police Station, Delhi.

Security has also been increased outside the top court’s premises.

CJI Ranjan Gogoi was given a clean chit by an in-house panel investigating sexual harassment charges against him on Monday. (Photo: PTI)

Several activists and a group of lawyers were protesting against the procedure adopted by the three-judge panel, led by Justice SA Bobde, to deal with the sexual harassment case against CJI Gogoi.

National Federation of India Women (NFIW) general secretary Annie Raja told India Today TV said the protest was being held to question the method adopted by the in-house investigation panel which gave a clean chit to Ranjan Gogoi.

She said the activists want a fair trial for the ex-Supreme court staffer who had earlier accused the CJI of sexually harassing her.

On Monday, the three-judge bench investigating into sexual harassment allegations against Ranjan Gogoi gave a clean chit to him in the matter. The panel said it did not find any substance in the allegations levelled by the former Supreme Court employee.

Delhi: Women lawyers and activists today held a protest outside the Supreme Court against the procedure adopted to deal with sexual harassment case against CJI Ranjan Gogoi. Section 144 has been imposed outside SC following the protest. pic.twitter.com/oefGGSCRCJ ANI (@ANI) May 7, 2019

However, the woman had earlier decided not to take part in the in-house investigation as she was frightened by the proceedings. After yesterday’s judgment, the woman staffer said her worst fears have come true and all her hopes of justice have been shattered.

Her statement came hours after the three-judge bench gave a clean chit to Ranjan Gogoi.

"Today, my worst fears have come true, and all hopes of justice and redress from the highest court of the land have been shattered, she said.
