Activists, lawyers stage protests against clean chit to CJI Gogoi, detained

Activists, lawyers stage protests against clean chit to CJI Gogoi, detained

Section 144 has been imposed outside the Supreme Court premises.

news Protest

Several protesters who had gathered outside the Supreme Court against the clean chit given to Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi in the sexual harassment case against him were detained by Delhi police on Tuesday.

Several lawyers, activists and some members of the media had gathered outside the Supreme Court to stage a silent protest against the Chief Justice of India and the procedure of the probe conducted by the in-house panel that was probing the charges against him. Shortly after they assembled at the Supreme Court, they were rounded up and taken to Mandir Marg police station. Section 144 has been imposed outside the Supreme Court premises.

"Be you ever so high, the law is above you." pic.twitter.com/zG7fcuVdv6 — Rohan Venkat (@RohanV) May 7, 2019

Women activists were peacefully protesting today morning against SC's acquittal of CJI of sexual harassment charges at the #SupremeCourt.



They have been detained by the police under Sec 144 & taken to Mandir Marg police station. Via @Zenanandini#SupremeInjustice pic.twitter.com/UxNwdnCMUm May 7, 2019

Outside Supreme Court, women protesting were forcibly picked up and packed into a police bus. #CJIRanjanGogoi pic.twitter.com/TS3mfjqrNy — Vijayta Lalwani (@VijaytaL) May 7, 2019

At the Mandir Marg police station Jagori, NFIW, AIDWA, SNS, NTUI members among others protesting #SupremeInjustice pic.twitter.com/NBFhDc9uOw — #MeTooIndia (@IndiaMeToo) May 7, 2019

The protests were held a day after the in-house panel, headed by Justice SA Bobde, dismissed the charges of sexual harassment against CJI Ranjan Gogoi stating that there was no substance to the allegations. The complainant, a former Supreme Court staffer, had submitted a sworn affidavit to 22 judges on April 19, accusing CJI Gogoi of sexually harassing her on two occasions in October 2018. On Monday, the complainant in a statement has said she is highly disappointed to learn that the "in-house committee has found no substance in my complaint" and that she felt gross injustice has been done to her.

The in-house panel, constituted by CJI Gogoi himself, comprised Justice SA Bobde, the second seniormost judge in the apex court, Justice Indira Banerjee and Justice Indu Malhotra. The committee submitted its report, which will not be made public, on May 5 in accordance with the "in-house procedure to the next senior-most judge competent to receive the report and also sent a copy of the report to the judge concerned, the Chief Justice India."

On Sunday, the apex court had issued a statement declining reports that stated Justice DY Chandrachud and Justice Rohinton Nariman had met Justice Bobde, who was heading the panel probing the sexual harassment allegations. It was claimed that Justices Chandrachud and Nariman had met the members of the in-house committee on the evening of May 3 to register their concerns over continuing with the probe involving the CJI in the absence of the complainant.

On April 30, the former employee of the Supreme Court withdrew from appearing before the panel. The subsequent hearings of the panel were held ex-parte.
