Karnataka BJP warns of protests over Congress-JD(S) govt's apathy towards drought

Bengaluru: The BJP in Karnataka took potshots at the Congress-JD(S) coalition government dubbing it as "dead" over its "apathy" towards drought relief measures and warned of state-wide agitations if no action was taken in two to three days.

Alleging that those in the government were immersed in dealing with coalition worries and infighting, the saffron party leaders also hit out at Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy over his temple visits, and not sparing time for drought management.

".. none of the officials or Ministers are paying heed. It looks like there is no one to question them," state BJP chief B S Yeddyurappa told reporters here.

Pointing out that over 170 taluks in the state were facing drought and there was a shortage of drinking water, also fodder for cattle at several places, he said, neither officials nor Ministers are visiting the affected areas, while the Chief Minister doesn't have time.

"... if no action is taken in two to three days it will be inevitable for us (BJP) to hold a statewide agitation. Government is dead, what has happened to officials. They should do their duty by travelling across the state and take measures, also release funds that are required," he added.

Promising that the BJP would work towards getting more assistance from the Centre, the leader of opposition said, without paying attention to any of this, those in the government were immersed in their own "political drama."

"The government was not paying attention towards anything; they are involved in their own confusion, infighting in Congress-JD(S) alliance.

There is a question that has arose whether this government is alive or dead," he said.

Meanwhile, speaking to reporters in Hubballi, former Chief Minister Jagadish Shettar said, "it looks like this government is non-existent. It is dead. Let the Chief Minister give his time to drought measures and farmers, instead of spending time visiting temples, performing homa-havana (rituals).

Calling the government "irresponsible", he alleged that the Chief Minister was wasting time pondering over his son's victory in Mandya, his party's performance in the polls, and saving the government.

"Chief Minister spends a lot of time visiting temples and performing rituals there, let him give that time to hold meetings on drought. Elections are over, people have given their verdict, and results won't change if you (CM) go to temples now and perform poojas. With the fear of losing, he (CM) is visiting temples," he added.
