‘I have the right to know’: Complainant in CJI case seeks copy of inquiry report

‘I have the right to know’: Complainant in CJI case seeks copy of inquiry report

The complainant in the case has sought a copy of the report filed by the committee that found “no substance” in her allegations.

news Sexual harassment

A day after the Supreme Court’s in-house panel dismissed the sexual harassment case against Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi, the complainant in the case has sought a copy of the report filed by the committee that found “no substance” in her allegations.

‘"I have a right to know how, why and on what basis have your Lordships found my complaint to have 'no substance'," the complainant has said in a statement, adding she was "deeply shocked" on the outcome of the committee's findings.

"Despite my detailed affidavit, ample corroborative evidence and clear, consistent statement reiterating my experience of sexual harassment and consequent victimisation, the Committee has found no substance in my complaint and affidavit," she said.

The complainant has questioned how the Committee came to its finding despite the fact that she withdrew from appearing before it.

“From the beginning I have been treated as an outsider, I have not been informed of the procedure, I have not been informed of my basic rights and obligations with regard to the inquiry proceedings. From the beginning there has been a lack of transparency in the functioning of the Committee and great prejudice is being caused to me repeatedly,” she stated.

She has questioned how the CJI got a copy of the report but she who lodged the complaint has not been given a copy.

“Not providing a copy to the complainant while holding her complaint to be unfounded would be a violation of the principles of natural justice and a complete travesty of justice,” she stated.

The complainant, a former Supreme Court staffer, had submitted a sworn affidavit to 22 judges on April 19, accusing CJI Gogoi of sexually harassing her on two occasions in October 2018. An in-house panel, headed by Justice SA Bobde and comprising Justices Indira Banerjee and Indu Malhotra, was formed to look into the allegations and on May 5 dismissed the charges of sexual harassment against CJI Ranjan Gogoi stating that there was “no substance” to the allegations.

Earlier on Tuesday, several lawyers, activists and some members of the media gathered outside the Supreme Court to protest against the clean chit given to CJI Ranjan Gogoi were detained by Delhi police.
