Uber and Lyft Drivers Are About to Go on Strike Worldwide

Drivers for Uber, Lyft, and other ride-sharing services are striking in solidarity with Uber drivers protesting for better working conditions. Drivers plan to log out of their apps between 7am and 9am Eastern time on May 8 -- the day Uber will go public for an estimated valuation that could exceed $90 billion.

The strike will be held in cities across the United Kingdom including London, Glasgow, Birmingham, and Nottingham, as well as US cities including Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Atlanta, and Uber’s single largest market, New York City. Uber drivers are seeking an end to upfront pricing, a cap on the per-fare commission that goes to the company instead of the drivers, and fewer driver deactivations.

“You’re fired at the press of a button,” Bhairavi Desai, executive director of the New York Taxi Workers Alliance, told Thrillist. “There’s no notice. And there are studies that have shown that passengers can make complaints that are motivated by racism or chauvinism, and it doesn’t matter. You still get deactivated, and if you get a number of those complaints then you’re fired permanently.”

According to an Uber Securities and Exchange Commission filing released in April, Uber aims to raise more than $10.35 billion in its initial public offering, which would make it one of the largest IPOs of any company to date. Uber is expected to be valued at close to $100 billion. According to the SEC filing, the top five executives at Uber made a combined $143 million in 2018. The highest-paid, chief operating officer Barney Harford, made more than $47.6 million. The people who perform the actual labor that keeps Uber so profitable, though, don’t enjoy nearly so large a share of what they produce. New York City has mandated that Uber drivers make $17.22 per hour after expenses, but drivers in other cities can make less than half that.

“We don’t want the minimum wage to become the ceiling,” Desai said. “As the revenues grow in this industry, drivers can only earn more of it if they remain as commission workers.”
