Naresh Goyal pens emotional letter to Jet employees, hopes for airline's swift revival

Ex-Jet Airways chairman Naresh Goyal recently penned a fresh letter to employees on May 6, just a day after the 26th anniversary of the grounded airline.

In the letter, Goyal not only expressed his gratitude to employees but thanked them for their constant support. Goyal added that he is "deeply moved" by the constant efforts of the airline's staff to rescue Jet Airways.

Naresh Goyal said he felt "terrible" that Jet Airways employees have not been not getting their hard-earned salaries, adding that it has been an extremely emotional and difficult period for him and his wife.

"For Neeta and me, it has been an extremely emotional and difficult period, most particularly about the non-payment of your hard-earned salaries," Goyal said.

Goyal added that he understands how difficult it has become for employees of the grounded airline to survive without a salary.

Maharashtra: Jet Airways employees hold a protest at Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport, Mumbai. pic.twitter.com/v2NSVvprc8 ANI (@ANI) May 8, 2019

"I cannot even begin to describe how terrible it is for me to contemplate the difficult situation each of you and your dear families are going through and cannot find the words to explain my deep personal anguish," he added.

The former board chairman of Jet Airways said he is "watching and closely monitoring" the efforts of employees who are trying their best to save the airline.

"I am truly, deeply moved," Goyal said.

Goyal also offered to infuse Rs 250 crore from his personal funds into the airline, adding that he has made the funds available to banks that are now controlling the airline till a bidder is finalised.

While Goyal empathised with the employees and hoped for a positive outcome on May 10--when banks are expected to finalise a bidder for the crisis-hit airline--the staffers who have not yet quit the airline are not impressed with the letter.

Employees unimpressed

Speaking to India Today TV, a senior aircraft engineer said there has been no respite from confusion over the last three months. "This letter reaffirms that the chairman's point of view is that he is no longer in the picture," said the employee on condition of anonymity.

Another Mumbai-based employee said: "The letter is not helpful. For Naresh Goyal to just show concern isn't going to help us in any manner."

Jet Airways Staff and Officer's Association has already demanded an FIR against Jet Airways management including Naresh Goyal for failing to pay remuneration for their services. The employees were also denied basic facilities like mediclaim.

The ailing airline, hit by its worst financial crisis, was temporarily grounded last month after it struggled to continue with operations. It is currently sitting on a debt of over Rs 8,500 crore.

As the situation stands, the last ray of hope for the airline rests with the lenders who are expected to finalise a bidder on May 10.
