Jet employees protest at airport seeking pending salary, job security

Submit memorandum of appeal to GVK general manager

After their silent protest at Azad Maidan on May 3, employees of the beleaguered Jet Airways again held a protest at Terminal 2 of the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport on Wednesday.

Shiv Sena leader Suryakant Mahadik, the president of Bhartiya Kamgar Sena (BKS), the party’s labour union, and members of the union were also present to support the protesters.

Mr. Mahadik, on behalf of the Jet Airways employees and BKS members, submitted a memorandum of appeal to Mohan Kadam, a general manager of GVK at Mumbai airport. The appeal consists of the demands of the Jet employees as well as a request to seek help to revive the airline.

“The Jet employees shouldn’t only get their pending salaries, but the management should also give them their jobs back. We are not only demanding a salary for three months, but we need the job security too,” Mr. Mahadik said.

While demanding that the government intervene in the matter, the BKS president said, “Even if we (Sena) are in an alliance with the Bharatiya Janata Party, the injustice towards workers will not be tolerated. [Sena founder] Balasaheb Thackeray always had a soft corner for the workers and following this idea, the BKS will stand with the Jet employees.”

The protesters said that if none of the lenders show interest in investing in the airline then the government should pressurise the State Bank of India and other banks.

“If the results turn out to be negative, we will still not lose the hope, but that will make us take a very tough step. With around 12,000 workers with us, the union has a capacity to shut down both the terminals in Mumbai. We will regret the inconvenience of the passengers; but if they (the government and the SBI) don’t let Jet fly, we will make sure that no other plane will fly in the sky,” Mr. Mahadik said.

He congratulated the Jet employees on remaining united and fighting for their rights every single day.

Meanwhile, the air carrier’s employees said they wanted their dues as well as their jobs back, and were eagerly waiting for May 10, when the bidders for the airline will be announced.
