Lok Sabha Elections 2019 Highlights: Mahagathbandhan can lead only to anarchy and instability, says PM Modi

Delhi’s backbone being broken: Rahul Gandhi

I saw AAP posters ‘hum kaam karte hain, wo kaam rokte hain’. You didn’t say this earlier when you contested elections. You are in power, small traders - Delhi’s backbone being broken, sealing underway and you say can’t do anything? Congress had stopped this in Parliament, says Rahul Gandhi.

R Gandhi: I saw AAP posters 'hum kaam karte hain, wo kaam rokte hain'. You didn't say this earlier when you contested elections. You are in power, small traders - Delhi's backbone being broken, sealing underway&you say can't do anything? Congress had stopped this in Parliament. https://t.co/yIwfks4ISn — ANI (@ANI) May 9, 2019

AAP cannot defeat Narendra Modi, only Congress can: Rahul Gandhi

AAP cannot defeat Narendra Modi, only Congress can: Rahul Gandhi.

You won’t hear ‘Chowkidar chor hai’ in AAP office: Rahul Gandhi

Rahul Gandhi in Delhi: In last elections AAP’s slogan in Delhi was ‘Dilli mein CM Kejriwal ji, Hindustan mein PM Narendra Modi ji’. They would opened gates for Narendra Modi. Congress and I have fought Narendra Modi ji across the country. You won’t hear ‘Chowkidar chor hai’ in AAP office.

Rahul Gandhi in Delhi: In last elections AAP's slogan in Delhi was 'Dilli mein CM Kejriwal ji, Hindustan mein PM Narendra Modi ji'. They'd opened gates for Narendra Modi. Congress&I have fought Narendra Modi ji across the country. You won't hear 'Chowkidar chor hai' in AAP office pic.twitter.com/YZHy5QwA60 — ANI (@ANI) May 9, 2019

Sealing in Delhi and GST implemented by PM Modi to finish small shopkeepers: Rahul Gandhi

Congress President Rahul Gandhi in Delhi: Why was sealing in Delhi and GST implemented? It was a strategy by Narendra Modi to finish the small shopkeepers, small businessmen and traders.

Congress President Rahul Gandhi in Delhi: Why was sealing in Delhi and GST implemented? It was a strategy by Narendra Modi to finish the small shopkeepers, small businessmen and traders. pic.twitter.com/SO7uOKaB2t — ANI (@ANI) May 9, 2019

Amit Shah today visited Garhwa Ghat Ashram in Varanasi

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) President Amit Shah today visited Garhwa Ghat Ashram in Varanasi.

Time to bid goodbye to PM Modi: Rahul Gandhi

Time to bid goodbye to PM Modi: Rahul Gandhi at poll rally in Madhya Pradesh

Mayawati is now seeking votes for people who had called Baba Saheb Ambedkar a land mafia: PM Modi

PM Narendra Modi in Jaunpur: Behen Ji will understand the game that has been played to keep her outside Uttar Pradesh only after May 23. Behen Ji is now seeking votes for the people who had called Baba Saheb Ambedkar a land mafia and insulted him at every step.

PM Narendra Modi in Jaunpur: Behen Ji will understand the game that has been played to keep her outside Uttar Pradesh only after May 23. Behen Ji is now seeking votes for the people who had called Baba Saheb Ambedkar a land mafia and insulted him at every step. pic.twitter.com/50oO3dmnqL — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 9, 2019

Modi can’t talk about his govt’s performance, so talks about past: Rahul Gandhi.

Modi can’t talk about his government’s performance, so talks about past: Rahul Gandhi.

Come and see the vibrancy here in Jaunpur. It’s BJP all the way: PM Modi

Come and see the vibrancy here in Jaunpur. It’s BJP all the way: PM Modi

Azamgarh had become synonymous with terrorism before 2014, not so any longer: PM Modi

Azamgarh had become synonymous with terrorism before 2014, not so any longer: PM Modi

Mahagathbandhan can lead only to anarchy and instability: PM Modi

The mahagathbandhan can lead only to anarchy and instability: PM Modi at rally in Azamgarh.

Our government prioritised national interest: PM Modi in Azamgarh

PM Modi in Azamgarh: How were bomb blasts brought under control in all cities after 2014? How have terror activities been restricted only to Jammu and Kashmir now? It is because our government prioritised national interest. We entered Pakistan and attacked terrorists.

PM Modi in Azamgarh: How were bomb blasts brought under control in all cities after 2014? How have terror activities been restricted only to J&K now? It is because our govt prioritised national interest. We entered Pakistan and attacked terrorists. pic.twitter.com/ONk4g78iY0 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 9, 2019

‘There will be new PMs every day of the week if Mahagathbandhan is elected’: Amit Shah

BJP President Amit Shah says, by the time it is Sunday, the nation will collapse.

‘Rajiv Gandhi’s death was unfortunate, but we can speak on Bofors and Bhopal tragedy’: Defence Min Sitharaman

Defence Minister Sitharaman says, everyone should respect the former PM but shall be allowed to question the scandals that surfaced during his tenure.

Sarwan Singh Channy, grandson of Giani Zail Singh, joins BJP

A former 1982-batch Punjab-cadre IAS officer who retired recently, former CIC of State Information Commission joins Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)

Rahul addresses rally in Sirsa, Haryana and steps up attack on PM on Rafale deal

‘PM Modi has failed the youth of Sirsa. Rafale jets could have been built if there was a HAL factory here’: Rahul

‘In 1971, Atalji united the opposition and rallied behind then PM Indira Gandhi during the war’: Union minister Gadkari

Gadkari addresses the media and says developmental projects are progressing at faster rate. Flyovers have been built to connect Baghpat to Meerut and Delhi.

‘Roads are being built by the Centre to connect lower economic zones of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and UP’, says Union minister Gadkari.

Trinamool has made mafia part of government, says Modi

Modi says, “Purulia has a lot of resources. But the governments here till date have created coal mafia, Trinamool has, infact, made the mafia a part of its government. He adds, “those who fought the mafia and laid their lives for democracy, their sacrifice won’t go in vain.”

‘People have to think twice before voting here’

PM Modi: Gurudev Rabindranath wanted an India which was unafraid but first the Congress and then the Communists have ripped to pieces his teachings. Modi adds, “people have to think twice before voting here. Political workers are murdered for campaigning.”

People are afraid in West Bengal: PM Modi

PM Modi adds, “If you (Mamata Banerjee) had shown the courage of slapping those people who looted people in the name of chitfund, you wouldn’t have been so afraid. Didi got your vote in the name of ‘maa, maati and maanush’. But what is the situation today in West Bengal? The mother is worried about the security of her children, the soil has become red with the blood of democracy-loving innocent people and people are afraid.

Didi’s slap will be a blessing for me: PM Modi at Purulia

Speaking at an election rally in West Bengal’s Purulia, PM Modi referred to CM Mamata Banerjee’s purported remark about slapping him. Modi said, “I call her didi and respect her, her slap will become a blessing for me. I am ready to be slapped.”

PM Narendra Modi to address rally in Purulia, West Bengal

Sitting MP from Trinamool Congress Mriganko Mahato will contest against BJP’s Jyotirmay Mahato. Purulia votes on Phase VI of Lok Sabha Elections 2019.

‘Didi has stalled PM Kisan Yojana schemes in Bengal’: PM Modi

PM reiterates his promise to award pensions to small-scale farmers and MSME traders. He says Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee stalling health care initiatives of the Central Government.

PM Modi says Bengal CM has ‘mamata’ for foreign actors but not for armed forces.

PM Narendra Modi attacks Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee for not celebrating surgical strike day.

PM Modi: ‘Didi supporting Dadagiri and tolabaazi across Bengal’

PM Modi speaks to the crowd in Bangla, attacks Bengal CM for supporting local coal mafia in Bankura. He says, he is not worried about Bengal CM’s ‘empty threats’. PM Modi says she should be worried about the people who are angered because of the chit fund scam.

Didi feels proud to call Imran Khan our nation’s PM: PM Modi

PM Narendra Modi attacks Bengal CM, says she was too proud to sit with him to discuss relief measures with the PMO and Army officials in the aftermath of Cyclone Fani.

PM Modi says, ‘Didi has forgotten Ma, Maati, Manush.’

PM Narendra Modi says Mamata Banerjee has insulted the Constitution of India. He said he is not afraid of insults and has gotten used to it.

PM Narendra Modi starts his address.

PM Narendra Modi begins his speech by commemorating the 158th birth anniversary of Nobel Laureate Rabindranath Tagore.

PM Narendra Modi to address the public in Bankura, West Bengal shortly.

PM Modi is back in Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee’s turf where he will canvass for BJP candidate Amiya Patra. TMC has changed its contestant in Bankura, replacing actor-turned-politician Moon Moon Sen with Subrata Mukherjee.
