Fali Nariman remembers the good old days when politics was about bonhomie and camaraderie

Fali Nariman | Photo Credit: BCCL

Fali Nariman is not only one of India’s most eminent jurists, he is equally famous for his epigrammatic logics and sunny sense of humour. A nonagenarian and someone who has witnessed a swathe of political and social change, he bemoans the current era where intolerance to another’s point of view has become commonplace.

Reminiscing the past, Nariman regaled the audience at an event recently in the national capital, “There was a minister in Pandit ji’s time, in my college days, who used to be lampooned constantly. It was a story about Sardar Baldev Singh, the then defence minister, travelling in one of those caravelle planes. When the plane landed, he wanted to get off first. The air-hostess after opening the door of the plane was awaiting the ladder, told the minister to ‘wait please’. But the minister understood ‘wait please’ (as weight) differently, and just said 118 kilos and promptly made for the door.”

Nariman clarified that this story was, of course, fake. It was a joke that was repeated in newspapers from time to time. Not everyone laughed at it, but the important thing about this jest was that the minister didn’t go to court complaining or go file a suit. He did not even protest to his Prime Minister…

“Laughing at yourself, is good for your soul. That is why I look back blissfully at the good old days,” he said.

Today, he says, for instance, we find members of Parliament and politicians are humourless. The former Rajya Sabha MP felt that this was not the case till at least the time of Atal Bihari Vajpayee. “Vajpayee ji was the prime minister for half of the 6 years during which I was a nominated Member of Parliament, and he was invariably full of fun and good humor. On one occasion the PM made his customary statement in the house when a very senior member of the Congress Party, which was then in opposition, asked the PM some very inconvenient and critical questions about his foreign policy. The member of Congress spoke in crisp English, and said I have 6 questions for the PM. And he set them out one after another, raising his voice and getting angrier with each. PM Vajpayee got up to answer the questions and ultimately came to the sixth question put by this gentleman. The PM spoke in fluent Hindi in response to the questions addressed to him in English. He referred to the Congress member, he complimented him said he was a great parliamentarian that Vajpayee had known for many years. He also said that whenever the Congress MP spoke, he always knew his full facts, but then innocently added; ‘Lekin Unko Gussa Bohot Jaldi Aa Jata Hai’. And that punch line brought the house down!”





Atal Bihari Vajpayee | Pic Credit: BCCL

Fali Nariman highly recommended the ‘Book of Joy’, which contains some fascinating verbal exchanges between two greats, his holiness the Dalai Lama and Archbishop Desmond Tutu. In it, the Dalai Lama reveals that one of his practices comes from the 8th century Buddhist monk called Shanti Deva who said, “If something can be done about a situation, what need is there to dejected. And, if nothing can be done about the situation what use is there for being dejected.”

Adding another philosophical note that he loves, Nariman pointed that author GK Chesterton had written somewhere that “angels can fly, because they take themselves lightly.”

Fali Nariman wrapped the address with another joke, “One night a delta twin-engine plane is flying somewhere above New Jersey in the United States. There are four people on board, Bill Gates then the richest man alive, the pilot, an old Buddhist monk, and a hippie who is carrying a backpack. Suddenly an oxygen generator explodes loudly in the luggage compartment and the passenger cabin began to fill with smoke. The pilot bursts into the compartment. ‘Gentleman’, he begins, ‘I have good news and bad news. The bad news is we are about to crash in New Jersey. The good news is there are only 3 parachutes onboard, and I have one of them.’ With that, the pilot throws open the door and jumps out of the plane. Bill Gates rises and says, gentleman, I am the world’s smartest man. The world needs smart man, I think the world’s smartest man should have parachute too and he grabs one and he jumps off. The Buddhist monk and the hippie look at each other at the only parachute left. Finally, the old Buddhist monk speaks, ‘My son,’ he says, ‘I have lived a satisfying life I have known true enlightenment. You have your life ahead of you; therefore, you take the parachute and I will go down with the plane.’ The hippie laughs loudly and says, ‘Don’t worry pops, the world’s smartest man just jumped out wearing my backpack!’,” Nariman wrapped up.

The moral of the story then is “to be smart but not too smart, be clever but not too clever”!
