Mumbai: Residents hit the street as 100 families go homess due to demolition of 'illegal' building

There were angry exchanges between the protesters and the civic officials as authorities started to tear down the structure. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: Nearly hundred families have gone homeless as Kalyan-Dombivli Municipal Corporation started to raze a seven-story building at Nandivli locality terming it illegal.

The residents of the building in Balaji Complex staged a massive protest on the streets against the demolition of the structure.

The building residents claimed they were not given proper notices before the demolition of the building. However, municipal officials have rejected the claim of the people.

According to a report in Times of India, the residents claimed the building questioned its illegality saying they were given Rs 2 lakh subsidy under under the Pradhan Mantri Avas Yojana.

An angry protester said they were middle-class people and had invested their hard-earned saving in the purchasing the flats.

There were angry exchanges between the protesters and the civic officials as authorities started to tear down the structure. The company, Balaji Enterprises, which constructed building claim the structure is legal.

“The builder told us he has all permissions required. And if at all the building is illegal, how did we get the government subsidy to buy homes? This smacks of negligence on the part of municipal officials,” the report quotes Mahesh Rajwade, a resident of the ill-fated building.

A woman protester said that municipal officials claim they had served them three notices, but they received only one notice so far. "They had served two more notices to the builder who kept it hidden from us,” the woman protester added.

The protesters urged the municipal authorities to stop demolishing the building and go after the builder, who is the real culprits who cheated the home buyers.

The municipal officials claimed that the building has violated rules on two counts. One the plot was reserved for a road under the development plan. Secondly, the builder did not take any persmisson to build the structure.
