Karnataka hospital under scanner after relatives of man allege anaesthesia overdose killed him

Karnataka hospital under scanner after relatives of man allege anaesthesia overdose killed him

40-year-old Kashyapa Bajandhri died on Wednesday. His family alleges that doctors at the hospital administered an overdose of anaesthesia.

news Health

A private hospital in Karnataka’s Bagalakote district has come under the scanner after relatives of a man alleged that he died after being administered an overdose of anaesthesia.

Kashyapa Bajandhri, a 40-year-old resident of Bagalakote, went to Kerudi Hospital and Medical research Centre on May 3 after he developed a cyst in his cheek.

Doctors who examined him had stated that he required a surgery to remove the cyst. He was scheduled for surgery on Wednesday. However, he died on Wednesday. Following his death, his family members took to protesting outside the hospital on Wednesday morning.

Kashyapa’s relatives have approached the Bagalakote Town Police police alleging that he was given an overdose of anaesthesia, which led to his death. Basavaraj Shivayogi Bajandhri, the brother of Kashyapa approached the police with a written complaint on Wednesday.

The police registered an FIR under section 304 (causing death by negligence) of the IPC.

“He was earlier admitted for the same issue, but the problem recurred so he was advised by doctors to get the surgery done. The family claims that anaesthesia was given twice and the overdose led to his death,” an official from Bagalkot Town Police Station told TNM.

According to the police, investigation is still underway and the exact cause of death is yet to be determined. “The issue will be taken up with the medical council and a proper enquiry will be conducted, only then can we determine if any negligence or error on the part of the hospital occurred,” the police added.

Earlier in December 2018, a Bengaluru hospital had come under the lens after a corporator from the city died days after an alleged ‘botched surgery.’ He too had been admitted for removal of a cyst.

Following the introduction of the Consumers Protection Act of 1986, several complaints were registered against medical practitioners, by people alleging that negligence had occurred.
