Coal production at Talcher suffers, mining resumes at IB valley

Bhubaneswar: Coal production at Talcher coal fields suffered during the general shift as contractors’ labourers went on strike again Wednesday. Coal mining operations , however, resumed at mines in Ib Valley Coalfields of Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL) Wednesday

MCL sources said complete normalcy failed to return Wednesday as coal production suffered for the second day today due to trade union strike but production at mines in Ib Valley Coalfields resumed.

With the day-long-bandh of Tuesday, the negative growth of MCL over last financial year Wednesday plunged from 0.87 per cent to 1.3 per cent.

MCL could produce only 3,349 tonne as against an average of 4.6 lakh tonne a day during the past one week. MCL, which contributes about 25 per cent to the total output of Coal India, commands Talcher Coalfields and Ib Valey Coalfields in Odisha.

However, due to intermittent stoppages and disturbances in mining operations, particularly in various mines under Talcher coalfields, reined in the growth journey of the company.

Stoppage of work due to disturbances in project areas of MCL have been highest during the current financial year. It is estimated that the company lost production to the tune of 4.867 million tonne in the

first three quarters of the current financial year due to external disturbances in mining projects.

Mining projects of Talcher coalfields in Angul district suffered maximum stoppages with 10 MT Kaniha OCP being worst hit due to work suspension to the tune of 7 weeks during first 3 quarters of financial year 2018-19, costing production loss of over 1.3 million tonne.

It was followed by Hingula mine of same production capacity which suffered production loss due to stoppages of about 37 working days during the current fiscal, amounting to loss of around 1.03 million tonne coal production.

At the end of 3rd quarter December 31, 2018, the 4 MT capacity Balram OCP remained paralysed up to 29 days, while stoppages of about 8 working days were witnessed at 27 MT Bhubaneswari OCP, over 9 working days at 16 MT Bharatpur OCP, over 8 working days at 16 MT Lingaraj OCP and around 6 working days at 6 MT Jagannath OCP.

Ananta OCP of 6 MT annual capacity was the only mine in Talcher coalfields which did not suffer any disturbance during first three quarters of financial year 2019, and continues to exceed its target.

Similarly, mines in Ib Valley Coalfields also suffered loss of working hours during the current fiscal, although not up to the extent of Talcher coalfields. Major setback in Ib Valley coalfields was from the 21 MT capacity

Lakhanpur OCP, which suffered the stoppage for more than a week up to the third quarter, resulting 0.4 million tonne less production.

Similarly, 13.7 MT Kulda OCP suffered working hour loss to the tune of

more than five days, while its adjacent 2 MT Basundhara (West) suffered working hour loss of 14 days.

Having an ambitious target of 162.5 MT for the current fiscal, the company had planned for a record production of 100 MT from Talcher coalfields alone to achieve the target, with rest coming from mines in Ib Valley Coalfields.

PNN
