In Giridih, both NDA and mahagathbandhan are fighting dissent

Ranchi: The Giridih parliamentary constituency, which goes to polls on May 12, will witness two sitting legislators — Chandra Prakash Choudhary and Jagarnath Mahto — square off against each other.But Ajsu-P ’s Chandra Prakash Choudhary, the state water resources minister, and Jharkhand Mukti Morcha’s ( JMM ) Jagarnath Mahto also have another thing in common — their nominations as NDA and mahagathbandhan candidates, respectively, have led to dissent within their own camps.Choudhary’s nomination came at the expense of five-time BJP MP Ravindra Kumar Pandey. The saffron party, keen to keep its state-level alliance with Ajsu-P intact with the assembly polls in mind, benched Pandey and handed over the seat to its ally.Upset at the treatment meted out to him, Pandey, who won the LS elections in 1996, 1998, 1999, 2009 and 2014, was rumoured to have made the rounds of Congress’s national headquarters and met JMM chief Shibu Soren for a switchover. He eventually towed the party line and announced his support to Choudhary on the instructions of BJP’s national leadership. But dissent had by then spilled over to the party’s district organization.“Everything is in the past now. We are extending our wholehearted support to the NDA candidate,” BJP’s Giridih president Sunil Agarwal told TOI. “Choudhary ji held a rally in Dumri today, where chief minister Raghubar Das and Pandey ji were also present. The meeting was jointly organized by Ajsu-P and BJP karyakartas,” Agarwal said, claiming all was well within the NDA.However, while BJP is rallying behind Choudhary, Ajsu-P’s renegade Tamar MLA Vikas Singh Munda has plunged into poll canvassing for Mahto.Giridih, once a mica-mining centre and then a hotbed of Left-wing extremism, has around 16.47 lakh voters spread over Giridih, Dumri, Gomia, Bermo, Tundi and Baghmara assembly segments. In 2014, Pandey had defeated Mahto by over 3.91 lakh votes.When JMM got Giridih in its kitty under seat-sharing arrangement of the mahagathbandhan, it handed over the election ticket to Mahto, the MLA from Dumri. But the move angered Jai Prakash Patel, JMM’s sitting MLA from Mandu, who was also eyeing the ticket. Patel’s father, late Teklal Mahto, became MP from Giridih in 2004 after defeating Pandey by over 1.5 lakh votes.Patel, who rebelled against his party, supported NDA after being ousted from JMM. “I have been telling people about the true nature of JMM. This party has become a proponent of dynastic politics and its leaders have misled tribals,” Patel said while attending the meeting at Dumri.But Mahto sounded confident: “JP (Patel) can do whatever he wants to. The people know he betrayed his father’s legacy. As for me, I am with the people throughout the year. The people of Giridih are with me this time.”
