Sam Pitroda's remarks on 1984 riots create stir; BJP-SAD protest against Congress

Protest in Amritsar | Photo Credit: Times Now

Amritsar: A day after Sam Pitroda brushed off the 1984 anti-Sikh riots, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) on Friday protested against Congress in Punjab’s Amritsar.

On Thursday, Indian Overseas Congress chief Pitroda, while talking about anti-Sikh riots, had said: "It happened in 1984, so what?"

However, in the wake of the furore over his remarks, Pitroda said that the BJP was twisting his words on the anti-Sikh riots to hide its own failures.

“Truth is being distorted, lies are being amplified through social media and targeted People are systematically being intimidated. However, the truth will always prevail and lies will be exposed. It is just a matter of time. Have patience,” tweeted Pitroda today.

The BJP had yesterday slammed Pitroda for his reported comments on the 1984 anti-Sikh riots and sought an apology.

"He (Pitroda) said 1984 genocide happened. So what? This is completely unacceptable to the country and we cannot allow this to sustain," Union minister Prakash Javadekar had said.

"Genocide was a gruesome thing that happened to India. At that time, (the then prime minister) Rajiv Gandhi justified it by saying that when a big tree falls, earth tremors," the BJP leader had said.

"The science says exactly the opposite that when earth tremors, big tree falls. This is what science is."

Javadekar had further accused the Congress of playing with public sentiments.

"Pitroda was Rajiv's colleague and Rahul's guru. If the guru is like this, how will the 'chela' (disciple) be? This is what is Congress doing... completely insensitive of public feelings."

"They must apologise. We demand that Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi should apologise, not only to Sikhs but to the entire country as it is an offence unacceptable to the country," Javadekar had added.

Meanwhile, SAD leader Manjinder Singh Sirsa had said that Pitroda’s remark exposed the Congress' anti-Sikh mentality.

"The Congress has yet again proved that its mentality against the Sikhs has not changed. Today Pitroda said '1984 has happened, so what?' He must have not lost anyone from his family," said Sirsa.

On Thursday, the BJP had cited the Nanavati Commission report for saying that "instructions to kill" came directly from the office of the then prime minister Rajiv Gandhi.

"It's on record of Nanavati Commission that probed the 1984 anti-Sikh riots, the biggest genocide of India in which the government killed its own citizens, that instructions to kill came directly from the then PM Rajiv Gandhi's office. The country awaits justice for this karma," the BJP had tweeted.

In response, Pitroda had rubbished the allegations, saying, "I don't think so, this is also another lie, and what about 1984? You speak about what you have done in five years. It happened in 1984, so what? (1984 hua toh hua). What have you done? (Ab kya hai '84 ka? Aapne kya kiya 5 saal mein, uski baat kariye. '84 mein hua to hua. Aapne kya kiya?)"
