Lok Sabha Election 2019 Updates: Meant to say 'jo hua woh bura hua', says Sam Pitroda amid row over remark on 1984 riots-Politics News , Firstpost

Lok Sabha Election 2019 LIVE Updates: At the centre of the controversy over his remark on 1984 riots, Sam Pitroda said, 'The statement I made was completely twisted, taken out of context because my Hindi isn't good. What I meant was 'jo hua vo bura hua.''

Auto refresh feeds

With the slugfest over his "INS Viraat" jibe on late Rajiv Gandhi still on, Prime Minister Narendra Modi is scheduled to campaign in Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Punjab on Friday. He is expected to speak in public meetings as Rohtak (11 am), Mandi (2.20 pm) and Hathiarpur (4.05 pm).

BJP president Amit Shah is scheduled to hold two rallies in Haryana, one at Hisar (11 am) and the other at Dadri (12.30 pm). Friday is the last day of campaigning in the 59 constituencies which will vote in the sixth phase of the Lok Sabha election, on Sunday

Congress chief Rahul Gandhi, who in his Delhi rally on Thursday sought to posit his party as the sole challenger to the BJP, will speak at Una in Himachal Pradesh (1.15 pm) and Chandigarh (5 pm). The contempt petition filed against Rahul by BJP leader Meenakshi Lekhi for attributing the chowkidar chor hain remark to the Supreme Court will be heard on Friday.

Gambhir, meanwhile, has sent a defamation notice to Atishi, Manish Sisodia and Arvind Kejriwal for naming him in this issue and has demanded that they apologise over what he calls are false accusations.

With only 48 hours to go before Delhi goes to polls in Phase 6 of Lok Sabha election, back and forth between BJP and AAP over a pamphlet written in sordid language has turned ugly. The Aam Aadmi Party, which has accused BJP East Delhi candidate Gautam Gambhir of distributing copies of a derogatory pamphlet against senior AAP leaders Manish Sisodia and Marlena Atishi, said it was contemplating legal action against the cricketer-turned-politician.

Reacting to the incident, Delhi Commission for Women chairperson Swati Maliwal tweeted that she was issuing notice to the police to register FIR and arrest culprits. Taking suo motu cognisance of the issue, the DCW has asked the Delhi deputy commissioner of police if an FIR has been registered, the accused behind circulating the pamphlet identified and arrested, and what the current status of the probe is.

"I condemn what has happened," he told ANI. "I am from a family where I have been taught to respect women. I didn't know Arvind Kejriwal would stoop so low. I have filed a defamation case," he told the news agency.

Former cricketer and BJP's candidate from East Delhi constituency, Gautam Gambhir has sent a defamation notice to Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) leaders Atishi, Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal, and Delhi deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia, demanding an unconditional apology for making "defamatory" comments against him.

With the back and forth between AAP and BJP over the circulation of a pamphlet insulting leaders of AAP in sordid language reaching a crescendo, it is not lost upon many women activists that much of the vitriol in it has been directed at Atishi, AAP's East Delhi candidate. With the image of Atishi breaking down while speaking at a press conference on the pamphlet unforgotten, many women pledged support for her on Twitter.

Nearly a week after Prime Minister Narendra Modi first brought up late prime minister Rajiv Gandhi and called him "bhrashtachari number one", the BJP targeted its early morning Twitter campaign at Rajiv's alleged use of INS Viraat for personal reasons. The party, on its official page on the site, shared alleged snapshots of earlier reports on the Gandhis' trips to Lakshadweep.

The Congress general secretary also talked to Piparpur police station incharge about the incident. The officer informed Vadra that FIRs from both sides were lodged and action was being taken.

According to Congress sources, Vadra, the general secretary in charge of eastern Uttar Pradesh, met party workers, who told her that this was an example of alleged hooliganism in the state.

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Thursday paid a surprise visit to Trishundi village in Amethi assembly segment of Uttar Pradesh to take stock of alleged atrocities on party activists by the police after a clash with BJP workers.

Amid the seemingly unending controversy over the use of naval warship INS Viraat by the Gandhi family for personal use, Times Now has published a report quoting former Navy officers who have supported the claims made by Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Former Navy Commander (Retd) VK Jaitly alleged that the Gandhi family had extensively used naval resources during their holidays. Another former Navy officer, Lieutenant Commander Harinder Sikka also supported the allegations.

Speaking to ANI, Gambhir said he would retire from politics the day allegations against him are proven. "If he has proof, then he must bring it today. My resignation will be written by Arvind Kejriwal and I will sign it publicly," said Gambhir. "If they have proof I am ready to retire from politics today itself. I will retire on 23 May if they come with proof but what if he doesn't turn up with proof? Will he resign as Delhi chief minister and retire from politics?" he asked.

A day after AAP candidate from Delhi East Atishi accused her BJP opponent Gautam Gambhir of circulating pamphlets with derogatory and casteist remarks against her, the latter asserted that if proven guilty, he would request AAP convener Arvind Kejriwal to draft his resignation letter, which he will tender publicly.

"I have noticed how BJP is again twisting three words from my interview to distort facts, divide us and hide their failures. Sad that they have nothing positive to offer," Pitroda tweeted on Friday.

Indian Overseas Congress chief Sam Pitroda hit out at BJP for "twisting his words and distorting facts" to "hide their failures", while reaffirming that he had acknowledged the pain of Sikhs during the 1984 anti-Sikh riots. On Thursday, Pitroda was asked about BJP's claim that instructions to "kill" in 1984 had come from late prime minister Rajiv Gandhi, and was quoted by media outlets as having said, "It (riots) happened in 1984, so what?"

The 2019 election may only be India's second polls since the social media wave, but that does not mean that the battle between Twitter accounts of rival political parties has been anything short of sharpened and curated exchanges, aimed at garnering the most likes. Late on Thursday, BJP responded to Congress chief Rahul Gandhi's challenge to Narendra Modi to appear in an unstaged interview or live debate, by tweeting, "When do you plan to release the video from that memorable interview?". The party was referring to an interview which Rahul gave to a magazine, a video recording of which, editor Rahul Kanwal tweeted , was done by the Congress.

With Rajiv Gandhi firmly back in the political discourse and amidst back to back allegations by BJP on the former prime minister's alleged excesses, Sam Pitroda sought to list the measures for which Rajiv was directly responsible.

Atishi has been in the middle of a slander campaign run through the distribution of a derogatory pamphlet by unknown persons. AAP has blamed the East Delhi BJP candidate Gautam Gambhir for it.

Gujarat MLA Jignesh Mevani and Kannada actor Prakash Raj will campaign for AAP's East Delhi candidate Atishi on Sunday, a party statement said. Kafeel Khan, who was the doctor credited with attempting to take lifesaving measures at Gorakhpur BRD Medical College where 63 children died, will also be campaigning for the party candidate.

As the controversy over the derogatory pamphlet on AAP's East Delhi candidate Atishi rages on, former India bowler Harbhajan Singh chipped in with his support for onetime teammate and BJP's candidate Gautam Gambhir, who AAP is blaming for circulating the pamphlet. Harbhajan described Gambhir as a "man above all this" and one who respects women.

Decorum has well and truly been thrown out of the window as the battle over Delhi gets uglier over a pamphlet written in filthy language directed mainly at AAP's East Delhi candidate Atishi. Amidst the flurry of defamation notices (one filed by Gautam Gambhir to AAP leaders over the latters' claim that Gambhir was behind this, and another threatened by AAP leader Manish Sisodia), former AAP leader Anil Bajpai took the already misogynist language of the pamphlet a step further. Bajpai, who has recently joined the BJP, said in an interview to News18 that he has witnessed Atishi eating beef. He then asked why her husband is missing from her campaigns.

Sections of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel, each with as many as eight jawans, will be deployed at each booth in Maoist-dominated Jhargram constituency of West Bengal, in the sixth phase of the election on 12 May.

Atishi on Friday, filed a complaint over the derogatory pamphlet mainly targeting her which is in circulation ahead of the Delhi polls, with the Delhi Commission of Women. AAP will also lodge complaints with the Election Commission and the Delhi Police, Atishi said. "If BJP and Gautam Gambhir can do this with an empowered woman then how will he ensure security to rest of the women?" she asked.

Speaking at his first rally of the day at Haryana's Rohtak, on Friday, prime minister Narendra Modi asked voters to note how entrenched in corruption the Congress has been in the last 70 years, as the country devolved. He hit out at "three words" used by the Congress's overseas chief Sam Pitroda, while responding to the 1984 Sikh riots. "One of Congress's biggest leaders said, 1984 Sikh riots 'hua toh hua'. Do you know who this leader is? He is closest to the Gandhi family, he is Rajiv Gandhi's friend, his is Congress's naamdar chief's guru," Modi said. The prime minister then gave graphic descriptions of the kind of alleged violence done on Sikhs in the riots, using the "hua toh hua" refrain.

Modi also reflected on how his government had supported sportspersons from this state which has already produced many medal winning athletes.

As much an opportunity to slam the Congress over, as it has been an segue into raking up Pakistan, the issue of India's national security returned to Narendra Modi's speech at Rohtak on Friday with renewed vigour. Modi once again relied on his oft used metaphor of entering terrorists' homes and killing them and asserted that there are no heights too high for his government to climb, when it comes to defeating any threats to the country.

As the issue of the 1984 riots, Rajiv Gandhi's culpability in it and Congress overseas chief Sam Pitroda's laconic comment on it dominated news on Friday, BJP Union minister and Bathinda MP Harsimrat Kaur Badal wrote on Twitter against Congress leader and Punjab chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh allegedly turning back on his "own community." She also accused him of protecting the likes of Jagdish Tytler and Kamal Nath for his love for his position.

As the issue of the 1984 riots, Rajiv Gandhi's culpability in it and Congress overseas chief Sam Pitroda's laconic comment on it dominated news on Friday, BJP Union minister and Bathinda MP Harsimrat Kaur Badal wrote on Twitter against Congress leader and Punjab chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh allegedly turning back on his "own community." She also accused him of protecting the likes of Jagdish Tytler and Kamal Nath for his love for his position.

He also said that the Congress had Modi in its grip now and that he was trapped. "He is trying to say 'kabadi, kabadi' and move out, but he is finished, he is done for," he said. Rahul also said Modi cannot meet the eyes of anyone asking him tough questions on Rafale and other issues.

"He says we are all chowkidar. No, Narendra Modi ji, the prime minister is not a chowkidar, he is supposed to listen to the people," the Congress president said, deviating from this usual rally practice of avoiding protracted slams on the prime minister.

Hitting out at Narendra Modi's style of governance, which allegedly does not pay heed to any adviser or senior politician, Rahul Gandhi heavily criticised the prime minister. "Narendra Modi is finished. The elections are finished," Rahul said, alleging that the prime minister has never paid heed to the country's force.

Addressing a rally in Mandi, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi should apologise to Sikhs in view of Sam Pitroda's comments on the 1984 riots. "Sonia and Rahul should join hands in front of the Sikhs and should immediately remove Sam Pitroda from Congress and accept that the 1984 massacre was done by Congress for selfishness," he said.

He further said, "On anti-Sikh riots, Congress has said 'hua toh hua'. If Sikhs were murdered, then 'hua toh hua'. This shows their ego," he said.

Stepping up his attack on the Congress over 1984 riots, Narendra Modi said in Mandi, "Our government is working to ensure justice for the sins committed by Congress leaders in 1984. The guilty are being sentenced to life imprisonment and are getting death penalty."

On Narendra Modi's remark that Rajiv Gandhi used INS Viraat as "personal taxi", Congress leader Anand Sharma said, "Any prime minister would do so (take family on official trips), but this prime minister has no family. If he had family, he would also be going there. But he travels alone because he has no connect with his family or any respect for family values."

In a reaction from the Congress on Sam Pitroda's "hua toh hua" remark, Punjab chief minister Amarinder Singh called the fellow party leader's comment "shocking". Amarinder said that the 1984 riots was a tragedy and "people are still awaiting justice".

West Bengal Chief Electoral Office has sent a report to the Election Commission regarding the money seized from BJP Lok Sabha candidate from Ghatal, Bharati Ghosh's car earlier on Friday, reported ANI.

In an interview to PTI, Amit Shah said that BJP will better its 2014 tally of 282 seats in this Lok Sabha polls. "BJP will win more than 55 new seats; to get more than 23 in West Bengal, 13-15 in Odisha," he was quoted as saying. He further said that regional parties were welcome to join NDA after polls if they wished so.

"Unlike the BJP, which has decided to field a candidate charged with terror crimes and is being lauded as its face by none less than Narendra Modi himself, Congress has shown the moral and political courage to punish people and leaders accused of violence/role in 1984. This is the yardstick of self-imposed accountability and sense of justice to people followed by the Congress, unlike the BJP."

Congress issued a statement over Sam Pitroda's remark on 1984 anti-Sikh riots. "We continue to support the quest for justice for 1984 riot victims. Any opinion remark made by any individual to the contrary including Sam Pitroda is not the opinion of Congress party," it said.

In a blog post, Arun Jaitley lashed out at the Opposition leaders and wrote, "Are the Opposition parties unable to figure out the ‘Modi Modi’ shouts confronting them when their leaders pass through crowded areas? Except for those who prefer to deceive themselves, media persons travelling across the country have a uniform report that there is an extremely strong pro-Modi trend visible amongst the voters. The prime ministerial contest is almost becoming a one horse race."

In Hoshiarpur, Narendra Modi said, "1984 riots may be 'hua toh hua' for Congress, but justice will be served under this chowkidar. In 2014, I had promised to the Sikhs that I won't spare the murderers of the members of their community."

At the centre of the controversy over his remark on 1984 riots, Sam Pitroda said, "The statement I made was completely twisted, taken out of context because my Hindi isn't good. What I meant was 'jo hua vo bura hua,' I couldn't translate 'bura' in my mind. What I meant was move on. We have other issues to discuss as to what BJP government did and what it delivered. I feel sorry that my remark was misrepresented, I apologise. This has been blown out of proportion."

"I have filed a complaint at Parliament Street police station and also lodged protest over Pitroda's comment at the National Commission for Minorities, seeking action against him for hurting sentiments of Sikhs who were victims in 1984 riots," he said.

Bagga said he has also filed a complaint against the Congress leaders with National Commission for Minorities seeking action for his comment.

West Bengal Chief Electoral Office has sent a report to the Election Commission regarding the money seized from BJP Lok Sabha candidate from Ghatal, Bharati Ghosh's car earlier on Friday, reported ANI.

Addressing his first poll rally, Modi alleged that the Congress insulted the warship by using it for a vacationing Gandhi family. The allegations were vehemently countered by the Congress, and soon navy veterans also got embroiled in the political mudslinging. To make sense of the ongoing controversy, let's try and segregate the facts from the claims and counter-claims.

The BJP's official Twitter timeline also flooded with allegations against the ex-prime minister. Although there is no apparent reason why issues which took place over three decades ago should be a factor in the ongoing Lok Sabha elections, BJP and the Congress have turned it into a fight which now focusses on the details of a 1987 trip that Rajiv undertook with his family.

With less than a month remaining for his 28th death anniversary, former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi's name is in the centre of a political controversy after Prime Minister Narendra Modi made a slew of allegations against him in his campaign rallies last week.

Did Rajiv Gandhi use INS Viraat as his 'personal taxi' like Modi says? Some facts are known, others not yet

In West Bengal's Mathurapur, Rajnath Singh said, "The BJP has risen from the land of Bengal at such a scale that it has scared Mamata Banerjee. She is so scared that she refused to respond to repeated phone calls from our prime minister in view of Cyclone Fani."

In an interview to PTI, Amit Shah said that BJP will better its 2014 tally of 282 seats in this Lok Sabha polls. "BJP will win more than 55 new seats; to get more than 23 in West Bengal, 13-15 in Odisha," he was quoted as saying. He further said that regional parties were welcome to join NDA after polls if they wished so.

"Unlike the BJP, which has decided to field a candidate charged with terror crimes and is being lauded as its face by none less than Narendra Modi himself, Congress has shown the moral and political courage to punish people and leaders accused of violence/role in 1984. This is the yardstick of self-imposed accountability and sense of justice to people followed by the Congress, unlike the BJP."

Congress issued a statement over Sam Pitroda's remark on 1984 anti-Sikh riots. "We continue to support the quest for justice for 1984 riot victims. Any opinion remark made by any individual to the contrary including Sam Pitroda is not the opinion of Congress party," it said.

In a blog post, Arun Jaitley lashed out at the Opposition leaders and wrote, "Are the Opposition parties unable to figure out the ‘Modi Modi’ shouts confronting them when their leaders pass through crowded areas? Except for those who prefer to deceive themselves, media persons travelling across the country have a uniform report that there is an extremely strong pro-Modi trend visible amongst the voters. The prime ministerial contest is almost becoming a one horse race."

In Hoshiarpur, Narendra Modi said, "1984 riots may be 'hua toh hua' for Congress, but justice will be served under this chowkidar. In 2014, I had promised to the Sikhs that I won't spare the murderers of the members of their community."

Sam Pitroda, Congress on his remarks on '84 riots: The statement I made was completely twisted, taken out of context because my Hindi isn't good, what I meant was 'jo hua vo bura hua,' I couldn't translate 'bura' in my mind. pic.twitter.com/ZATArjpC79

At the centre of the controversy over his remark on 1984 riots, Sam Pitroda said, "The statement I made was completely twisted, taken out of context because my Hindi isn't good. What I meant was 'jo hua vo bura hua,' I couldn't translate 'bura' in my mind. What I meant was move on. We have other issues to discuss as to what BJP government did and what it delivered. I feel sorry that my remark was misrepresented, I apologise. This has been blown out of proportion."

"It will not be surprising if the NDA wins all the 40 Lok Sabha seats in Bihar, given the fragmented and disintegrated opposition which stands nowhere against NDA in Bihar," Modi told reporters.

The opposition grand alliance is fragmented and disintegrated, while the NDA is marching ahead unitedly, the senior BJP leader said before embarking on a roadshow in Gopalganj in favour of JD(U) nominee Alok Kumar Suman from the constituency.

candidates of each other, and it will not be surprising if the BJP-led NDA wins all the 40 Lok Sabha seats in the state.

"I have filed a complaint at Parliament Street police station and also lodged protest over Pitroda's comment at the National Commission for Minorities, seeking action against him for hurting sentiments of Sikhs who were victims in 1984 riots," he said.

Bagga said he has also filed a complaint against the Congress leaders with National Commission for Minorities seeking action for his comment.



Lok Sabha Election 2019 LATEST Updates: At the centre of the controversy over his remark on 1984 riots, Sam Pitroda said, "The statement I made was completely twisted, taken out of context because my Hindi isn't good. What I meant was 'jo hua vo bura hua,' I couldn't translate 'bura' in my mind. What I meant was move on. We have other issues to discuss as to what BJP government did and what it delivered. I feel sorry that my remark was misrepresented, I apologise. This has been blown out of proportion."

Addressing a rally in Hoshiarpur, Narendra Modi said, "1984 riots may be 'hua toh hua' for Congress, but justice will be served under this chowkidar." Congress earlier issued a statement on the issue. "We continue to support the quest for justice for 1984 riot victims. Any opinion remark made by any individual to the contrary including Sam Pitroda is not the opinion of Congress party," it said.

In an interview to PTI, Amit Shah said that BJP will better its 2014 tally of 282 seats in this Lok Sabha polls. "BJP will win more than 55 new seats; to get more than 23 in West Bengal, 13-15 in Odisha," he was quoted as saying. He further said that regional parties were welcome to join NDA after polls if they wished so.

Punjab chief minister Amarinder Singh called Sam Pitroda's comment on 1984 riots "shocking". Amarinder said that the riots were a tragedy and "people are still awaiting justice".

Addressing a rally in Mandi, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi should apologise to Sikhs in view of Sam Pitroda's comments on the 1984 riots.

Hitting out at Narendra Modi's style of governance, which allegedly does not pay heed to any adviser or senior politician, Rahul Gandhi heavily criticised the prime minister. "Narendra Modi is finished. The elections are finished," Rahul said, alleging that the prime minister has never paid heed to the country's force. He also said that the prime minister could unleash his anger on Rajiv Gandhi and Indira Gandhi, but all he has to give is love in return.

The charged rhetoric over the pamphlet targetting AAP leaders and mainly the party's East Delhi candidate Atishi showed no indication of mellowing, with Gautam Gambhir tweeting out yet another challenge to Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal, after being blamed for circulating the pamphlet. He said he would hang himself in public if the AAP convener could prove that he had anything to do with the pamphlet.

Shortly after his rally at Haryana's Rohtak, prime minister Narendra Modi spoke to ANI, mainly on issues he has already spoken many times on. Modi also said that he was unbothered by the efforts of the Opposition to unite against him. "For the first three phases they were all abusing Modi. Since they sensed which way wind was blowing they started abusing EVMs. Like in cricket the batsman who gets out sometimes abuses the umpire, they are abusing the EC too," he said.

As the issue of the 1984 riots, Rajiv Gandhi's culpability in it and Congress overseas chief Sam Pitroda's laconic comment on it dominated news on Friday, BJP Union minister and Bathinda MP Harsimrat Kaur Badal wrote on Twitter against Congress leader and Punjab chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh allegedly turning back on his "own community." She also accused him of protecting the likes of Jagdish Tytler and Kamal Nath for his love for his position.

BJP workers held protests outside Congress president Rahul Gandhi's residence, against Congress leader Sam Pitroda's remarks on the 1984 anti-Sikh riots. On Thursday, Pitroda was asked about BJP's claim that instructions to "kill" in 1984 had come from late prime minister Rajiv Gandhi, and was quoted by media outlets as having said, "It (riots) happened in 1984, so what?"

Speaking at his first rally of the day at Haryana's Rohtak, on Friday, prime minister Narendra Modi asked voters to note how entrenched in corruption the Congress has been in the last 70 years, as the country devolved. He hit out at "three words" used by the Congress's overseas chief Sam Pitroda, while responding to the 1984 Sikh riots. "One of Congress's biggest leaders said, 1984 Sikh riots 'hua toh hua'. Do you know who this leader is? He is closest to the Gandhi family, he is Rajiv Gandhi's friend, his is Congress's naamdar chief's guru," Modi said. The prime minister then gave graphic descriptions of the kind of alleged violence done on Sikhs in the riots, using the "hua toh hua" refrain.

Atishi on Friday, filed a complaint over the derogatory pamphlet mainly targeting her which is in circulation ahead of the Delhi polls, with the Delhi Commission of Women. AAP will also lodge complaints with the Election Commission and the Delhi Police, Atishi said. "If BJP and Gautam Gambhir can do this with an empowered woman then how will he ensure security to rest of the women?" she asked.

Decorum has well and truly been thrown out of the window as the battle over Delhi gets uglier over a pamphlet directed mainly at AAP's East Delhi candidate Atishi. Amidst the flurry of defamation notices (one filed by Gautam Gambhir to AAP leaders and another threatened by AAP leader Manish Sisodia), former AAP leader Anil Bajpai took the already misogynist language of the pamphlet a step further. Bajpai, who has recently joined the BJP, said in an interview to News18 that he has witnessed Atishi eating beef. He then asked why her husband is missing from her campaigns.

BSP supremo Mayawati Friday called prime minister Narendra Modi's allegation that the SP-BSP alliance was casteist, both laughable and immature. "Modi indulged in casteism by forcibly describing himself as pichhda (backward). Had he been backward by birth, the RSS would not have let him become the PM. What RSS has done to leaders like Kalyan Singh is known to all," she said.

With Rajiv Gandhi firmly back in the political discourse and amidst back to back allegations by BJP on the former prime minister's alleged excesses, Sam Pitroda sought to list the measures for which Rajiv was directly responsible. Pitroda credited Rajiv for having begun the process of the use of phones and computers in India. He also said the late prime minister had kickstarted revolutions in technology missions on water, literacy drives, immunization, cooking oil, milk production, and telecom.

Nearly a week after Prime Minister Narendra Modi first brought up late prime minister Rajiv Gandhi and called him "bhrashtachari number one", the BJP targeted its early morning Twitter campaign at Rajiv's alleged use of INS Viraat for personal reasons. The party, on its official page on the site, shared alleged snapshots of earlier reports on the Gandhis' trips to Lakshadweep.

Gautam Gambhir has now said that he is ready to retire from politics the day allegations of circulating the derogatory pamphlet against him are proven. "If he has proof, then he must bring it today. My resignation will be written by Arvind Kejriwal and I will sign it publicly," said Gambhir. "If they have proof I am ready to retire from politics today itself. I will retire on 23 May if they come with proof but what if he doesn't turn up with proof? Will he resign as Delhi chief minister and retire from politics?" he asked.

Delhi deputy chief minister and Aam Aadmi Party leader, Manisha Sisodia on Friday laughed off the suggestion that BJP had made, in placing the blame of the pamphlet on AAP. He also said it was outrageous that Gautam Gambhir, who AAP is claiming was behind the circulation of the pamphlet, was sending AAP leaders a defamation notice. "We are being defamed and they (BJP) are saying they will file defamation against us? We are going to send defamation notice to them today," Sisodia said.



Women from across the board were not the only ones who have unequivocally called out the slander that AAP leader Atishi was subject to in the pamphlet circulated in the East Delhi constituency. Politicians who have rallied behind her include Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav, Shah Faesal, and Vadgam MLA JIgnesh Mevani. For a long time on Thursday and well into Friday, the hashtag #IStandWithAtishi trended on Twitter.

With only 48 hours to go before Delhi goes to polls in Phase 6 of Lok Sabha election, back and forth between BJP and AAP over a pamphlet written in sordid language has turned ugly. Gautam Gambhir has sent a defamation notice to Atishi, Manish Sisodia and Arvind Kejriwal for naming him in this issue and has demanded that they apologise over what he calls are false accusations. He said he did not know Arvind Kejriwal could stoop so low.

The Aam Aadmi Party, which has accused BJP East Delhi candidate Gautam Gambhir of distributing copies of a derogatory pamphlet against senior AAP leaders Manish Sisodia and Marlena Atishi, said it was contemplating legal action against the cricketer-turned-politician.

Earlier on Thursday, Delhi deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia and AAP's East Delhi candidate Atishi charged Gambhir with distributing the pamphlets which made sordid allegations against AAP leaders. At the press conference in New Delhi, Atishi broke down while reading contents of the pamphlet and stated that the pamphlets were distributed in several colonies of East Delhi, including Krishna Nagar.

Friday is the last day of campaigning in the 59 constituencies which will vote in the sixth phase of the Lok Sabha election, on Sunday. Star campaigners from parties will hold rallies in close proximity to each other today (10 May).

With the slugfest over his "INS Viraat" jibe on late Rajiv Gandhi still on, Prime Minister Narendra Modi is scheduled to campaign in Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Punjab on Friday.

Former navy chief Admiral Laxminarayan Ramdas on Thursday released a statement refuting Modi's claim that Rajiv had used the Navy ship as a "personal taxi" for ten days. "I would like to state unequivocally, that this was not the case," Ramdas said in his statement.

The former navy chief quoted parts of written responses from retired Vice Admiral Vinod Pasricha (then captain and commanding officer of INS Viraat) and other officials. He also referred to a note from an officer who was then the naval officer in charge of Lakshadweep islands.

He is expected to speak in public meetings as Rohtak (11 am), Mandi (2.20 pm) and Hathiarpur (4.05 pm). BJP president Amit Shah is scheduled to hold two rallies in Haryana, one at Hisar (11 am) and the other at Dadri (12.30 pm).

Congress chief Rahul Gandhi, who in his Delhi rally on Thursday sought to posit his party as the sole challenger to the BJP, will speak at Una in Himachal Pradesh (1.15 pm) and Chandigarh (5 pm). The contempt petition filed against Rahul by BJP leader Meenakshi Lekhi for attributing the chowkidar chor hain remark to the Supreme Court will be heard on Friday.

Congress general secretary for Uttar Pradesh (east) Priyanka Gandhi will address four public rallies at Siddarthnagar (11.20 am), Basti (12.50 pm), Santkabirnagar (2 pm) and Bhadohi (3.50 pm).
