Alwar gang-rape case: All six accused arrested by police, protests across state over delay in probe

Bhim Sena holds protests against Alwar rape case; Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad Ravan also present | Photo Credit: ANI

Jaipur: All six accused of Alwar gang-rape have been arrested by the Rajasthan Police on Thursday. The case has been on the national headlines after the opposition parties held protests against the Rajasthan government for allegedly covering up the matter due to the ongoing Lok Sabha polls.

IGP (Jaipur Range) S Sengathir said that the judicial magistrate recorded the victim's statement on Thursday under Section 164 of the CrPc. The accused Hansraj Gurjar was arrested on Wednesday night from Mathura, the key accused, Chhote Lal Gurjar was arrested on Thursday from Pragpura in Alwar district. Chhote Lal was the sixth accused to be arrested and he had a criminal history.

Mirror Now reported, the woman was gang-raped in front of her husband on April 26. The incident happened while was going to a place from her village on a motorcycle with her husband and the accused who were on two bikes, stopped them on Thanagazi-Alwar bypass and took them to an isolated place off the road.

They beat the husband and raped her in front of him, threatening them of dire consequences. The cops were accused of going slow in the case but after pressure from the public, 14 police teams were formed to nab the accused in the case.

The gangrape has evoked sharp criticism from all sections of the society, with political parties protests holding protests in various parts of the state, including Ajmer, Alwar, Swai Madhopur and Churu. They cornered the Rajasthan government for allegedly covering up the matter due to the Lok Sabha elections in the state.

In the matter, the BJP MP Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore told news agency PTI, that they had taken prior permission and time in writing from the district collector to present the memorandum but he was not available. It is a serious issue. People want to know who had given the order to cover up the matter during elections.

Jaipur: Bhim Sena holds protests against Alwar rape case; Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad Ravan also present. #Rajasthan pic.twitter.com/zAR8Ylit4D — ANI (@ANI) May 10, 2019

BJP state president Madan Lal Saini termed it a "gruesome crime" and a "blot" on the state. Archana Sharma from Congress party told Mirror Now that the women in the state are safe, they have talked to the survivor's family who was reluctant to file an FIR in the case. The officers who were accused of delay have been suspended by the authorities.

Reportedly, the accused- Mukesh Gurjar filmed the incident on his mobile phone. The victims went to the police when the accused demanded money for not circulating the video on social media but the FIR was lodged only on May 2.

The victims claimed that when they approached the police, they allegedly said that they will have to wait as the police were busy with the election work in the state. Responding to which the former DGP, Vikram Singh told Mirror Now that this the administrative crime of the worst kind.
