Hua toh hua? - PM Narendra Modi attacks Congress over Sam Pitroda's remark on 1984 anti-Sikh riots

PM Narendra Modi during a rally in Haryana criticised Congress over Sam Pitroda's hua toh hua remark on 1984 anti-Sikh riots | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi Friday attacked the Congress party over Overseas party chief Sam Pitroda's 'hua toh hua' remark on 1984 ant-Sikh riots, saying that that it was 'Congress' arrogance' which got them 44 seats in 2014 and it will also ensure that they slip even further during the ongoing polls.

In response to Pitroda's remark, Modi said, "This Reflects Congress's mentality, they have done this for years. Rajiv Gandhi had said 'when a big tree falls earth shakes'. They even made Kamal Nath in charge of Punjab, now made him MP CM. So don't take this as an individual's statement." Pitroda, while speaking to news agency ANI, had referred to 1984 riots saying, "Why are you talking about it right now. 84 mein hua toh hua'.

Even earlier, while addressing a rally in Haryana's Rohtak, Modi referred to Pitroda's remarks and said, "Hua so hua- the three words that sum up Congress's arrogance were uttered yesterday by one of its most senior leaders, he said this on 1984 anti-Sikh riots. This leader is one of the closest people to the Gandhi family."

Earlier, BJP workers staged a protest outside Congress president Rahul Gandhi's residence and burnt Pitroda's effigy. Party president Amit Shah took to Twitter and said, "Agony of the entire Sikh community. The suffering of all those Sikh families killed by Congress leaders in 1984. Attack on Delhi’s secular ethos. All Summed up in these three words by Sam Pitroda - Hua To Hua. India will never forgive #MurdererCongress for its sins."

Addressing a press conference, BJP spokesperson Sambit Patra said that Pitroda's statement is 'inhuman' and ínsensitive'. The ongoing war-of-words between the BJP and Congress over the anti-Sikh riots comes ahead of the fifth and sixth phase of Lok Sabha elections which will witness Delhi and Punjab going to polls.
