7 ways the world has changed since Lok Sabha elections began

PHOTOS (from left): 1, 3, 4, 6 and 7 by the Associated Press. 2 by ESO. 5 by Reuters

An Indian general election is an event of breathtaking scale. Voting alone has been spread across nearly six weeks this year, and the code governing campaign activity came into force way back in March. Since then, there have been major events across the world -- some of them deeply tragic. Here are seven examples.

1. A cyclone killed dozens in South Asia.

Damaged signage lying on a street in Puri district after Cyclone Fani hit Odisha on May 3, 2019. (Photo: AP)

Fani, the strongest storm to hit India's east coast in 43 years, killed dozens there and in neighbouring Bangladesh after making landfall last week in Odisha -- where the death toll has risen to 41. Early warnings helped the authorities evacuate over a million people from low-lying Indian towns. Prime Minister Narendra Modi conducted an aerial survey of cyclone-hit regions in Odisha this week. A baby girl born in Bhubaneswar on May 3 was named after the storm.

2. Sri Lanka's decade of peace was shattered.

Sri Lankan Catholic devotees lighting candles outside St. Anthony's church after it was partially opened for the first time since the Easter Sunday attacks, in Colombo, on May 7, 2019. (Photo: AP)

Over 250 people, including Indians, were killed in Sri Lanka in a series of bombings on April 21, Easter Sunday -- a attack claimed by Islamic State (IS), and which the Sri Lankan government blames on two little-known radical Islamic groups. The blasts shattered nearly a decade of peace in Sri Lanka, whose bloody civil war ended in 2009. Attacks have taken place elsewhere in recent months, including in New Zealand on March 15, when a gunman killed 51 people in attacks on two mosques in Christchurch. It was the worst peace-time shooting in the country's history.

In India, the Shiv Sena cited Sri Lanka's decision to ban face covers in the wake of the Easter Sunday blasts when it called for a ban on burqas. Watch IndiaToday.in journalists discuss the issue here.

3. There is now a photo of a black hole.

Scientists unveiled the first-ever photo of a supermassive black hole on April 10, 2019. (Photo: Twitter/ESO)

They named it Powehi -- in Hawaiian, the "embellished dark source of unending creation". Some were reminded of the Eye of Sauron from Lord of the Rings. But the photo they beheld was, perhaps, of something even more mysterious -- it was the first ever image of a black hole, assembled from data gathered by eight radio telescopes. Albert Einstein theorised the existence of these light-gobbling celestial monsters a long time ago -- an existence confirmed only indirectly until now.

For all their fearsome gravitational power, it seems there is something black holes themselves cannot escape -- our politicians' love for trading jibes. Read more here.

4. Notre Dame no longer has a spire.

Flames and smoke rising from the blaze after the Notre Dame cathedral's spire toppled over on April 15, 2019. (Photo: Reuters)

Last month, on banks of the Seine river, Parisians watched, aghast, as the spire of the Notre Dame cathedral snapped like a twig in a raging inferno. The world, too, mourned the stately monument's fate. President Emmanual Macron of France wants the cathedral rebuilt in five years; some experts do not think that is possible.

Notre Dame is a beloved symbol of Paris and France. Read about its history here.

5. Masood Azhar is banned by the UN.

BJP members burning placards with pictures of Jaish-e-Mohammed leader Masood Azhar in Ahmedabad, on May 2, 2019. (Photo: AP)

Maulana Masood Azhar, chief of the terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed, was added to a United Nations sanctions list last week after China stopped blocking efforts to do so. The Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed is responsible for a number of terrorist attacks on Indian soil; it claimed the suicide bombing that killed dozens of Indian paramilitary personnel in Kashmir on February 14 this year. The blacklisting of Azhar is a big diplomatic win for New Delhi; India had released him from prison in 1999 in exchange for passengers abord a hijacked flight.

6. A comedian is now President of Ukraine.

Volodymyr Zelenskiy, center, the President-elect of Ukraine, approaching the parliament to meet with the speaker and faction leaders in Kiev, on May 4, 2019. (Photo: AP)

Volodymyr Zelenskiy had no political experience before he was elected President of Ukraine last month -- unless you count the fact that he is used to playing that role in a sitcom. In Servant Of The People, his character, President Vasyl Petrovych Holoborodko, comes to power unexpectedly -- thanks to a filmed rant gone viral. Zelenskiy's campaign, on the other hand, was deliberate. The task ahead for the 41-year-old comedian is no laughing matter. Here is a profile.

7. Archie is the 7th in line to the British throne.

Prince Harry and Meghan, Duchess of Sussex, with their newborn son, Archie, in St George's Hall at Windsor Castle in southern England, on Wednesday, May 8, 2019. Archie Harrison Mountbatten-Windsor was born on May 6. (Photo: AP)

Archie Harrison Mountbatten-Windsor slept through his very first meeting with the media on May 8. The newborn son of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle, Duchess of Sussex, is the British royal family's first Anglo-American member -- his mother is a former actress who starred in the popular series Suits -- and he's eligible for US citizenship. Back in the UK, he's seventh in line to the throne. Here is a beautiful photogallery.

Inputs from agencies
