Know Your Leader | Arvind Kejriwal: Journey of an 'insignificant man' from anti-graft crusader to Delhi CM

The Commonwealth Games scam and the 2G scam had rattled the nation by the sheer magnitude of the money involved in it. A giant hole was burnt in the taxpayer’s pocket and the citizens weren’t happy. Meanwhile, a mutiny started by an Indian Revenue Services (IRS) Officer in his own office was starting to take form.

Parivartan (Change)

Disconcerted by the culture of government officers taking bribe, Arvind Kejriwal had secretly started a non-profit organisation called Parivartan in 2000. He used to put up posters in office, which read, “Are you facing a bribe problem? If you do, contact Parivartan”. The organisation, then led by close aide Manish Sisodia, facilitated people whose pensions had been stalled by greedy government officers.

Saturated by the blooming culture of bribery in his own office, Kejriwal took a two-year study leave from bureaucracy and focused his attention on his NGO. During those two years, Kejriwal traversed villages across North India, garnering support for a law on Right to Information (RTI) in order to nip corruption in the bud.

His crusade culminated in victory with the RTI Act being passed in 2005. In July 2006, Kejriwal was awarded the Ramon Magsaysay Award, widely described as Asia’s Nobel Prize, for Eminent Leadership – “activating India’s right to information movement at the grassroots and empowering New Delhi’s poorest citizens to fight corruption by holding government answerable to the people”.

Lokpal

But he wasn’t content, and with reason. By the end of 2010, at least 10 RTI activists had been murdered. He was determined that not only stringent laws, but also stringent enforcement was needed to alleviate corruption from the nation.

With the news of scams making headlines, Kejriwal knew that the time was right to exhort the support of unhappy citizens and give the movement a name and prominent face. Simultaneously, he started working on drafting the Lokpal Bill under the aegis of the NCPRI (National Campaign for People's Right to Information).

While Anna Hazare seemed to be the apt face for the 'India Against Corruption' Movement, the Bhushans provided legal aid on the drafting of the Lokpal, which was an ombudsman.

Hence began the long haul of potential talks with the UPA government, protests and demonstrations which culminated in hunger strikes at the historic Jantar Mantar in central Delhi. Team Anna, including Kejriwal, were being looked as anarchists by the skeptics of the Lokpal.

As Anna sat on days-long fasts, Kejriwal mobilised support for their cause, wrote press notes, held meetings with the Manmohan Singh-led government and attended press conferences. He met many leaders, such as current Bihar chief minister Nitish Kumar, Baba Ramdev and Swami Agnivesh so as to draw large crowds.

Veteran Indian social activist Anna Hazare (R) speaks to Arvind Kejriwal, a member of his team during their hunger strike in New Delhi August 2, 2012. (Image: Reuters)

However, after facing increasing opposition for his demands in the drafting committee of the Lokpal Bill, often by Congress biggies such as P Chidambaram and Kapil Sibal, he realised their movement had reached a plateau. To overcome the stagnancy, Kejriwal decided to jump into active politics, even if it meant breaking away from Hazare.

On October 2, 2012, birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, Kejriwal announced the formation of a political party; and on November 26, the day that the Indian Constitution was adopted, he formed the Aam Aadmi Party (Common Man's Party) — a year ahead of the Delhi elections.

Aam Aadmi Party (AAP)

Thus began the mammoth task of mobilising a diverse population of more than 1.9 crore people – rural, urban, migrants, JJ clusters et al – with nearly no funds. In addition, the challenge was to defeat two national parties – the Congress and the BJP.

An undeterred Kejriwal decided to launch his own brand of politics. Funds were collected from donations and crowdsourcing in the most traditional and conventional manner. With no money to spare on large hoardings and advertisements, small banners were put behind auto-rickshaws, whose drivers willingly accepted Kejriwal as their crusader.

AAP volunteers indulged in going from door-to-door to reach out to everyone. Kejriwal had now started to win the battle of perceptions.

While championing for RTI, Kejriwal had come across discrepancies in the privatisation of electricity and water, and a staggering increase in price rise after that. He made water and electricity his poll planks, accusing three-time chief minister Sheila Dikshit of rampant corruption.

In the chilly winter evenings of Delhi, a petite figure with a small moustache, neatly-parted hair and a muffler around his neck was seen holding road shows, travelling in the metro in order to reach out. He was seen visiting JJ clusters and burning electricity bills.

Manish Sisodia and Arvind Kejriwal addressing the masses. (Image: Reuters)

From battle of perception to game of thrones

As a powerful statement of intent, Kejriwal challenged Sheila Dikshit and contested against her on her home turf – the New Delhi constituency – in the 2013 assembly polls. At this time, Kejriwal battled infighting in the party, threats, scandals and many a controversy surrounding his party members accepting bribes. Meanwhile, Dikshit was confident that Kejriwal’s AAP had no influence in the city. In an interview prior to elections, she is seen telling a news channel, “Arvind Kejriwal was a story; which is now over”.

However, the results of the 2013 Delhi assembly polls shocked many. Kejriwal defeated Dikshit by over 25,000 votes and formed the government. At his swearing-in ceremony at the Ramlila Maidan, he compelled a large gathering to take an oath – that we will never receive or accept a bribe – and finished his speech with Inqalaab Zindabad.

A supporter of Aam Aadmi (Common Man) Party (AAP) cheers after its chief Arvind Kejriwal took an oath as the new chief minister of Delhi during a swearing-in ceremony at Ramlila ground in New Delhi. (Image: Reuters)

Although Kejriwal resigned as chief minister within 49 days of forming the government over the drafting of the Lokpal Bill, and faced a crushing defeat in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, where he contested from Varanasi against Narendra Modi, he was given a second chance by Delhi.

A firebrand leader, he came back with a sweeping majority in the 2015 Assembly elections, winning 67 of 70 seats. After wresting power, he audited power companies of the country's biggest conglomerates and water companies. What the national parties had branded impossible, Kejriwal made happen. Months after coming to power, he gave 700 litres of water free to all households per day and reduced electricity bills by 50 percent.

Having experienced the harsh Delhi winter himself while staging a sit-in, he was so moved that he came up with the innovative idea of using old DTC buses as temporary shelters for the urban poor and the homeless.

Often labelled as headstrong, he is often criticised for launching the odd-even policy so as to curtail pollution in the capital city. Recently, he even launched Mohalla clinics and doorstep delivery of public services, a move which was received well by the lower-middle and lower classes.

Kejriwal made a little slice of contemporary history in India by bringing in a new brand of politics, with an insurgent new political party, which wielded basic public issues such as water, electricity and graft and challenged the nation's oldest political parties.

Not without brickbats

However, this man is not all virtues and no vice.

After forming the government in Delhi, Kejriwal was consistently embroiled in squabbles with Lieutenant Governor Najeeb Jung over issues of distribution of power in the Capital. Often when his demands were not met, he took to sit-ins at the Jantar Mantar, leaving the operation of the state government in limbo. In the ongoing elections, Kejriwal has been championing for full statehood of Delhi.

Many founding members, who were with Kejriwal from the time of the anti-graft movement, have left the AAP due to disagreements over the future prospects of the party. These include figures like renowned political analyst Yogendra Yadav, lawyer Prashant Bhushan, Shazia Ilmi, Ashutosh, and close aide Kumar Vishwas. Most have cited Kejriwal’s 'iron fist' way of ruling the party and a general 'my way or the highway' attitude.

Recently, his supporters have been questioning him over his keenness to ally with the Congress, which is not only a nemesis figure to the AAP, but also catalysed its formation from an anti-graft movement to a political party. When his proposal of alliance was rejected by the Congress, Kejriwal blamed the party of dividing anti-BJP votes.
