Stir over Pitroda's remark on Sikh riots

Congress veteran Sam Pitroda might have just provided the BJP with its 'chaiwala' moment of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. Like his party colleague Mani Shankar Aiyar, Pitroda's 'Hua toh hua' comment about the 1984 anti-Sikh riots had the grand old party scampering to control the damage, ahead of the elections in Delhi and Punjab.

On Thursday, while speaking to a news agency, Pitroda, who is considered extremely close to the Gandhi family, said, "What is there to talk about 1984? Talk about what you've done in the last five years. 1984 mein hua toh hua (whatever happened, happened)."

His comment immediately sparked widespread outrage and the BJP was quick to attack the Congress for Pitroda's insensitive remark.

BJP president Amit Shah tweeted, "Agony of the entire Sikh community. Suffering of all those Sikh families killed by the Congress leaders in 1984. Attack on Delhi's secular ethos. All summed up in these three words by Sam Pitroda - Hua to hua. India will never forgive murderer Congress for its sins."

Sensing the damage, Pitroda tried to clarify his remark. He tweeted on Friday, "I have noticed how the BJP is again twisting three words from my interview to distort facts, divide us and hide their failures. It's sad that they have nothing positive to offer."

Pitroda said that he sympathised with the pain of the Sikh community, but argued that the 1984 anti-Sikh riots are not relevant in the present context when the current government's performance should be the subject of the conversation.

But the Congress was already embarrassed! The Congress said in a statement, "Congress believes that justice should be done to 1984 riots' victims and the 2002 Gujarat riots victims. We abhor violence of any kind, against any person or a group of people based on their caste, colour, region or religion... Any opinion, remark made by any individual to the contrary, including Sam Pitroda is not the opinion of the Congress."

Punjab CM Amarinder Singh distanced himself from Pitroda's comments. He said: "If Pitroda really said that 'if riots happened they happened' it is shameful. 1984 was a tragedy and the people are still awaiting justice."

The BJP and the Akali Dal protested in Amritsar and Delhi, outside the Congress headquarters. Speaking exclusively to India Today TV, Union minister Harsimrat Kaur Badal said, "There can be nothing more shameful and shocking. This same casual attitude has ensured no justice. Shame on Capt Amarinder for saying Congressmen had no role in it. What has Rahul Gandhi done to ensure that there was justice for the thousands who were massacred? Was anybody sent to jail? I thank our government which set up an SIT and reopened the cases."


