Sent to clean septic tank without safety gear, three manual scavengers die after inhaling toxic fumes in Thane

Workers protest against the violation of Manual Scavenging Prohibition Act at Jantar Mantar in New Delhi in 2018 (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: Manual scavenging claimed three more lives near Mumbai in the early hours of Friday when they inhaled toxic fumes while cleaning a septic tank at a housing society in Thane. The victims have been identified as 20-year-old Amit Puhal, 21-year-old Aman Badal and 24-year-old Ajay Bumbak, all natives of Haryana.

Going by reports, eight labourers were summoned by contractors to clean four septic tanks at Pride Presidency Luxuria Housing society in Dokhali area. They began their work around 4 pm on Thursday and tragedy struck at around midnight when their work was nearing completion. After inhaling toxic fumes, all of the labourers attempted to move out of the tank but failed.

This is when officials with the Kapurbawadi police were alerted and arrived at the scene. Two fire engine and two ambulances were also rushed to the spot for the rescue operation. However, Puhal, Badal and Bumbak were declared dead on arrival at a nearby hospital while two other labourers who were also rescued from the septic tank in an unconscious state were later discharged from the same hospital.

A preliminary inquiry has revealed that the contractors sent the labourers to clean the septic tanks without providing them with any safety gear at all despite knowing fully well they were putting the lives of these men at risk. Senior inspector AV Deshmukh said that contractors Vaibhav Patil and Jeetendra Khait have been booked under section 304 (A) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) which corresponds to death due to negligence along with sections 7 and 9 of the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013.

This is the second such instance which has come to light in less than a week from Mumbai and neighbouring areas with the first being the deaths of three men while cleaning a septic tank in Nallasopara earlier this month. In April of this year, a worker with Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) died due to inhaling toxic gases after he entered a manhole at Nana Chowk in order to clean it.

Despite repeated instructions from the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and the Supreme Court, civic bodies and private contractors continue to engage people in manual scavenging. Sent to clean septic tanks without any safety equipment, these men are essentially being sent to their deaths for a few hundred rupees.
