The same old story in Chhitmahal

The same old story in Chhitmahal In the erstwhile enclaves, also known as Chhitmahal, people have very little faith in electoral politics. But why?

| Published 11.05.19, 08:41 PM

Nota People Thousands of villagers in Bengal who have lost their homes to erosion of the Ganges are disinterested in polls. Kedar Nath Mondal, former schoolteacher and activist, has been fighting on behalf of 900 impacted families across six villages in Malda. Says the octogenarian, “None of the parties takes up the cause of these villagers. As a result young people are migrating in hordes to other states.” It is believed many of the villagers will either abstain from voting or opt for Nota.

Advertisement

The situation of the villagers of Krishnaganj, Hanskhali and Ranaghat blocks is no better. These people live 80 kilometres northeast of Calcutta along the Churni and Mathabhanga rivers. Mostly farmers and fishermen, their livelihood is linked to these rivers that originate in Bangladesh and are polluted by industrial effluents dumped by the neighbouring country. Basudeb Halder, a fisherman in Majhdia, says, “Foul-smelling effluents make our life unbearable. It is killing all fish and aquatic plants.” The villagers have formed the Mathabhanga and Churni River Rescue Committee and have written to the Prime Minister as well as the Bengal chief minister. Says Swapan Bhaumik, committee secretary, “Despite appeals to both the state and the Centre, the simple solution — a waste water treatment plant in Bangladesh — is pending for several years.” He too talks about Nota and the exodus of youths. He says, “Vote ashey jae, Churni, Mathabhangar kalo jol aro kalo hoy... Elections come and go, but the Churni and Mathabhanga, they turn a little more black every day.”

At the time of the great exchange, there were 37,369 people in the Indian enclaves in Bangladesh and 14,854 people in the Bangladeshi enclaves in India. Curiously, only 922 people officially registered to opt for India — ICUC claims several thousands were left out — but not a single family from the enclaves in India exercised the option of moving to Bangladesh. We arrive at Dhabalsuti Mrigipur, one such former Bangladeshi enclave, a couple of kilometres ahead of the camp where Swapna lives. It has some markers of prosperity — a metalled road, an anganwadi (rural childcare centre) and some pumps for irrigation. We meet Anil Roy Lashkar in his house in a bamboo grove. The walls of his home are made of dorma (bamboo) and the roof is of sheet metal. The Lashkars are not particularly enthusiastic about the Lok Sabha elections. Says Anil, “Now we are considered citizens of India and we have got the right to vote, but most of our demands have been ignored.” He continues, “Tubewells, toilets and roads are inadequate.” It seems he donated portions of his land for an anganwadi and a primary school, but not much progress has been made. He adds, “I expected the local youths to get jobs here, but nothing has happened.” The common allegation of the 182 families in this former enclave is that almost all of them lost some land after the exchange due to bureaucratic errors. Our last stop is Tinbigha Corridor, the 178m x 85m strip of land that links enclaves Dahagram and Angarpota with the Bangladeshi mainland. Despite strong opposition from a large section of people in the neighbouring Kuchlibari village, the corridor was given on a permanent lease to Bangladesh to facilitate movement of its land-locked citizens. Utpal Ray is a leader of the Kuchlibari Sangram Committee (KSC), a group of citizens protesting against India’s surrender of the corridor to Bangladesh. Sudhir Ray, a member of KSC, was shot when police opened fire on protesters in 1981. Says Utpal, “The BJP had been supporting our movement from the very beginning. But now that they are the ruling party, they care two hoots about our condition here.” He thunders, “Why were Dahagram and Angarpota not exchanged? Why did India surrender 10,000 extra acres of land to Bangladesh? Why aren’t the BJP leaders taking action against criminals who use these enclaves to traffic cattle and women across the border?” He takes us to the memorial of Sudhir Ray. “There was a time when all top leaders of the BJP used to visit this place. Now it’s a forgotten cause,” he sighs. Rajorshi says, “It’s clear that the exchange of enclaves has solved some problems but it has undeniably opened up new ones.” Swapna stolidly adds, “Unless they bring my husband here, I am not going to budge.”
