Narendra Modi: PM Modi averages 3 rallies in UP, 2 in West Bengal in each phase

New Delhi:For the BJP, success in the Lok Sabha elections depends on how far it can retain its 2014 tally of 71 in UP and how many it can win from the 42 seats in West Bengal As the elections enter the last phase, the focus has shifted to these two states that together send 122 MPs to the 545-member Lok Sabha, and to the hard campaigning by Prime Minister Narendra Modi The Prime Minister has clocked an average of three rallies in every phase of UP elections and two rallies in every phase in West Bengal. So far, Modi has addressed 21 rallies in UP and 13 rallies in West Bengal for the six phases of polling. Interestingly, Madhya Pradesh , where the BJP won 27 out of 29 seats in 2014, pales in comparison with the party’s star campaigner doing only five rallies, underscoring the PM’s priority in terms of campaigning.UP and West Bengal are the two states where polling is taking place across all seven phases. A multiple phase election in these two mega states has helped the BJP plan PM rallies better to get the maximum out of his campaigning.In West Bengal’s first phase where two seats of North Bengal went for polls, PM held only one rally in Cooch Bihar on April 7, four days before the elections. The Prime Minister skipped the next phase that saw three remaining seats of North Bengal going to polls, considering the not-so-bright prospects for the party, despite the fact the phase included Darjeeling, a seat won by the BJP in 2014 .As the election shifted towards Jangal Mahal and seats around Kolkata during the sixth phase, Modi put up maximum efforts to attract voters towards the BJP. Between phase five and phase six, Modi conducted four rallies in Jhargram, Tamluk, Bankura and Purulia. The party pinned high hopes on this region bordering Jharkhand and a rally by PM was expected to brighten its chances.In UP, till the fourth phase, PM did seven rallies. But as the election shifted towards Avadh and Purvanchal, PM accelerated the number. Between phase four and five of UP elections, Modi did seven rallies trying to touch upon almost all the regions and constituencies.Similarly, for the fifth and sixth phase, Modi addressed seven rallies across Purvanchal to improve party’s chances in the region. The BJP owed its 2014 success in UP to a great extent to its performance in these areas.With an alliance between the SP and the BSP on a number of seats, these two parties have higher vote share than the BJP in 2014. So the focus of the Prime Minister was to use his charisma on these seats to negate the alliance arithmetic. One phase is still left and as per current schedule, PM is supposed to address four rallies in West Bengal and three more in UP before the elections get over on May 19.
