Top five stories to watch for on May 13, 2019

About 25 developing countries will be participating in a meeting to be held in New Delhi from May 13 to discuss various issues related to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), an official said. The meeting assumes significance as several countries are raising questions over the relevance of the Geneva-based global trade body. Many countries are also taking protectionist measures, impacting global trade.

United States (US) Secretary of State Michael Pompeo will meet US diplomats at the American Embassy in Moscow, Russia on May 13. During his 48-hour-long trip, the secretary will hold discussions regarding disputes between the two nations, involving Ukraine, Venezuela and Syria. He would also discuss other issues, as well as the continued accusations of Russia’s US election interference.

A Delhi court will pass its order on May 13 regarding Subramaniam Swamy’s plea wherein he sought to be part of the trial associated with the death of Sunanda Pushkar, wife of Congress MP Shashi Tharoor. Subramaniam Swamy had also sought to bring on record the Delhi Police’s vigilance report on tampering of evidence in the case. He claimed that it might lead to framing of additional charges.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will address election rallies May 13 in Punjab, where polling for all the 13 Lok Sabha seats will be held on May 19. He will address a rally in Mansa, which is part of the state’s Bathinda constituency. The Prime Minister will also hold a rally in Solan, Himachal Pradesh. Meanwhile, Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra will be campaigning in two districts of Madhya Pradesh – Ratlam and Indore.

On May 13, the Supreme Court will hear a plea seeking a direction to the Election Commission (EC) to advance the poll timing to 5.30 am from 7 am for the last phase of the Lok Sabha polls. The plea is being made due to the heatwaves and the ongoing holy month of Ramzan. The plea was mentioned for urgent listing before a bench comprising Chief Justice (CJI) Ranjan Gogoi and Justice Sanjiv Khanna which said it would be heard by a vacation bench on May 13.
