Amit Shah Denied Permission To Hold Rally at Jadavpur

Guwahati: Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) President Amit Shah was denied permission to hold rally at Jadavpur in West Bengal on Monday.

According to sources, Amit Shah’s rally has been denied by the authorities which at first granted for Shah’s chopper to land but it was later denied.

The rally of Shah is not the first time which has been denied. Earlier, in January also, Shah’s chopper to land in Malda district has also been denied who was about to hold a rally in the district.

Malda district administration, in its defence, said that it was not possible to grant permission to land VVIP helicopters that week owing to construction work.

Shah is supposed to hold rallies in two other places- Kolkata and North 24 Parganas apart from Jadavpur. However, the meetings in Kolkata’s Canning Rajarhat have been duly granted by the administration and the helicopter landing permission for the Baruipur meeting is still awaited.

Meanwhile, BJP leader Ravi Shankar Prasad claimed that West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has used the land where Shah was to land to hold rally but Banerjee claimed that she too had to change her landing location on the request of the state police.

Moreover, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath too, was denied permission to land his chopper in West Bengal in February for which he had to land in Jharkhand’s Bokaro and then travel to Purulia district by road to participate in the rally.

On February 3, Yogi was scheduled to address two rallies in West Bengal but the Mamata Banerjee government declined permission for his chopper to land for both the district of North and South Dinajpur without any prior notice.

The administration, however, said that they haven’t denied or granted permission for the Baruipur meeting of Amit Shah but if BJP manages to get the land permission, helicopter landing permission shall also be granted. The administration also said that there is no question of PWD denying permission as the land belongs to a private owner and first he has to grant permission from them.

Also Read: NATIONAL NEWS
