Catch me if you can: Amit Shah says Jai Shri Ram, dares Mamata Banerjee to arrest him

Taking on Mamata Banerjee over denial of permission for a rally in Jadavpur, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) chief Amit Shah on Monday dared the West Bengal chief minister to arrest him.

"I am chanting Jai Shri Ram here today. If you have guts, Mamata didi, arrest me," Amit Shah said during a rally in Joynagar of West Bengal.

#WATCH BJP President Amit Shah in Joynagar, West Bengal: Mamata didi, I am chanting Jai Shri Ram here & leaving for Kolkata, arrest me if you have guts. pic.twitter.com/gw7yg8bHHU ANI (@ANI) May 13, 2019



Amit Shah had earlier also dared Banerjee to arrest him for chanting 'Jai Shri Ram' at the multiple election rallies he addressed in West Bengal.

Shah had earlier alleged that West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee was not allowing people to chant 'Jai Shri Ram' in the state, and wondered if the Lord's name cannot be taken in India, will it be uttered in Pakistan.

"The infiltrators tell Mamata didi not to allow people to say 'Jai Shri Ram'. Lord Ram is a part of the culture of India... Can anybody stop people from taking his name? I want to ask Mamata didi, if Shri Ram's name is not taken in India, will it be chanted in Pakistan?" he said.

"I want to tell Mamata didi that this is West Bengal and not Pakistan... I am going to Kolkata from here (Bishnupur), put me in jail if you have the guts," the BJP chief had said.

In a recent incident, three people were arrested allegedly for chanting Jai Shri Ram when Mamata Banerjee's convoy was passing by.

Mamata Banerjee had tried to confront those raising the slogan, but they fled. A video of the incident had gone viral on social media.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi had also dared Mamata Banerjee to arrest him for hailing Lord Ram with the chant at his Jhargram rally.

"Didi has thrown people into jail for chanting 'Jai Shri Ram'. I thought of greeting her with the chant so she can throw me behind bars, too. I will then serve the innocent people who are in jail for chanting in praise of Lord Ram," Narendra Modi had said.

Meanwhile, the BJP has hit out at the Mamata Banerjee government for denying permission to Amit Shah's rally and alleged that the chief minister has replaced democracy with her "dictatorship" over administration denying permission to a rally by Amit Shah.

Amit Shah was scheduled to hold a rally in Jadhavpur on Monday but the West Bengal administration denied permission and also withdrew its nod to the landing of Shah's chopper in the constituency, BJP leader and Union minister Prakash Javadekar told reporters.

"This is murder of democracy. The EC should take cognizance of the matter. If important leaders are not allowed to hold rallies then what is the meaning of elections," Javadekar had said.

He said the West Bengal administration has been denying permission to Shah's poll programmes and events of other important BJP leaders.

He asserted that the denial of permission reflected her frustration over the growing support for the BJP, claiming that people who had elected her earlier are determined to defeat her.

Nine seats will go to polls in the last phase of the general election in West Bengal.

READ | Amit Shah denied permission to hold rally in Bengal, BJP cries Mamata's dictatorship

READ | Mamata Banerjee exclusive: My slogan is Jai Hind and Vande Mataram not Jai Shri Ram

WATCH | Our slogan is Jai Hind not Jai Shri Ram, says Mamata Banerjee
