Amit Shah denied permission for holding rally in Bengal, BJP terms it Mamta's dictatorship

Home >> Kolkata Amit Shah denied permission for holding rally in Bengal, BJP terms it Mamta's dictatorship

Accusing the ruling state government of not allowing Mr Shah’s rally, a senior party leader said the Election Commission has become a “mute spectator” to the Trinamool Congress’ alleged undemocratic means to target the saffron party.

Kolkata : Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) national president Amit Shah was denied permission to hold a rally in Baruipur which falls under Jadavpur constituency in the run-up to the last phase of polls.

The party sources on Monday said that although permission was granted for Shah`s chopper to land here, it was later denied by the authorities.

Meanwhile, Mr Shah in a tweet said: “Since Mamata Banerjee Govt did not give permission for the 2nd rally which was to be held in Jadavpur, Kolkata, Shri @AmitShah is compelled to hold only 2 rallies. People of Bengal will give a befitting reply to this anarchy of Mamata Didi on 23rd May.”

Since Mamata Banerjee Govt did not give permission for the 2nd rally which was to be held in Jadavpur, Kolkata, Shri @AmitShah is compelled to hold only 2 rallies. People of Bengal will give a befitting reply to this anarchy of Mamata Didi on 23rd May. #DeshModiKeSaath https://t.co/mwlhcGXFOq pic.twitter.com/DXclvgvYTp — BJP (@BJP4India) May 13, 2019

Accusing the ruling state government of not allowing Mr Shah’s rally, a senior party leader said the Election Commission has become a “mute spectator” to the Trinamool Congress’ alleged undemocratic means to target the saffron party.

BJP media head and Rajya Sabha MP Anil Baluni said his party will hold protests and also move the EC.

Senior BJP leader Mukul Roy last night hit out at TMC chief Mamata Banerjee saying that history will never forget her for engaging in "bloodthirsty politics".

In a tweet Mr Roy said: “Devi, please don’t get so desperate and stop killing the sons of West Bengal. History will never forgive you for your bloodthirsty politics. You are losing West Bengal for sure.”

Ramen Singh, booth President of Jhargram Loksabha was brutally killed by TMC goons on Saturday night. He was killed from blows on his head with sticks, a BJP leader said.

Earlier, on Sunday, Mr Roy lodged a protest with the election commission that he was allegedly harassed several times by the city police while traveling by a car on the VIP road coming from Dum Dum airport.

He told media persons that his car was frisked several times by the Kolkata Police as well as the Bidhannagar police though each time they got nothing.

Mr Roy alleged the frisking on his car was done at the instance of Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee even though he revealed his identity.

"When I challenged the policemen to produce search warrants, they said it was an order from the election commission which is not true at all," Mr Roy said.

He said he allowed the policemen to frisk his car in presence of media people and alleged the city police and Bengal police allegedly have been falsely implicating the BJP leaders and producing false seizure list.

Mr Roy also condemned the police action, saying under the TMC ruling the law enforcement agencies have allegedly turned ruling party agents and been harassing not only the opposition leaders but also common people.

Another BJP leader and Union minister of state Babul Supriyo took to Twitter to call out the TMC for allegedly sending goons to attack his convoy when he had stopped for some tea on the way back from campaigning.

“Driving bk frm Bashirhat after a rwlly for fellow BJP candidate SayantanBasu.Stopped 2 hv some tea. People taking selfies, cordial chats but suddenly a bunch of #TMchhi goons arrive &start shouting dirty slogans!Resisted by my security, they break their car&try on me too#TMchhi,” he tweeted.
