Mamatadi Gets Angry When Someone Chants ‘Jai Shri Ram’: Amit Shah

Guwahati: Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) President Amit Shah today dared West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee to arrest him for chanting ‘Jai Shri Ram’. He also claims that Banerjee could stop him from attending rallies in Bengal but won’t be able to stop BJP’s victory march in the state.

Addressing a rally at Canning in West Bengal which comes under Joynagar Lok Sabha constituency, Amit Shah said that Mamatadi gets angry if someone chants ‘Jai Shri Ram’. “I am chanting Jai Shri Ram’ here today. If you have the guts, arrest me. I will be in Kolkata tomorrow,” said Shah.

Shah also hits out at the TMC government over denial of permission for his chopper to land in Baruipur claiming that the Mamata Banerjee government is visibly perplexed. “She wants to stop me from attending rallies. They can stop me from attending rallies but who will stop the victory of BJP in Bengal,” Shah asked.

Earlier on Monday morning, BJP Chief Amit Shah was denied permission to hold a rally at Jadavpur in West Bengal.

According to sources, Amit Shah’s rally has been denied by the authorities which at first granted for Shah’s chopper to land but it was later denied.

The rally of Shah is not the first time which has been denied. Earlier, in January also, Shah’s chopper to land in Malda district has also been denied who was about to hold a rally in the district.

Malda district administration, in its defence, said that it was not possible to grant permission to land VVIP helicopters that week owing to construction work.

Shah is supposed to hold rallies in two other places- Kolkata and North 24 Parganas apart from Jadavpur. However, the meetings in Kolkata’s Canning Rajarhat have been duly granted by the administration and the helicopter landing permission for the Baruipur meeting was still to get permission.

BJP leader Ravi Shankar Prasad claimed that West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has used the land where Shah was to land to hold a rally but Banerjee claimed that she too had to change her landing location on the request of the state police.

Also Read: NATIONAL NEWS
