Protests erupt in city over delay in power restoration

Bhubaneswar: People in several parts of the city and its neighbouring areas staged protests and held electricity workers hostage on Monday as power is yet to be restored in their localities even after 10 days of the cyclone. Dharnas were staged in Samantraapur, Pahala, Naharakanta, Niali, Phulnakhara, Old Town and Nuagaon.Those living in the city are irked over the frequent power outages exposing them to the sweltering heat though the government claims to have restored electricity in the capital. Power is yet to be completely restored in parts of Khandagiri, Kalinganagar, Samantarapur, Nuagaon and Baranga.Government sources said restoration of power will start in Puri district from May 15, while it may take longer in the interior areas of Khurda and Puri districts. “The government is making tall claims of restoring 100% power in Bhubaneswar, but in reality the supply is erratic. Living conditions are pitiable in this sweltering heat with patients, the elderly and children being the worst affected. The power supply is continuous at night but only for a few hours,” said Pramila Satapathy, a senior citizen of Old Town.They admitted that there are problems in some areas and it will take some more days for the city to get uninterrupted power supply. These areas are Kalinga Nagar, SBI Colony, Uttara, Baranga, Chandaka Industrial Estate and Gothapatna. Several IT companies in Chandaka area are yet to get power, said information and public relations secretary Sanjay Singh.He explained that 100% power can be restored in three phases like restoration, stabilisation and rectification. The restoration work has been completed in most places while stabilisation and rectification are yet to start, he added.The situation in rural areas is worse due to lack of power and delay in lifting of debris. “Even after 10 days of the cyclone we are in darkness and using lanterns and earthen lamps. There is also fear of snakes, scorpions and rats as animals are coming out of their resting place due to the heat,” said Santosh Patra of Baipatna village, on the outskirts of the city.In the worst-hit Puri district, people waited for hours in long queues for relief materials, where only 60.14% of the eligible beneficiaries have received rice and 23.4% victims cash assistance. “We fail to understand the reason behind the government not showing any promptness. Had the cyclone taken place before the elections, the situation would have been different today,” said Kailash Dalei of Krushnaprasad village, one of the worst-hit areas in the district.
