Horror at 5 am: Dacoits loot veggie shop owner

dacoits

.

Bangalore

.

Seeing the woman alone, five-member gang barges into Chandra Layout store, snatch her gold chain; damage vehicle of cab driver who came to her rescueFour years ago, Pavithra and her husband Redappa opened a vegetable shop in Chandra Layout near BBMP corporator Umesh Shetty’s house. Morning walkers were their main customers and the couple used to roll up the shutters early to cater to them. They stay on the floor above so opening shop early wasn’t any trouble at all.Until Sunday when Pavithra nearly lost her life.Between 5 and 5.10 am, when her husband was away buying fresh vegetables, five armedbarged into her shop and asked her to hand over valuables and cash. The shop is located on Gangondahalli Main Road in Chandra Layout (in pic).“We have been in the business for the last four years. At the time of the incident, my wife was alone and I had gone to market to buy vegetables in bulk. The incident has happened between 5 to 5.10 am. Two of the gang members barged inside the shop and threatened my wife with a knife to hand over the valuables and cash. My wife managed to run outside the shop and started screaming for help. Three other gang members who were waiting outside caught her and attacked her with some weapon.They managed to pull her gold chain. Despite being scared for her life, my wife held on to the chain so the accused could take only half of it,” Redappa toldMirror.While Pavithra was repeatedly screaming for help, a cab driver noticed her and came to her rescue in the car. The accused threatened to attack him if he dared to help her. While escaping on two bikes, the gang members damaged the cab. The part of the gold chain which the victim lost is estimated to be around Rs 18,000. Pavithra also sustained injuries as she was pushed to the floor by the gang members.“The shop opens by 5 am as many people come to the nearby park for a morning walk. We suspect that the accused noticed my wife being alone so early in the morning as I go to the market as farmers come with fresh vegetables in the early hours. This is the first time we have encountered such an incident in the last four years. Ever since the incident, we open the shop an hour later in my presence,” Redappa added.“The details of the accused is known as their movements have been captured in CCTVs in the vicinity. Efforts are being made to nab them,” said an officer who is part of the investigation.The Chandra Layout police have registered a case of dacoity with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt (IPC 397) and house-trespass (IPC 451).
