Lok Sabha Election News : Clashes break out at BJP president Amit Shah`s roadshow in Kolkata

Home >> Delhi Lok Sabha Election News : Clashes break out at BJP president Amit Shah`s roadshow in Kolkata

The BJP, the Congress and the SP-BSP gathbandhan, all are scheduled to hold rallies in Eastern Uttar Pradesh`s Purvanchal region this week. Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be addressing election rallies in Uttar Pradesh`s Ballia, Bihar`s Buxar and Sasaram along with Chandigarh today.

With Lok Sabha polls coming to an end with the last phase of voting on May 19, all parties are making their last ditch efforts to woo voters. As campaigning enters into the seventh and last phase of Lok Sabha election 2019, the seats will be witnessing a relay of rallies. The BJP, the Congress and the SP-BSP gathbandhan, all are scheduled to hold rallies in Eastern Uttar Pradesh`s Purvanchal region this week. Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be addressing election rallies in Uttar Pradesh`s Ballia, Bihar`s Buxar and Sasaram along with Chandigarh today. SP chief Akhilesh Yadav and BSP chief Mayawati will be holding a joint-rally in Salempur. While Congress chief Rahul Gandhi will be campaigning in Madhya Pradesh`s Neemuch, Khandwa and Tarana today, BJP chief Amit Shah will be holding a roadshow in North Kolkata. Meanwhile, the Bharatiya Janata Party is protesting after Amit Shah`s rally in West Bengal`s Jadhavpur was cancelled yesterday. The BJP also claimed that the Mamata Banerjee government denied permission to its leaders- Yogi Adityanath and Smriti Irani - to hold rallies in the state. Stay tuned to IndiaToday.in for all the live news updates.

Attack on Amit Shah’s peaceful rally by the TMC is deplorable: Arun Jaitley



"Has Bengal acquired a Government of Gangsters? The attack on Amit Shah’s peaceful rally by the TMC is deplorable. Is a free and fair poll possible in Bengal? All eyes are now on the Election Commission," Arun Jaitley tweeted.

"Keep it up Amit Bhai. Only Modi Ji and you can do in Bengal what others failed to realise. Victory is now at an arm’s length distance," added Jaitley.

A scuffle broke out between Trinamool Congress and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) workers during Amit Shah`s roadshow in Kolkata on Tuesday.

17:28 PM IST

When Punjab was fighting for country`s independence, RSS people were doing `chamchagiri` of Britishers: Priyanka Gandhi

Priyanka Gandhi while addressing the crowd in Bathinda, Punjab said," When entire Punjab was fighting for country`s independence, RSS people were doing `chamchagiri` (flattery) of Britishers, they never fought in the independence movement."

17:11 PM IST

7 BJP workers killed in Bengal: Amit Shah



BJP president Amit Shah during his roadshow in Kolkata told India Today that seven BJP workers have been killed in Bengal.

Amit Shah also said that BJP is going to win Bengal with a huge mandate.

17:02 PM IST

MK Stalin challenges Soundarrajan to prove DMK is in talks with BJP

DMK President MK Stalin challenges Tamil Nadu BJP President Tamiliasai Soundarrajan to prove that the DMK is in talks with the BJP.

MK Stalin said, "I am ready to resign from politics if Tamilsiai or Narendra Modi can prove that I am in touch with the BJP. If they fail to prove, will they resign?

16:58 PM IST

WATCH | BJP President Amit Shah`s roadshow in Kolkata



BJP President Amit Shah`s roadshow in Kolkata.

16:56 PM IST

BJP leader Ashwini Upadhyay approaches Delhi HC seeking action against Kamal Haasan

BJP leader Ashwini Upadhyay has approached Delhi High Court seeking direction to Election Commission to take appropriate action against Kamal Haasan for his comment "First terrorist in independent India is a Hindu, his name is Nathuram Godse"





14:37 PM IST

Priyanka Gandhi`s Sundernagar rally cancelled due to bad weather

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra`s public rally in Himachal Pradesh`s Sundernagar has been cancelled as her chopper could not take off from Kangra airport as IMD had forecast bad weather between Kangra-Sundernagar, the pilot has also filed a report.





14:18 PM IST

Parties like Cong, RJD want to keep 21st century India in darkness, NDA committed to leading nation towards light: PM

14:17 PM IST

Mahamilavatis think some castes are beholden to them; they were born poor and ended up amassing crores: PM Modi in Bihar

14:17 PM IST

After response in six phases of polls, anger of opposition leaders has touched seventh heaven: PM in Bihar







13:36 PM IST



Mani Shankar Aiyar: Statement has come from my side, there is a whole article, picking out one line from it and saying "now talk on this". I`m not ready to be involved in your games, "main ullu hoon, lekin itna bada ullu nahi hoon."

13:33 PM IST

Mani Shankar Aiyar: I have been a victim of the media and it has caused me significant damage









13:31 PM IST

There is no need for a clarification: Mani Shankar Aiyar on terming PM Modi as foul mouthed



Congress leader Mani Shankar Aiyar on terming PM Modi as foul mouthed in an article for an online publication: There is no need for a clarification. I have been told that the Congress party has given an official statement.















11:29 AM IST

Mani Shankar Aiyar says he stands by neech jibe against PM Modi



Congress leader Mani Shankar Aiyar said that he stands by his `neech aadmi` jibe against Narendra Modi and termed his December 2017 remark about the prime minister as "prophetic".

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

11:18 AM IST

Country needs `pure PM` who can run country in accordance with welfare spirit of Constitution: Mayawati

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------







11:18 AM IST

People across India know Modi government`s boat is sinking: Mayawati

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11:05 AM

Over 20 Congress MLAs unhappy with Kumaraswamy will join BJP: Yeddyurappa



"Not a single person from BJP will join any other party. After May 23, more than 20 Congress MLAs who are not happy with HD Kumaraswamy will not continue in the party," says BJP leader BS Yeddyurappa after Congress leader KC Venugopal`s said many BJP MLAs in Karnataka will join Congress after May 23.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11:01 AM IST

Modi govt losing election, even RSS has stopped supporting BJP, says Mayawati

PM Modi`s government is losing this election, it appears that even RSS has stopped supporting them (BJP). In view of unfulfilled election promises and the public agitation, their swayamsevaks are not being seen putting in the work, it has made Shri Modi nervous, says BSP chief Mayawati.



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



10:51 AM



Authorities didn`t release water, we had to become aggressive: Congress MLA who abused officials



"Authorities were supposed to release water but didn`t, so we had to become aggressive. We`ve been demanding the release of water since last two weeks, collector had also ordered release of water from Upper Wardha but BJP MLA intervened," says Yashomati Thakur, Congress MLA from Teosa.




