AP SSC Results 2019: East Godavari tops highest percentage of GPA fourth time in a row

The Board of Secondary Education Andhra Pradesh (BSEAP) will announce the SSC results today. Direct Link For AP SSC Result. The AP SSC results will be updated on its official website bseap.org. The SSC results will be released in a press conference at Vizag any time between 11.00 am and 12.00 pm, said a board official.

Apart from this official website, AP SSC results will also be updated on other websites like manabadi, indiaresults and examresults.

East Godavari district registered the highest pass percentage, 98.19% of students have cleared SSC exam in this district. Nellore district recorded the least performance with (83.19%).

The highest pass percentage has been recorded in the third language where students opt for Hindi to Telugu. The pass percentage in Science is 94.42%. In Social Science, the pass percentage is 99.84%.

Girls outshined boys with a pass percentage of 95.09%. Whereas, the pass percentage among boys is 94.68%. A total of 6,21,649 students took the SSC exam this year under the Andhra Pradesh Board of Secondary Education.

The pass percentage in government schools was 94.48%. Whereas last year the private schools registered the highest performance in SSC result with a total of 6475 students secured a perfect 10 CGPA in the exam.

The Secondary School Certificate (SSC) exams were held from March 18 to April 2. A total of 6,21,649 students took the SSC exam this year under the Andhra Pradesh Board of Secondary Education.

Students can get individual marks by logging in to the official result portals. As the class 10th result certificate is a valid document for date of birth proof in future, students should check the entries made in the result copy immediately after downloading the same online. Errors, if any, should be rectified at the earliest.

How to check the AP SSC Results

1. Go to the official website: www.bseap.org or the apps

2. You will be redirected to the result page.

3. Enter your roll number in the space provided and click submit.

4. View and download your AP SSC result.

KSSSN Tejaswini is the Andhra Pradesh State topper. A total of 11 students are in the top 10 positions in the State. CBSE class 10 result was declared on May 6.

Students who want to go for revaluation and recounting the last date is May 30 and the fee for the application is Rs 500.
