After Guv’s intervention, J&K Bank declares uniform cut-off of 40 marks

After Guv’s intervention, J&K Bank declares uniform cut-off of 40 marks

PO aspirants

JAMMU, May 13: Under pressure from several groups in Jammu, the Jammu and Kashmir Bank Monday announced to alter the cut off marks to a uniform number of 40 marks across all districts of the State for the ongoing process of recruitment of Probationary Officers.

Bank’s Chairman and CEO Parvez Ahmed tweeted Monday morning that all those aspirants who have scored 40 marks and above can write the mains part of PO exam. Besides representations, he also mentioned intervention of the Raj Bhawan for altering the cut off merit.

CEO tweeted, “Good News for P.O. aspirants. In view of the various representations received from candidates & also the directions from the Hon'ble Governor Bank has decided to declare a uniform cut off of 40 across the state in relaxation of policy."

He added, “All those candidates having assessment score of 40 and above shall be eligible to write the mains. Good luck aspirants. Stay tuned for rescheduled date after arranging logistics.”

Post declaration of the results of the bank's online recruitment test for the preliminary examination conducted by Institute of Banking Personnel Selection (IBPS), Mumbai for the selection of probationary officers in the bank, the students in Jammu protested against J&K Bank's PO exam result. The protests continued for a few days following which the bank dismissed such protests by terming the recruitment process transparent.

The Bank, which says its recruitments are outsourced to a professional agency, announced the reduction in cut off marks after several groups in Jammu, mainly BJP, sided with the aspirants who alleged that cut off marks were higher in Jammu than in Srinagar. This sparked a religious discrimination row, packaged in regional one.

A group of candidates had staged protests here alleging discrimination with Jammu in the selection process. Several political parties including the Congress and the BJP had extended support to the protesting youth and demanded an inquiry into the entire recruitment process.

Reacting to protests by a group of, what it had said, “unsuccessful candidates over alleged discrimination in the selection of probationary officers”, the Jammu and Kashmir Bank on Sunday had said its ‘recruitment process is completely transparent.’

“Post declaration of the results of the bank’s online recruitment test for the preliminary examination conducted by institute of banking personnel selection (IBPS), Mumbai for the selection of probationary officers in the bank, it has come to the notice of the bank that there is a parochial attempt by some vested interests to misguide the applicants with baseless misinformation on the selection process being skewed to a particular district on the basis of merit cut off,” the bank had said in an advertisement to local dailies.

It said the bank has a board approved policy for the recruitment of officers (probationary officers) and clerks (banking associates) wherein the process is kick-started by forecasting the vacancies district wise to quantify the number of posts, followed by issuing of notification for soliciting applications clearly notifying that the vacancies are as per district-wise requirement followed by declaration of district-wise merit list and putting it in public domain.

“The bank has religiously adhered to the board approved policy and process with absolute transparency. The cut off has been decided by the bank on the basis of merit list provided by the IBPS and as per the geographic distribution of vacancies in each district of the state which has been communicated ab initio by the bank at the time of issuance of first notification,” the bank had said.

It had said, “The bank reiterates that its recruitment process is completely transparent and public in general and applicants in particular, should not fall prey to the misinformation campaign by some mischievous elements on social media by making assertions which are hypothetical, libellous and aimed at tarnishing the image of J&K bank branch.”
