Lok Sabha elections 2019: Where former CEC OP Rawat feels Election Commission has failed

The burden of conducting a free and fair poll in the ongoing 2019

elections is on the shoulders of the

. Former Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) Om Prakash Rawat, who preceded incumbent Sunil Arora, feels the commission has left a bad impression over the manner in which it has dealt with the Model Code of Conduct (MCC) violation cases. Other than that, Rawat, who presided over assembly elections in Karnataka, Mizoram, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura, says the present dispensation has been doing sterling work. Rawat, a retired IAS officer of the Madhya Pradesh cadre, was appointed election commissioner on August 14, 2015. During his tenure, elections were held in 13 states including Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Kerala,

, Assam, Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat besides the presidential and vice-presidential polls. He assumed charge as CEC on January 23, 2018 and demitted office on December 1, 2018. TOI's Kumar Shakti Shekhar spoke to the former CEC on a host of issues. Excerpts:

Q: West Bengal has witnessed violence in almost all six phases of elections so far. Has the Election Commission failed to ensure free and fair polls in the state?

Q: Do you think the Election Commission should have deployed more central forces in West Bengal?

Q: BJP president

could not hold his public rally at Jadavpur in West Bengal on May 13 because the local administration did not allow his aircraft to land there. Is the administration working under the instructions of the Election Commission justified in this decision?

Q: Several opposition parties have raised questions over the EVMs. Do you think they are right in doing so?

Q: Is the Opposition justified in demanding counting of 50 per cent of the VVPAT slips?

Q: The Election Commission is alleged to be soft towards deciding complaints regarding violations of Model Code of Conduct (MCC) by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, BJP president Amit Shah and Congress president Rahul Gandhi. How do you view it?

Q: The Election Commission has penalised several prominent politicians such as Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, Bahujan Samaj Party supremo Mayawati, BJP Bhopal candidate Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur, Punjab minister and Congress leader Navjot Singh Sidhu and Samajwadi Party candidate Azam Khan for MCC violation by banning them from campaigning for 48 to 72 hours. But this has hardly proved effective.

Q: What do you have to say about the voter turnout in the six phases of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections so far?

A: I do not agree that the Election Commission has failed in its duty. Violence does not indicate that the Election Commission has failed to conduct free and fair polls. Basically there is a trade-off between throne and dumps. When stakes are high for political parties, they resort to all means. It is like sportspersons taking banned drugs and getting caught. Therefore, it is up to all the stakeholders such as the media, political parties, Election Commission, Supreme Court and high courts to ensure that the situation does not go out of hand.The BJP sees that people are supporting it whereas the TMC does not want to cede any of its space to the former. Hence, the two parties are fighting it out tooth and nail. The Election Commission cannot be omnipresent. If you compare the incidents of violence which have taken place in these elections with those in the previous ones, you will find that it is far less.A: This issue will always be there. The Union home ministry is constrained to provide central forces because there are several hot spots - from Jammu and Kashmir to Assam and the naxal-affected areas in some states. These require heavy deployment. Therefore, it is not possible to deploy more forces in West Bengal.The Election Commission is doing commendable work and that is why the whole world is praising it. I had visited Harvard University and the State University of New York as the Chief Election Commissioner. Everyone was all praises for the Election Commission and the fact that it efficiently conducts polls with 900 million voters, difficult terrain and immense diversity.A: I am not aware of the details. But according to rules, there is a software called Suvidha for seeking permission to hold public meetings or aircraft landings. Permission to hold an election rally is given within 24 hours of application and for aircraft to land within 36 hours. In the latter case, 12 hours are needed to get permission from the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA).A: When I was the CEC, Lok Sabha bypolls were held in Kairana in Uttar Pradesh and Bhandara-Gondiya in Maharashtra. Even before the election was held in Kairana, Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav said on record at a press conference that his party was going to win, but because of EVMs its candidate would lose. But when the SP candidate won, he turned it around by saying the party could have won with a greater margin if it wasn't for EVM. Offence is better defence. Nothing can be done about such doubters.The third generation EVMs are so foolproof that if anyone even touches it with mala fide intention, the machine resets to factory mode and stops working. It is like the theft alarm in a car which goes off and immobilises the vehicle. EVMs and VVPAT (Voter-Verifiable Paper Audit Trail) slips are insoluble. But one cannot expect all the 11 million polling officials deployed in election duty to resist threats, allurements and pressures.Voting at all booths is monitored through webcast, CCTV cameras and videography. Any poll-related malpractice cannot go on for a long period. Sooner than later, it has to come to the notice of the Election Commission and is rectified.A: Till I was CEC, VVPAT slips were matched with EVM results at one randomly selected polling booth in each Assembly segment of a parliamentary constituency. In view of the varying demands for enhanced percentage of VVPAT slip count, the Election Commission engaged the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) to analyse and scientifically examine the issue. ISI submitted its report in March.Last month, the Supreme Court raised the VVPAT physical verification from one to five EVMs in each Assembly segment of a parliamentary constituency. It means if there are eight assembly segments in one parliamentary constituency, earlier eight VVPAT slips used to be matched with EVM results. Now, 40 VVPAT slips are matched. This I think is sufficient. However, I would like to add that this issue comes under the statistical domain. In my view, the Election Commission should continue with confidence building measures to address doubts of political parties as 21 of them had approached the Supreme Court.A: The Election Commission has unfettered powers to decide complaints of MCC violation against politicians, howsoever powerful, high and mighty he or she may be. But because of delay in disposing off the complaints, it has suffered a loss of confidence.MCC violation complaints should be dealth with within 2-3 days or a maximum a week. Such complaints are to be decided most expeditiously. The Election Commission has all machineries at its disposal and can call for any document and evidence in no time.But the fact that the commission took about 30 days to decide some cases and that too after the intervention of the Supreme Court has caused adverse perception in the public at large. It has left a bad impression about the Election Commission. Otherwise, it has been doing a sterling job in these elections so far.A: I do not think this will work. Instead of working hard by moving around in the heat and sun, some politicians deliberately commit mischief and violate MCC to remain in the news for 10-15 days. In fact, the media has a role to play here. They should stop reporting the MCC violations and controversial statements of the politicians.A: There has generally been an increase in voter turnout so far. Madhya Pradesh has seen a jump of 10 per cent. This is commendable as this voting percentage has been witnessed after 62 years.The Election Commission’s Systematic Voters’ Education and Electoral Participation, better known as SVEEP, has played a crucial role in the states which have registered higher voter turnout. SVEEP is the flagship programme of the Election Commission for voter education, spreading voter awareness and promoting voter literacy. For instance, the commission has made elaborate arrangements for the disabled also.However, there also are political angles to the increased voter percentage in some constituencies.
