SC orders release of BJP leader arrested for Mamata''s meme

monicakchauhan@gmail.com

Satya Prakash

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, May 14

The Supreme Court on Tuesday ordered immediate release of West Bengal BJP Yuva Morcha leader Priyanka Sharma who was arrested for sharing the morphed picture of Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Facebook.

However, a Vacation Bench of Justice Indira Banerjee and Justice Sanjiv Khanna ordered that at the time of her release Sharma will tender an apology in writing for putting up/sharing the pictures complained of on her Facebook account.

Twenty-five-year-old Sharma – who was arrested on the basis of a criminal complaint filed by TMC leader Vibhas Hazra—was on Saturday produced before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Howrah, who had sent her to 14-day judicial custody.

“It is made clear that this order is being made in the special facts and circumstances of this case and shall not operate as a precedent,” the Bench said while keeping open the issues raised in the petition challenging the BJP activist’s controversial arrest.

Directing the petitioner to serve a copy of her petition to the counsel appearing for the state of West Bengal for filing a formal response, the Bench posted the petition for hearing after summer vacation.

Initially, the Bench had made Sharma’s release subject to the young BJP leader tendering an apology, but later it called back senior advocate Neeraj Kishan Kaul, representing the petitioner, and clarified that she has to be released immediately.

“This is wrong...Your right to free speech ends where another person’s begins,” it said.

“But is sharing a meme enough for that (arrest)? This is something like caricature,” Kaul submitted.

“We do not see that there should be any difficulty for you in apologising for your post on social media. We are not asking you to apologise for others.

“Let her tender an apology we will forthwith grant bail. You take instruction. Since you are member of BJP the insinuation is different. The other side may have taken it differently. Had you been a common person, then may be it could have been no problem,” the Bench said.

Kaul said the provisions of IT Act and IPC under which she was arrested does not apply in this case.

Referring to the court’s 2015 verdict in Shreya Singhal’s case in which it declared Section 66A of the IT Act unconstitutional, Kaul said Sharma has been arrested by the police under the scrapped provision as well.

“You are a member of a political party. Elections are going on. We understand all these things,” the Bench said, adding, “You cannot put anybody’s face on anybody... It is wrong”.

Kaul said such an apology would have a chilling effect on free speech as tomorrow West Bengal Police can arrest anybody for four days for giving a statement and then demand an apology.

“If you say sorry, it does not bring you down. We are not going on the angle of freedom of speech and expressions,” the Bench said.

The controversy surrounding Sharma’s arrest by the West Bengal Police for allegedly posting a meme of Chief Mamata Banerjee on Facebook had finally reached the Supreme Court on Monday with the young BJP leader seeking her release on bail.

On Monday, the Vacation Bench had agreed to take up her bail plea on Tuesday after senior advocate Neeraj Kishan Kaul submitted that her plea against arrest needed urgent hearing.

She was arrested on May 10 by the state police under Section 500 (defamation) of the IPC and certain other provisions of the Information Technology Act.

Kaul said the BJP Yova Morcha activist was forced to move the top court as there was complete strike in local courts in West Bengal since April 25 following a “brutal attack” on lawyers in Howrah court by the state police.

Because of the strike, the petitioner had no option of availing of any legal remedy in the state, and she was forced to approach the top court, he said.

Sharma allegedly shared on Facebook the photo in which Banerjee’s face has been photo-shopped on to actor Priyanka Chopra’s picture from the MET Gala event in New York.
