Amit Shah-PM Modi posters removed ahead of roadshow in Kolkata; BJP protests against Mamata Banerjee govt

Amit Shah and PM Narendra Modi's posters were removed ahead of Amit Shah's road show in Kolkata | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: The feud between the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Trinamool Congress (TMC) intensified in Kolkata on Tuesday after posters and banners of the saffron party, BJP chief Amit Shah and Prime Minister Narendra Modi were removed in the city ahead of the massive road show of Shah. BJP workers, led by senior party leader Kailash Vijayavargiya, staged protests in the state capital over what they alleged was Mamata Banerjee government’s high-handedness.

Vijayvargiya claimed that there was a rule of “anarchy” in the state after posters and banners related to the BJP’s mega roadshow, scheduled to be held later on Tuesday. The saffron party has blamed TMC workers for the incident, stating that the posters were removed even though the party had taken all the requisite permission to hold the roadshow.

"Mamata ji's goons and police removed all the posters and flags. They escaped soon after we reached here," the BJP leader said.

In response to the development, BJP workers staged protests and raised anti-Mamata Banerjee slogans in Kolkata on Tuesday. Some of the BJP workers have also alleged that the State Election Commission was favouring TMC and had been biased with its decisions.

West Bengal: BJP alleges that party posters and flags were removed by TMC workers and Police ahead of Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata. Kailash Vijayvargiya, says,"Mamata ji's goons and police removed all the posters and flags. They escaped soon after we reached here." pic.twitter.com/QNrHnzHSbN — ANI (@ANI) May 14, 2019

BJP chief Amit Shah was slated to commence the BJP rally from Sahid Minar Maidaan on Tuesday, however, the Kolkata Police denied permission citing that the BJP had not taken permission for setting up a stage there. Speaking to Times Now, Vijayavargiya said that even though they had taken permission for the entire road show, the authorities had not given them the go-ahead to set up the stage.

Consequently, Shah is now expected to lead the BJP rally from Dharmatala, which will end at the house of Swami Vivekananda at Simla street, reports said. The roadshow is said to feature tableau from 20 states and showcase culture events, as per reports.

The BJP aims to transform Amit Shah's road show into a show of strength by the saffron party, which plans to make inroads in the TMC citadel in the ongoing Lok Sabha elections. In the run-up to the polls, TMC chief Mamata Banerjee and BJP president Amit Shah and PM Narendra Modi have traded bitter and caustic words.

Kolkata goes to polls on May 19, the last phase of polling in the 2019 elections.


