High drama in Bengal as cops evict BJP cadres from hotel

Picture for representation

Within hours of Bharatiya Janata Party President Amit Shah holding a rally in West Bengal's Barasat district, high drama ensued in the constituency on Monday night.

Reportedly, many BJP workers who had come down from Gujarat and put up at a local hotel were evicted from the premises last evening by the cops. They were told to leave the hotel after a routine pre-poll check was conducted at the hotels.

However, that is not the sole reason why the checks were conducted. Trinamool candidate Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar informed the police that the BJP workers might be in possession of money and arms to be used in the seventh and final phase of the national elections. After being evicted, the workers headed to the home of local BJP worker Tuhin Mondal.

In the meantime, Dastidar held a sit-in protest outside the police station seeking punitive action against the saffron cadres.

What followed next was commotion outside Mondal’s home as locals were startled by the sudden inflow of the BJP’s vehicles, reported NDTV.

Several vehicles were reportedly vandalised in the aftermath, so the police had to intervene and pay Mondal a visit to probe the matter. However, when they reached there, the entire house wore a deserted look, and no one answered repeated calls from the cops to open the door.

Eventually, the police had to break in and turn on the lights. Upon entering, they saw a few men seated along with local BJP leader Pradeep Banerjee. When questioned, they said they were about to start a party meeting and confirmed the presence of an RSS leader and Arvind Menon, BJP's co-in-charge of Bengal, there.

Since many local supporters of the Trinamool party gathered outside Mondal’s house to protest, the cops had to escort them safely to the police station.



.@WBPolice officers have informed that no Gujaratis can stay in the district of Barasat & they have to leave immediately even though next phase of polls is 6 days away Their message is rather clear NO GUJARATIS @swapan55 @BJP4Bengal @BJP4India

— chowkidar shishir bajoria (@shishirkb) May 13, 2019

Shishir Bajoria, a BJP office-bearer, tweeted: “WB Police officers have informed that no Gujaratis can stay in the district of Barasat and they have to leave immediately, even though the next phase of polls is 6 days away. Their message is rather clear. NO Gujaratis.”

Later that evening, the BJP informed the media via WhatsApp that Menon's vehicle had been vandalised near Barasat.

Notably, nine constituencies in West Bengal, including Barasat, will vote in the seventh and last phase of the Lok Sabha elections on May 19.
