Delhi Reels Under Toxic Air, Army Struggles With Faulty Ammo + More Top News

Parts of Delhi and the National Capital Region (NCR) have been experiencing dust storms for the past couple of days. With more dust storms predicted for the coming days, the NCR which is home to some of the most polluted cities in the world is bracing for more pollution. The dust has pushed the PM 2.5 levels in the air to winter levels. Read more

Here's more top news if the day:

1) Army Struggles With Faulty Ammunition At Border, While Politicians Do Chest Thumping In Studios

BCCL/Representational Image

The Army has sounded the alarm over the unacceptably high number of accidents taking place in the field due to the poor and defective quality of ammunition being supplied for tanks, artillery, air defence and other guns by the state-owned Ordnance Factory Board (OFB). Read more

2) Plastic Has Reached The Deepest Point Of The Ocean And It Is A Worrying Sign

Reuters

Retired naval officer, Victor Vescovo, said he made the disconcerting discovery as he descended nearly 6.8 miles (35,853 feet/10,928 meters) to a point in the Pacific Ocean’s Mariana Trench that is the deepest place on Earth. Read more

3) By 2040, More Than 1.5 Crore People Worldwide Will Need Chemotherapy Each Year

Cancer is slowly becoming a global threat and if a new study is to be believed, more than 1.5 crore people will need chemotherapy globally each year by 2040. Around one lakh cancer physicians will be required to treat the growing number of cancer patients mostly in low and middle-income countries. Read more

4) Protests Erupt In Kashmir As People Demand Justice For A 3-YO Rape Survivor

AP

The violent protests, which began on Monday in Kashmir demanding justice for a 3-year-old rape survivor, have spilled across the valley, with people calling for strict punishment. Protests have been reported from parts of Srinagar, Budgam and Bandipur forcing authorities to close all educational institutions including schools and colleges. Read more

5) Drought-Like Situation Is Forcing People To Steal Water From Storage Tanks In Nashik

BCCL/ REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

They say that the next world war will be fought over water. While it might sound exaggerated, there is no denial in the reality of an acute water shortage around the world and the ends to which people will go to get water. Read more
