Alwar Gangrape: 5 policemen injured in violent protests in Dausa, BJP demands CM's resignation

New Delhi:

Protests demanding justice for the Alwar gang rape victims in Rajasthan’s Dausa district turned violent on Tuesday with at least five policemen injured by stone pelting.

Huge number of people gathered at Dausa Railway Station in support of the gang rape victims, following BJP MP Kirodi Lal Meena's call for a public march from Dausa to Jaipur.

"The police had to resort to mild cane charging to disperse the agitating mob. Nearly five to six policemen sustained injuries when the mob started pelting stones.

"BJP MP Kirodi Lal Meena was dispersed to a different location. The situation is completely under control now," Dausa SP Prahlad Singh said.

Rashtriya Loktantrik Party legislator Hanuman Beniwal reached Dausa to support the rally and addressed the public meeting.

Agitators raised anti-government slogans, alleged negligence on part of the state government and demanded to know why swift action was not taken in the matter.

Meanwhile, the Rajasthan government appointed Jaipur Divisional Commissioner KC Verma as the investigating officer in the Alwar gang rape case.

On the other hand, Union Minister Prakash Javadekar demanded resignation of Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot for the “delay” in initiation of action in the case, which, he alleged, was done for political gains during the Lok Sabha elections.

On April 26, a woman was travelling with her husband on a motorcycle when the accused stopped them and took them to an isolated place off the road. They allegedly beat the husband and raped her in front of him, threatening them of dire consequences.

Her husband claimed that he had approached Rajasthan police on April 30 after the incident, but an FIR was filed on May 7. He had alleged that the police did not take action saying that they were busy with elections.

The case has not only caused nationwide outrage, but also resulted in a political slugfest. The BJP has accused the Ashok Gehlot-led Congress government of covering up the matter before the Lok Sabha elections. Gehlot has hit back, accusing the BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of playing politics over case.

Meanwhile, BSP chief Mayawati, who has six MLAs supporting the state government, has called for the Supreme Court to take action against the state and its police.

The police said they have arrested all the six accused - Indra Raj Gurjar, Mahesh Gurjar, Ashok Gurjar, Hansraj Gurjar, Chhote Lal Gurjar and Mukesh Gurjar.

Mukesh Gurjar allegedly filmed the crime in his mobile phone. After the couple went to the police, the accused allegedly demanded money for not circulating the video on social media.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
