Elections 2019 updates: EC asks Twitter India to remove all posts related to exit polls

Remove all content regarding exit polls, Election Commission tells Twitter | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi/Kolkata: The Election Commission on Wednesday ordered Twitter India to remove all the tweets related to the 2019 Lok Sabha elections exit polls. The seventh and last phase of the Lok Sabha polls will take place on May 19, after which media is allowed to broadcast results of the exit polls. 59 constituencies across eight states go to polls on May 19. These include eight seats in Bihar, three in Jharkhand, eight in Madhya Pradesh, 13 in Punjab, nine in West Bengal, one in Chandigarh, 13 in Uttar Pradesh and four in Himachal Pradesh.

Earlier today, EC barred campaigning in West Bengal after 10 pm on Thursday, in view of the alleged poll violence in the state. The poll panel invoked its plenary panel under Article 324 for its unprecedented decision to curb campaigning in the state after violence erupted during BJP chief Amit Shah’s rally in Kolkata.

Lok Sabha Elections 2019 updates:

11:04 pm: 'EC is acting at BJP's behest,' says Mamata Banerjee

After facing twin setbacks by the Election Commission and the West Bengal governor, TMC president and West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee on Wednesday questioned the poll panel, which has cut short campaigning by a day in the state in view of incidents of poll violence. “EC is acting at the behest of BJP,” Banerjee said in a press conference held at Kalighat on Wednesday night.

Attacking PM Narendra Modi, the TMC supremo said, “Modi knows that the person standing against him, challenging him is strong, which is why he is doing all these tactics.” Alleging that the violence that broke out in Kolkata yesterday was "Amit Shah's doing," Banerjee questioned the poll panel for not taking action against the BJP president. She said, "Why didn't EC sack Amit Shah and take action?"

She also claimed that the PM Narendra Modi had been given time to finish his rallies as the EC has barred election campaigning in West Bengal after 10 pm tomorrow. She said, “Tomorrow Modi has a rally in Bengal and after that campaigns will stop. Is this a democratic decision? All RSS people are controlling Election Commission.”

She termed EC's decision as "unfair, unethical and politically biased," and said that PM Modi had been given time to finish his two rallies tomorrow. Lambasting the poll panel, the TMC chief said, "Why don't you send show cause notice to Modi, Shah? Are you working for them? We respect you (EC), you should respect other leaders too."

10:00 pm: I'm pained at the vandalising of Vidyasagar statue, says WB Governor

West Bengal governor KN Tripathi today condemned the desecration of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue in yesterday's violence during Amit Shah's rally in Kolkata. He said, "As chancellor of Calcutta University, I'm pained at the vandalising of Vidyasagar statue. The real culprit for breaking the statue must be traced out&suitably punished. Efforts should also be made by Calcutta University at the earliest to install a new statue."

9:14 pm: West Bengal governor's scathing report against TMC govt

After the Election Commission took action on Mamata Banerjee government over violence in Kolkata on Tuesday and shunted officials of the government, the West Bengal governor has also submitted a scathing report against the TMC government in connection with alleged poll violence in the state. “No free and fair polls in West Bengal,” state governor Keshari Nath Tripathi has purportedly said in his report to the Ministry of Home Affairs.

Meanwhile, a day after clashes broke out between TMC and BJP supporters during BJP chief Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata, fresh poll violence was reported from the state on Wednesday. RSS office was allegedly attacked in Kolkata today, with cops making a timely intervention to contain the situation. Police also had to resort to mild lathi-charge to disperse the crowd, Times Now reported.

8:40 pm: EC cuts short election campaigning in West Bengal

In an unprecedented move, the Election Commission on Wednesday announced that election campaigning in West Bengal will end tomorrow (Thursday), cutting it short by 24 hours. Noting the violence that erupted during the roadshow of BJP chief Amit Shah in Kolkata, the poll panel invoked its plenary powers under Article 324 to curtail campaigning in the state before the last phase of polling on May 19.

In its press release, the Election Commission stated that it is the first time that it had to invoke Article 324 in this manner in order to cut short election campaign in a state. The EC has barred political parties from campaigning for the seventh phase of Lok Sabha elections after 10 pm on Thursday (May 16).

The nine constituencies in the state which go to polls on May 19 are: Dum Dum, Barasat, Basirhat, Jaynagar, Mathurapur, Jadavpur, Diamond Harbour, South and North Kolkata. The Election Commission also condemned the desecration of the statue of Bengali reformer Ishwar Chandra VIdyasagar during the violence on Tuesday. "The Commission is deeply anguished at the vandalism done to the statue of Vidyasagar. It is hoped that the vandals are traced by the state administration," the poll panel said.

Election Commission: This is probably the first time that ECI has invoked Article 324 in this manner but it may not be last in cases of repetition of lawlessness and violence which vitiate the conduct of polls in a peaceful manner. pic.twitter.com/j8oG4cwP6V — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

Meanwhile, the Ministry of Home Affairs has summoned ADG Intel Rajiv Kumar, who has been relieved from his duty, in connection with the Kolkata violence, and has asked him to appear before it by 10 am on Thursday, Times Now reported. The principal secretary (home) in the West Bengal ministry has also been relieved from duty with immediate affect for having interfered in process of conducting polls by directing WB CEO."

7:44 pm: Mamata's nephew will be defeated in LS polls, says PM

Prime Minister Narendra Modi continued his attack on TMC chief Mamata Banerjee in West Bengal, saying that Banerjee’s nephew Abhishek Banerjee, who is contesting from Diamond Harbour Lok Sabha constituency, will be “defeated.” Addressing a rally in Diamond Harbour, Modi alleged that there was a lot of pressure on bureaucracy and police in the state.

“There is a lot of pressure on bureaucracy and police here, an example of this is the suicide of a former IPS. I'm making a serious allegation, the person who spent his whole life protecting the common man of W Bengal was forced to end his life,” PM Modi said.

7:15 pm: Kamal Haasan files for anticipatory bail

Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM) chief Kamal Haasan on Wednesday filed for anticipatory bail plea before Madurai bench of Madras High Court, in connection with a case filed against him for allegedly making "anti-Hindu remarks." Earlier, the court had said that the vacation bench cannot take up the plea seeking to quash the FIR registered against him. It had asked his counsel to file an anticipatory bail plea, if needed. A case has been lodged against Kamal for "anti-Hindu remarks" under sections 153A and 295A of the Indian Penal Code.

7:08 pm: Priyanka Gandhi holds roadshow in Varanasi

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra held a roadshow in Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh on Wednesday. Varanasi is the parliamentary constituency of PM Narendra Modi. Congress' Ajay Rai is fighting the Lok Sabha elections from this seat.

7:00 pm: Rahul Gandhi's latest jibe at PM Modi - "Modilie"

Congress President Rahul Gandhi on Wednesday mocked PM Modi, claiming that a new word had been added in the dictionary called "Modilie". He attached a screenshot in which "Modilie" was defined as a noun which meant to "constantly modify the truth" or "to lie incessantly and habitually." The veracity of the screenshot could not be ascertained.

There’s a new word in the English Dictionary. Attached is a snapshot of the entry :) pic.twitter.com/xdBdEUL48r — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) May 15, 2019

6:40 pm: Mamata Banerjee leads mega march in Kolkata

TMC chief Mamata Banerjee led the mega march in North Kolkata on Wednesday, a day after clashes broke out between TMC and BJP supporters during BJP chief Amit Shah’s rally in Kolkata. During her march, the Trinamool Congress chief is expected to pay floral tributes to Swami Vivekananda at his residence.

Mamata Banerjee’s rally also showcases the busts of three Bengali icons – Swami Vivekananda, Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose and Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar. Notably, it was Vidyasagar’s bust that was desecrated during the scuffle that took place during Shah’s roadshow.

The march turned out to be a massive show of strength for the TMC as a large crowd of people walked along with the West Bengal CM, raising slogans and banners in favour of the TMC chief. Banerjee's march began from Beliaghata and will end at Shyambazar, news agency ANI reported.

5:54 pm: 'Bengal will help BJP win over 300 seats,' says PM Modi in West Bengal

A day after violence disrupted BJP chief Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata, Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched a blistering attack on Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee, claiming that the ruling party in West Bengal was “anti-democracy.” Alleging that the Bengali culture was under threat in the state, PM Modi claimed that “Mamata Banerjee was rattled by the BJP.”

PM Modi condemned the violence that took place yesterday when TMC and BJP supporters clashed during the Shah’s roadshow at Calcutta University, during which several people were injured and the bust of noted Bengali reformer Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar was also vandalised.

Addressing a rally in West Bengal's Basirhat, PM Modi said, "Mamata didi had declared publicly two days ago that she will take revenge. She fulfilled her agenda within 24 hours, BJP President Amit Shah's roadshow was attacked."

Exuding confidence in BJP's victory, PM Modi predicted that BJP would win "more than 300 seats" with the help of Bengal. He said, "All the surveys are giving BJP a full majority on its own, but Didi after seeing your frustration and the support from the people of Bengal, I'm saying that Bengal will help us win more than 300 seats."

PM Modi in Basirhat, West Bengal: Didi, aap khud artist ho, aapse agrah karunga, aap mera bhadde se bhadda chitra banaiye aur May 23 ke baad, meri PM shapth ke baad, meri jo tasveer aapne banayi hai woh mujhe bhent karen, mein aap par FIR nahi karunga https://t.co/DtwNiE5B3o — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

In his sharpest attack on the TMC chief, PM Modi also slammed the West Bengal chief minister for lodging a case against a BJP youth activist Priyanka Sharma for sharing a meme on her on social media. The Prime Minister threw a challenge at Banerjee, asking her to “make my meme and gift it to me.” He vowed that he would not file a complaint against her and will always cherish her gift.

5:40 pm: West Bengal govt misusing state machinery, says West Bengal govt

Home Minister Rajnath Singh attacked Mamata Banerjee-led government in West Bengal on Wednesday, a day after violence broke out during BJP chief Amit Shah's rally in Kolkata. In a series of tweets, Singh accused the West Bengal government of "misusing state machinery" to "stifle democratic rights of the people." He also expressed concern over the "increasing incidents of political violence" in the state. "It seems that the Law and Order situation is worsening further in the state with every passing phase in the ongoing General Elections," he tweeted.

5:28 pm: Kamal Haasan defends 'Hindu terror' jibe

Actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan on Wednesday defended his ‘Hindu terror’ remark, asserting that he had simply stated a “historical fact” and that his statement had been taken “out of context.” At a rally in Aravakurichi, Haasan had said that Nathuram Godse, “a Hindu”, was the “first terrorist of independent India.” The Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM) chief claimed that he had “not spoken in a discriminatory manner against any religion or community” and added that he had members in his family – his daughters and his sister – who follow Hindu religion.

While campaigning in Thiruparankundram, Kamal said, “I am deeply hurt at the insinuations cast at me. What I told is historical truth and it has been quoted out of context.”

5:15 pm: Yogi Adityanath supporter interrupts Congress' media briefing

The media briefing by Congress spokesperson Pawan Khera was interrupted by a man who shouted that calling Yogi Adityanath by his name "Ajay Bisht" was "against Indian culture." He also raised the slogans 'Bharat Mata ki Jai' and 'Vande Mataram' while waving the tricolour.

#WATCH Delhi: A man interrupts the media briefing by Congress Spokesperson Pawan Khera, shouts "Yogi Adityanath ko Ajay Singh Bisht kehna Bharatiya sanskriti ka apmaan hai, Vande Mataram, Bharat mata ki jai" pic.twitter.com/pRDNd7WKsc — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

4:58 pm: TMC blames BJP for Kolkata violence, submits "proof" to the EC

Escalating the attack against the Bharatiya Janata Party, the Trinamool Congress on Wednesday approached the Election Commission over the violence that took place during BJP chief Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata, during which BJP workers had clashed with students of Calcutta Unviersity protesting against Shah. While the BJP has blamed TMC of instigating the violence, the TMC has alleged that the BJP “had hired goons” for the roadshow and has pinned the blame on BJP for “starting the ruckus.”

TMC’s Derek O’Brien met RC to “submit proof” of BJP damaging Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar’s bust at Vidyasagar College during the roadshow violence. The Mamata Banerjee-led party has claimed that it had “video evidence” to prove BJP’s role in the violence.

4:40 pm: BJP chief Amit Shah blames TMC govt over Kolkata violence

A day after a scuffle broke out between TMC and BJP workers during Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata, the BJP chief Amit Shah held a press conference and blamed TMC government over violence in the state. Shortly afterwards, TMC leader Derek O'Brien held another press conference and blamed the BJP for bringing 'outsiders' to create ruckus during Shah's roadshow.

Earlier, UP CM Yogi Adityanath's rally in the state was cancelled after the stage set-up for the rally was vandalised. Meanwhile, in yet another significant development, BJP youth wing convenor Priyanka Sharma was released from Alipore Correctional Home. Prior to her release, the Supreme Court warned Mamata Banerjee for not releasing Sharma who was detained for creating a meme of West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee. Sharma said that she will not apologise for the meme.

4.00 pm: BJP-TMC created chaos is hitting at the heart of Bengal and its core- Yechury

BJP-TMC created chaos is hitting at the heart of Bengal and its core. They cannot be allowed to get away with this. They will not, says CPI(M) leader Sitaram Yechury.

3.10 pm: Timing of the puja won't be changed if you want to change the timing, change the timing of Muharram procession- Adityanath

UP CM Yogi Adityanath in Barasat, West Bengal: In the whole country, Durga puja & Muharram fell on the same day, in UP officers asked me, should we change the timing of puja? I said the timing of the puja won't be changed if you want to change the timing, change the timing of Muharram procession.

3.00 pm: I will leave politics if I am proved wrong: Tejinder Pal Singh Bagga, BJP

Tejinder Pal Singh Bagga, BJP: Nobody takes Derek O Brien seriously. I challenge him if he can prove that I was within 500 metres of the spot where violence broke out. I will leave politics if I am proved wrong or else he should leave politics if he fails to prove the charge.

Tejinder Pal Singh Bagga,BJP: Nobody takes Derek O Brien seriously. I challenge him if he can prove that I was within 500 metres of the spot where violence broke out. I will leave politics if I am proved wrong or else he should leave politics if he fails to prove the charge pic.twitter.com/rNcT5HjlDz — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

2.43 pm: TMC's Derek O'Brien shows photographs to prove BJP link

We have two more pictures to show, this is to do with the elections, we have nothing personally against the Central forces, we have two startling pictures to expose what we have been saying that the Central forces are in cahoots with the BJP in Bengal.

2.33 pm: What were the outsiders doing, asks Derek O'Brien

Derek O Brien, TMC: "Anybody can come and do a procession, but what were the outsiders.....Who is this fellow Tejinder Bagga? Who is he? He was arrested, is he not the same guy who slapped somebody in Delhi? You have taken in your outsider goons."

#WATCH Derek O Brien,TMC: Anybody can come and do a procession, but what were the outsiders.....Who is this fellow Tejinder Bagga? Who is he? He was arrested, is he not the same guy who slapped somebody in Delhi? You have taken in your outsider goons pic.twitter.com/0JDca4y6G1 — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

2.21 pm: The central forces are in cahoots with the BJP in Bengal, alleges Derek O'Brien

TMC's Derek O'Brien hit back at BJP saying that the central armed forces are in cahoots with the BJP to incite violence in West Bengal.

1.44 pm: Delhi High Court disposes of a petition against Makkal Needhi Maiyam party president and actor Kamal Haasan

Delhi High Court disposes of a petition against Makkal Needhi Maiyam party president and actor Kamal Haasan. HC said that the petitioner Ashwini Upadhyay may approach the appropriate forum as the incident took place in Tamil Nadu.

1.40 pm: TMC's student wing protests against the vandalisation of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue

Kolkata: TMC's student wing protests against the vandalisation of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue during clashes in BJP Chief Amit Shah's roadshow in the city, yesterday.

Kolkata: TMC's student wing protests against the vandalisation of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue during clashes in BJP Chief Amit Shah's roadshow in the city, yesterday. pic.twitter.com/Xhup7Zf19a — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

12.49 pm: Yogi Adityanath's rally in WB cancelled

Rahul Sinha, BJP, on Yogi Adityanath's rally in Kolkata cancelled: When the stage was being set up yesterday, labourers working on it were beaten up and scared away; the stage was vandalised. The public meeting was scheduled for 2 pm today, the stage couldn't be repaired. So we had to cancel it

12.44 pm: Yechury demands an investigation into vandalisation of statue of Vidyasagar

CPI (Marxist) holds protest against a statue of Vidyasagar vandalised in violence during BJP President Amit Shah's roadshow yesterday. CPI (M) General Secretary Sitaram Yechury says, "an investigation should be done to find out how could this happen in Kolkata".

12.14 pm: Won't apologise - Priyanka Sharma

BJP Youth Wing Convenor Priyanka Sharma who was arrested for sharing a meme on West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee: My bail was granted yesterday, but still I wasn't released for another 18 hours. They didn't allow me to meet my advocate & family. They made me sign an apology

12.04 pm: BJP Youth Wing Convenor Priyanka Sharma released from Alipore Correctional Home

Kolkata: BJP Youth Wing Convenor Priyanka Sharma at BJP office after being released from Alipore Correctional Home. She was arrested for sharing a meme on West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee

12.03 pm: Workers protest against violence in BJP President Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) holds protest against violence in BJP President Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata, West Bengal yesterday. Union Ministers Harsh Vardhan, Jitendra Singh and Vijay Goel also present

11.43 am: Delhi Police file Action Taken Report in a case pertaining to Rahul Gandhi's derogatory statement against PM

Delhi Police today filed 'Action Taken Report' in Rouse Avenue Court, on a criminal complaint seeking direction to police for registration of FIR u/s 124A (Sedition charges) against Rahul Gandhi for allegedly making a derogatory statement against the PM.

11.39 am: PM Narendra Modi addresses a rally in Paliganj, Bihar

PM Narendra Modi in Paliganj, Bihar: Be it Congress' 'naamdaar' family or the corrupt family in Bihar, their assets are in thousands & crores now. From where the money came? If they had little care of the nation & the poor, they would have hesitated from doing corruption

11.34 am: I am lucky to have survived- Shah

BJP president Amit Shah said that if it weren't for the CRPF protection, it was difficult for him to survive during his roadshow on Tuesday.

11.28 am: BJP will form a majority government under Prime Minister Narendra Modi with over 300 seats - Shah

BJP will form a majority government under Prime Minister Narendra Modi with over 300 seats, says BJP chief Amit Shah during a press conference at BJP HQ. Shah said that the BJP will win 23 seats in the 42-seater state.

11.25 am: Violence didn't take place in 6 phases of elections anywhere but Bengal- Amit Shah

Mamata Banerjee claims that BJP is doing it, I want to tell her, we are fighting in every state in the nation, unlike you on 42 seats in West Bengal. Violence didn't take place in 6 phases of elections anywhere but Bengal which proves that TMC is responsible for it - Amit Shah.

11.16 am: BJP chief Amit Shah addresses press conference over WB violence

BJP is fighting elections across the country. TMC is contesting only on 42 seats. If BJP was inciting violence, there would have been violence across the country. But it is not so. The fact that West Bengal is experiencing violence proves that it is incited by the TMC, says BJP chief Amit Shah.

11.09 am: It's condemnable and an effort to polarise people - Sitaram Yechury

CPI (M) leaders Sitaram Yechury, Prakash Karat and others reach Calcutta University for protest. CPI (M) leader Sitaram Yechury slams Bengal attack. "It's condemnable and an effort to polarise the people," says Yechury.

11.08 am: Supreme Court censures West Bengal govt over delay in the release of Priyanka Sharma

Supreme Court censures West Bengal govt over delay in the release of BJP Youth Wing Convenor Priyanka Sharma who was arrested for sharing a meme of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee.

10.55 am: This has been taken absolutely out of context- MNM

Kamal Haasan's Makkal Needhi Maiam on India's first terrorist a 'Hindu' remark: He was calling for religious tolerance & co-existence amongst all religious groups & condemned extremism in whichever form & religion... This has been taken absolutely out of context and the speech has been painted as anti -Hindu with a malafide intent. This has created complete confusion and utmost anxiety amongst many common citizens who are not privy to this larger conspiracy.

10:45 am: SC warns Mamata government

In a big setback to the Mamata Banerjee government, the Supreme Court on Wednesday termed the arrest of BJP youth wing worker Priyanka Sharma as "arbitrary" over sharing of a morphed picture of the West Bengal chief minister, Times Now channel reported. The top court, which yesterday granted bail to Priyanka while asking her to tender a written apology to Mamata Banerjee, warned of contempt proceedings if the state government failed to free the Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM) leader. The state government, meanwhile, is reported to have told the court that the BJYM leader was released from the jail at 9.40 am.

10.21 am: EC meeting on WB violence shortly

Election Commission to hold a meeting with West Bengal observers on poll violence in the state at 11.30 am today via video conferencing.

10.11 am: PM's legacy a black stain on BJP and country's communalism - Mayawati

PM Narendra Modi was indeed the CM of Gujarat for a longer time than I was the CM of Uttar Pradesh. But his legacy is a black stain on BJP & country's communalism... While in our government, Uttar Pradesh was free of riots and anarchy

10.09 am: BJP protest at Jantar Mantar at 10.30 am

A national protest against the cowardly attack on BJP National President's roadshow in Kolkata, would be held at 10:30 am on Wednesday, 15th May at Jantar Mantar, New Delhi- tweets BJP.

10.05 am: PM doesn't hesitate from calling BSP, 'Behenji ki Sampatti Party- Mayawati

PM doesn't hesitate from calling BSP, 'Behenji ki Sampatti Party.' Whatever the national president of BSP has, it has been given by well-wishers & the society, and nothing is hidden from the government.

9.15 am: PM Narendra Modi to hold an election rally in Diamond Harbour in West Bengal

PM Narendra Modi to hold an election rally in Diamond Harbour in West Bengal. The rally assumes importance on the backdrop of ongoing violence in the state ahead of the crucial last phase of Lok Sabha election on May 19.

9.02 am: Maharashtra CM says Mamata Banerjee is scared

Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis on clashes in Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata, West Bengal: "Mamata Ji has become so scared of her defeat, that she is killing democracy & doesn't even want to let anyone campaign. I appeal the Election Commission to ensure free & fair polls."

8.30 am: Rae Bareli Congress MLA Aditi Singh's vehicle attacked

Rae Bareli Congress MLA Aditi Singh's vehicle was attacked on her way to Rae Bareli where she was headed for a floor test against District Panchayat Chief Awadhesh Singh; says, "Attack was done on Awadesh Singh's direction near Dinesh Singh's college."
