Congress, CPM condemn vandalisation of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar’s statue

Statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar vandalised at Kolkata’s Vidyasagar College in clashes that broke out at BJP President Amit Shah’s roadshow..

High-level inquiry ordered, more than 100 arrested; CM Mamata Banerjee has said a new statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar will soon replace the one allegedly vandalised by BJP supporters at Vidyasagar College

The vandalised statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar at Vidyasagar College. (Photo: Twitter/@derekobrienmp)

Agencies AMN / NEW DELHI

Congress Party has strongly condemned the destruction of statue of Icon of Bengal Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar. “We condemn the destruction of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar’s statue. This insult to the people of Bengal by BJP will never be forgiven

Greed for power will see the BJP dismantle every icon of Bengal, their legacy and the culture that they helped build” said senior party leader Ahmad Patel.

We condemn the destruction of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar’s statue This insult to the people of Bengal by BJP will never be forgiven Greed for power will see the BJP dismantle every icon of Bengal, their legacy and the culture that they helped build. — Ahmed Patel (@ahmedpatel) May 15, 2019

“Vidyasagar was conferred the title of the ocean of knowledge. A leading figure in the Bengal renaissance, he stood for progress, pathbreaking reform and enlightenment. It is very clear why the Sangh parivar would seek destruction of his ideas” says CPM chief Sitaram Yechury, adding that BJP-RSS think nothing of when they vandalise the historic Vidyasagar College, break Vidyasagar statue. This is their advocacy of India’s civilisational heritage? Attacking knowledge is central to getting their poisonous project going. Bengal will reject the destruction they offer

BJP-RSS think nothing of when they vandalise the historic Vidyasagar College, break Vidyasagar statue. This is their advocacy of India’s civilisational heritage? Attacking knowledge is central to getting their poisonous project going. Bengal will reject the destruction they offer — Sitaram Yechury (@SitaramYechury) May 14, 2019

The statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, a renowned philosopher and a key figure of the Bengali Renaissance, at Vidyasagar College in Kolkata was destroyed during the violent clashes that broke out during BJP chief Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata on Tuesday evening.

During the chaos, Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) members supposedly entered the college premises and vandalised property, reports said.

High drama was witnessed in the West Bengal capital after massive clashes broke out between BJP workers and students of Calcutta University, who were protesting against the BJP chief’s roadshow in Kolkata. The students had shown black flags at Shah’s convoy and had raised “Amit Shah go back” slogan.

Vidyasagar College principal Gautam Kundu told a private news channel that the college authorities would lodge a complaint with the police against the “BJP attackers” and termed the entire incident as “condemnable.”

Meanwhile, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who visited Calcutta University and Vidyasagar College after the clashes, stated that Vidyasagar had been “disrespected.”

A livid Banerjee warned that she would not spare “anyone who broke Vidyasagar’s statue and damaged college property.” She said, “Today, during the roadshow of Amit Shah, a section of BJP goons set Vidyasagar College on fire. They damaged the statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar. It’s a shameful incident, which never before happened in West Bengal.”

Threatening BJP of retaliatory measures, Banerjee said, “I can reach you in Delhi also. I will not spare anyone who broke Vidyasagar’s statue and damaged college property.”

TMC leader Derek O’Brien also condemned the vandalisation of Vidyasagar’s statue and said claimed that BJP had brought “desperate goons” to break Vidyasagar’s bust. He said, “Violent mob of BJP ‘outsiders’ in presence of Pukeworthy Shah. How little you know about Bengal, its rich history, its culture. Bengal will never forgive for what you did today. (sic).”

The TMC chief has also announced a protest rally on Thursday over the vandalisation of the statue.

MEANWHILE West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee and Trinamool Congress MP Derek O’Brien changed their Twitter and Facebook display photos to Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar’s image, hours after a statue of the Bengali philosopher and reformist was vandalised during clashes between workers of the ruling party and the BJP on Tuesday.

Trinamool’s official profile on Twitter and Facebook also changed their display picture to Vidyasagar’s image.
