Lok Sabha elections 2019 highlights - ‘Remove all tweets related to LS elections exit polls’: EC to Twitter India

‘Remove all tweets related to LS elections exit polls’: EC to Twitter India

Election Commission of India has ordered Twitter India to remove all the tweets related to 2019 Lok Sabha elections exit polls. :ANI

EC delayed Bengal’s campaign ban for PM rallies, says Congress

“If situation in Bengal is so severe that campaigning must be stopped, why is EC waiting until tomorrow? Is it because PM has scheduled rallies tomorrow? Isn’t it unprecedented that EC claims it’s an unprecedented situation in West Bengal but yet is waiting for PM to complete his public meetings?” tweeted Ahmed Patel.

‘Why does EC not send show cause notice to PM Modi?’: Mamata Banerjee

“Amit Shah has spent 15 lakh to 20 lakh for his rallies. Why has a show cause notice not been sent to Narendra Modi? We respect you, but you need to respect people too,” Mamata Banerjee told the Election Commission.

‘The man who slapped Kejriwal was sent from UP’: Mamata Banerjee

“The man who slapped Arvind Kejriwal was sent from Uttar Pradesh, he was not a common man,” said Mamata Banerjee.

‘EC is working under BJP’: Mamata Banerjee

“The Election Commission is biased. Prime Minister Narendra Modi listed how many phases he wanted the elections to be conducted in, and the Election Commission announced the phases accordingly,” said Mamata Banerjee.

West Bengal CM, Mamata Banerjee: Election Commission's decision is unfair, unethical and politically biased. PM Modi given time to finish his two rallies tomorrow. pic.twitter.com/nsU9l5TJ7u — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

‘Goons created violence wearing saffron’: Mamata Banerjee

“Goons were brought from outside, they created violence wearing saffron, violence similar to when Babri Masjid was demolished,” said West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee in Kolkata. :ANI

Poll panel removes two top Bengal officers

The poll panel has also removed two top Bengal officers the principal home secretary Atri Bhattacharya and additional director general Rajiv Kumar.

‘Fear psychosis prevalent in West Bengal’: Deputy Election Commissioner

“During the review…it clearly came out that while logistics arrangements, including training of polling officials, etc are mostly on track…there is distinct resistance and non-cooperation from the district administration and district police when it comes to providing level playing field to all candidates for campaigning and in providing a fearless threat free environment to the voters. The Observers pointed out that while on the surface everything looks fine, in their interaction with the public, the fear psychosis that is widely prevalent comes out…” Deputy Election Commissioner, in charge of West Bengal, submitted to the Election Commission.

Bengal campaigning to end tomorrow, a day early, for 7th round of voting after violence at Amit Shah roadshow

“No election campaigning to be held in 9 parliamentary constituencies of West Bengal - Dum Dum, Barasat, Basirhat, Jaynagar, Mathurapur, Jadavpur, Diamond Harbour, South and North Kolkata from 10 pm tomorrow till the conclusion of polls,” said the Election Commission. :ANI

‘Protection of RS members is responsibility of house, Chairman’: Prakash Javadekar

“Protection of Rajya Sabha members is responsibility of house and Chairman.We’ve submitted a memorandum to VP on it & demanded that a report be sought & appropriate action be taken,” said Prakash Javadekar after meeting Vice President over violence in Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata yesterday. :ANI

Prakash Javadekar met the Vice President over violence in Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata yesterday. ( ANI )

Priyanka Gandhi holds roadshow in Varanasi

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, Congress General Secretary for Uttar Pradesh (East) held a roadshow in Varanasi. Congress Varanasi LS candidate Ajay Rai and Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel were also present at the roadshow.:ANI

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, Congress General Secretary for Uttar Pradesh (East) holds a roadshow in Varanasi. Congress Varanasi LS candidate Ajay Rai and Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel also present. pic.twitter.com/WL6905yzub — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 15, 2019

‘A lot of pressure on bureaucracy and police in West Bengal’: PM Modi

“There is a lot of pressure on bureaucracy and police here, an example of this is the suicide of a former IPS. I’m making a serious allegation, the person who spent his whole life protecting the common man of West Bengal was forced to end his life,” said prime minister Narendra Modi. :ANI

‘Only illegal immigrants, goons fearless in West Bengal’: PM Modi

“Only the illegal immigrants, Mamata Banerjee’s syndicate, those who loot the poor and the goons are fearless here,” said PM Modi at Diamond Harbour.

‘Difficult to say ‘Jai Ma Kaali, Jai Ma Durga’: PM Modi

“Such is the condition that it is difficult to say ‘Jai Ma Kaali and Jai Ma Durga’,” said prime minister Narendra Modi.

PM Modi addresses rally in Diamond Harbour, West Bengal

“Sitting in New Delhi, nobody can imagine the situation in West Bengal. Yesterday, an attempt was made to foil the BJP’s roadshow, but the people of Bengal foiled the efforts of the miscreants and I want to thank the people for it,” said prime minister Narendra Modi.

‘Mamata Banerjee scared of her own shadow’: PM Modi

“Mamata Banerjee scared of the election results and afraid of her own shadow,” said prime minister Narendra Modi.

‘Mamata Banerjee high on power’: PM Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday stepped up his party’s attacks on Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee at a rally in Bengal’s Basirhat, accusing Trinamool Congress of letting its goons loose because the party was scared of its defeat in the national elections.

Mamata Banerjee begins her roadshow to protest vandalism in Kolkata

Mamata Banerjee begins her roadshow to protest against the vandalism that took place in Kolkata. :ANI

#WATCH Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee holds a march from Beliaghata to Shyambazar. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/3p2GYk5VAl — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

Allies of Congress would put one in jail for saying ‘Jai Sri Ram’, says Smriti Irani

“You are lucky that when you chant ‘Jai Sri Ram’, at least you are not arrested. Today in India, there is a state where if a common citizen merely says ‘Jai Sri Ram’ allies of Congress put him in jail,” said BJP’s Smriti Irani while addressing a public meeting in Himachal Pradesh’s Palampur.

‘There should be central intervention in Bengal’: Yogi Adityanath

“There should be central intervention in Bengal,” said chief minister of Uttar Pradesh,Yogi Adityanath. :PTI

‘Mamata Banerjee has lost her senses, does not consider me prime minister’: PM Modi

“Mamata Banerjee has lost her senses, she does not consider the prime minister of India as a prime minister. She acknowledges the prime minister of Pakistan, but not India. What mental condition are you in?” prime miniter Narednra Modi.

‘Make the worst possible painting of me, I will accept it with grace and not file an FIR against you’: PM Modi tells Mamata Banerjee

“You are an artist too. Make the worst possible painting of me. Present the painting to me after I become the prime minister again. I will accept it with grace and not file an FIR against you,” the prime minister said, challenging Mamata Banerjee.

‘You insulted the daughters of the land of Goddess Durga and Saraswati’: PM Modi

“This is the land of Goddess Durga and Saraswati. You insulted daughters of this land. Why did you become so angry on seeing a picture? Are you not an artist yourself?”, asked prime minister Narendra Modi at his Bengal rally.

‘Mamata Banerjee cursed girls students for asking questions, recently put Bengal’s daughter in jail too’: PM Modi

“Three to four years ago, when a few girl students of a Bengal college asked her questions, she threw the microphone, cursed the grls, and ran away from the television interview. Recently also, she became angry and put a daughter of Bengal into the jail,” said prime minister Narendra Modi.

‘You are trying to throttle the democracy that brought you to power’: PM Modi to Mamata Banerjee

“You are strangulating the democracy that brought you to power,” said prime minister Narendra Modi, targeting Mamata Banerjee in West Bengal.

‘Mamata Banerjee fulfilled her agenda within 24 hours, Amit Shah’s roadshow was attacked’: PM Modi

“Mamata didi had declared publicly two days ago that she will take revenge. She fulfilled her agenda within 24 hours, BJP President Amit Shah’s roadshow was attacked,” said Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Basirhat, West Bengal :ANI

Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Basirhat, West Bengal: Mamata didi had declared publicly two days ago that she will take revenge. She fulfilled her agenda within 24 hours, BJP President Amit Shah's roadshow was attacked. pic.twitter.com/JZZzu55Sch — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

Narendra Modi addresses public meeting in West Bengal’s Basirhat

Prime minister Narendra Modi addressed a public meeting in West Bengal’s Basirhat, Hasnabad.

PM Modi scared of debating with me because he will lose face: Rahul Gandhi

Congress President Rahul Gandhi on Wednesday said that the 2016 demonetisation decision of the Modi government had destroyed the economy and asserted that Congress’s election promise of NYAY scheme will revive it, reports news agency ANI.

“Manmohan Singh had said in parliament that India’s GDP will suffer by 2 per cent due to demonetisation and the same thing was proven true after a year. NYAY will not only benefit five crore families and 25 crore people but would also help the economy by boosting the business of small and medium traders”, he said addressing an election meeting here.

Rahul Gandhi promises strict action against those involved in incidents of sacrilege of religious scriptures in 2015 in Punjab

Rahul Gandhi promises strict action against those involved in incidents of sacrilege of religious scriptures in 2015 in Punjab.

PM Modi used to make fun of Manmohan Singh but after 5 years country is making fun of PM on unkept promises: Rahul Gandhi

PM Modi used to make fun of Manmohan Singh but after 5 years country is making fun of PM on unkept promises: Rahul Gandhi

Narendra Modi thinks only one person can run country, but actually it is people who run it: Rahul Gandhi

Narendra Modi thinks only one person can run country, but actually it is people who run it: Rahul Gandhi at poll rally in Punjab’s Faridkot

TMC shows video, WhatsApp message asking people to come to Amit Shah’s roadshow with rods and arms to fight TMC and police

TMC shows video, WhatsApp message asking people to come to Amit Shah’s roadshow with rods and arms to fight the TMC and police, reports PTI.

Central forces in Bengal have started a whisper campaign asking people to vote for BJP: TMC

Central forces in Bengal have started a whisper campaign asking people to vote for BJP, alleges Derek O’Brien.

Trying to obtain, authenticate audio of slogans like ‘Vidyasagar finished, where is the Josh’ raised during the violence: TMC

Trying to obtain, authenticate audio of slogans like ‘Vidyasagar finished, where is the Josh’ raised during the violence: Derek O’Brien.

We have nothing personally against the Central forces: TMC

Derek O’Brien, TMC: We have two more pictures to show, this is to do with the elections, we have nothing personally against the Central forces, we have two startling pictures to expose what we have been saying that the Central forces are in cahoots with the BJP in Bengal.

Derek O'Brien, TMC: We have two more pictures to show, this is to do with the elections, we have nothing personally against the Central forces, we have two startling pictures to expose what we have been saying that the Central forces are in cahoots with the BJP in Bengal. pic.twitter.com/6DoTspfSJQ — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

Streets of Kolkata tinged with shock, anger. What happened yesterday hurt Bengali pride: Derek O’Brien

‘Streets of Kolkata tinged with shock, anger. What happened yesterday hurt Bengali pride’: Derek O’Brien.

Anybody can come and do a procession, but what were the outsiders doing: TMC

Anybody can come and do a procession, but what were the outsiders.....Who is this fellow Tejinder Bagga? Who is he? He was arrested, is he not the same guy who slapped somebody in Delhi? You have taken in your outsider goons.

#WATCH Derek O Brien,TMC: Anybody can come and do a procession, but what were the outsiders.....Who is this fellow Tejinder Bagga? Who is he? He was arrested, is he not the same guy who slapped somebody in Delhi? You have taken in your outsider goons pic.twitter.com/0JDca4y6G1 — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

We will take videos we have to the Election Commission: TMC

We will take videos we have to the Election Commission. We are authenticating them on record, says TMC’s Derek O’Brien.

TMC leader Derek O’Brien releases video to claim BJP damaged statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar

TMC leader Derek O’Brien releases video to claim BJP damaged statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar.

What happened yesterday hurt the very ethos of Bengal: Derek O’ Brien

Today is the saddest press conference we have held... saddest for all of us to see the streets of Kolkata... there is anger and there is shock. The president of the BJP does what he does with his goons, who he hired from outside Bengal. What happened yesterday hurt the very ethos of Bengal, says Derek O’ Brien.

Vandalism in Bengal done by hired goons: TMC

Vandalism in Bengal done by hired goons: TMC

‘Amit Shah is a liar’, says TMC Rajya Sabha MP Derek O’ Brien

‘Video not only clearly establishes what the BJP did, but proves party chief Amit Shah is a liar’, says TMC Rajya Sabha MP Derek O’ Brien.

Doing the saddest press conference ever: Derek O’ Brien

Doing the saddest press conference ever, says Derek O’ Brien.

BJP trying to justify the act: TMC

BJP trying to justify the act: TMC.

One batsman says hua toh hua on anti-Sikh riots, the other is abusing me again: PM Modi

One batsman says hua toh hua on anti-Sikh riots, the other is abusing me again: PM Modi in veiled dig at Sam Pitroda and Mani Shankar Aiyar, reports PTI.

Congress preparing to shift the blame from ‘naamdar’ for its defeat after polls: PM Modi

Congress preparing to shift the blame from ‘naamdar’ for its defeat after polls: PM Modi in Jharkhand.

Congress can’t say they lost elections because of ‘naamdar’, it would be against rules of dynasty: PM Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Deoghar, Jharkhand: Congress can’t say they lost elections because of ‘naamdar’, it would be against the rules of dynasty. That is why after the 5th phase, 2 of the closest ‘darbaari’ of the ‘naamdar’ family started batting on their own.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Deoghar, Jharkhand: Congress can't say they lost elections because of 'naamdar', it would be against the rules of dynasty. That is why after the 5th phase, 2 of the closest 'darbaari' of the 'naamdar' family started batting on their own. pic.twitter.com/Q3GxaLx0dt — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

TMC’s student wing protests against the vandalisation of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar’s statue

Kolkata: TMC’s student wing protests against the vandalisation of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar’s statue during clashes in BJP Chief Amit Shah’s roadshow in the city, yesterday.

Kolkata: TMC's student wing protests against the vandalisation of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue during clashes in BJP Chief Amit Shah's roadshow in the city, yesterday. pic.twitter.com/Xhup7Zf19a — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

CPI (M) holds protest against statue of Vidyasagar vandalised in violence during BJP President Amit Shah’s roadshow yesterday

Kolkata: CPI (Marxist) holds protest against statue of Vidyasagar vandalised in violence during BJP president Amit Shah’s roadshow yesterday. CPI (M) General Secretary Sitaram Yechury says,”an investigation should be done to find out how could this happen in Kolkata”.

BJP holds protest against violence in BJP President Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata

Delhi: Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) holds protest against violence in BJP President Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata, West Bengal yesterday. Union Ministers Harsh Vardhan, Jitendra Singh and Vijay Goel also present.

Delhi: Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) holds protest against violence in BJP President Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata, West Bengal yesterday. Union Ministers Harsh Vardhan, Jitendra Singh and Vijay Goel also present pic.twitter.com/pIK872wgYF — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

‘This is my last public meeting today’: PM Modi

PM Modi in Paliganj, Bihar: This is my last public meeting today; last opportunity to seek blessings for 2019 Elections.

PM Modi in Paliganj, Bihar: This is my last public meeting today; last opportunity to seek blessings for 2019 Elections. Lekin iske baad Pradhan Mantri pad ko seva ke bhav se svikaar karte hue, main fir ek baar vikas ki ganga lekar ke aapke beech aaunga. pic.twitter.com/74CJk4i7eZ — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

‘Mahamilavatis say national security is not an issue. How can it be so when so many lives are lost in terrorism’: PM Modi

The Mahamilavatis say national security is not an issue. How can it be so when so many lives are lost in terrorism, asks PM Modi.

‘Cheap internet connection, smart phones have transformed the lives of poor’: PM Modi

Cheap internet connection and smart phones have transformed the lives of the poor, says PM Modi.

‘If Congress had little care of nation, they would have hesitated from doing corruption’: PM Modi

PM Narendra Modi in Paliganj, Bihar: Be it Congress’ ‘naamdaar’ family or the corrupt family in Bihar, their assets are in thousands of crores now. From where the money came? If they had little care of the nation and the poor, they would have hesitated from doing corruption.

PM Narendra Modi in Paliganj, Bihar: Be it Congress' 'naamdaar' family or the corrupt family in Bihar, their assets are in thousands of crores now. From where the money came? If they had little care of the nation & the poor, they would have hesitated from doing corruption pic.twitter.com/aXSQ41LxfP — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

‘Mahamilavatis have only two issues tarnish the image of Modi and dislodge him from power’: PM Modi

The Mahamilavatis have only two issues tarnish the image of Modi and dislodge him from power: PM Modi at a rally in Bihar.

‘TMC workers damaged Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar’s bust to gain sympathy’: Amit Shah

TMC workers damaged Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar’s bust to gain sympathy. Election Commission mute spectator in West Bengal, history sheeters not arrested before polls, says Amit Shah.

‘I am not God. Don’t think you are’: Amit Shah’s comeback to Mamata Banerjee

‘I am not God. Don’t think you are’: Amit Shah’s comeback to Mamata Banerjee.

‘Violence taking place in Bengal because of TMC’: Amit Shah

The polls are taking place in every state of India, they why violence always and only takes place in Bengal? Because TMC is there. Mamata didi acts so innocent as she asks why the violence, but its the TMC doing. They are saying the motorcycle that was set on fire was ours, if its BJPs’ why will we burn our own motorcycle?

‘Had CRPF not been there, it would have been difficult for me to escape’: Amit Shah

Had CRPF not been there, it would have been difficult for me to escape: Amit Shah.

‘TMC’s days in Bengal over’: Amit Shah

TMC workers damaged Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar’s bust to gain sympathy. This is their conspiracy. They are trying to get sympathy from the people. But people can see through it. TMC’s days in Bengal is over. Election Comission is a mute spectator in West Bengal.

‘BJP is not afraid of FIRs’: Amit Shah

I just got the news that didi has filed FIR against me, does she not know? BJP is not afraid of FIRs.

‘Violence didn’t take place in 6 phases of elections anywhere but in Bengal’: Amit Shah

Mamata Banerjee claims that BJP is doing it, I want to tell her, we are fighting in every state in the nation,unlike you on 42 seats in West Bengal. Violence didn’t take place in 6 phases of elections anywhere but Bengal which proves that TMC is responsible for it.

‘Trinamool is reason for Bengal violence, not BJP,’ says Amit Shah

‘Trinamool is the reason for Bengal violence not BJP,’ says Amit Shah at press conference in New Delhi.

“The Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar statue in Kolkata was damaged by Trinamool Congress supporters but they are trying to blame the BJP now,” he added.

EC to hold meeting with West Bengal observers on poll violence

Election Commission to hold a meeting with West Bengal observers on poll violence in the state at 11.30 am today via video conferencing.

Election Commission to hold a meeting with West Bengal observers on poll violence in the state at 11.30 am today via video conferencing pic.twitter.com/9AemO9TkG2 — ANI (@ANI) May 15, 2019

TMC alleged Amit Shah brought ‘outsiders’ for his roadshow

The Trinamool Congress alleged that BJP president Amit Shah brought “outsiders” for his roadshow in Kolkata who were responsible for the violence in the city on Tuesday.

Amit Shah’s convoy was attacked with stones by alleged TMC supporters from inside the hostel of Vidyasagar College

Parts of the city plunged into a welter of violence as Amit Shah’s convoy was attacked with stones by alleged TMC supporters from inside the hostel of Vidyasagar College, triggering a clash between supporters of the two parties, officials said.

TMC has sought meeting with Election Commission

Mamata Banerjee’s Trinamool Congress on Tuesday sought a meeting with the Election Commission a day after its party workers fought pitched battles on the streets of Kolkata with BJP supporters during a massive road show of party chief Amit Shah.

Also Read| ‘Murder of democracy’: BJP slams Mamata Banerjee over violence at Amit Shah roadshow

PM Modi to address rallies in Basirhat and Kolkata’s Diamond Harbour

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will address public rallies in Basirhat and Kolkata’s Diamond Harbour in West Bengal.

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra to hold roadshow in Varanasi

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra will hold a roadshow today in the constituency represented by Prime Minister Narendra Modi

Amit Shah’s address comes a day after violence took place at his roadshow in Kolkata

Amit Shah’s address to the media comes a day after violence took place at his roadshow in Kolkata.

Amit Shah will address media in the national capital today

BJP president Amit Shah will address the media in the national capital today.
