Kolkata Violence: EC curtails campaigning time in Bengal, removes two senior officials

Kolkata Violence: EC curtails campaigning time in Bengal, removes two senior officials

Tension was palpable since noon, hours before Shah's roadshow began, after posters with images of Modi and him were dismantled by the police, provoking several senior leaders to stage a flash sit-in.

Day after brazen vandalism took place on the streets of Kolkata during Amit Shah's rally where even Vidyasagar's statue was not spared, Election Commission has cracked the whip. In a press conference the EC has curtailed the campaigning time in West Bengal for one day. It has also shunted out two of senior police officers who are perceived to be close to West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee.

Election Commission said, "No election campaigning to be held in 9 parliamentary constituencies of West Bengal - Dum Dum, Barasat, Basirhat, Jaynagar, Mathurapur, Jadavpur, Diamond Harbour, South and North Kolkata from 10 pm tomorrow till the conclusion of polls". EC also said. "This is probably the first time that ECI has invoked Article 324 in this manner but it may not be last in cases of repetition of lawlessness and violence which vitiate the conduct of polls in a peaceful manner.

Who broke Vidyasagar's statue: Shah's pointed questions, Babul sharing viral post vs TMC's video 'proof'

ËC in its notice said, "ADG CID, Rajiv Kumar stands relieved and attached to MHA. He should report to MHA by 10 am tomorrow.Principal Secy,Home &Health Affairs WB govt Atri Bhattacharya stands relieved from his current charge immediately for having interfered in process of conducting polls by directing WB CEO".

Chief Secretary Malay Kumar De will be looking after the Home Department after Atri Bhattacharya's removal. Rajiv Kumar was former Kolkata top cop who made the headlines for sharing the stage with her during dharna.

EC has also asked for a compliance report of its order by 10 PM today.

BJP and TMC supporters Tuesday fought pitched battles on the streets of Kolkata during a massive roadshow by Amit Shah, who escaped unhurt but was forced to cut short the jamboree and had to be escorted to safety by police.

Parts of the city plunged into a welter of violence as his convoy was attacked with stones by alleged TMC supporters from inside the hostel of Vidyasagar College, triggering a clash between supporters of the two parties, officials said.

Furious BJP supporters retaliated and were seen exchanging blows with their TMC rivals outside the college entrance.

Several motorcycles parked outside were vandalised and set ablaze. Shards of broken glass littered the lobby of the college where a bust of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, a noted philosopher and a key figure of Bengal Renaissance, was smashed to smithreens. Police personnel were seen trying to douse the fire with buckets filled with water.

Contingents of Kolkata Police deployed for the roadshow swung into action and were seen chasing away the warring groups.

Here are the latest updates on the row:
