India to accept reality of Kashmir one day

Srinagar, May 14, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, the Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Gilani has expressed hope that sooner or later India will have to accept the ground reality of Kashmir and pave the way for final settlement of the dispute in accordance with the wishes and aspirations of the Kashmiri people.

Syed Ali Gilani in a statement issued in Srinagar, today, asked the people to remain cautious from the ill designs of pro-India local political parties. He said that the people of Kashmir had rendered innumerable sacrifices over the past seven decades for right to self-determination and not for perks and privileges.

The Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, in a statement in Srinagar denounced the arrest spree unleashed by Indian forces in different areas of south Kashmir even in the holy month of Ramadan.

Forceful protests by students against the rape of a three-year-old girl in Bandipora district rocked Kashmir University and colleges in Srinagar, Gandarbal, Badgam, Pulwama, Kupwara, Baramulla and even in Kargil. The protesting students were holding placards demanding justice for the victim girl. Clashes were reported from Amar Singh College and Bemina College in Srinagar.

Senior APHC leader and Anjuman Sharie Shian President, Agha Syed Hassan Al-Moosvi Al-Safvi in a statement said the victim girl is the daughter of Kashmir and people from across the society are on the same page against the heinous crime. He asked the people to frustrate the designs of certain elements with unity. These elements, he added, want to create communal divide amongst the people.

Meanwhile, complete shutdown was observed in south Kashmir’s Islamabad district against the levying of tax by India on Srinagar-Jammu highway. Call for the strike was given by the local transporters. Indian troops during house raids arrested five youth in Islamabad, Bandipora and Ramban districts.

Jamaat-e-Islami of occupied Kashmir in a statement appealed to the world community to use its influence to stop India’s suppressive policies in the territory.

Famous Indian author, writer and activist, Arundhati Roy, in an online media interview said Kashmir is like a pressure cooker in which anything can happen at any time. In response to a question about Pulwama attack, she said the attack was a false flag operation and Indian army chief knew about the incident in advance. She quoted a video clip wherein when the Indian army chief was asked about the attack, he said, ‘Let them do it…we will see it’. She said that attack was used as an election campaign. She went on to add that historically there had been many false flag attacks in Kashmir and she mentioned Chittisinghpura massacre as one of them. Arundhati Roy pointed out that many people including herself had been writing months before the attack that something would happen before the elections.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
