Lok Sabha elections 2019: Pak’s ‘hekdi’ has vanished, says Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said on Tuesday the arrogance of Pakistan and terrorists had vanished after the Balakot air strikes by the Indian army.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and chief minister Yogi Adityanath at a rally in Ballia on Tuesday.

“Their ‘hekdi’ (arrogance) has vanished. Terrorists, who used to demonstrate weapons in their Pakistan-based hide-out, now spend sleepless nights praying for removal of Modi. All the time they fear that ‘Sapoot of Bharat’ (sons of India) will come. Sometimes they look at the jungle, sometimes the sky, sometimes the sea. They remain restless and have lost their sleep...I have given a free hand to the bravehearts of the country. Hence, first the surgical strikes took place and then it was the air strikes. Today we have taken the war against terrorism across the border,” he asserted at a rally in Ballia.

Also read: Lok Sabha elections 2019: RSS has dumped Modi in ongoing polls, says BSP chief

Attacking the opposition, he said the SP, BSP and the Congress did not speak on national security.

“Instead, they question the bravery of our jawans,” he said while hitting back at the opposition parties for seeking his caste certificates.

“Though I was born in backward caste, I am working with a goal to make India most forward nation of the world. There is no caste discrimination in my mind. Caste of the people is not asked when the government gives benefits. I am not seeking votes in the name of caste. I live for the country and therefore seek vote for the country,” Modi said.

Modi said the ‘mahamilavatis’ were asking the caste of Modi. “I have been the CM of Gujarat for a longer period than both Bua and Babua combined served as CM. I have contested election and extended help to many. But I never used my caste for the support,” he said.

Modi said after six rounds of voting it had become clear that the opposition was losing and its leaders were angry.

“And this is why the competition to abuse Modi has picked up pace. They can’t win so they are venting their frustration by abusing (me),” the prime minister said.

Insisting that the opposition had failed, Modi said, “Those who failed to control street goons cannot be expected to rein in the terrorists.”

He claimed that the development has caught pace in eastern UP under his role. “My government has ensured that the 4G connectivity reaches to the poor.”

He threw opposition an “open challenge” to prove if he had amassed any asset or kept money in any foreign bank. “I am throwing an open challenge to the ‘mahamilawati’ people that instead of hurling abuses at me, they should accept my challenge and prove if I have acquired any benami property, built any farmhouse, bungalow or shopping complex, or deposited money in any foreign bank, purchased property abroad or bought vehicles worth lakhs and crores,” Modi said.

Also read: Lok Sabha elections 2019: Politicians dab poll scene with some comic relief

The prime minister said neither had he ever dreamt of being rich, nor had he committed the sin of looting money of the poor. “We accord top priority to the welfare of the poor, the honour and security of the motherland,” he said. He said the opponents looted the country in the name of power.

“These people built bungalows for their relatives and created Benami properties. Agencies are carrying out probe and they will be booked soon.”

Citing a recent clash between SP and BSP workers in Ghazipur, Modi said, “The workers of SP and BSP were hitting each other, hurling abuses, tearing each other’s clothes, and the entire country witnessed this. The elections are yet to be over, and they have started settling scores. People will give a befitting reply through votes to the abuses hurled at me by these ‘mahamilavati’ parties.”
