Citizens take to streets in Delhi, demand death penalty for men who stabbed businessman to death in Moti Nagar

A protester at India Gate on Wednesday (Photo Courtesy: @vikasjha228) | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: Scores of citizens took to the streets of the national capital today as part of a protest against the brutal murder of a businessman who was stabbed to death in the city's Moti Nagar area earlier this month by a group of four miscreants, allegedly after he objected to their misbehaviour with his daughter. The demonstrators demanded speedy justice for the victim and the death penalty for the accused.

Members of the victim's family met Home Minister Rajnath Singh today, who assured them that stringent action will be taken against the culprits. It is no secret that the brutal murder has sparked a political fight between the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) and other opposition parties, with BJP leader Vijay Goel questioning Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal's silence over the issue. However, news reports have asserted that the CM has asked Delhi Police to punish the accused as they deserve.

Massive protest at India Gate #JusticeForDhruvTyagi https://t.co/LFXWPHnn23 — Chowkidar Kapil Mishra (@KapilMishra_IND) May 15, 2019

Speaking to media outlets, the victim's daughter said that she was returning home from a hospital along with her father when a boy made lewd gestures at her. My father went back to speak to the boy's family which is when a fight broke out and four men stabbed him to death, said the girl. Other family members of the victim also broke their silence today, making it very clear that there was no communal angle to the victim's murder. It was our Muslim neighbours who rushed the victim and his son, who was also injured, to the hospital.

Acting on the inputs amassed by city police, four accused, including a rickshaw-puller and his three sons, have been arrested for the murder which took place in Basai Darapur village of Moti Nagar. "We have pleaded with so many people not to see the crime through a Hindu-Muslim prism. The killers were habitual criminals who did not see the religion of their victims before harassing them,” said the victim's brother.
