BJP workers hold countrywide protest against Kolkata violence, Mamata's 'anarchist' rule in WB

New Delhi [India], May 15 (ANI): Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) workers on Wednesday staged protests across various parts of the country against the violence that took place during party chief Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata on Tuesday.

Clashes broke out during Shah's mega road show in Kolkata after sticks were hurled at his convoy. Police had to resort to lathi charge to disperse the crowd. The protest left several injured, due to which Shah was asked to end the roadshow. Bengali polymath Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue was also vandalised during the clashes.

Condemning the same, Kolkata BJP women cell workers held a silent protest near Mahatma Gandhi's statue, holding placards and raising slogans against the TMC. "The attack on Amit Shah and Vidyasagar's statue was pre-planned. Mamata is doing vote bank politics here. Everything will come out once police get the CCTV footage of the incident. The public has understood Mamata's tactics, which will be seen in the results of Lok Sabha polls," one of the protestors told ANI.

In Bhopal, BJP cadres took out a peaceful march and observed silence at Roshanpura area. The protestors were carrying banners of Prime Minister Modi and Shah saying "save Bengal, save democracy".

Protestors in Mumbai's Nariman Point were seen with black gags on their mouth while others raised slogans against the Mamata Banerjee government and its "anarchist" rule.

At Jantar Mantar in the national capital, hundreds of BJP supporters and leaders gathered to raise their voice against "goonda tantra" and elimination of democracy in West Bengal.

"The people of India and the revolutionary people of Bengal are in anger. Mamata Banerjee has turned Bengal into the land of goons. The people of Bengal have decided that they will contribute to the winning of Modi. Mamata Banerjee will get the answer for creating violence in Bengal. The responsibility of the central government is to maintain the law and order in every part of the country," Union Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan said at Jantar Mantar.

He also appealed the Supreme Court to take action in the matter. 'The apex court should suspend the government in Bengal which is defaming the country. And it should take a recommendation from the President of India."

Since the Lok Sabha elections began on April 10, BJP and TMC have been at loggerheads in West Bengal. Workers of two parties have repeatedly clashed with each other on polling days.

Voting for nine seats in the state will be held in the seventh and final phase of the general elections on May 19. Counting of votes will take place on May 23. (ANI)
