Arun Jaitley evokes 'TINA' in slamming opposition

Pragya Thakur after making controversial Nathuram Godse remark I Photo credit: ANI | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: BJP Bhopal candidate and 2006 Malegaon blast accused Pragya Singh Thakur raised a storm on Thursday after calling the assassin of Mahatma Gandhi a 'patriot'. Her spokesperson said she apologised for the comment. BJP distanced itself from Thakur's comment.

Spokesperson GVL Narasimha Rao said the party strongly disagrees with her statement and will ask her to tender a public apology for the same. “BJP does not agree with this statement, we condemn it. Party will ask her for clarification, she should apologise publicly for this statement,” Rao said in a statement.

Thakur later said she trusts her party, the BJP, and will tow her party’s line as she is a worker. Earlier, BJP said she has apologised for her remarks. "Apne sangathan BJP mein nishtha rakhti hun, uski karyakarta hun aur party ki line meri line hai," she told ANI.

BJP's Pragya Thakur says, "Apne sangathan BJP mein nishtha rakhti hun, uski karyakarta hun aur party ki line meri line hai." Earlier in the day, she had said "Nathuram Godse was, is and will remain a 'deshbhakt'." BJP has condemned her statement & asked her to apologise publicly pic.twitter.com/0bPJSsgPaL — ANI (@ANI) May 16, 2019

Lok Sabha Election 2019 Updates:

11.17 pm: Eggs hurled in Kamal Haasan's public meeting

Two unidentified persons hurled eggs and stones at the dias during a public meeting of Kamal Haasan's Makkal Needhi Maiam on Thursday. Earlier, the police denied permission for the actor-turned-politician for campaigning for the Sulur by polls on Friday.

10.36 pm: Arun Jaitley takes on opposition in new blog post

Union Minister Arun Jaitley slammed the opposition for its attack on the Election Commission as an advance alibi for defeat. In a blog post shared on Facebook, Jaitley wrote that the new India will not make a suicidal choice by voting for “highly corrupt and temperamental mavericks”.

In the blog post titled, “The Frightening and Scary Scenario of India’s Opposition”, Jaitley evoked the oft-repeated ‘TINA’ or ‘There is No Alternative’ narrative used by the BJP stating ‘they have no agreement on either a leader or programme’.

10.00 pm: Amit Shah seeks votes for national security provided by PM Modi

Amit Shah on Thursday sought votes for BJP's Rampati Ram Tripathi for "not only the work done by the party but also the security provided under the leadership of PM Narendra Modi

9.30 pm: EC declares polling at Chandni Chowk booth no 32 as void

Election Commission of India declares polls held on 12th May at polling station no. 32 of Chandni Chowk Assembly Segment as void. Re-poll to be held on May 19.

8.51 pm: AP CM Chandrababu Naidu writes to EC over re-polling in 5 seats

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu writes to EC over its decision to order re-polling at 5 polling stations of Chandragiri AC & Chittoor PC. Letter states, "I'm writing this letter to strongly oppose the partial one sided and undemocratic motivated actions of the EC".

8.20 pm: EC seeks report from MP CEO on Pragya Thakur's remark on Godse

The EC has sought a report on Sadhvi Pragya's 'Godse a patriot' remark from Madhya Pradesh Chief Election Commissioner (CEO) by tomorrow.

7.57 pm: Party's line is my line: BJP's Pragya Thakur

Election campaigning in West Bengal will end by 10 pm on Thursday. This, after the Election Commission, curbed the deadline for campaigning by a day citing violence in the state. West Bengal Chief Minister and TMC leader Mamata Banerjee hit out at the EC saying that the poll body was trying to 'sabotage' her campaign by favouring Modi.

“Trinamool Congress (TMC) goons spread violence, they vandalised statue of (Ishwar Chandra) Vidyasagar. CCTV cameras were installed there. The way the state government erased evidences of Narada and Sarada scam, it is trying to remove evidence in the incident. I demand a strict action should be taken,” Modi said while addressing a public meeting in West Bengal’s Mathurapur.

A bust of the 19-century reformer reformer Vidyasagar was vandalised when clashes broke out in Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata Tuesday.

Both BJP and TMC blame each other’s cadre of damaging the statue.

7.52 pm: EC relieves two senior West Bengal officers

EC has relieved Diamond Harbour (West Bengal) SDPO Mithun Kumar Dey and Kaushik Das, Office In-Charge at Amherst Street with immediate effect. Both the officers will not get any election-related posts.

7.30 pm: You have the right to dream of PM position: PM Modi to Mamata

"Didi aapko PM pad ke sapne dekhne ki poori azaadi hai lekin humare surakshka balon unke khilaf gundon ka istemal karne se aapki vishwasniyta par sawaal uth chuke hain. Didi sun lo, yeh Paschim Bengal aapki aur aapke bhatije ki jaagir nahi hai. Yeh Maa Bharati ka ek atoot ang hai (Didi, you have a right to dream of PM position but using goons against our security forces put a question mark on your credibility. Listen didi, West Bengal does not belong to you and your nephew, it's a indespensible part of Ma bharti)," Modi said.

7:27 pm: If Constitutional bodies weren't there, you would not be CM: PM to Mamata Banerjee

"Why are you forgetting that Left had created similar situation for you and at that time constitutional bodies of the nation ensured a fair election in West Bengal. If these constitutional bodies and central forces weren't there, you would not have been CM today," Modi said in West Bengal's Dum Dum.

7.18 pm: EC declares polling void in 5 Andhra seats

The EC has declared that polls held on April 11 at five polling stations of the Chandragiri Assembly constituency and the Chittoor Parliamentary constituency of Andhra Pradesh as void. Re-polling will be held on May 19 .

6.52 pm: West Bengal voting to give more than 300 seats to BJP: PM Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi while addressing a rally in West Bengal’s Dum Dum said the state is voting to give more than 300 seats to the BJP in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

6.47 pm: Amit Shah campaigns for Gorakhpur BJP candidate Ravi Kishan

BJP President Amit Shah campaigned for party candidate from Gorakhpur, Ravi Kishan. Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath was also present.

Gorakhpur: BJP President Amit Shah campaigns for party's candidate from Gorakhpur, Ravi Kishan. Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath also present. pic.twitter.com/g68dNJu6Wz — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 16, 2019

6:17 pm: West Bengal: Opposition meets EC on curtailing campaigning a day earlier

After the Election Commission (EC) in a first-of-its-kind decision curtailed campaigning in West Bengal by a day on grounds of security, the opposition met EC over the same. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Congress says, "We did not receive a satisfactory response from the Election Commission."

5.36 pm: Modi takes on Mamata Banerjee on home turf in West Bengal

Modi continued his attack West Bengal government targeting TMC supremo Mamata Banerjee. "Didi has resorted to threats, today in the morning I received the threat of being sent to jail. Yesterday, I saw in media that didi had threatened to take over BJP's office, she is also threatening to take over homes of BJP workers".

5:20 pm: Congress condemns Pragya Singh Thakur's 'Godse a patriot' remark

BJP's Bhopal candidate Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur stirred a controversy by calling Nathuram Godse a 'deshbhakt'. While BJP was quick to distance itself from Thakur's remarks, the Congress party rushed to condemn and said that BJP, the 'successors of Godse' are a threat to India's democracy.

Addressing a rally in Mau in Uttar Pradesh's Azamgarh, PM Modi, on Thursday condemned the 'hooliganism' by TMC workers and vowed to construct a grand statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar at the place where it was vandalised by TMC workers during BJP chief Amit Shah's roadshow on Tuesday.

4.58 pm: Mamata asks Modi to prove TMC vandalised statue

Banerjee was quick to respond and asked Modi to 'prove' the allegations that the TMC vandalised the statue. "Bengal has money to make the statue. Can he give back the 200 years old heritage? We have proof and you say that TMC has done. Aren't you ashamed? He should do sit-ups for lying so much. Liar. Prove allegations otherwise we'll drag you to jail," she said in a rally.

Meanwhile, Congress president Rahul Gandhi met the family members of Alwar gangrape victim and said that the meeting was 'not a political issue but an emotional thing'. Modi will be holding rallies in Laxmikantapur and Dum Dum in West Bengal later during the day.

4.48 pm: Gloryfing Godse is sedition: Digvijaya

Congress's Bhopal candidate Digvijaya Singh attacked BJP rival Pragya Thakur for her statment on Naturam Godse. "Modi ji, Amit Shah ji & the state BJP should give their statements & apologize to the nation. I condemn this statement, Nathuram Godse was a killer, glorifying him is not patriotism, it is sedition," he said.

4.12 pm: BJP's Gurdaspur candidate Sunny Deol campaigns in Amritsar

BJP's Gurdaspur candidate Sunny Deol campaigns in Amritsar; all 13 parliamentary seats in Punjab will go to polls in the last phase of Lok Sabha elections on 19th May, Sunday.

Punjab: BJP's Gurdaspur candidate Sunny Deol campaigns in Amritsar; all 13 parliamentary seats in Punjab will go to polls in the last phase of Lok Sabha elections on 19th May, Sunday pic.twitter.com/jWJ03X2HNN — ANI (@ANI) May 16, 2019

4.10 pm: India's soul is under attack by successors of Godse, says Congress

"India's soul is under attack by successors of Godse, the BJP ruling dispensation. BJP leaders are describing the murderer of the father of the nation as a true nationalist and declaring those who sacrificed their lives for a nation like Hemant Karkare as anti-nationals," says R Surjewala, Congress.

3.56 pm: BJP distances itself from Pragya Singh Thakur's statement that 'Nathuram Godse was a deshbhakt'

"BJP does not agree with this statement, we condemn it. Party will ask her for clarification, she should apologise publicly for this statement," says Rao.

3.15 pm: Banerjee asks crowd to chant 'Chowdikar Chor Hai'

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee asks the crowd to chant, "Chowdikar Chor Hai", at a rally in Diamond Harbour.

#WATCH: West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee asks the crowd to chant, "Chowkidar Chor Hai", at a rally in Diamond Harbour. pic.twitter.com/Dpj1Ex3Aa5 — ANI (@ANI) May 16, 2019

2.56 pm: PM told you that he himself will deposit 15 lakh in your accounts, will you trust them again? - Priyanka

PM told you that he himself will deposit 15 lakh in your accounts and the president of the same party, after the elections, said it was a 'chunaavi jumla', will you trust them again?

2.38 pm: Nathuram Godse was a 'deshbhakt', says Sadhvi Pragya Thakur

BJP Bhopal Lok Sabha Candidate Pragya Singh Thakur says "Nathuram Godse was a 'deshbhakt', is a 'deshbhakt' and will remain a 'deshbhakt'. People calling him a terrorist should instead look within, such people will be given a befitting reply in these elections."

#WATCH BJP Bhopal Lok Sabha Candidate Pragya Singh Thakur says 'Nathuram Godse was a 'deshbhakt', is a 'deshbhakt' and will remain a 'deshbhakt'. People calling him a terrorist should instead look within, such people will be given a befitting reply in these elections pic.twitter.com/4swldCCaHK — ANI (@ANI) May 16, 2019

1:40 pm: Mamata slams poll panel

Addressing a rally in West Bengal's Mathurapur, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Thursday clammed the Election Commission for curbing the period of campaigning in the state. The EC, on Wednesday, curtailed the period of campaigning before the last phase of Lok Sabah elections to 10 pm on Thursday in view of the clashes between BJP and TMC workers.

Mamata said in Mathurapur, South 24 Parganas district: "Last night, we came to know that the BJP had filed a complaint with the EC so that we can't hold any meeting after Narendra Modi's meeting. The EC is a brother of the BJP. Earlier, it was an impartial body but now everyone in the country says the EC is sold out to the BJP. I feel sad but I don't have anything to say, I am ready to go to jail for saying this. I am not scared to say the truth."

The Trinamool Congress supremo also attacked the BJP and vowed revenge for the vandalisation at polymath Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue during BJP president Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata earlier this week. Mamata, who has accused the BJP of vandalising the statue, said the ruling party at the Centre had hurt the Bengali pride.

12.52 pm: Sonia Gandhi calls for a 3-day strategy meet

Congress leader Sonia Gandhi calls for a three-day strategy meet with opposition leaders. Gandhi has reached out to opposition parties for a meeting on May 20, 21 and 22, Times Now channel reported.

12.21 pm: Country is saying phir ek baar Modi sarkar, says Modi

Those with eight seats, 10 seats, 20-22 seats, 30-35 seats are dreaming of becoming Prime Minister, but the country is saying-phir ek baar Modi sarkar, says PM Modi in Chandauli.

11.27 am: We are committed to Vidyasagar's vision and will install his grand statue at the same spot - Modi

PM Modi in Mau: We saw hooliganism by TMC workers again during Bhai Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata, they vandalized Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue. We are committed to Vidyasagar's vision and will install his grand statue at the same spot.

11.25 am: Mamata Banerjee thanks Mayawati, Congress and Akhilesh for support

"Thanks and gratitude to @Mayawati, @yadavakhilesh, @INCIndia, @ncbn and others for expressing solidarity and support to us and the people of #Bengal. EC's biased actions under the directions of the #BJP are a direct attack on democracy. People will give a befitting reply," tweets Mamata Banerjee.

11.15 am: SP-BSP has given a ticket to a person here who is an absconder in a rape case - PM Modi

PM Narendra Modi in Mau: SP-BSP has given a ticket to a person here who is an absconder in a rape case. SP has this history in UP, people know, but Behen ji will you seek votes for such candidates?

11.05 am: Rahul Gandhi meets Alwar gangrape victim's family

Congress president Rahul Gandhi, on Thursday, met Alwar gangrape victim and said that incidents such as 'this' will not be tolerated. "This is not a political issue but an emotional thing for me," Gandhi said while addressing a press conference. "Soon after I heard about the incident (Alwar gang rape) I spoke to Ashok Gehlot Ji. This is not a political issue for me. I met the victim's family and they have sought justice which will be done. Action will be taken against culprits," he said.

10.22 am: Election Commission’s order is a parting gift to PM Modi- Surjewala

Election Commission’s order is a parting gift to PM Modi & BJP, in order to ensure that the two pre-announced election rallies of Shri Modi today are not hit by the EC’s order. Does the EC now take orders from the BJP headquarters rather than from the mandate of the Constitution?

10.14 am: MCC is Modi Code of Misconduct, alleges Congress

Congress alleges that the Election Commission's decision on West Bengal is 'undemocratic'. Raises questions over the action taken by EC over complaints against PM Modi, Amit Shah.

10.04 am: EC is acting under pressure- Mayawati

Election Commission has banned campaigning in West Bengal, but from 10 pm today just because PM has two rallies in the day. If they had to ban then why not from today morning? This is unfair and EC is acting under pressure

9.57 am: Modi, Amit Shah and their leaders are targeting Mamata Banerjee - Mayawati

Mayawati: It is clear that PM Modi, Amit Shah and their leaders are targeting Mamata Banerjee, its planned targeting. This is a very dangerous and unjust trend and one which doesn't suit the PM of the country.

9.23 am: PM Modi to address five rallies today

PM Modi will address five rallies across Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. "Do watch the rallies in Mau, Chandauli, Mirzapur, Mathurapur and Dum Dum," he said in a tweet. The campaigning for the last phase of Lok Sabha election on May 19 ends at 10 pm today.

9.00 am: Chandigarh: Actor Anupam Kher campaigns for wife and BJP candidate Kirron Kher in Shivalik Park, Manimajra.

Chandigarh: Actor Anupam Kher campaigns for wife and BJP candidate Kirron Kher in Shivalik Park,Manimajra. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/hWMxEAshr0 — ANI (@ANI) May 16, 2019

8.45 am: NK Sidhu: I was denied ticket after our CM sa'ab & Asha ji had specifically said that I can't win from Amritsar. If I'm working for party, at least don't have such a small heart & brain that when you can see the larger picture that the country needs to be saved from Modi
