Noida Extension struggles to cope as population rises

GREATER NOIDA: Noida Extension , the expanding pocket of Greater Noida , which has about one lakh residents and is projected to get another lakh by the end of the year, is struggling with severe infrastructure issues, raising a question mark over whether it is equipped to handle and provide a better quality of life to its burgeoning population The region has developed into a major residential hub over the past few years. At present, it has 40,000 flats, of which 25,000 are occupied. Another 40,000 are likely to be delivered by the end of year. Families are living in 65 of the 125 societies. Sector 16 C is the most dense society and comprises of Gaur City 1, Gaur City 2, Palm Olympia, Exotica Dreamville, Vedantam, Mahagun Mywoods, among others.The area is already grappling with several problems, which residents say require immediate attention from agencies. Among them are lack of hospitals, public transport, proper drainage system, foot overbridges, along with bad roads and high levels of pollution, making it difficult for them to lead a healthy life.“It has been quite some time that people have been living in various apartments but they seem to be heavily compromised when it comes to the quality of roads and other amenities. About a year ago, there were about 30,000 people living here but now there are close to one lakh people. It is high time the roads are repaired,” Manish Kumar, a resident of Supertech Eco Village, says.Last month, 25 residents of Noida Extension had taken to the streets to clean up their muddy roads, digging into their own funds. Their pleas to the Greater Noida Industrial Development Authority and the Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board, the residents said, had fallen on deaf ears. The authorities finally took notice and started repairs in the first week of May.The roads in the area, if not broken or dirty, are underdeveloped and kuchcha, often leading to dust pollution. Several stretches across sectors 1, 2, 3 are in urgent need of repairs.“It is not just about broken roads. The overall quality of life in Noida Extension needs a push. Pollution, sewage issues and garbage are big problems. There has been a long period of neglect. These issues need to be looked at,” says Abhishek Kumar, president, Noida Extension Flat Owners’ Welfare Association (Nefowa).Safety is another concern for residents here. Several streetlights in the area don’t function properly, especially at night. Public transport and bad traffic are other common grouses. In the absence of buses, residents mostly depend on their own car or bike if they don’t get an auto and e-rickshaw for commuting to Noida-Ghaziabad, or are forced to take a lift.“Already residents are facing major traffic issues. So one can imagine the condition of this area if preventive steps are not taken,” says Indrish Gupta, co-founder, Nefowa.Greater Noida CEO Narendra Bhooshan, however, feels the issues of connectivity and infrastructure have been addressed, although he admits there is still some work to be done.“The problem areas in Noida Extension are sectoral. We shall take care of that now as we start focusing on the development of each sectors and its specific issues,” he says.There are other problems too that the residents battle on a daily basis. “There is no Ganga water supply, so the residents are forced to use water with high TDS (total dissolved solids) content. It is alarming because by now, at least some of the utilities should have been in place,” believes Shweta Bharti, the general secretary of Nefowa.Because the entire region has been carved out of an agricultural land which was originally under a village area, it has taken a while for the residents to get the system in place so that the letters and parcels can be delivered to them. While there is a pin code in place now, the number is yet to be circulated widely so that the deliveries reach the residents. Meanwhile, the locals still do not have a single Aadhaar centre where they can get their cards made.“Most of us use our office addresses to receive parcels or important documents because there is no guarantee that we will get the orders at our doorstep as a system is still not in place,” says Manish Kumar.The residents have been frequently meeting Greater Noida officers to get their issues addressed. “We have written to them many times and met them and shared our woes. They have promised that our concerns will be addressed,” says Nefowa president, Abhishek Kumar.
