Lok Sabha Elections 2019 Live Updates:Mamata considering Bengal as personal property: PM Modi

Home >> Delhi Lok Sabha Elections 2019 Live Updates:Mamata considering Bengal as personal property: PM Modi

West Bengal will witness two rallies by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Laxmikantpur and Dumdum before he heads to Uttar Pradesh to address three public meetings.

In the run-up to the final phase of polling in the Lok Sabha elections, which concludes on Sunday, leaders continue their last leg of campaign rallies in various parts of the country. Following Election Commission’s decision Wednesday to invoke Article 324 in West Bengal, curtailing campaign rallies in the state for 20 hours, the campaigning is scheduled to end at 10 pm today.

West Bengal will witness two rallies by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Laxmikantpur and Dumdum before he heads to Uttar Pradesh to address three public meetings. Mamata Banerjee had termed the EC’s decision to draw an early curtain on campaigning in the state as “EC’s gift to Modi”. The West Bengal Chief Minister will hold two rallies and two padyatras in Kolkata.

19:01 (IST) 16 May 2019

Mamata considering Bengal as personal property: PM Modi

"Several BJP workers were assaulted and killed this time in Bengal. Their houses were ransacked. There should be no place for such terror. In Bengal, violence was reported in all the phases (of elections). Mamata didi is wrong to consider Bengal as her personal property," PM Modi told the crowd.

18:54 (IST) 16 May 2019

Watch: PM Modi addresses rally in Kolkata`s Dum Dum

Dum Dum is determined to reject corrupt and criminalised TMC. People are with BJP. Watch. https://t.co/O7HUDKAN73 — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) May 16, 2019

18:51 (IST) 16 May 2019

EC directs re-polls in 5 Andhra polling stations

Meanwhile, the poll watchdog declared polling held on Aprill 11 across five polling stations of Chandragiri Assembly constituency and the Chittoor Parliamentary constituency of Andhra Pradesh as void. Re-polling will be held on May 19.



18:50 (IST) 16 May 2019

No Bengali will desecrate Vidyasagar statue: Chidambaram

"If Nathuram Godse is a patriot, I am happy to be an anti-national. Gathered from my Bengali friends: no Bengali will desecrate Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar`s statue. The culprits must be from outside W. Bengal. Which party brought supporters from outside W. Bengal?" former Union minister P Chidambaram tweeted.

If Nathuram Godse is a patriot, I am happy to be an anti-national.



Gathered from my Bengali friends: no Bengali will desecrate Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar`s statue. The culprits must be from outside W. Bengal.



Which party brought supporters from outside W. Bengal? — P. Chidambaram (@PChidambaram_IN) May 16, 2019

18:44 (IST) 16 May 2019

Gorakhpur: BJP President Amit Shah campaigns for party`s candidate from Gorakhpur, Ravi Kishan. Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath also present. pic.twitter.com/g68dNJu6Wz — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 16, 2019

14:26 (IST) 16 May 2019

`Bengal has money to make Vidyasagar statue, but can he (PM) give back 200 years heritage?`

In a reply to PM`s assurance of building the statue of Vidyasagar at Kolkata college, the TMC Chief said, "(PM) said he will make Vidyasagar statue. Bengal has money to make the statue. Can he give back the 200 years old heritage? We`ve proof and you say that TMC has done. Aren`t you ashamed? He should do sit ups for lying so much. Liar. Prove allegations otherwise we will drag you to jail."

14:23 (IST) 16 May 2019

Not afraid to go to jail for saying the truth: Banerjee on her `EC sold out to BJP` remark

TMC Chief Mamata Banerjee slamming BJP said that the poll watchdog is no more an impartial body but has been sold out to the party. Banerjee explained that she felt sad about it but didn`t have anything to say. "I am not scared to say the truth, not afraid to go to jail for saying the truth," she added.

14:08 (IST) 16 May 2019

"EC is brother of BJP, used to be an impartial body but now sold out to party"

WB CM Mamata Banerjee in Mathurapur: Last night we came to know that BJP had filed a complaint with EC so that we can`t hold any meeting after Narendra Modi`s meeting. EC is brother of BJP, earlier it was an impartial body now everyone in the country says EC has sold out to BJP. pic.twitter.com/lWqXHJz6x5 — ANI (@ANI) May 16, 2019

13:32 (IST) 16 May 2019

EC`s biased actions under directions of the BJP are direct attack on democracy: Mamata Banerjee

Meanwhile, TMC Chief Mamata Banerjee expressed her gratitude on Twitter for the support lent by BSP leader Mayawati, SP`s Akhilesh Yadav, Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu and Congress. She continued her attack against EC and said that the poll watchdog is biased towards the directions of BJP which is `direct attack on democracy`.

Thanks and gratitude to @Mayawati, @yadavakhilesh, @INCIndia, @ncbn and others for expressing solidarity and support to us and the people of #Bengal. EC`s biased actions under the directions of the #BJP are a direct attack on democracy. People will give a befitting reply — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) May 16, 2019

13:25 (IST) 16 May 2019

In PM`s turf, BSP Supremo Mayawati slams BJP for `casteist, communal approach`

BSP Supremo Mayawati hitting out at BJP, at a public rally in Prime Minister`s Lok Sabha constituency, Varanasi, said, "The crimes against Scheduled Caste-Scheduled Tribes have increased. BJP has a casteist, communal approach." She also said that BJP`s Ganga Rejuvenation programme had failed and it still remains polluted, adding "Ma Ganga would punish Modi".

12:48 (IST) 16 May 2019

`Country still has one slogan— Phir Ek Baar Modi Sarkaar`: PM in Chandauli

PM Modi addressing a rally in UP`s Chandauli says, "Some with 8 seats, some 10 seats, some 20-22 seats and some even with 35 seats are dreaming of becoming the Prime Minister. But the country is stuck with one slogan—Phir Ek Baar Modi Sarkaar."

11:43 (IST) 16 May 2019

We are committed to Vidyasagar`s vision, will install his grand statue at same spot: PM Modi

Talking about the poll-pitched battle that came down to the streets of Kolkata during Amit Shah`s roadshow on Tuesday, the prime minister said, "We saw hooliganism by TMC workers again during Bhai Amit Shah`s roadshow in Kolkata, they vandalized Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar`s statue. We are committed to Vidyasagar`s vision and will install his grand statue at the same spot."

11:37 (IST) 16 May 2019

PM Modi takes a dig at Mayawati, questions her choice of alliance

Taking a dig at the Mahagathbandhan in Uttar Pradesh` Mau, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that the SP-BSP alliance has given a ticket to an absconder in a rape case referring to Atul Rai. "SP has this history in UP, people know, but Behenji will you seek votes for such candidates," PM Modi asked Mayawati. Slamming Mayawati further, he added, "I had thought the way Mamata didi is targeting UP-Bihar Purvanchal ppl, calling them outsiders for her politics, Behen Mayawati will surely slam Mamata didi, but this did not happen."

11:22 (IST) 16 May 2019

Rahul Gandhi ensures `action will be taken against culprits` in Alwar rape case

Congress President Rahul Gandhi: Soon after I heard about the incident (Alwar gang rape) I spoke to Ashok Gehlot Ji. This is not a political issue for me. I met the victim`s family and they have sought justice which will be done. Action will be taken against culprits. #Rajasthan pic.twitter.com/rjJVoVgmtQ — ANI (@ANI) May 16, 2019

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11:14 (IST) | 16 May 2019

Rahul Gandhi meets Alwar rape victim

Following Prime Minister Narendra Modi`s attack where he claimed that the Rajasthan government tried to suppress the Alwar rape case and there was inaction on behalf of the police, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi met the survivor today. Ahead of his rallies in Rajasthan today, Gandhi accompanied by Ashok Gehlot, held a press conference after meeting the victim and informed that police arrested the accused within a week of the complaint being filed. The Congress president also ensured justice to the victim and the victim`s family.

10:48 (IST) | 16 May 2019

PM Modi to address five rallies in West Bengal, UP

Always a delight to be among the people. Today will address five rallies across Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Do watch the rallies in Mau, Chandauli, Mirzapur, Mathurapur and Dum Dum.



Sharing a video covering parts of my speeches yesterday in Bihar, Jharkhand and Bengal. pic.twitter.com/7UHQETSnWl — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) May 16, 2019

10:28 (IST) 16 May 2019

EC acting under pressure; PM Modi, Amit Shah targeting Mamata Banerjee: Mayawati

Taking the attack further, BSP Supremo Mayawati said, "It is clear that PM Modi, Amit Shah and their leaders are targeting Mamata Banerjee, it`s planned targeting. This is a very dangerous and unjust trend and one which doesn`t suit the PM of the country." She rhetorically questioned about why the EC had banned campaigning in West Bengal from 10 pm today when PM Modi was holding two rallies in the state and not from the morning. She added that this was "unfair pressure and that EC was acting under pressure."

10:20 (IST) 16 May 2019

Democracy under attack, claims Congress

Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala claimed that the poll watchdog had completely lost its independence and yesterday`s EC order is "an attack on democracy". He further said, "Election Commission has become a toothless commission under PM Modi and Amit Shah. There has been no action taken against NaMo TV."

10:16 (IST) | 16 May 2019

MCC has now become Modi Code of Conduct: Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala

Randeep Surjewala addressing a Congress press conference attacked the poll watchdog`s decision to invoke Article 324 in West Bengal from Thursday, said, "The MCC originally known as the Model Code of Conduct has now become Modi`s Code of Conduct. (Invoking Article 324 in West Bengal) is a parting gift for the Prime Minister."

10:14 (IST) 16 May 2019

Mamata Banerjee: EC is spokesperson for BJP, taking orders from Modi and Shah

Mounting a scathing attack on the Election Commission after it ordered an early end to campaigning for the last phase of the Lok Sabha elections in West Bengal, TMC leader and Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee Wednesday said the poll panel has become a BJP “mouthpiece and spokesperson” working on the “instructions of Narendra Modi and Amit Shah”. Addressing a press conference late at night, Banerjee described the Commission’s decision to invoke Article 324 of the Constitution as “unprecedented, unconventional, unfair, unethical and politically biased”
