Why Election Commission cutting short campaign time in West Bengal was not immediate

As a political slugfest erupted after the Election Commission curtailed election campaign time in West Bengal to 10 pm on May 16, the poll body has said the deadline was set to give a cooling-off period to voters in the wake of violence between TMC and BJP workers.

Sources in the Election Commission told India Today TV that the decision to end campaigning at 10 pm and instead of ending it immediately was taken to ensure that political parties don't have to end campaigning all of a sudden at a time when political atmosphere is charged.

Defending their decision, the Election Commission said the step was also taken to give a cooling-off period to voters in view of the "disturbed" atmosphere.

On the transfer of two key officials of West Bengal, Election Commission sources claimed the decision was taken after reports pointed towards their direct interference in the election process.

"The West Bengal administration was informed about their conduct in advance, but no action was taken against them. It is then that the EC took the step," sources said.

The EC also considered the report of the deputy election commissioner, in-charge of West Bengal, who was in the state a few days back to gauge the situation in West Bengal.

After the EC's decision to curtail campaign time, both the BJP and TMC approached the Election Commission with complaints against each other.

While BJP president Amit Shah accused the EC of behaving like a mute spectator for not taking action against the West Bengal government, chief minister Mamata Banerjee said the poll body was being directed by the BJP.

Opposition parties also questioned the decision of the Election Commission over its decision to put the 10 pm deadline. They also alleged that the time was chosen as it suited the Prime Minister who was scheduled to hold two rallies in West Bengal.

Nine constituencies of Dum Dum, Barasat, Basirhat, Jaynagar, Mathurapur, Jadavpur, Diamond Harbour, South, and North Kolkata are set to go to polls in the final phase on May 19.

READ | EC cuts short campaign period in West Bengal due to violence

READ | Campaign ban a gift to PM Narendra Modi by Election Commission, says Mamata Banerjee

WATCH | Is Election Commission's Bengal campaign ban biased?
