‘Amit Shah not God, but Mamata no goddess either’:Shiv Sena

The Shiv Sena has attacked the West Bengal government for the situation in the state during the ongoing Lok Sabha elections and allegedly accused chief minister Mamata Banerjee of fanning the violence. The Sena, in mouthpiece Saamana, took on Banerjee for her remark against BJP president Amit Shah and said that Shah was not God, but Mamata was not a Goddess or saint either.

The attack came after violence erupted between the Trinamool Congress and BJP workers during Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata on Tuesday. The Sena said that the chief minister did not give permission for Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) president Amit Shah’s chopper to land in West Bengal which started the conflict between the BJP and TMC workers.

Reacting to Banerjee’s remark that Shah was not God so that people cannot protest against him, the Sena said, “Amit Shah is not God, but Banerjee is also not Goddess Durga or a saint.” The Sena attacked Banerjee and said, “She did not permit senior leaders to step into the state. What kind of arrogant behaviour is this? She has turned West Bengal into a battleground by fanning violence,” the editorial said.

The Sena added that Banerjee’s government was elected democratically and that she will retain or lose power through the democratic process. “Whether she wins or loses will be decided democratically. She will not win by becoming a roadblock in the way of Modi-Shah,” it added. It also criticised Banerjee for following in the footsteps of the Left government in Bengal, which “had sown violence” in the eastern state. “They (CPI-M) were thrown out of power by the people. Now Mamata is also doing the same (sowing violence). This is detrimental to the country,” the editorial said.

Sena leader and Saamana editor Sanjay Raut on Wednesday had slammed the West Bengal government over the attack on Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata. He said that the incident was “unfortunate” for democracy in the country. He added that any leader is free to campaign in any part of the country. “West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee did not want Narendra Modi and Amit Shah in Bengal. Did anyone stop her from campaigning in Gujarat?” he asked.
