Mamata Banerjee is the biggest anti-national, she promotes jihadists: Chandra Kumar Bose

BJP's Chandra Kumar Bose said his party will win at least 25 Lok Sabha seats in Bengal. (@Chandrabosebjp) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Subhas Chandra Bose’s grand-nephew Chandra Kumar Bose is contesting General Elections 2019 on a Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) ticket from one of the most high-profile constituencies of West Bengal, Kolkata Dakshin. In a conversation with Biplob Ghosal of Timesnownews.com, the BJP leader spoke on how the Congress deliberately destroyed thousands of documents which would have helped resolve Netaji’s death mystery. From accusing West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee of promoting jihadists to running a ‘goonda’ brigade, Chandra Kumar Bose launched a barrage of charges against Trinamool Congress supremo.

Excerpts:

Biplob: What made you join the BJP and not the Congress or any other political outfit?

Chandra Kumar Bose: No political party has betrayed the nation the way Congress has. Former prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru was solely responsible for the bifurcation of India in 1947, not Muhammad Ali Jinnah; Jinnah only wanted a different State. So how could I join a party which has betrayed the nation.

Biplob: Subhas Chandra Bose's death is considered to be one of the greatest mysteries of India. How do you see the approaches of different governments at the Centre to unravel the truth?

Chandra Kumar Bose: Every government was suppressing papers and documents related to Netaji. But the situation changed after NDA came to power in 2014 with Prime Minister Narendra Modi at the helm. On January 23, 2016, classified documents, which the Congress had hidden, were released by the Modi government. Congress destroyed many critical documents which could have solved the mystery surrounding Netaji’s death... and this is not my saying. If one goes through the Justice Mukherjee Commission of Inquiry report, one would come across such a file where a noting states that Indira Gandhi in 1972 instructed to destroy four critical files which could have solved Netaji's death mystery. Thousands of documents have been destroyed by the Congress which could have solved the mystery.

Biplob: How different has been PM Narendra Modi’s approach from former prime ministers?

Chandra Kumar Bose: PM Modi is the first Prime Minister who has honoured Subhas Chandra Bose and Azad Hind Fauj. He has said from the ramparts of Red Fort that it is because of Netaji that India attained freedom. Netaji’s ideology is BJP’s ideology and Netaji was the first PM of united India and Azad Hind government was the first government of free India. PM Modi announced this on October 21, 2018.

Biplob: Do you bear a certain burden of expectation as Netaji’s name is associated with you?

Chandra Kumar Bose: No... I am in politics as Chandra Kumar Bose. Netaji is a national icon and above politics, and I don’t bring in Netaji into my politics. He has the same stature as of Mahatma Gandhi. I am simply a BJP worker, and he was the liberator of India.

Biplob: How do you view BJP president Amit Shah’s leadership style?

Chandra Kumar Bose: Amit Shah ji showcases a very strong and committed leadership. Under his leadership, the BJP has grown 6-7 times.

Biplob: BJP leaders have been raking the term ‘Syndicate Raj’ against TMC during election campaign. Could you shed some light on this?

Chandra Kumar Bose: The BJP is not saying this. It is the people of Kolkata and West Bengal who are saying that the Trinamool Congress doesn’t have any government or Chief Minister in the state. They have a 'syndicate raj' where the syndicate CM is Mamata Banerjee who runs a ‘goonda’ brigade. Governance is zero under Mamata’s rule.

My cousin Sugata Bose, who is a Trinamool Congress MP from Jadavpur... his house was attacked and my aunt Krishna Bose was heckled by ‘syndicate raj’ goons... They were just repairing their balcony and not constructing a house. They were practically beaten up. Luckily, Sugata rang up the police and got them arrested. Suppose, if it was an ordinary person? He/she would have been killed on the spot. This is the plight of people in south Kolkata. Police have no say, they report to the ‘syndicate’ goons.

Biplob: The TMC is repeatedly accusing the BJP of rupturing the social fabric of the state. Your reaction to this.

Chandra Kumar Bose: BJP is the only party which can save history, heritage and culture of Bengal. Party’s ideology is based on Swami Vivekananda, Subhas Chandra Bose and Shyama Prasad Mukherjee. They were the makers of modern India. TMC is a congregation of criminals who have assembled together to loot the state. They are just a bunch of goons and Mamata Banerjee is the biggest anti-national in the country today. She promotes jihadists, Pakistan... She shouldn’t be allowed to stay in West Bengal.

Biplob: What according to you has led to the downfall of Left, which ruled the state for more than thirty years?

Chandra Kumar Bose: Goondaraj, criminal activity, criminalisation of politics – these are the reasons why Left Front was driven out and now the same will happen with the Trinamool Congress. West Bengal has a culture and tradition, and Mamata Banerjee cannot govern the state.

Biplob: Kolkata Dakshin constituency is considered to be the home ground of Mamata Banerjee. How confident are you against Trinamool Congress candidate Mala Roy. How many seats do you think the BJP will get in West Bengal?

Chandra Kumar Bose: No longer... that is history. Now Kolkata Dakshin is the home ground of BJP and me. Trinamool Congress will be uprooted and the BJP will get more than 25 Lok Sabha seats.


