Campaigning for final phase of LS elections in West Bengal ends

AGENCIES

Campaigning for the final phase of Lok Sabha elections in West Bengal ended at 10 tonight for the remaining nine seats, a day ahead of the scheduled closing.

Electioneering has been curtailed by the Election Commission in the state following Tuesday’s violence in Kolkata during BJP President Amit Shah’s roadshow.

Campaigning for 50 constituencies spread over six states and one union territory will come to a close tomorrow evening. The polling for all the 59 parliamentary constituencies will take place on Sunday.

Top political leaders are leaving no stone unturned to woo the voters. Senior BJP leader and Prime Minister Narendra Modi held public meeting at Mathurapur in South 24-Parganas district and Dum Dum in North 24 Parganas district of West Bengal.

He said, those involved in the act of vandalizing the statue of social reformer Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, should be given an exemplary punishment.

A bust of 19th-century reformer Vidyasagar was desecrated during the violence on Tuesday. Mr Modi said, the ruling Trinamool Congress is destroying the rich heritage and culture of Bengal and the entire country is a witness to the happening in the State during the last few days.

The Prime Minister said TMC President and State Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee is responsible for escalating violence in West Bengal. He charged Ms Banerjee of indulging in violence for vote bank politics.

Speaking at a rally at Mandirbazar, Ms Mamata Banerjee accused BJP activists of destroying the heritage of the state. Earlier in the day, Prime Minister Modi addressed rallies at Mirzapur, Chandauli and Mau in Uttar Pradesh.

He said, NDA government fought terrorism and Naxalism resolutely and has ensured a corruption free government. He accused the previous governments of Samajwadi Party, BSP and the Congress of closing sugar mills in the state and destroying carpet industry.

He said, NDA government is committed to the welfare of the poor, farmers and women. Mr Modi said, the government worked on the principle of ‘Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikaas’. He said, BJP’s policy on terrorism is very clear and it will never compromise with the safety of the soldiers.

BJP President Amit Shah held rallies at Maharajganj, Salempur, Ballia and Deoria in Uttar Pradesh. He said, the Ayushman Bharat scheme of the Centre has benefitted 26 lakh people. The BJP Chief said, NDA government tried to improve the living standards of 50 crore people of the country. He also held a road show in Gorakhpur.
