Lok Sabha Election: It was raining today, I thought his plane shouldn`t disappear: Rahul Gandhi takes jibe at PM

Home >> Delhi Lok Sabha Election: It was raining today, I thought his plane shouldn`t disappear: Rahul Gandhi takes jibe at PM

On the other hand, PM Narendra Modi, over violence at Amit Shah`s rally, taunted Mamata Banerjee, saying he wanted to see if she would allow his rally in Kolkata on Wednesday. The rallies of senior BJP leaders -- including Amit Shah and the party`s star campaigner Yogi Adityanath -- have been a flashpoint in the Trinamool-ruled state, where the BJP is aiming to win 23 of 42 seats.

As Lok Sabha elections are drawing to a close, political turmoil has gained momentum across the nation. Following the violence in West Bengal this week, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Thursday alleged that Prime Minister Narendra Modi`s election rally in Mathurapur constituency was held at a ground which belongs to the owner of an illegal micro-finance company.

On the other hand, PM Narendra Modi, over violence at Amit Shah`s rally, taunted Mamata Banerjee, saying he wanted to see if she would allow his rally in Kolkata on Wednesday. The rallies of senior BJP leaders -- including Amit Shah and the party`s star campaigner Yogi Adityanath -- have been a flashpoint in the Trinamool-ruled state, where the BJP is aiming to win 23 of 42 seats. Also, Election Commission has been clamping down on political rallies in the state. A number of Opposition leaders have criticised the Election Commission`s move saying it was only done to benefit the BJP.

..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

#LIVE

16:58 PM IST

It was raining today, I thought his plane shouldn`t disappear: Rahul Gandhi



Taking potshots at PM Modi`s "cloud-radar" theory, Rahul Gandhi said that it was raining today in the capital city and "I thought his plane should not disappear". "Because the radar could not trace the plane in the clouds," he said, dramatically thumping the table three times. He also said that the Congress party has been able to catch the lies of the PM Modi.

On PM Modi`s attack on his family, Rahul Gandhi said that the "prime minister can say whatever he wants". I have not spoken on his family, he said.

16:58 PM IST

BJP to return for second consecutive time: Modi



"It will happen after a long time in the country, our government will come to power with absolute majority for second consecutive time. We can say some things proudly to the world. This is the world’s largest democracy. This is our responsibility. We need to influence the world. Our democracy is so vibrant. All festivals, school exams everything underway during election," PM Modi said.





16:57 PM IST

BJP will come back with full majority: Modi



"The election has been very constructive. I congratulate all on succcessful completion of polls. We will come back with full majority," PM Narendra Modi said.





16:39 PM IST

Multi-party democratic system can take country forward: Amit Shah



"The poor, farmers and women have been our focus. A multi-party democratic system can take the country forward, this is what we believe in. We have achieved success in assembly polls as well. 50 crore poor have benefited from PM Modi`s schemes."





16:32 PM IST

BJP has run most extensive campaign in history: Amit Shah



"We have come to the end of the election campaign. BJP has run the most extensive campaign in history," said BJP`s Amit Shah.





16:34 PM IST

Came to power with a historic majority in 2014: Amit Shah



"We thank the public for its support. In 2014, we came to power with a historic majority. We have worked hard under PM Modi to fulfil public aspirations. We are confident that Modi government will return to power," Amit Shah said at the BJP press conference.

16:04 PM IST

EC on Lok Sabha election phase 7 silence period



In multi-phased poll, silence period of last 48 hrs may be on in certain constituencies while the campaign is ongoing in other constituencies. In such event, there shouldn`t be reference amounting to soliciting support for parties or candidates in seats observing silence period, the Election Commission said. It added: "During the silence period, star campaigners and other Political Leaders should refrain from addressing the media by way of press conferences and giving interviews on election matters."





16:01 PM IST

BJP and TMC like offering voters two kinds of poison: Brinda Karat



Whatever the brand, poison kills," says CPI(M) Politbureau member Brinda Karat, warning people in West Bengal against voting for either the BJP or the state`s ruling TMC. With the saffron party making inroads into the state and the fear that Left votes are getting transferred to it en masse, Brinda Karat tried to explain the vacuum created by the Left in a state it ruled for 34 years.

"You can`t think that you can taste this poison or that. The TMC`s policies have led to great discontent among the people of Bengal against the party. The BJP is using its central-state powers and huge money to claim that it`s the only alternative here. It is like offering people two choices of poison - BJP and TMC," Karat told PTI in a recent interview.

15:38 PM IST

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra holds a roadshow in Kushinagar



Priyanka Gandhi Vadra holds a roadshow in Kushinagar; Congress candidate from the constituency, RPN Singh is also present. pic.twitter.com/LP7bOr6MgW — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 17, 2019

15:11 PM IST

BJP, RSS not God-Ke but God-Se lovers, says Rahul Gandhi



Congress party president Rahul Gandhi said, "I finally got it. The BJP and the RSS...are not God-Ke lovers. They are God-Se lovers."

I finally got it. The BJP and the RSS...



Are not God-Ke Lovers.



They are God-Se Lovers. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) May 17, 2019

15:07 PM IST

BJP leader Anil Saumitra suspended by party for calling Gandhi Pakistan`s father



BJP leader Anil Saumitra has been suspended by party for calling Mahatma Gandhi Pakistan`s father. He has been asked to answer within seven days.





14:56 PM IST

Can never forgive Sadhvi Pragya for insulting Mahatma Gandhi: PM Modi



In a recent interview to News 24, PM Modi said that he would never be able to forgive Sadhvi Pragya for her comments on Nathuram Godse and for insulting Mahatma Gandhi.

14:35 PM IST

Tweets of BJP leaders show whose side they are on: Congress leader Dinesh Gundu Rao



The tweets of @nalinkateel and @AnantkumarH show whose side they are on.



If BJP/Modi rule for another 5 yrs, discussions will be surely about how #MahatmaGandhi was an anti national & memorials of #Godse will be built throughout the country.



Thats the final agenda of the RSS. pic.twitter.com/TyQOxWeEVq — Dinesh Gundu Rao / (@dineshgrao) May 17, 2019

14:32 PM IST

Kerala: Repolling in 3 more booths due to bogus voting



The election commission has recommended repolling in three more booths in Kerala. Booth number 48 in Kasargod Lok Sabha constituency, booth numbers 52 and 53 in Kannur Lok Sabha constituency will go for polls on Sunday.





13:39 PM IST

Rahul Gandhi addresses public in Solan, Himachal Pradesh

#WATCH Rahul Gandhi in Solan,Himachal Pradesh: Narendra Modi ne apne cabinet ko notebandi ke samay racecourse road mein taale se bandh kar diya tha.Sachaai hai, SPG wale meri bhi security karte hain,inhone ne bataya mujhe pic.twitter.com/YsQLyvsNTF — ANI (@ANI) May 17, 2019

13:02 PM IST

PM Modi world`s biggest actor: Priyanka Gandhi in rally

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra in Mirzapur: Ab aap samajh lijiye ke apne duniye ke sabse bade abhineta ko apna PM bana diya hai, is se accha toh aap Amitabh Bachchan ko hi bana dete, karna toh kisi ne kuch nahi tha aapke liye. pic.twitter.com/oYrtXdGuwS — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 17, 2019

13:01 PM IST

Amritsar is my home seat, not fair to tell me to go Bhatinda: Navjot Kaur Sidhu

Navjot Kaur Sidhu, wife of Congress leader Navjot Singh Sidhu, said, "I didn`t talk of any other seat except Amritsar in the context that I was denied Amritsar ticket by CM and Asha Kumari Ji saying that Dussehra incident hampered my image. Amritsar is my home seat. It`s not fair to tell me to go Bhatinda when I don`t know anyone there."

Navjot Kaur Sidhu:I didn`t talk of any other seat except Amritsar in the context that I was denied Amritsar ticket by CM&Asha Kumari Ji saying that Dussehra incident hamper my image. Amritsar is my home seat. It`s not fair to tell me to go Bhatinda when I don`t know anyone there. pic.twitter.com/89DjehuC10 — ANI (@ANI) May 17, 2019









12:31 PM IST

Congress has been rejected by the country: PM Modi



PM Modi said that the Congress has been rejected by the country. "The Congress took up the issues like snatching privileges from the soldiers and scrapping the law of treason," PM Modi said.

The country agress that those who are lobbying for a separate prime minister for Jammu and Kashmir should be given major punishment in this election, PM Modi said.

12:28 PM IST

When you go to cast your vote, you will be scripting history: PM Modi

PM Narendra Modi in Khargone,Madhya Pradesh said, "This Sunday when you go to cast your vote then you will be scripting history. After decades you will elect a majority government for a second time in a row."

PM Narendra Modi in Khargone,Madhya Pradesh: This Sunday when you go to cast your vote then you will be scripting history. After decades you will elect a majority govt for a second time in a row pic.twitter.com/hOFV3ms6Up — ANI (@ANI) May 17, 2019

12:26 PM IST

Abki baar, 300 paar: PM Modi in Madhya Pradesh rally

PM Modi in a rally in Madhya Pradesh said, "Abki baar, 300 paar." He was referring to the number of seats.

PM Narendra Modi in Khargone,Madhya Pradesh: From Kashmir to Kanyakumari, from Kutch to Kamrup, the whole nation is saying- Ab ki baar, 300 paar, phir ek baar Modi Sarkar pic.twitter.com/aD6yvvUtUl — ANI (@ANI) May 17, 2019

12:22 PM IST

Appeal people to vote for strong govt: PM Modi

PM Modi in his rally in Madhya Pradesh appealed to the voters to vote for the strong government.

"You are about to form a government of absolute majority for the second consecutive time after decades," PM Modi said.









11:45 AM IST

Mayawati not married, doesn`t know what family is, says Ramdas Athawale



Union Minister Ramdas Athawale on Thursday said, "Mayawati is making remarks about PM Modi and his wife. She (Mayawati) is not married, she doesn`t know what a family is. Had she been married, she would have known how to handle a husband. We respect Mayawati, she should not make such statements."

Union Minister Ramdas Athawale: Mayawati is making remarks about Modi Ji & his wife. She (Mayawati) is not married, she doesn`t know what a family is, had she been married she would have known how to handle a husband. We respect Mayawati, she should not make such statements. pic.twitter.com/fGCIb9nuZW — ANI (@ANI) May 17, 2019

11:16 AM IST

Mahatma Gandhi became hero after assassination: Kapil Mishra



Delhi BJP MLA Kapil Mishra on Thursday said that Nathuram Godse made Gandhi a "mahatma" and that Mahatma Gandhi became a hero only after assassination.

Mishra was expelled from Aam Aadmi Party.

10:48 AM IST

Congress- NCP candidate from Thane cuts birthday cake with Desh ka Chowkidaar hi chor hai written on it



Maharashtra: Congress- NCP candidate from Thane, Anand Paranjpe cut a cake on his birthday with `Desh ka Chowkidaar Hi Chor Hai` written on it. (16/05/19) pic.twitter.com/v8zWcjeJhZ — ANI (@ANI) May 17, 2019

10:30 AM IST

Godse killed 1, Rajiv Gandhi killed 17,000: BJP leader Nalin Kateel



Nalin Kumar Kateel, a BJP MP from Karnataka, compared Nathuram Godse with former PM Rajiv Gandhi.

"Godse killed one, Kasab killed 72, Rajiv Gandhi killed 17,000. You judge who is more cruel in this??" - Nalin Kateel tweeted, amid controversy over Pragya Thakur`s comment glorifying Godse as a patriot.

10:21 AM IST

Bengal will be bonus, will help BJP in crossing 300-mark: Sunil Deodhar



The BJP will cross the majority mark without West Bengal and the state will help the party in crossing the target of 300, says BJP secretary Sunil Deodhar, who is credited as one of the key architects of saffron party`s victory in Tripura where it ended 25 years of Left Front rule in 20018.

In an interview to IANS, he said the Bharatiya Janata Party would win 27-30 seats in the state and the Trinamool will be wiped out in next Assembly polls and for this credit would go to Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and her Muslim appeasement politics besides Prime Minister Narendra Modi`s mantra of "sabka saath, sabka vikas" (development for all).

"When I came to Bengal, I thought we will be able to win 20-21 seats and I had then said `19 me half 21 me saaf` (In 2019 Trinamool`s seat count will be halved and in 2021 Assembly polls, it will be wiped out). Now, I can say we will win 27-30 seats and Trinamool will be wiped out in 2021 Assembly polls," said Deodhar, who has been deployed in the state by the party leadership for the nine Lok Sabha seats that go to the polls on May 19 in the last phase of elections.

He exuded confidence that the BJP would snatch six out of nine seats from the Trinamool.

09:43 AM IST

Union Minister Anantkumar Hegde calls Rahul Gandhi a moron over Modilie tweet



Union Minister Anantkumar Hegde on Thursday called Congress party president Rahul Gandhi a moron over his "Modilie" tweet.

Hegde tweeted, "This moron, Rahul Gandhi, is hell bent on proving himself that he is one of his own kind of international idiotic skill master and hence the horizons have extended beyond the boundaries. No one can prevent his growth...Amazing...!!!!"

This moron @RahulGandhi is hell bent on proving himself that he is one of his own kind of international idiotic skill master and hence the horizons have extended beyond the boundaries. No one can prevent his growth....Amazing...!!!! https://t.co/0W7GXMHASV — Chowkidar Anantkumar Hegde (@AnantkumarH) May 17, 2019

09:32 AM IST

Like khaki nikkar, Nathuram Godse an identity of RSS: Azam Khan



Nathuram Godse is the identity of Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) the same way the `khaki nikkar` is, Samajwadi Party (SP) leader Azam Khan said after BJP`s Bhopal candidate Pragya Singh Thakur courted a controversy by calling killer of the Mahatma Gandhi a "patriot".

"Condemnation of Pragya Singh Thakur`s comment by the BJP is not enough. Godse is the identity of Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, the same way khaki nikkar (khaki shorts) is. Now, it is in the hands of the people to decide whether they want our nation to be identified with Gandhi or Godse, humanity or khaki nikkar," Khan said on Thursday.

On May 16, when questioned about actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan`s remark that India`s first terrorist was a Hindu (in reference to Godse), Thakur had said, "Nathuram Godse was a `deshbhakt`, is a `deshbhakt` and will remain a `deshbhakt`."

09:22 AM IST

EC announces re-poll at polling booth in Chadni Chowk seat

The Election Commission of India ordered on Thursday re-poll at a polling booth in Chandni Chowk parliamentary constituency.

The poll body declared re-poll at polling station no. 32 of Chandni Chowk Assembly Segment after the presiding officer forget to delete the test votes before the actual polling on May 12.

The re-poll will be conducted on Sunday.

In Chandni Chowk, sitting BJP MP and Union Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan is contesting against four-time Lok Sabha MP and Congress leader Jai Prakash Agarwal and Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) Pankaj Gupta.

The counting of votes will take place on May 23.

(ANI)

09:15 AM IST

Does only PM Modi have right to hold public meetings, asks Mamata Banerjee

Amidst ongoing political slugfest in West Bengal, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Thursday questioned if Prime Minister Narendra Modi is the only one who has the right to hold public rallies and meetings in the state.

"Only PM Modi has the right to hold rallies and meetings in the state, no one else? Did any sort of security issue happen to him? Then why they (EC) stopped the meeting for us?," Banerjee asked while expressing her discontentment over the Election Commission`s decision to cut short the campaign period in the state.

Further, she said that the proposed public meeting of PM Narendra that is slated to be held in Mathurapur is four kilometres away from the place that she held the public meeting.

"PM Modi`s rally is four kilometres away. Why do they think only prime ministers security is important and not others?", she asked.

Questioning her rights under the federal system of governance she said, "Why did they stop the election campaign? What do they think, whatever the Election Commission says, that`ll happen? Don`t we have any right to hold meetings in this country?"

08:59 AM IST

I don`t feel threatened: Kamal Haasan on stones thrown at his rally in Trichy



Kamal Haasan, on stones thrown at his rally in Trichy, said, "I feel the quality of polity is going down. I don`t feel threatened. Every religion has their own terrorist, we cannot claim that we are sanctimonious. History shows that all religions have their extremists."

08:58 AM IST

Mamata would not have been CM but for EC: PM Modi



Slamming West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for questioning the role of the Election Commission, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday said she would not have been the CM if the poll panel had not ensured free and fair elections by deploying Central forces.

"Didi, now you are using abusive words for Election Commission, election process and the Central forces. But why are you forgetting that the Left Front (government) had also made you to face a similar situation?

"Country`s constitutional bodies had only ensured fair elections in Bengal. Had these constitutional bodies not been there, and enough central forces had not been deployed, today you would not have been the Chief Minister of Bengal," Modi said at his last public meeting in Bengal ahead of the last phase of Lok Sabha polls to be held on May 19.

Banerjee on Wednesday had alleged the Election Commission`s decisions to curtail election campaigning and remove two senior officers were taken on the direction of the BJP, its President Amit Shah and Prime Minister Modi.

She had also claimed that RSS-backed functionaries had been inducted into the Election Commission.

(IANS)




