BJP, Cong Pressers | PM Modi will again do some 'distract India' event: Rahul Gandhi

New Delhi:

BJP chief Amit Shah is addressing the BJP's press conference in presence of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. PM Modi is scheduled to address party workers later.

Meanwhile, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi is also addressing Congress' media briefing.

The pres conferences come as election campaigning for the seventh phase of the Lok Sabha elections comes to an end at 5 pm today.

17:29 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In

BJP chief Amit Shah: We'll perform good in North-East, very good in West Bengal. We'll do good in Odisha & there will be improvement in number of seats in all the states in the South. We'll improve in Maharashtra also. pic.twitter.com/vkkGHMCMD3

— ANI (@ANI) May 17, 2019



17:20 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In ragya Thakur's candidature is a 'satyagrah' against a fake case of fake Bhagwa terror. I want to ask Congress, some people were earlier arrested in 'Samjhauta Express' who were related to LeT.A fake case of "bhagwa terror" was made in which accused have been acquitted: Amit Shah

17:19 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In

80 BJP workers have been killed in one and a half years. What does Mamata Banerjee has to say about this? If we were responsible for this, why violence didn't take place anywhere else?: Amit Shah



17:15 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Pragya Thakur's candidature is out protest against a fake case of 'saffron terror': Amit Shah

17:14 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We closed 90 per cent doors for Narendra Modi; he closed 10 per cent for himself by abusing opponents: Rahul Gandhi

17:13 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Party has served her a show cause notice & asked her to reply within 10 days. After she files a reply, party's disciplinary committee will take appropriate actions: Amit Shah on Pragya Singh Thakur's remarks

17:12 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Priority number two is to push Congress ideology, priority number three is to win the Vidhan Sabha election. But ideological they are on the same page like us, I don't see Mayawati Ji, Mulayam Singh Ji, Mamata Ji, Chandrababu Ji supporting Narendra Modi govt: Rahul Gandhi

17:11 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress has tried to protect institutions from PM Modi and BJP: Rahul Gandhi

17:10 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We ensured last-mile delivery which was a new structure of governance: PM Modi

17:06 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Election results came on May 16, 2014. A huge casualty took place on May 17, 2014. Today is May 17. People in 'Satta bazaar' who used to bet for Congress to win in elections faced huge losses on May 17: PM Modi

17:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Now that the Prime Minister is doing a live press conference, I want to ask him 'why didn't you debate with me on Rafale? I had challenged you for a debate, tell the press why didn't you debate?': Rahul Gandhi

17:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi will again do some 'distract India' event, but country won't get distracted: Rahul Gandhi

17:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I'm not Narendra Modi, won't ignore experience; Congress will benefit from Sonia Gandhi and Manmohan Singh's experience: Rahul Gandhi

17:00 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress dismantled idea of Narendra Modi, claims Rahul Gandhi.

16:58 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In It will happen after a long time in the country, our Government will come to power with absolute majority for second consecutive time: PM Modi

16:56 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In In last 2 elections, even IPL couldn't be held. When government is strong, IPL, Ramzaan, school exams and others take place peacefully: PM Modi

16:56 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Role of EC has been biased in this elections, Modi Ji can say whatever he wants to say while we're stopped from saying the same thing.Seems that the elections schedule was made for Modi Ji's campaigning. BJP and Narendra Modi have lots of money while we have truth: Rahul Gandhi

16:55 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Cong's role as opposition party has been 'A' grade: Rahul Gandhi.

16:55 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I have come straight from Madhya Pradesh to meet you, says PM Modi in his first press conference.

16:55 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I have said it clearly, public will decide on May 23, and the basis of which we will work: Rahul Gandhi on opposition alliance

16:52 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Election Commission's role in these polls has been biased and it has issued orders keeping in mind PM Modi's schedule: Rahul Gandhi.

16:52 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Why did PM not accept my challenge for debate on Rafale issue, asks Rahul Gandhi.

16:50 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Philosophy of Amit Shah, PM Modi not philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi: Rahul Gandhi

16:49 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prime Minister holds a press conference just 4-5 days before the election ends, unprecedented, Prime Minister of India is holding a press conference for the first time: Rahul Gandhi

16:48 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Rahul Gandhi reiterates charges of corruption in Rafale deal.

16:46 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Rahul Gandhi thanks party workers for election campaign.

16:46 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Rahul Gandhi mocks PM for attending first press conference accompanied by BJP president Amit Shah just days before polling ends.

16:44 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Shah gives a report card of Modi government's performance in last five years; refers to development and national security.

16:43 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Narendra Modi govt has launched 133 schemes to uplift all sections of society: Shah.

16:42 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We started our election campaign from January 16...Our target was to win 120 Lok Sabha seats which we couldn't win the last time. We are confident that we'll receive good results: Amit Shah

16:42 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Since Independence, these elections have been the biggest for the BJP: Shah

16:42 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We will come back with a much bigger majority: Amit Shah
