Varian Medical Installs ProBeam at Research Hub in Singapore

Varian Medical Systems, Inc. VAR recently announced the completion of the cyclotron installation for the Varian ProBeam Compact single-room proton therapy system at Biopolis, an international biomedical research hub in Singapore. Notably, this is in partnership with Proton Therapy Pte., Ltd.

Earlier this year, this Zacks Rank #3 (Hold) company had announced the installation of the gantry for the Varian ProBeam Compact single-room proton therapy system at the new oncology center in Biopolis. (Read More: Varian Medical's ProBeam Compact Picked by Biopolis)

Brief Note on ProBeam

Varian's ProBeam is the world's first commercially available pencil beam scanning system, which is the most precise form of proton therapy available. Notably, the ProBeam Compact system is a single-room system equipped with a 360-degree gantry for intensity modulated proton therapy. When combined with ARIA oncology information system and Eclipse treatment planning system, the ProBeam system enables an efficient adaptive workflow.

It is encouraging to note that in the recently reported second quarter of fiscal 2019, revenues from the company’s Protons solutions business totaled $33 million, up 2% year over year.

Presence in Asia

Varian Medical has a significant presence in Asia. Notably, the company delivered strong double-digit growth in the fiscal second quarter in China, Japan and Southeast Asia, China being the second-largest market for expansion. APAC revenues grew 7% year over year.

Also, last month, the company announced the installation of cyclotron for the Varian ProBeam proton therapy system at Hefei Ion Medical Center in China, on completion of which the center will feature three proton therapy treatment rooms with full 360-degree rotational gantries. Additionally, the company’s much-coveted Halcyon system recently treated its first patient in Malaysia, marking the first successful patient demonstration in Southeast Asia.

Story continues

In March, Varian Medical signed a three-year agreement with Tata Trust with a view to increase patient access to advanced radiation therapy treatments in India.

Market Prospects

Technavio analysts expect the global proton therapy market to see a CAGR of more than 9% between 2018 and 2022. Advantages of proton therapy over standard radiation therapies currently fuel demand for proton therapy around the world.

Hence, the developments have been well-timed for Varian Medical.

Price Performance

Over the past year, shares of Varian Medical have rallied 10.6% against the industry’s 1.3% decline. The current level is also higher than the S&P 500 index’s 4.2% rally.

Key Picks

Some better-ranked stocks in the broader medical space are DENTSPLY SIRONA XRAY, Masimo Corporation MASI ad CONMED Corporation CNMD, each carrying a Zacks Rank #2 (Buy). You can see the complete list of today’s Zacks #1 Rank (Strong Buy) stocks here.

DENTSPLY’s long-term earnings growth rate is expected at 11.5%.

Masimo’s long-term earnings growth rate is projected at 16.1%.

CONMED’s long-term earnings growth rate is estimated at 13.3%.

Breakout Biotech Stocks with Triple-Digit Profit Potential

The biotech sector is projected to surge beyond $775 billion by 2024 as scientists develop treatments for thousands of diseases. They’re also finding ways to edit the human genome to literally erase our vulnerability to these diseases.

Zacks has just released Century of Biology: 7 Biotech Stocks to Buy Right Now to help investors profit from 7 stocks poised for outperformance. Our recent biotech recommendations have produced gains of +98%, +119% and +164% in as little as 1 month. The stocks in this report could perform even better.

See these 7 breakthrough stocks now>>



Want the latest recommendations from Zacks Investment Research? Today, you can download 7 Best Stocks for the Next 30 Days. Click to get this free report



Varian Medical Systems, Inc. (VAR) : Free Stock Analysis Report



Masimo Corporation (MASI) : Free Stock Analysis Report



DENTSPLY SIRONA Inc. (XRAY) : Free Stock Analysis Report



CONMED Corporation (CNMD) : Free Stock Analysis Report



To read this article on Zacks.com click here.



Zacks Investment Research
