Vital services crash as MCD and AAP clash

Salary delays range from 2-5 months for around 410 nurses, 800 doctors & health employees and 160 paramedical and technical hands at Hindu Rao Hospital

Not paid for months, about 450 doctors of North Delhi Municipal Corporation-run Hindu Rao Hospital escalated their protest and shut medical services on Friday. They even threatened an indefinite strike from Monday if they don't get salaries by then.

"We have to pay bills, school fees of our children and run our households. We have been raising concern, but in vain," said Dr Rahul Chaudhary, president, resident doctors' association at the hospital. "We do not want patients to suffer. But we cannot survive without salaries for long," he said.

Induvati, a senior staffer at the hospital, said salary delays range from two to five months for around 410 nurses, 800 doctors and health employees and 160 paramedical and technical hands. "Only watchmen, guards and helps are being paid," she said.

The scene at the hospital is just a small part of the actual disruption the city is facing as civic bodies and the AAP government escalate their fight over funds. Vital civic services such hospitals, schools and property and birth/death certification are falling apart as thousands of corporation employees raise their banner of protest over massive salary delays.

"Civic bodies are the nerve centre of any city. The first thing you see from your window in the morning is a sweeper. You need birth/death certificates. You have to submit property tax. All these services have been affected because of salary delays," said a North Corporation official.

Recently, when a 70-yearold woman approached corporation authorities in Civil Lines about discrepancies in her property papers, relating to wrong age, gender and address, an officer expressed her inability to do any corrections since the staff had not been paid salaries for months. So, even as she acknowledged the discrepancies, she would not act upon them. "You can go and complain to our seniors," she said adamantly.

Corporation schools have also suffered and witnessed a jump in dropout rates due to a lack of adequate infrastructure. Recently, 14 schools under North Delhi Municipal Corporation were shut because enrolment and attendance dropped to record lows.

THE POLITICS

The corporations say the Delhi government is not releasing the required funds. The Delhi government accuses the corporations of mismanaging their finances.

All corporations are ruled by BJP and administratively report to the Union Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) through the Lieutenant-Governor (L-G) chosen by the Centre.

But the three civic bodies depend on grants-in-aid from the Delhi government. The Delhi government coordinates with them through a directorate of civic bodies. The money that MHA releases also comes to them through the Delhi government.

After the erstwhile Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) was trifurcated in 2012, administrative expenses have gone up, while shared revenue is not of much help. The three new entities have been struggling to pay their employees. The battle is in the Delhi High Court. Last week, the Delhi government said Rs 2,370.5 crore would be allocated to the three municipal corporations for the current fiscal year that did not excite civic officials much.

CORPORATION STAND

North Delhi Mayor Avtar Singh said, "I have written to Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal for an appointment. "We have a cash crunch which I cannot resolve overnight. I do not have a magic wand. Kejriwal government is not releasing funds."

Of the Rs 3,140 crore that the civic body needs for salaries, Rs 2,288 crore had to come from the Delhi government, the Mayor said.

Jayaraj Naik, additional commissioner (health) at North Corporation, said: "We are constantly in touch with the Delhi government. How can we give salaries, if Delhi government does not release funds? Deputy CM is out of town, still the discussion is on."

In the meantime, as a temporary measure, the civic body plans to rent out its vacant properties to earn some money. "We can allow mobile towers on buildings where we have space," said the Mayor.

The South Delhi Municipal Corporation, the only civic body with relatively good finances, is also suffering. "There is a drop in tax collection and services like sanitation, health and education have been affected," said an official.

AAP'S COUNTER

AAP leader Anil Lakda said that Delhi government has given its share on time. "If the Mayor finds it difficult to run the corporation, he should immediately resign. We have requested them to hand over hospitals to the Delhi government so that they are run smoothly," he said.

AAP chief spokesperson Saurabh Bharadwaj also denied corporation charges. "We have been releasing funds in accordance with guidelines," he said.

Delhi government Health Secretary Sanjeev Khirwar said, "A few days back, we sent partial funds to the finance department for approval and release it. But full amount is still stuck."
