Mumbai Ground Report: Post-graduate medical students stage protest against ordinance on Maratha reservation

The students further demanded justice and asked why should they accept seats in private colleges through back entries and be denied the merit seats in the state government-run colleges. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Mumbai: The post-graduate medical students are protesting against the new ordinance passed by the Maharashtra State Government in Mumbai on Saturday. The affidavit passed by the government mentioned that they have kept a quota for the Maratha students in the post-graduate courses of the medical college. Mostly students who have staged the protests belong to the general category, who think they might fail the exams due to the quota.

Mirror Now reported, the students of the open category are angry about the new ordinance that has been passed on Friday. The students claimed that the private universities are expensive and they cannot afford admissions in them and the quality of education is higher in the state government colleges as compared to private colleges. They added, that providing scholarships in the private universities is not the way of compensating the students.

Meanwhile, a participant of the protest told Mirror Now that on April 26 the second list of the admissions was released with specific mentions about the Maratha quota. The student claimed that the government has surpassed the judgement given by the apex court in the case.

The students further demanded justice and asked why should they accept seats in private colleges through back entries and be denied the merit seats in the state government-run colleges. Another student added that they will challenge the ordinance passed by the Maharashtra state government, claiming their right to study in the government college.

Reportedly, the government has succumbed to Maratha students who came out demanding quota for the community in Maharashtra and hence they brought out an ordinance against the Supreme Court judgement.
