Bengal violence: EC`s attempt to conduct peaceful election miserably fails

Home >> Kolkata Bengal violence: EC`s attempt to conduct peaceful election miserably fails

Several incidents of the clash between TMC and BJP workers are being reported since the polling began in the morning.

West Bengal that has seen violence in almost all the previous six phases of polling continues to be on the same line during the last phase of Lok Sabha election. The polling for 9 remaining seats is taking place in West Bengal in the last phase which includes Kolkata North, Kolkata South, Dum Dum, Barasat, Basirhat, Jadavpur, Diamond Harbour, Jayanagar (SC) and Mathurapur (SC).

Several incidents of the clash between TMC and BJP workers are being reported since the polling began in the morning.

BJP`s CK Bose told in the morning that his workers are being threatened by `TMC`s `jihadi` brigade` "There`s no difference between a terrorist organization & TMC", he said.

BJP`s CK Bose: Last night, I was getting calls from my workers from different booths that they have been threatened by TMC`s `jihadi` brigade that if you sit as booth agents for BJP, you`ll be murdered. There`s no difference between a terrorist organisation & TMC. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/OkG6e4l3TT — ANI (@ANI) May 19, 2019

In another incident, voters at polling station number 189 in Basirhat held protest alleging that they were being prevented from voting by TMC workers. BJP MP candidate from Basirhat, Sayantan Basu said, "100 people were stopped from voting. We will take them to cast their vote."

West Bengal: Voters hold protest outside polling station number 189 in Basirhat, allege that TMC workers are not allowing them to cast their vote. BJP MP candidate from Basirhat, Sayantan Basu says, "100 people were stopped from voting. We will take them to cast their vote." pic.twitter.com/9qoXEi8YDV — ANI (@ANI) May 19, 2019

Reports of clashes between the BJP and TMC workers have also come up from state`s Diamond Harbour parliamentary constituency where BJP candidate Nilanjan Roy`s car was vandalized in Dongaria area of the constituency.

West Bengal: BJP candidate for Diamond Harbour Lok Sabha constituency, Nilanjan Roy`s car vandalised in Dongaria area of the constituency. pic.twitter.com/Ag09xHu5hZ — ANI (@ANI) May 19, 2019

The election commission had earlier cut short the campaign period after the violence in Amit Shah`s road show and had decided to deploy 710 companies of security forces to ensure peaceful polling in the last phase of Lok Sabha Elections.

"710 companies of security personnel will be providing 100 percent coverage during the seventh phase of elections in West Bengal. This will include 512 quick response teams (QRTs) led by assistant commandants," said the EC in a statement.

All the preparations of the poll body seem to be going in vain as the state faces violence in the remaining phase.

Meanwhile, Abhishek Banerjee, the nephew of party chief Mamata Banerjee, who is seeking re-election from Diamond Harbour has sent a defamation notice to Prime Minister Narendra Modi for making "wildly fabricated allegations" against him during a rally in the constituency.

PM Modi had said that the state was being tortured by the bua-bhatija - an apparent reference to Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and Abhishek Banerjee.
