Farmer’s widow to open Marathi literary meet today

Vidrohi Sanskrutik Chalval

92nd Akhil Bhartiya Marathi Sahitya Sammelan

author Nayantara Sahgal

Marathi Sahitya Mahamandal

to hold counter programme in Pune next month to condemn the Marathi Sahitya Sammelan.The organisers of thehave decided to let a farmer’s widow inaugurate the event in Yavatmal on Friday. The literary meet is embroiled in controversy over withdrawal of invitation to noted Englishand the consequent refusal of prominent writers to attend the meet. While the Left-leaning Vidrohi Sanskrutik Chalval has condemned the Sammelan for its decision, called it “undemocratic” and announced a counter programme in Pune next month, the president of the organising body (the Akhil Bharatiya), Shripad Joshi resigned in protest on Wednesday.The Sahitya Sammelan begins today in Yavatmal, a district known for the highest number of farmer suicides. The organising committee had proposed the names of writers Mahesh Elkunchwar, Suresh Dwadashiwar and Vitthal Wagh to replace Sahgal. However, they refused to accept the invitation and criticised the organisers. Left with no option, deputy president of the Marathi Sahitya Mahamandal, Vidya Deodhar, announced that the event will be opened by a farmer’s widow, whose identity is being kept under wraps.Calling the Sammelan “biased”, state president of Sanskrutik Chalval Prof Pratima Pardeshi said, “The Sammelan is casteist. They do not believe in democracy and secular values of the country. Mahatma Phule had also refused to attend such a literary conclave for its biased attitude. They take funds from the government but spread inequality in society. We condemn the way Nayantara Sahgal’s invitation was withdrawn.” Pardeshi told Mirror that her organisation will hold a Vidrohi Stree Sahitya Sammelan in Pune next month.Noted writer Ganesh Visputay said he stopped attending the Sahitya Sammelan 15-20 years ago and alleged that the body is “too political”. “The Sahitya Sammelan is not organised to cherish love for Marathi. We see a feudal mind-set of the organisers all the time. They are politically motivated and nothing serious happens at the Sammelan and it should be shut,” said Visputay, who was one of the signatories demanding that Sahgal’s speech be read even if her invitation was cancelled.Meanwhile, the new president of the Sahitya Sammelan, Aruna Dhere is silent on the issue. It is said that the speech prepared by Sahgal was “inconvenient” for the authorities and hence her invitation was withdrawn.
