Didigiri, Babugiri over as BJP breaches Bengal, Odisha: India Today exit poll

The India Today-Axis My India exit poll has predicted that the BJP is likely to win 19-23 seats and TMC 19-22 in Bengal, while in Odisha, of the 21 seats in, the exit poll predicts a near rout for BJD and a sweep by BJP.

It’s set to be the biggest story of the Lok Sabha 2019 election. The India Today-Axis My India exit poll has predicted the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) will do extremely well in West Bengal and Odisha.

For years, the BJP has tried to make a dent in the two eastern states but to no avail. Mamata Banerjee’s Trinamool Congress (TMC) and Naveen Patnaik’s Biju Janata Dal (BJD) had successfully guarded their fortresses against BJP.

The India Today-Axis My India exit poll has predicted that the BJP is likely to win 19-23 seats and TMC 19-22. Congress will at the most win just one and the Communist Party of India (Marxist)-led Left Front’s tally in West Bengal will be zero. West Bengal sends 42 MPs to Parliament, the third highest after Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra.

Of the 21 seats in Odisha, the exit poll predicts a near rout for BJD and a sweep by BJP. The India Today-Axis My India exit poll, released on Sunday, says BJP is likely to win 15-19 seats, BJD 2-6 and Congress a maximum of one seat.

Now let’s put the exit poll results in perspective and why they could be the defining stories of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

In the 2014 parliamentary elections, of the 42 seats in West Bengal, Mamata Banerjee’s TMC won a whopping 34 while the BJP won just two seats.

In Odisha, Naveen Patnaik’s BJD won 20 of the 21 seats while BJP won one.

If the exit poll numbers are true then the saffron footprint will be across a large swathe of India. South India, except for Karnataka, is still holding out against Narendra Modi and BJP.

Expanding the party

BJP’s gain in West Bengal and Odisha is less chance and more design. The party’s recent electoral losses made the party go back to the drawing board. In the 2017 Gujarat assembly election the party’s tally was 99 out of 182 seats, down from 115 in 2012.

BJP supporters wearing masks of PM Narendra Modi at a campaign during the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. ( File Photo: Kasif)

A few bypoll losses followed in Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan. But the bigger losses were in the 2018 assembly elections. BJP lost power in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.

The party has for some time now strategised a 'look East' policy to expand in East and Northeast India.

The party could expand exponentially in these states as it had a low base. While in the Northeast BJP tied up with regional parties in the run up to assembly and Lok Sabha polls, it found it difficult to do so in either Odisha or West Bengal.

Both Naveen babu and Mamata didi had a firm grip on the government as well as the party. To dislodge them was well nigh impossible.

Both West Bengal and Odisha were firmly in BJP’s sights this poll season. The party believed that whatever seats it loses in various North Indian states (because of anti-incumbency and other factors) could be made up by wins in the two eastern states.



Enemy at the gate

Mamata Banerjee has been an unsparing critic of Narendra Modi and his brand of politics. In the run up to the 2019 general elections she has met a number of opposition leaders trying to cobble up an anti-BJP alliance. She also held a mega opposition leaders’ rally in Kolkata.

Naveen Patnaik though a critic is not vociferous one. He has also not hobnobbed with opposition leaders and clamoured for an anti-BJP alliance. Many commentators think that if the inducements are right BJD would lend support to the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance should it fall short of numbers.

Narendra Modi and Amit Shah have gone easy on Naveen babu, but when it came to Mamata didi they hit out at her with vengeance. Modi held 17 rallies in West Bengal, second only to the 36 he held in UP.

(File photo: Reuters)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has called Mamata Banerjee speed-breaker didi, highlighted the various scams and criticised the notorious tola (extortion) system. And the covert (and sometimes blatant) theme of BJP’s criticism of Mamata Banerjee is her appeasement of Muslims.

Naveen Patnaik has been spared Narendra Modi’s barbs. Perhaps the only direct criticism was at a rally in Kendrapara in April. There Modi warned the Odisha CM that his time was up and a few bureaucrats were not enough to save the BJD government in Odisha.

Odisha conducted assembly as well as Lok Sabha polls across four phases in April 2017.

However, it’s Bengal and the poll outcome there that has everybody on the edge.

True there is a growing disenchantment with Mamata Banerjee. Bengal’s economic development has been on slow mode for decades. Jobs are scarce. Trinamool factions run amok. And corruption/extortion is achingly quotidian.

BJP’s accusations are sure to find some resonance in many middle-class Hindus. And that could be the reason why India Today-Axis My India exit poll has thrown these startling numbers.
