Movement of EVMs observed across North India, claims Tejashwi Yadav

Unused/reserved EVMs being brought to same places where EVMs used for voting are stored in several Lok Sabha constituencies | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: With less than two days remaining for the counting of votes for the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections, a huge controversy has erupted over unused/reserved EVMs being brought to same places where EVMs used for voting are stored in several Lok Sabha constituencies across north India.

Rashtriya Janata Dal leader Tejashwi Yadav has also raised the issue saying, "Visuals and claims of sudden movement of EVMs observed across north India! Why is it so? Who is transporting these EVMs & Why? What is purpose and objective of this exercise? In order to avoid any confusion & misconception, Election Commission must issue a statement ASAP."

Meanwhile, opposition party workers have started demonstrating against the EVMs movement. On Monday, protests erupted at Navin Krishi Mandi Sthal in Chandauli parliamentary constituency and in Ghazipur Lok Sabha seat in Uttar Pradesh. Navin Krishi Mandi Sthal is already in the news after residents claimed that BJP workers gave them Rs 500 and forcefully applied ink on their fingers on the eve of polling.

In Mau as well, opposition party workers gathered outside the place where EVMs were stored after news of EVMs movement started to emerge. "Some people had gathered outside the EVM strong room believing social media rumors. They were dispersed using light force, law and order of the area is intact," SP Mau, Surendra Bahadur said.

While the opposition is claiming that EVMs are being replaced at the instance of the BJP, authorities have justified the move saying that the reserved EVMs from the constituencies are being brought and being stored in different rooms under supervision.

Additional chief electoral officer BDR Tiwari tried to pacify the protesting workers in Chandauli stating that the additional EVMs are being taken to different strong room and party leaders can inspect the seal on the door.

Opposition meet in Delhi

As exit polls predict a second term for the Narendra Modi-led NDA government, opposition party leaders are set to meet on Tuesday in Delhi to discuss further course of action for the formation of an anti-BJP front.

A delegation of 21 opposition leaders, including the Congress, will also reportedly meet the Election Commission in the afternoon to raise their concerns regarding EVM.


