Lok Sabha elections 2019: The uniqueness of the electoral trends in Odisha

Odisha, which went to polls in four phases between 11-29 April, was mainly a Modi versus Patnaik contest. (Photo: Twitter/ @Naveen_Odisha)

The India Today-Axis My India exit poll seems to suggest that the voter in Odisha is making a clear distinction between the Lok Sabha and State Assembly elections held simultaneously. The Exit poll suggests that the in the state assembly elections, the Biju Janata Dal (BJD) is likely to get around 97 seats, the BJP is likely to get around 36 seats and the Congress would need to be satisfied with 10 seats.

On the other hand, in the Lok Sabha poll from Odisha, the BJP is projected to get 17 seats and BJD 4 seats. If this result was to hold on 23rd May, it would imply a clear split ticket.

The implication clearly is that when it came to the national poll, the voters were keen to vote for the BJP, and at the state level they wanted the BJD back in power. More importantly, it implies that the electors of Odisha, voted for Modi as Prime Minister and Naveen Patnaik for the Chief Minister.

In the past when elections to the two levels of government are held simultaneously in a particular state, the trend has always been in the same direction at both the state and central level.

An example that comes closest to the possible Odisha case is what happened in Karnataka in 2004. The state had an assembly poll and a simultaneous Lok Sabha poll. In the latter, BJP won 18 of the 28 seats in the state (64% seats) while Congress won 8 seats (29%) and Janata Dal (S) 2 seats. On the other hand, in the State Assembly polls, BJP managed to emerge as the single largest party with 79 of the 224 seats (36%), Congress won 65 seats (29%) and JD(S) 58 seats (26%).

Thus, unlike the Odisha Exit Poll projection, which gives the majority in the Lok Sabha poll from the state to BJP and the Assembly majority to BJD, in Karnataka, BJP got a majority in the Lok Sabha elections from the state but secured just over one-third of the Assembly seats.

Diverse results in elections to the State Assembly and Lok Sabha elections held over a short gap of time has become common. A few examples in this context. In the December 1984 Lok Sabha election, Congress won a majority of seats in Karnataka. The Janata Party was in power in the state.

Ramakrishna Hegde, the then Chief Minister of Karnataka, resigned and called for the dissolution of the Assembly. In the state Assembly Election held in March 1985 (three months after the Lok Sabha election), the Janata Party returned to power with a clear majority. Remaining with Karnataka, in the summer of 2013, the ruling BJP in the state was routed in the Assembly election and Congress came to power. Within less than a year, in the Lok Sabha election of 2014, BJP won a majority of seats in the polls.

A similar trend was seen in Delhi. The BJP swept the Lok Sabha polls from Delhi in 2014, winning all the seven seats. A year later, when the Delhi Assembly election was held, the Aam Aadmi Party won 67 of the 70 seats. Similarly, in Bihar, the NDA won a majority of seats in the Lok Sabha election of 2014. In the Assembly election held the next year, the NDA lost and the JDU-RJD-Congress alliance won the election. An important caveat needs to be added. The JDU, RJD, and Congress which were in alliance fought the Lok Sabha election separately.

So, what the India Today-Axis My India Exit Poll projects for Odisha may well be setting a new trend. It reflects a sense of political maturity of the voter who makes a clear distinction between national and state assembly elections, especially when held simultaneously.

(Sandeep Shastri is Pro Vice-Chancellor of Jain University and National Coordinator of Lokniti Network)
