For protection of votes, take up weapons if you have to: RLSP's Upendra Kushwaha causes a furore

RLSP chief Upendra Kushwaha I Photo credit: PTI | Photo Credit: PTI

Patna: Ahead of the Lok Sabha election results on Thursday, Rashtriya Lok Samta Party (RLSP) Upendra Kushwaha in a joint press conference of mahagathbandhan in Patna on Tuesday warned of bloodshed if “result loot” happens.

The controversial statement was made by Kushwaha in a joint press conference conducted by Bihar mahagathbandhan or grand alliance partners on Tuesday in Patna’s Maurya hotel.

The presser was addressed by Bihar Pradesh Congress Committee president Madan Mohan Jha, RLSP chief Kushwaha, Bihar RJD chief Ram Chandra Purve and Vikasshil Insan Party (VIP) chief Mukesh Sahni.

The RLSP chief said an illusion is being created through exit polls by BJP leaders. “BJP’s leadership is trying to create an illusion through these exit polls in order to create a psychological process. We do not accept these exit polls,” he said.

“Vote ki raksha ke liye zaroorat pade toh hathiyaar bhi uthana ho toh uthaiye. Aaj jo result loot ki jo ghatna karne ki jo koshish ho rahi hai toh isko rokne ke liye hathiyaar bhi uthana ho toh uthana chahiye (Pick up weapons if you have to in order to protect votes. Pick up weapons to stop this attempt of the loot of results),” the RLSP chief added.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and its alliance partners, the Janata Dal-United (JDU) and Lok Janshakti Party (LJP), in Bihar are predicted to retain its seat 2014 seat tally in the state, according to the Times Now-VMR Exit Poll. While the Exit Poll has further suggested that the Congress-led coalition, which includes the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD), Rashtriya Lok Samta Party (RLSP) and Hindustani Awam Morcha (HAM), will also win the same number of seats in Bihar it won in 2014.

According to the Times Now-VMR Exit Poll, the BJP alliance is expected to win 30 Lok Sabha seats this time out. However, there hasn't been much loss of vote share predicted for the BJP alliance as it is mooted to garner 48.52 per cent vote share compared to 51.5 per cent vote share it received in the 2014 general elections.

The Times Now-VMR Exit Poll further predicted that the Congress alliance will garner 10 seats in the state repeating its 2014 tally. On the vote share front, the alliance has improved significantly since last time. In the 2014 elections, it has secured 32.8 per cent vote share while in the 2019 elections, it has been predicted to garner nearly 42.78 per cent vote share.

There is not much likelihood of improvement in the standing of the other parties and the candidates in Bihar as the Times Now-VMR Exit Poll has predicted that their seat count will remain unchanged to zero while their vote share will see a dip to 8.7 per cent from 15.7 per cent in 2014

The Times Now-VMR Exit Poll 2019 was carried out between April 11 and May 19, 2019. The cumulative sample of the exit poll was 40,000 spread across the country.
