Cab driver strips naked in protest outside aggregator's offices in Hyderabad

Ola is yet to respond on the issue (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Hyderabad: In a bizarre incident which has come to light from the city of Hyderabad, a cab driver decided to stage a nude protest outside the offices of a major cab aggregator after the company decided to take his cab off the road. The incident took place on Monday when the cab driver, Arjun, stripped naked outside the offices of Ola at Kukatpally.

While the demonstration was peaceful, it was successful in getting the attention of the can aggregator. Ola is currently valued at over $430 USD and is one of the most popular aggregators in the country. In March of this year, as many as 150 drivers employed by Ola staged a massive protest outside the company's offices in SR Layout in Bengaluru. The demonstrators registered their displeasure with the aggregator's policies, including heavy charges as part of their lease agreements.

According to a report by The New Indian Express, Vijay claimed that the company was preventing him from taking his cab but asking him to pay the vehicle's daily rent anyway. While the company attributed the issue to a technical snag, the protesting cab driver said that he was being kept in the dark by Ola executives for the past ten days. Other drivers also stood by as Vijay held the protest, airing their grievances against private cab aggregators worth millions of dollars.

In October of last year, cab drivers employed by private cab aggregators Ola and Uber launched a massive protest in Mumbai. The demonstrators called a strike, demanding higher minimum base fares. They claimed that the companies also promised to compensate the drivers for losses incurred during the protests. The demonstration caused massive delays to commuters who depended on the cab aggregators for their daily commute. The strike ended only after leading private cab aggregators decided to agree to the demands put forward by the drivers.
