Fact Check: Viral claim of EVMs being stolen in UP's Chandauli is false

One viral video on Facebook shows commotion and claims that EVMs are being stolen by BJP in Chandauli area of UP

As counting day approaches, the social media is flooded with claims of EVMs being tampered or changed in various places across India.

One such viral video on Facebook shows commotion, and claims that EVMs are being stolen by the BJP in Chandauli area of Uttar Pradesh.

India Today's Anti-Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the claim to be untrue. Even the Election Commission has stated that the reason for the commotion in Chandauli was baseless.

Facebook page 'Janshakti Samachar' uploaded a video in which people are talking about EVM. The video is shot after sunset and a politician is seen talking to the media amid the commotion.

Along with the video, 'Janshakti Samachar' claimed, "Just now: BJP caught stealing EVMs in #Chandauli? Be awake, keep a watch on EVMs."

This post has been shared by over 14,000 Facebook users till the filing of this story. The archived version of the post can be seen here.

Facebook page 'Priyanka Gandhi Vadra', which is a fan page of the Congress leader, uploaded the same video claiming, "BJP caught stealing #EVM in Chandauli".

This post uploaded on May 21 has been shared by over 1,300 Facebook users till the filing of this story. The archived version of the post can be seen here.

AFWA searched the internet for news in Chanduali concerning EVMs.

A commotion did happen in Chandauli on the evening of May 20 after a vehicle loaded with EVMs reached the district headquarters at Navin Krishi Mandi Samiti. According to news reports like this one, reserved and unused EVMs were brought in from Sakaldiha, one of the assembly segments under Chandauli parliamentary constituency.

However, the Opposition, including Samajwadi party MLA Prabhunarayan Yadav, protested against the vehicle's entry in the strong room area. Yadav can be seen in the viral video as well.

On the other hand, the Election Commission spokesperson tweeted on May 21 saying, "Clarification issued by RO (Returning Officer) with respect to mishandling of EVMs in Chandauli, UP. All extant guidelines issued by ECI followed."

This tweet also contains a letter written by the district magistrate to Lucknow-based chief election officer giving details of the incident.

The letter states, "After voting and scrutiny ended on May 20,2019, the assistant returning officer sent these machines from Sakaldiha tehsil temporary strong room by vehicle to be kept in the allocated strong room No. 9 at Navin Krishi Mandi Samiti, Chandauli. Political parties had been informed beforehand about this along with the strong room number where it was to be kept. (A photo of this has been attached)".

According to the DM, proper procedure for unused reserve EVMs was followed.

News about the protest and the DM's clarification can be read here.

It is clear that the issue had emanated from unused reserve EVMs being brought to the Chandauli strong room area. There was no issue of EVMs being stolen in Chandauli.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim BJP workers caught stealing EVMs in Chandauli. Conclusion No EVMs were stolen in Chandauli. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
