Will BJP's Look East policy pay rich dividends in Bengal and Odisha?

Six months back, in December, Bharatiya Janta Party’s national president Amit Shah predicted 23 seats of 42 for his party in West Bengal. Since then, in every public meeting, he put it on record that his party will be surging ahead in Bengal with almost two dozen seats, more than half of total 42 in the state. As late as last week, he repeated the same tally for his party in Bengal while addressing a press conference in Delhi, flanked by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.The arithmetic behind such predictions is Shah's own domain, but by public perceptions, BJP 's larger kitty of seats in Bengal this time is a common refrain. If Shah pegs it on 23, a more moderate estimate hovers around 8 to 12 seats for the party this time, which if proved true, itself would be a major breakthrough for the saffron brigade in West Bengal. The exit poll results have however pushed everything in Bengal to a state of flux. It seems all quiet at all fronts, and the political observers are calling it a ‘lull before the storm’.The poll research unit of the party and the RSS have a conservative estimate of around 15 to 20 seats in the state which will have a significant bearing on their national poll strategy. According to a senior leader in the party, the election is all about what BJP loses in Uttar Pradesh and gains in Bengal. However, this election looks like more as BJP’s aggressive and desperate saffron push in eastern state, primarily – West Bengal and Odisha.Even though, it appears to be an advantage BJP right at the outset as it has nothing to lose and can actually again ride over Modi magic, one also should not undermine the organizational capability of Mamata Banerjee The upsurge in BJP’s election campaign in parts of West Bengal, particularly in Northen and Western parts of Bengalwas palpable, visible and even audible as one travels across the region. In fact, if the BJP is looking at states like West Bengal to make up for its deficit of seats elsewhere this is one region with over half a dozen seats that hold promise for the party. No wonder the BJP’s chief election campaigner – Narendra Modi held as more as 17 rallies in West Bengal including an address at the historic Brigade Parade Ground in April.Majority of BJP’s candidates are disgruntled TMC, CPM or Congress leaders. Apart from internal bleeding within the TMC, there is other poll chemistry at work. Precisely, it is about the possibility of shifting of Left Front votes to BJP. North Bengal has always been a strong bastion of Left Front parties, mostly Forward Bloc, RSP and CPM. The Left support base survived in the region even after Mamata storming into power in 2011 and retained its vote share of close to 30%. The Left support base is BJP’s target with Left losing its stranglehold on voters.Apart from West Bengal, Odisha is another state that has also witnessed a saffron surge. The state had Lok Sabha and Bidhan Sabha polls together. So, these two states, along with Uttar Pradesh and Maharastra will be keenly watched tomorrow once the trends start coming.
