Oppn vigil on EVMs as power cuts fuel tampering rumours

Allahabad: Scores of Congress, Samajwadi Party (SP) and Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) workers spend Tuesday and Wednesday camping outside the strongroom in Mundera Mandi keeping a close eye on the stored EVMs after frequent power cuts were reported from the area.

The party workers alleged that the administration was facilitating movement of EVMs by ensuring frequent power cuts.

“Our workers have been keeping a close eye on the EVMs stored in the strongroom as we suspect that these machines are being exchanged,” said RS Patel, the SP-BSP alliance candidate from Allahabad.

Patel alleged that administrative officials were also involved in the alleged exchange of machines as they wanted Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) candidates to win by ‘hook or crook’.

Around Wednesday midnight, a large number of SP, BSP and Congress workers reached the strongroom in Mundera Mandi and started protesting against the power failure. Later in the evening, many party workers also started filming the lanes of Mundera Mandi shrouded in darkness due to the power outage on the mobile phones and posted them on social media.

“We have been here since yesterday and have noticed that the electricity has been cut several time. When we called the SDO, he is not picking up. This hints at a conspiracy and even the authorities are trying to change EVMs to ensure that candidates of a particular party win the election,” said Haseeb Ahmed, general secretary of Congress city unit.

Opposition parties’ candidates have been asking party workers to stay vigilant and keep an eye on the strongroom.

“We have asked our agents and party workers to be more alert as the ruling party could go to any extent to ensure its candidates’ victory,” said SP spokesperson KK Srivastava.

Dismissing opposition parties’ allegations, SDO (Bamrauli) Nitin Singh said, “There was no power failure in the strong room. I am personally monitoring the arrangements closely. These are just some rumours and things are under control.”

The district election officer and district magistrate Bhanu Chandra Goswami said, “No workers of any political party are sitting on a dharna outside the strongroom. They have a right to sit and keep a vigil for their own sake. We are obliged to respect the norms laid down by the Election Commission of India.”

The votes polled during the seven phase Lok Sabha elections would be counted on Thursday from onwards.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
