It Is Modi Wave 2.0

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

India has reposed trust in Prime Minister Narendra Modi with a sweeping mandate. In many states across India, particularly the Hindi heartland – Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand — BJP has even polled more than 50% votes making even alliances of the sort stitched by SP and BSP in UP redundant. The opposition has been restricted to pockets like Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Bengal, Odisha and Telangana.

Even in many of these states BJP has made stunning progress, especially Bengal, Odisha and Telangana. In Bengal, BJP is leading in 20 seats, in Odisha in eight and in Telangana in four. After the Rajiv Gandhi victory of 1984, no party has achieved such a sweep across the country. But unlike that Congress victory, BJP’s win rests on more solid organisational foundations. The Congress was brought down by a troika of three factors: anti-corruption, Mandal and Hindutva.

On all three BJP now controls the narrative. It continues to paint Congress as a corrupt decadent organization with great effect. In Hindutva it has now ideological glue that has attracted a larger captive base across successive elections. And in attracting OBCs and Dalits to its fold without succumbing to the dynastic and exclusivist caste politics of the socialist parties, BJP has aced the Mandal game too. In the past five years aided by technology and greater executive focus on service delivery, BJP has also aced the targeting of welfare schemes in a better manner than all governments of yore.

The driving force behind these achievements has been Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his extraordinary success as a communicator. In Modi, BJP and the country has perhaps found the most perfect politician since Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. The coincidence that both are Gujarati is difficult to miss. Here is wishing him good luck.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
