The Accidental Prime Minister: Congress members protest against screenings in Kolkata, Ludhiana, Raipur-Politics News , Firstpost

The Accidental prime Minister's release has been termed 'convenient' by many who feel the film was released prior to the 2019 Lok sabha elections in order to influence audiences

The issues surrounding The Accidental Prime Minister somehow do not seem to end. The film, featuring Anupam Kher in the lead as former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, was released in theatres on Friday. Reports state that West Bengal Congress has held protests outside film theatres in Kolkata demanding the screenings be halted with immediate effect. Videos of Congress supporters burning effigies of PM Narendra Modi were also captured.

The protests were held outside Hind Cinema in Kolkata. Despite protesters thronging outside the theatre chanting slogans, the audiences inside the theatre remained unhurt as the Kolkata Police tried to contain crowds. As per reports in CNN News18, the protest was an isolated incident of rebellion rather than a coordinated series of events. Though the protests have for now ceased, reports state that Hind cinema presently has significant policemen on site to avert any kind of disorder for the upcoming screenings of The Accidental Prime Minister in the theatre.

Kolkata# Congress Protest against the release of Accidental Prime Minister movie .They want it to be withdrawn from the Cinema hall and multiplexes pic.twitter.com/erz5QBQim4 — Shabana@ANI (@ShabanaANI2) January 11, 2019

Other places where the Congress seems to have created an obstacle are Raipur and Ludhiana, added reports. While a Ludhiana mall faced protests during The Accidental Prime Minister's screening, in Raipur, youth wing of Congress opposed the screening at 36 multiplexes. All shows in Raipur city currently stand cancelled due to the fear of disruption of order.

Ever since the release of The Accidental Prime Minister's trailer, the video has received considerable backlash as many considered it Bharatiya Janta Party's (BJP) ploy to influence audience opinion before the imminent Lok Sabha elections.
