Shocking defeat for BJD heavyweight Maheswar at Puri

BHUBANESWAR: Poll results came as a shock defeat for BJD ’s heavyweight minister and five-time MLA from Puri assembly segment, Maheswar Mohanty . While chief minister Naveen Patnaik and eighteen other ministers in Odisha contested from different assembly and Lok Sabha seats, only Mohanty bit the dust.Puri was Mohanty’s stronghold as he had continuously been winning from the assembly seat since 1995. However, Mohanty’s citadel crumbled this time as his friend-turned-foe Jayant Sarangi of BJP defeated him by a slender margin of 4008 votes. Sarangi and Mohanty secured 76,747 and 72,739 votes, respectively. Sarangi, who was in BJD and once a close associate of Mohanty, switched his allegiance to the BJP ahead of elections.Sources said Mohanty faced massive anti-incumbency and wrath of voters for failing to usher in development in his area. Political observers said poor developmental works at the tourist destination might have prompted the constituents to vote against him. “There had been voice of dissent from locals over alleged misappropriation of government funds, sanctioned during 2015 Nabakalebara festival of Jagannath temple. Mohanty was chairman of Nabakalebara Infrastructure Supervision Committee. Though crores of rupees were sanctioned for overhaul of Puri infrastructure, the beach town still reels under a series of problems,” said Suresh Kumar Nanda, a political analyst.Despite repeated attempts, 63-year-old Mohanty was unavailable for comment. His office staffers at Puri said Mohanty was down with fever. Significantly, Mohanty had until this elections had successfully dodged all controversies that surrounded him in the past. While serving as assembly speaker in 2008, Mohanty was accused of sexually harassing the assembly’s lady assistant marshal. Mohanty was so controversial that some armed miscreants opened fire on him at Puri in February 2014 and attacked his head in Chandanpur near Puri January 2012. He had also faced allegations of land grab around Swargadwar in Puri and Nabakalebara mismanagement.Meanwhile, the Pipili assembly segment under Puri Lok Sabha seat has been won by BJD heavyweight and former minister Pradeep Maharathy despite his involvement in a series of controversies. Maharathy was arrested just a day before April 23 third phase elections on charges of assaulting a team of polling officials at his farmhouse in Pipili. Maharathy, a six-time MLA, had to resign from Naveen Patnaik’s ministry in January for hailing the acquittal of two brothers in connection with 2011-12 rape-murder of a 19-year-old girl in Pipili. Maharathy comfortably won Pipili seat by securing 88,518 votes while BJP’s Ashrit Pattanayak stood second with 72,731 votes.BJD’s key leader and former minister Sanjay Das Burma was defeated by BJP’s Lalitendu Bidyadhar Mohapatra at politically sensitive Brahmagiri assembly constituency under Puri Lok Sabha seat. Das Burma recently hogged headlines for his alleged involvement in a chit fund scam.
