Protests rock Kashmir Valley day after Musa encounter, curfew imposed

SRINAGAR: A day after Ansar Ghazwat-ul Hind chief Zakir Musa (25) was killed in Pulwama ’s Tral area, clashes erupted across Kashmir Valley on Friday, prompting the administration to impose curfew in Srinagar and major towns of Kashmir. Meanwhile, J&K Police revealed that the slain terrorist was involved in the serial blasts in Punjab’s Jalandhar on September 14 last year.Musa’s body was handed over to his family on Friday morning. Soon after the news of his killing spread, clashes broke out in several parts of south Kashmir. In view of the precarious security situation, curfew was imposed in Srinagar and major towns of Kashmir, including Pulwama, Awantipora, Srinagar, Anantnag and Budgam.All roads leading to Tral were sealed to stop people from marching towards Noorpora, Musa’s native village. Internet services were snapped and educational institutions remained shut as a precautionary measure. Braving rain and curfew, however, hundreds of sympathisers from various parts of Kashmir Valley, including Pulwama, Anantnag and Shopian, marched to Noorpora to join his funeral while protesters took to the roads, waving IS flags and shouting pro-Musa slogans.DGP Dilbagh Singh said, “Musa was declared a proclaimed offender by an NIA court on May 2, 2019, pertaining to his involvement in the serial blasts at a Jalandhar police station on September 14, 2018.” Wanted since 2013, Musa had planned and executed several attacks on security establishments and committed civilian atrocities, and would incite Kashmiri youth to join militancy, the DGP said.Musa alias Zakir Rashid Bhat was an engineering student in Chandigarh before joining Hizbul Mujahideen (HM) in January 2013. A close aide of HM commander Burhan Wani, he was one of the core group of 11 terrorists based in Tral, and took over the reins of the outfit after Wani’s killing in July 2016.With the rest of his group members killed in encounters, Musa was the only surviving member of the 11. Musa quit HM in 2017, days before al-Qaeda announced him as the chief of its Kashmir unit, Ansar Ghatwat-ul Hind. With a bounty of Rs 12 lakh on him, Musa was one of the most-wanted terrorists who managed to elude the security forces for six years before getting killed late on Thursday.
