Tribal seats still a hard nut to crack for BJP

RANCHI: Even as BJP-led NDA managed to win 12 of 14 seats in Lok Sabha elections in Jharkhand to maintain its tally of 2014 parliamentary elections, the results in five seats reserved for Scheduled Tribes should make the saffron party introspect about its performance. The party won one tribal seat, lost two, and won another two in extremely close battles.While BJP’s Sunil Soren managed to unseat JMM patriarch and eight-time MP Shibu Soren from Dumka by a decent 47,590 votes, the contest was too close for comfort in former CM Arjun Munda in Khunti (winning margin of 1,445 votes) and Union minister Sudarshan Bhagat in Lohardaga (10,363-vote win). Even as the Modi wave swept other parts of the state, BJP’s state president and sitting MP Laxman Gilua lost Singhbhum to Congress Geeta Koda by 72,155 votes and Hemlal Murmu lost to JMM’s Hansdak in Rajmahal by 99,195.The results in tribal seats was surely far from perfect for the saffron party. Political observers believe BJP needs to focus more on these tribal areas ahead of the assembly polls later this year as the tide could very well shift in favour of the mahagathbandhan of opposition parties. In recent years, tribals have launched a series of protests against the state government’s various controversial decisions. The efforts to amend pro-tribal land laws and bring in an anti-conversion bill did not go down well in the state. The crackdown on Pathalgarhi movement and the activists leading it was also criticised in tribal sections of the society.The mahagathbandhan used these issues as a poll plank against the NDA. “We lost by less than 1,500 votes. We will analyse what went wrong but the voting pattern in Khunti indicates that the tribals aren’t too happy with BJP,” senior Congress leader Alok Dubey said, adding, “All the issues that the grand alliance stood for — jal, jungle and jameen — struck the right chord among voters. We will plug the gaps before the state goes to the polls.” Talking about the other ST seats, Dubey said, “The fight was narrow in Lohardaga, too, and we managed to win Singhbhum and Rajmahal by a huge margin,” he added.BJP insiders said while Khunti helped them level their previous tally, the party needs to introspect on how to tackle further challenges in tribal pockets. “We were not sure about Khunti right from the start because of issues such tenancy laws, pathalgarhi and polarization attempts by missionary forces. Apart from that, there was a sense of anti-incumbency against the state government too,” a senior party worker said.BJP spokesperson Pratul Shahdeo, however, dubbed the victory in Khunti as BJP’s crowning feat. “Our fight against anti-national forces that spearheaded Pathalgarhi and the polarization attempts by churches paid off. Victory tastes best when it comes amid adversity,” Shahdeo said.
