Students kick-start climate strike in city

Inspired by the FridaysForFuture movement, two youngsters gathered like-minded people to demand civic bodies to come up with plans to conserve Pune’s biodiversity



School strike for climate, an international movement of school students that sees the pupils taking part in demonstrations to seek action and intervention to check the fast-paced climate change we have seen in the last couple of years, has hit the streets of Pune as well. Following the positive trend, more popular as FridaysForFuture, two young women from the city decided to get activists together on Friday to demand a policy be framed to act against climate change by conducting climate strike.



The initiative harps on students taking time off from their schools, mostly on Fridays, to assemble before government institutions, such as the parliament, to protest against global warming and demand actions to prevent further deterioration of the climatic conditions. The climate strikes became more popular when, in 2018, Greta Thunberg, a 15-year-old Swedish girl, protested outside the Swedish parliament, demanding action on climate change.



~~69489343~~

“There is so much happening in other parts of the world about climate change. The threats that we face today are grave and people need to speak up,” said Radhika Castle, an entrepreneur and one of the duo holding the demonstration.



Stating that she did not see the city come out voicing its concern over climate change strongly, Castle added, “We wanted to provide a platform for like-minded people to raise their apprehension on climate change.”



Castle’s ideas gained momentum when she got in touch with Arunima Jamwal, a city-based educator, who shares her views on the matter. Together they decided to get support from city activists and raise awareness over the burning issue.



The two youngsters gathered activists, students and youngsters from the city in front of the Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU) on Friday morning to raise slogans and speak about conserving the hills, rivers and biodiversity in and around Pune.



“The last FridaysForFuture was held in March in the city and May 24 was the second such day where students of the world would come together, demanding their governments to act swiftly and draft policies to mitigate climate change,” Jamwal said. She also added that a lot of programmes, such as reaching out to students to explain the effects our lifestyles have on climate change, are lined up until the next event is held in September.



Satish Gore, an MPhil student from SPPU’s English department, said that the United Kingdom government declared climate emergency recently, which shows the policymakers want to work towards saving the planet. “Our demand is the civic body and state government take measures and frame policies that would help support the cause of climate change,” he added.



Amitav Malik from Climate Collective Pune, a non-governmental organisation (NGO), said, “One of the schools in Pune conducted the climate strike in March with support from the NGO.”


