Did voters in Bengal punish BJP in last phase of Lok Sabha elections?

The BJP seeped in through Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee's turf, a place it has never reached a two-digit figure.

The Bharatiya Janata Party clean swept the country in the Lok Sabha elections 2019 and this time with a bigger bang.

For the first time in its history, the Bharatiya Janata Party made a huge entry into West Bengal, a state ruled by the left and the Trinamool Congress (TMC) for a long time.

The Bharatiya Janata Party, seeped in through Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's turf, a place it has never reached a two digit figure.

The state holds such importance for the BJP, that Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave the second highest number of rallies and speeches here, the highest being Uttar Pradesh.

Analysing the poll data of Lok Sabha constituencies in West Bengal, the India Today Data Intelligence Unit found that though the BJP improved its performance this election, the party could not win even one of the nine seats that went to polls in the seventh phase of the Lok Sabha elections.

Phase-wise progression

The BJP won at least two seats in every phase of the Lok Sabha elections till phase six.

In the first and second phases, the BJP won all the seats in West Bengal. In the third phase, the BJP won two out of five seats, the AITC won two and one was won by the Indian National Congress.

In the fourth phase, it was a 3-4 competition for BJP-AITC and one for the INC. In the fifth phase too, the BJP won three seats and Trinamool Congress won four.

As the election campaigning was intense, the sixth phase gave five of the eight seats to the BJP in West Bengal, whereas the AITC could win only three.

However, the BJP lost all nine West Bengal seats in the seventh phase. Of these nine seat, eight were lost with a margin of more than one lakh votes. In Dum Dum Lok Sabha constituency, the margin was over 52,000 votes.

The seats were Basirhat, Diamond Harbour, Joynagar, Jadavpur, Mathurapur, Kolkata Uttar, Kolkata Dakshin, Barasat and Dum Dum.

Interestingly, the BJP was at the third position on all these nine seats in 2014, now it stands to second position on all these seats, with almost double the votes than it had got last time.

What exactly happened in the seventh phase?

The phase seven of the Lok Sabha elections in nine West Bengal constituencies coincidently took place a week after Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue was vandalised inside a college during violence that erupted between students and BJP supporters in north Kolkata.

The violence started when the BJP supremo Amit Shah was leading an election rally, in northern part of Kolkata city.

In the aftermath of the violence, some miscreants, who are yet to be identified, vandalised Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue at the century-old Vidyasagar College, causing huge uproar.

Vidyasagar, a social and educational reformer, is an important part of West Bengal's rich culture and literary history. Thus, whoever vandalised the statue, was bound to irk the people.

Considering the importance of Vidyasagar, both the BJP and the TMC tried to do damage control by indulging in a blame-game.

While the TMC gave "proof" to the Election Commission, showing that the BJP was behind the task, PM Modi accused the TMC supporters of indulging in "hooliganism".

PM Modi also promised to install a statue of Vidyasagar at the same venue where it was vandalised.

If voting patterns are to be considered, then, in the areas closer to Kolkata city, the BJP lost three key seats.

"These attacks and the humiliation of my state will not go unpunished. I am keeping a track of everything. I will take revenge for everything inch by inch", Chief Minister, Mamata Banerjee had said.

Kolkata Uttar, Kolkata Dakshin and parts of Jadavpur are the urban areas in South Bengal which has a strong presence of Trinamool Congress. As visible in the voting preferences, the people elected the AITC with a margin of more than 1 lakh in these three seats. In Jadavpur alone, the vote margin is close to 3 lakh votes.



The AITC has increased its margin of victory as opposed to the 2014 results in the three seats.

In the prestigious Kolkata South seat, the AITC's lead this year is 1,55,192 against 1,36,338 in the last elections.



Similarly, in Kolkata North, TMC heavyweight Sudip Bandopadhyay has increased his lead substantially with a margin of 1,27,095 votes against 96,226 votes in 2014.

At Jadavpur, the AITC margin this year is a stunning 2,95,239 votes against 1,25,203 in the last elections.



Given the emotive nature of the issue, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee was quick to use the Vidyasagar issue to target the BJP as a party of outsiders, one that does not understand or respect the sensibilities of the state.

A glance at the Lok Sabha election results data does show that voters in Kolkata somehow punished the BJP after the vandalism of Vidyasagar statue as Mamata used the Bengali card to woo the urban electorate.
