Ludhiana residents want completion of pending works

LUDHIANA: With Congress MP Ravneet Bittu winning the Lok Sabha election from the industrial town, residents are now looking up to him for the completion of pending projects in the city, especially those under the Smart City Mission. The residents want Bittu should first find a solution to the pollution problem of Buddah Nullah and traffic mess of the city. The projects going on under the National Highway Authority of India should be taken up on priority. The ongoing six-laning project of the national highway from Panipat to Amritsar is yet to be completed by the National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) as work is pending on three bridges within the city limits.Bittu had staged a protest at the toll plaza before elections for the completion of these projects. The residents demanded that first of all these bridges should be completed so that people were not made to continuously face traffic mess. Similarly, the projects under the Smart City Mission are hanging fire and only a single project was completed in the past five years. The ongoing construction work at Jagraon bridge should also be taken up at priority.While raising the demand, a businessman, Rahul Verma, said, “Ludhiana needs to get rid of traffic jams, so a ring road is required to reduce the burden on the existing Chandigarh and Ferozepur roads. With Bittu continuing as MP from Ludhiana, he should concentrate on these issues.” He said bridges near Sherpur Chowk, Basti Jodhewal Chowk and cancer hospital chowk should be completed as soon as possible for which Bittu had staged a protest as well. He demanded that even the work on the elevated road project should be taken up on priority.Meanwhile, city-based architect and one of the directors of Smart City Mission Sanjay Goel said, “First of all, MP Bittu should fulfil the promises he had made in his first term. He should try to bring more funds from the central government for reducing the pollution in Buddah Nullah and now when Modi government is also repeating its term, then pending as well as new funds can be sought under the mission from the Centre.
