Guideline on uniforms leaves PU colleges confused

MANGALURU: The admission guidelines for the academic year 2019-20 issued by the department of pre-university education (DPUE) states that uniforms are not compulsory for students. In contravention of the rule, a few principals and administrative committees have made uniforms compulsory here. The uniform material is either given by the college after collecting money from students to get it stitched outside, or students are asked to get it from outside on their own.The department has turned a blind eye and has not given any clarification and has also not pulled up institutions for violating the rule, or put a dress code in place.The department maintains that uniforms have been banned as many colleges were collecting money for uniforms or had tie-ups with vendors, and asked students to buy uniforms from them. The issue caught the department’s attention following complaints against several unaided PU colleges , which have introduced uniforms for students, adding to the financial burden of parents.However, in Dakshina Kannada, for almost a decade, several PU colleges including government colleges have introduced uniforms for students. Kusharathi K deputy director, DPUE, Dakshina Kannada, said, “We have received instructions that uniforms are not compulsory, which has just been issued. A few colleges have already given uniforms to students for this academic year. There have been cases of students demanding uniforms, as they cannot afford to have several dresses. In case the colleges prescribes uniforms, then students can manage with two sets of uniforms for a year,” she said. The district has 201 colleges of which 53 are government colleges.The principal of a private college said: “Unlike a few colleges in Bengaluru, where the objection has come from parents, here no parent has raised objections or protested against uniforms for students. In fact, many parents are happy with it. We wish that the department provides more clarity on the issue.”In a few colleges the managements provide uniforms without charging students.Most principals are not aware about the guideline, and insisted that all students have to strictly follow the prescribed uniform and dress code. A few colleges in Mangaluru change the pattern or the colour of the uniform for I PU or II PU students so that the students can be identified, when in campus. There are a few residential colleges that insist on students wearing uniforms, even when they go out with their parents.A principal supporting the government guideline said it would be nice if uniforms are not made mandatory, but a dress code should be put in place.C Shikha, director, DPUE, said guidelines on uniforms are not compulsory. “The government or aided colleges cannot prescribe and collect uniform fees separately from students,’’ she added.
