City corpn takes 2.5yrs to lay drainage pipeline for 15km

Coimbatore: It took two-and-a- half years for the city corporation to lay 15km of drainage pipeline under the underground drainage (UGD) project in Ondipudur and Singanallur.

The third phase of the project to lay pipelines for 583km was started 10 years ago. The work for 563km was completed in 2016. But the work to lay pipelines for 5km on Trichy Road has been pending for more than a year.

While the corporation blames the contractor for the deadlock, claiming the firm stopped the work for no reason, sources attributed the delay to the payment it owes to the contractor. “As the corporation has been delaying settling the bills, the contractor had stopped the work. The corporation has to settle the bills worth over Rs 6crore. In the last three years, the contractor had spent lakhs of rupees from own pockets and had been waiting for the corporation to settle the amount,” a source privy to the project told TOI.

Explaining that the bills for the works completed would be submitted by the end of each month, the source said that the corporation used to clear the bills within a week after submission till the end of 2015. “But now it takes at least six months to clear them. It is yet to clear the bills submitted last November. For every single rupee of the bill amount that the corporation delays to pay back, they have to pay it along with an interest of 18%. The contractor is planning to move court,” said the source.

The contractor restarted the UGD work on Trichy Road recently after the corporation claimed that it was facing severe fund crunch. By September 2016, pipelines were laid for 563km and the work was pending only in Ondipudur, Singanallur and Trichy Road.

The civic body is not sure why the contractor stopped the work, said city engineer A Lakshmanan. “We have issued a notice seeking explanation. If they refuse to explain or restart the work, the contractor would be blacklisted, and re-tender would be floated to finish the project.”

When the corporation is struggling to complete a project, why should it start new projects worth crores of rupees, asked Velmurugan, a former councilor. “Instead of spending more on new projects, it should concentrate on completing the existing one. The corporation has already obtained thousands of crores of rupees as loan and is struggling to pay the interest. It has been outsourcings its human resources without being able to pay them.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
