Fresh violence in West Bengal district after BJP worker shot dead

Fresh violence in West Bengal district after BJP worker shot dead I Photo credit: PTI | Photo Credit: PTI

Kolkata: Shortly after West Bengal cops removed by the Election Commission (EC) were reinstated after the Model Code of Conduct eased, fresh violence broke out between BJP and TMC cadre after a BJP worker was shot dead.

BJP worker Chandan Sau, 36, was allegedly shot dead in West Bengal’s North 24 Parganas district on Sunday night. After the BJP worker’s murder, the situation got tense in the area as clashes broke out between TMC and BJP and crude bombs were also hurled.

Sau was shot by unidentified miscreants while he was returning to his home around 10:30 pm Sunday. The attack occurred at Kalitala area in ward number 7 which lies in Jagaddal police station limits.

#Visuals from West Bengal: A BJP worker, Chandan Shaw, was shot dead by unidentified assailants late last night in Bhatapara of North 24 Parganas district. Security forces have been deployed in the area. Investigation has started. pic.twitter.com/lVvzC4zIhG — ANI (@ANI) May 27, 2019

Sau, a resident of Choushotti Pally area, was reportedly stopped by bike-borne assailants while he was on his way home, after which one of them opened fire at him. The police have initiated an investigation into the case.

The incident comes to light when West Bengal police officers including former Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar, which were removed by the EC, were reinstated after the MCC was eased. As many as 11 IPS officers who were transferred by the EC returned.

Violence broke out at multiple occasions during the seven-phase Lok Sabha elections in the state between April 11 and May 19. BJP incumbent from Asansol Babul Supriyo’s vehicle was attacked while on his way to the polling booth on May 7 and another BJP nominee from Ghatal Bharati Ghosh had to take refuge in a temple after being attacked by TMC cadre on May 12.

The shocking incident comes just a day after a 23-year-old BJP worker Santu Ghosh was shot dead in the state’s Nadia district in similar circumstances. General secretary of the Nadia BJP Committee blamed the TMC for the murder.

BJP workers set up a roadblock in Nadia’s National Highway 34 in a protest against the killing. Central forces were deployed to maintain order. The BJP made major gains in the state in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections by increasing its 2014 tally of two to 18 seats in the recently concluded polls.
