Attacked delivery boy’s colleagues protest outside police stn

Ludhiana: A day after the assault on a food delivery boy, employees of the online food delivery service organised a peaceful protest at Sahnewal police station, accusing the police of deliberately not mentioning the name of main accused Paramveer Singh in the FIR, as he is the brother of Congress leader Parminder Singh Soma.

Victim Vishal Kumar stated that after thrashing him, the accused also snatched Rs4,000 from his pocket, but the police did not add sections of snatchings against the accused. Moreover, the main accused was Paramveer who ordered the food and thrashed him with his accomplices, which was captured in CCTV cameras. However, police have skipped his name in the FIR, and instead registered a case only against his accomplice Surjit and other unidentified accused.

Vishal said: “Today, we have gathered at the police station, and are on a silent protest. However, we will approach senior officials if not given justice.” It is alleged that on Paramveer’s request, Vishal had gone to Dhandari Kalan to deliver food on Saturday, but when he reached the location in the mobile app around 3.30pm, Paramveer asked him to come further away to deliver the food. Vishal had replied that as per company rules, he could deliver food only at the mentioned location, so he asked Paramveer to collect food from that spot. However, minutes later, three men —two of them turbaned — turned up in a white Maruti Suzuki Swift, and started thrashing him. They also snatched his helmet and hit him with it, leaving him with a severe injury in one eye.

Meanwhile, Paramveer’s brother Parminder stated that Vishal had refused to deliver food at the address, and he misbehaved with Paramveer over the phone. He alleged that Vishal had also called his accomplices and indulged in a scuffle with his brother, when he reached at the point to receive his food packet. Sahnewal police station SHO, inspector Iqbal Singh, said the police had identified all the accused, who would soon be arrested.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
