Mumbai doctor suicide case: Accused doctors demand 'fair probe' as furious locals stage protest

The deceased, Dr Payal Tadvi ended her life after being teased for being a tribal (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A new development has been made in the Mumbai Nair Hospital case. Following the incident, the Maharashtra State Commission for Women has issued a notice to the Dean of BBYL Nair Hospital. The notice was issued in relation to the suicide of a junior doctor after repeated harassment by her seniors.

The doctors accused of driving the deceased to suicide also wrote a letter to the Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) seeking a 'fair probe' in relation with the case.

Maharashtra State Commission for Women has issued a notice to Dean of BYL Nair Hospital seeking a report on the action taken in connection with Payal Tadvi suicide case. Payal Tadvi had committed suicide on May 22 after facing harassment at the hands of three senior doctors. — ANI (@ANI) May 27, 2019

The three doctor criticised the ongoing probe in their letter and demanded to be heard by the media and the police. The three accused, Ankita Khandelwal, Bhakti Mehare and Hema Ahuja asked the MARD to 'give justice' to them. The deceased, Dr Payal Tadvi ended her life after being teased for being a tribal.

The junior doctor ended her life on May 22. Investigation revealed that the accused had made a WhatsApp group where they used to hurl casteist slurs at the victim. Initially, the MARD had suspended the doctors.

The news agency, PTI reported that the anti-ragging committee of the hospital were asked to submit a report on the suicide. The committee was also asked to formulate stringent rules anti-ragging norms. Notices to the head of department and the unit head of obstetrics and the gynaecology department were also issued following the incident.

Protesting against the incident, the workers of the Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi, All India Democratic Association, Democratic Youth Federation of India and Students Federation of India thronged to the hospital and staged their disapproval.


