DWCD comes to rescue of minor girl forced to beg to feed her ailing mother suffering from alcoholism

The minor girl and her ailing mother | Photo Credit: ANI

Bengaluru: In January of this year, as many as 2,000 women staged a massive demonstration in Chitradurga district of Karnataka, seeking a complete ban on the sale of liquor in the state. At the time, an observer had asserted how these women understood how alcoholism represented economic and health problems. One such instance which demonstrates the ills of excessive liquor consumption has come to light from Karnataka's Koppal district.

The Department of Women and Child Welfare Development (DWCD) of Karnataka has decided to pay for the medical treatment of a woman admitted to a local hospital in Koppal and is being treated for health issues caused due to alcoholism. The case caught the department's attention after pictures and videos of the woman's six-year-old daughter begging on the streets for the past week in order to feed her ailing mother began doing rounds on social media.

Koppal: A 6-year-old girl has been begging since the past week to feed her mother who is admitted to a hospital after she fell ill due to alcoholism. State Women & Child Welfare Department will now pay for the medical treatment of the woman & the education of the girl. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/sdAeljrbOh — ANI (@ANI) May 28, 2019

Sympathising with the family's condition, officials with the women and child welfare development took a call to not only fund the woman's medical treatment but also the minor girl's education, reported news agency ANI. The highlighted how a six-year-old girl had to step in at such a tender age and shoulder a responsibility which should have been taken care of by her mother.

This just goes on to prove how alcoholism has the tendency to destroy the lives of consumers and their families. This riveting tale is one of many which come to light from various parts of the country every single day. It is not uncommon to come across a housewife who faces domestic abuse at the hands of her alcoholic husband or children who have abusive parents.

Several initiatives have been launched to tackle the issue such as the establishment of Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts (IRCAs) or de-addiction centres by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. However, the menace continues to cast a dark shadow on the lives of men, women and children across the length and breadth of the country.
