Hospital forms anti-ragging committee to probe reasons which drove Dr Payal Tadvi to suicide, suspends HOD

Protests were held outside the BYL Nair Hospital by SFI activists (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: Almost a week after a second-year student of Gynaecology and Obstetrics department was found hanging in her hostel room in Mumbai city, a committee has been formed to investigate the circumstances surrounding her death. Outrage followed after 26-year-old Dr Payal Tadvi's family alleged that ragging and harassment by her seniors drove her to commit suicide. Earlier furnished with a show-cause notice, the Head of the Gynaecology department at BYL Nair Hospital, Dr SD Shirodkar has been suspended until further notice.

In a letter she wrote to her daughter's peers at BYL Nair Hospital in Mumbai, Payal's mother claimed that she was constantly hounded and harassed due to her caste. She told me that three senior doctors hurled casteist slurs at her owing to her tribal background, said Abeda Tadvi. Based on her complaint, the Agripada police have registered a complaint under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), SC/ST Atrocities Act, Anti-Ragging Act and Information Technology Act, 2000.

As per the latest reports, hospital management has formed an anti-ragging committee to probe the matter. For this purpose, the committee has recorded the statements of as many as 30 staff members, including doctors, heads of department (HODs), Payal's roommates and other employees. This committee will then submit a report in this regard to the Maharashtra University of Health Sciences.

While the committee has been instructed to look into allegations of ragging and harassment, the Agripada police are probing allegations of casteist remarks directed towards Tadvi which led to her taking the drastic step. Police officials are likely to question Payal's parents and her husband Dr Salman Tadvi, an assistant medical professor at the RN Cooper Hospital, today.

Abeda Tadvi, mother of Payal Tadvi, a PG student of Gynaecology who committed suicide on May 22: Whenever she used to speak to me on a call, she would say 'these (3 senior doctors) people torture me as I belong to a tribal community, use casteist slurs.' We want justice for her pic.twitter.com/Z5uPGyKx6S — ANI (@ANI) May 26, 2019

Dr Payal hailed from a Muslim tribal family of Jalgaon and was a second-year student in obstetrics and gynaecology. Serving earlier in tribal areas of Gadchiroli in Maharashtra, she married Dr Salman Tadvi in 2016. Her death triggered widespread protests by the Students Federation of India (SFI) who staged demonstrations outside the hospital where she was found dead along with other parts of the country. A social media campaign under the banner of #JusticeForDrPayal has also gained traction in recent days after the reasons behind the medico's death came to light.

Payal Tadvi suicide case: Head of the Gynaecology department, BYL Nair Hospital suspended until further notice. Payal Tadvi had committed suicide on May 22 after facing harassment at the hands of three senior doctors. — ANI (@ANI) May 28, 2019

After her suicide on May 22, the BYL Nair Hospital authorities suspended three doctors who had been identified by name in a complaint written to the management by Tadvi's mother on May 13. In response, Dr Hema Ahuja, Dr Bhakti Mehere and Dr Ankita Khandelwal wrote to the Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD), demanding a fair probe into the allegations against them.
