Dr Payal Tadvi may have been murdered by three accused female doctors, alleges her husband

Dr Salman Tadvi during the protest outside BYL Nair Hospital | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: Family members of Dr Payal Tadvi, a second-year post-graduate student of Gynaecology who committed suicide in Mumbai earlier this month, staged a massive protest outside the BYL Nair Hospital where she was working as a junior doctor. Speaking to media outlets, Payal's husband Dr Salman Tadvi, an assistant medical professor at the RN Cooper Hospital, said that the bereaved family wants government intervention.

Alleging that the police is not taking any action against the senior medicos who allegedly drove his wife to suicide, Dr Salman claimed that it is possible that Dr Payal was "murdered by the three woman doctors" who have been identified by name as the ones who tortured and harassed his wife. Maharashtra Medical Education Minister Girish Mahajan also arrived at the scene of the protest and met with the deceased doctor's kin.

Nair Hospital Suicide Case | Payal Tadvi's family & activists stage protest outside the Nair Hospital in Mumbai demanding action against the accused doctors. Earlier the accused doctors skipped anti-ragging committee meet. @apekshaalive gets the latest pic.twitter.com/Mo8wBpneV1 — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 28, 2019

Contrary to claims made by Dr Ramesh Bharmal, Dean of BYL Nair Hospital, Dr Salman Tadvi has stated that he and his family approached the head of the Gynaecology and Obstetrics department (HOD), Dr SD Shirodkar and asked him to look into allegations of harassment. We made our complaint about three female doctors harassing and torturing Payal due to her caste and tribal background is known to the HOD and she sent Payal to two months of training, said Dr Salman.

He went further to say that the family requested Payal's unit be changed but their request was not entertained despite several assurances. They started troubling her even more after she came back from training, said a grieving Dr Salman.

Payal Tadvi,student of BYL Nair Hospital,suicide case: 3 accused doctors write to Maha Assn of Resident Doctors, state "We want college to conduct fair investigation. But this isn't the way to do investigation through police force&media pressure without listening to our side..." pic.twitter.com/pNAjJRswND — ANI (@ANI) May 27, 2019

Other statements made by the hospital administration have also been challenged by the family such as the Dean's claim that the family never approached him with a complaint regarding the ragging and harassment faced by Payal. The deceased medico's mother has furnished a written application she allegedly submitted to the dean on May 13, nine days before Dr Payal was found hanging in her hostel room.

While the HOD of Gynaecology and Obstetrics has been suspended along with the three accused female doctors, there is little clarity about the circumstances surrounding Dr Payal Tadvi's death. Meanwhile, police officials with the Agripada Police Station in Mumbai are unable to locate the three accused, namely Dr Hema Ahuja, Dr Bhakti Mehere and Dr Ankita Khandelwal. Their cell phones have been switched off since May 22, the day of the incident said an official. The three accused also failed to show up for a hearing of the anti-ragging committee set up by the BYL Nair Hospital to probe the matter.
