Big blow to Mamata Banerjee! 2 TMC MLAs, over 50 councillors join BJP after West Bengal poll debacle

Trinamool Congress councillors join BJP in Delhi. | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: The political tussle in West Bengal between the Trinamool Congress and the Bharatiya Janata Party, who has made massive inroads into the eastern Indian state in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, continues to create ripples after as many as 50-60 TMC councillors and 2 MLAs (and one CPM MLA) today resigned from the party and joined the BJP in the presence of senior BJP leader Kailash Vijayvargiya as reports of defection and horse-trading once again surface from the Mamata Banerjee bastion.

TMC councillor from Garifa (Ward number 6), Ruby Chatterjee had earlier today claimed that as many as 20 party councillors might defect into the BJP soon. “Around 20 councillors are here in Delhi. We are not upset with Mamata ji but the recent victory of BJP in Bengal has influenced us to join the party. People are liking BJP as they are working for them,” she said, as quoted by news agency ANI.

According to a Times Now report on Monday, three TMC MLAs could jump the ship and desert the party in wake of the general elections results. It was a major setback for Mamata's party as it won only 22 out of the total 42 seats in the state, with the BJP securing 18 against its 2014 tally of 2.

#Breaking | West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee loses her legislators as 4 TMC MLAs join BJP. More details by @SreyashiDey. pic.twitter.com/QB7SU4qMiz — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) May 28, 2019

Ruby Chatterjee, TMC councillor from Garifa (West Bengal), ward no 6 says, "20 councillors are here in Delhi. We are not upset with Mamata ji but the recent victory of BJP in Bengal has influenced us to join the party. People are liking BJP as they are working for them." pic.twitter.com/qpYCCmS4HF — ANI (@ANI) May 28, 2019

While the election campaigns were in full force, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had revealed that at least 40 MLAs of the TMC were in touch with the BJP. Once the results came out, a BJP MP from the state had reiterated Modi’s claim, saying that Mamata Banerjee’s government in West Bengal could fall “within 90 days”.

Meanwhile, Pandaveswar TMC MLA Jitendra Tiwari alleged that BJP workers vandalised TMC’s office in Durgapur on Monday. “The BJP is doing tandav in Bengal. If BJP doesn’t stop its workers, we will retaliate, we won’t stay silent. You have won in Bengal but you can’t break TMC’s office.”

West Bengal: Pandaveswar TMC MLA Jitendra Tiwari alleges BJP worker vandalised TMC office in Durgapur y'day, says, "BJP is doing tandav in Bengal. If BJP doesn't stop its workers,we'll retaliate,we won't sit silent'.You've won in Bengal but you can't break a TMC office." (27 May) pic.twitter.com/y9oIRyHuAO — ANI (@ANI) May 28, 2019

Earlier on Tuesday, reports came out that a bomb was hurled at a Vijay Rally of BJP supporters, allegedly by TMC supporters, in Birbhum within Mayureswar police station limits.
