Pregnant woman dies at government hospital in Patiala; family alleges medical negligence

PATIALA: A 34-year-old pregnant woman died at government-run Rajindra Hospital in Patiala after which the family members protested against the authorities alleging negligence on part of doctors. The family members of the deceased claimed that doctors did not operate on her to take out the dead foetus in her womb on the intervening night of Monday and Tuesday.They further alleged that the doctors gave painkillers to the deceased in stead so that she could be operated upon by senior doctors on Tuesday morning as the junior doctors were not able to operate. The deceased woman has been identified as Parminder Kaur of Barnala The authorities at Rajindra Hospital had called a meeting of doctors including the doctors and other staff present at the gynaecology department during the night. The authorities are however yet to mark any probe in the absence of any written complaint by the family members of the deceased.The woman was rushed to a local hospital in Barnala where doctors confirmed that her foetus was dead but asked the family to take her to a higher institute as her life can be saved. The family of Parminder Kaur rushed her to government Rajindra hospital on Sunday night but they alleged there were no doctors available for operation.Jaswinder Singh, husband of the deceased said, “My wife could not get operated in time as the doctors did not reach during the night. She was given the medicines and we were asked to wait for the senior doctors who would operate her. Meanwhile, she slowly lost her breathe.”However, the medical superintendent at Rajindra Hospital, Dr Rajan Singla said, “There were five doctors present in the gynaecology department including four junior doctors and one senior doctor. The patient suffered a pulmonary edema in which blood clots enter the lungs and thus leads to heart failure. The foetus was 34 weeks old and had already died inside the womb.” He added that no written complaint was received from anyone and hence no inquiry was marked however he had held a meeting with the doctors and the staff to know the details about the case.Head of gynaecology department Dr Manjit Kaur Mohi could not be contacted for comments. The dead body of the deceased woman has been sent to the mortuary in order to get conducted the post-mortem examination.
