Mumbai doctor suicide: One of three accused arrested, NCW shoots letter to hospital demanding probe

A resident doctor at a state-run hospital in Mumbai, accused of abetting suicide of a junior colleague by harassing her with casteist slurs and ragging, was arrested Tuesday, police said. Bhakti Mehere was one of the three resident doctors against whom an offence was registered after 26-year-old Payal Tadvi hanged herself in her hostel room on May 22.

The two other accused doctors— Ankita Khandelwal and Hema Ahuja—have moved an anticipatory bail application before the session court in Mumbai.

@Mumbaipolice arrested Bhakti Mehare in Payal Tadvi suicide case. She is one of the three resident doctors who harassed and passed casteist comments on the deceased doctor, said Add CP Veeresh Prabhu (Central) @IndianExpress — Sagar Rajput (@sagarajput24) May 28, 2019

Earlier in the day, Maharashtra medical education minister Girish Mahajan confirmed that the evidence in the anti-ragging report in connection with the case suggested that the deceased was a victim of targeted harassment and that her seniors made casteist remarks against her. The minister also assured that all accused doctors will be arrested soon.

The minister’s remarks came even as the family of Tadvi protested outside the BYL Nair hospital in Mumbai where she worked.

Protesters belonging to the Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi and other Dalit and tribal organisations also joined Tadvi’s mother Abida and husband Salman who demanded “strictest action” against the three seniors who allegedly drove her to end her life by “torturing her by ragging and hurling casteist abuses at her”.

Expressing solidarity with the protesters and with Tadvi’s family, Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad said he would visit Maharashtra if needed to “fight for justice for our younger sister”.

The National Commission for Women, meanwhile, shot off a letter to BYL Nair hospital authorities demanding investigation and action into the death of Tadvi. The Maharashtra State Commission for Women has also taken cognisance of the matter and issued a notice to the hospital authorities demanding a reply within eight days on the action taken to implement the anti-ragging law.

READ | Payal Tadvi suicide: What is known about the Mumbai doctor’s case so far

Demanding government intervention, Salman said, “We want govt to intervene, police are not taking any action. It is possible Payal was murdered by the 3 women doctors.”

Abeda Tadvi, mother of Payal Tadvi outside Nair hospital. (Express Photo by Nirmal Harindran) Abeda Tadvi, mother of Payal Tadvi outside Nair hospital. (Express Photo by Nirmal Harindran)

Tadvi, a second-year PG student of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, was found hanging in her hostel room that she shared with three other students on May 22. She was studying at the Topical National Medical College, attached with BYL Nair Hospital.

On Monday, the Head of the Gynaecology department, BYL Nair Hospital and the three PG resident doctors were suspended until further notice.

ALSO READ | Four suspended in Mumbai medical student suicide case

While the Nair hospital dean Dr R N Bharmal had denied receiving any information on the case, Tadvi’s mother, Abeda had said the letter of May 13— asking them to change her daughter’s unit as she was being mentally harassed in name of castesim— was family’s third plea to hospital in a year. She also alleged that the letter received a stamp in the dean’s office but was returned. Its contents, in Marathi, show that Tadvi’s suicide was a tragedy waiting to happen.
