Mumbai Police arrest one female doctor in connection with Dr Payal Tadvi's suicide, two still absconding

Mumbai police have arrested Dr Bhakti Meher (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: Police have arrested one of the female doctors accused of driving Dr Payal Tadvi, a second-year student of Gynaecology at the BYL Nair Hospital, to commit suicide. As per the latest reports, Dr Bhakti Meher has been arrested in Mumbai. Two of the accused doctors, Dr Hema Ahuja and Dr Ankita Khandelwal are still at large and have been untraceable since May 22, the day Dr Tadvi's body was found hanging in her hostel room. This is a developing story.

#Mumbai Nair Hospital Suicide Case | One accused, doctor Bhakti Meher has been arrested in the case. 2 people still absconding. pic.twitter.com/nV87iGSh0W — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 28, 2019

Earlier today, Dr Payal Tadvi's husband, Dr Salman Tadvi along with other members of her family staged a protest outside the BYL Nair Hospital in Mumbai. Speaking to media personnel, Dr Salman claimed that his wife's death could be a murder caused by the three female doctors she had accused of harassing and torturing her. He also reiterated claims made by the family indicating that authorities at the hospital were approached not once but several times over complaints alleging casteism.

Medical student Payal Tadvi suicide case: National Commission for Women writes to director of BYL Nair Hospital requesting for an investigation and apprise the commission of action taken in the case. pic.twitter.com/CQi9CTWk38 — ANI (@ANI) May 28, 2019

A second-year student of Gynaecology at the BYL Nair Hospital, Dr Payal allegedly committed suicide by hanging herself in her hotel room on May 22. In the aftermath of her demise, Dr Payal's mother and other family members alleged that she was being mentally tormented by three female senior doctors, allegedly over her caste and tribal background. A case in this regard was also registered at the Agripada Police Station, to investigate charges levelled against the doctors under Prevention of Atrocities SC/ST Act.

Meanwhile, the hospital management suspended the Gynaecology and Obstetrics department (HOD), Dr SD Shirodkar and initiated an anti-ragging committee to probe the allegations levelled against the female doctors. However, reports suggested that the three accused doctors had been missing since the day Dr Payal's body was discovered in her hostel room. They were also suspended from the Medical College for failure to report to duty and failure to attend the hearing of the anti-ragging committee.
