Death of merit: How suicide of an Adivasi woman doctor shook Mumbai

A social media campaign called #JusticeForPayal has also gained momentum in which prominent personalities from all over India have demanded justice for the deceased medico.

The last public post on Dr Payal Tadvi's Facebook account is the announcement of her joining a prestigious private hospital in Mumbai. The post says that she started a new job as a resident gynaecologist at the TNMC and Nair Hospital, Mumbai.

She had joined the hospital on May 13, 2018.

And on May 22, 2019, she committed suicide.

What happened in the one year that forced a 26-year-old doctor to take such a step? Repeated discrimination from her colleagues because she was from a lower caste.

Payal Tadvi, a post-graduate medical student, who joined the premier Nair Hospital in Mumbai faced what many students face in the Indian educational system -- ragging. But what made her story different was the social ostracization that came with being from a lower caste.

Her death has shaken up Mumbai, a city otherwise criticised for its apathy. Mumbaikars have taken to the streets to protest the "institutional murder" of an Adivasi woman who broke the glass ceiling imposed on members of her community.

Protest For Justice

At Nair Hospital Mumbai

Justice for Dr Payal Tadvi

Casteism kill a Promising Doctor Once Again.

Het Together For Justice #institutionalcasteism#justiceforpayal #institutionalmurder



#JusticeForPayalTadvi pic.twitter.com/QFjqL0iRJJ Prakash Mavchi (@Prakash_mavchi) May 28, 2019

The Mumbai Police has now arrested one of the three accused in the case.

The case

Twenty-three-year-old Payal Tadvi hailed from the Jalgaon district of Maharashtra. A Bhil Muslim, she belonged to the scheduled tribes.

Her husband, Salman Tadvi, is an assistant medical professor at the RN Cooper Hospital and they had married in 2016.

Payal and her husband Salman Tadvi.

On May 22, she was found hanging in her room in the Nair hospital premises. She had committed suicide after months of harassment by three college seniors who subjected her to casteist slurs and other forms of caste violence.

While the policy of reservation provided her entry to such a hallowed institution, it could not make her an equal before her seniors.

"My daughter was the first woman from our community to pursue post-graduation and the first in our family to become a doctor. She was a bright student and had worked hard to reach where she was," Payal's mother Abeda told The Hindu.

Three seniors -- Hema Ahuja, Bhakti Mahere and Ankita Khandelwal continued to harass her because she was not from the same caste as them.

The three accused. From L-R: Ankita, Bhakti and Hema. (Photo: Twitter/ihansraj)

The harassment went on from the three seniors repeatedly using casteist slurs against her to them going to the toilet and wiping their feet on her bed. They would throw around her belongings and litter her room.

The extent of her abuse was such that Payal eventually became depressed.

In December 2018, Payal had shared her ordeal with her parents who wrote a complaint to the head of Payal's department. Not much was done then.

Payal Tadvi's mother had lodged a formal complaint to the Nair hospital on May 10, and still the hospital administration took no action. Why? pic.twitter.com/8D35pyAJ8Z Tejas Harad (@h_tejas) May 26, 2019

Her parents had written a complaint on May 10 as well but no action was taken.

The final straw

While Payal Tadvi had been facing discrimination since she joined the course, it all became too much for her after she was abused on a work WhatsApp group.

The three seniors saw photos of Payal from a dinner outing she had been to on May 21. Enraged, the seniors accused her of neglecting work because she came from the reserved category.

What finally broke Payal was when the seniors threatened to deny her entry to the hospital's operation theatre. They told her she would not be allowed to perform deliveries or study further. All because she had gone out for dinner.

On the fateful day, Payal performed two surgeries. She called her family and her husband to tell them about the mental torture she was undergoing. Hours later, she was found dead in her room.

Is burden of work ragging?

A case has been filed against the three seniors under the Atrocities Act, the Anti-Ragging Act and the IT Act and Section 306 (abetment to suicide) of the Indian Penal Code.

The trio has been on the run since May 22.

However, they have now written a letter to the Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) demanding a fair investigation in the process.

While they are well within their rights to demand the due process, what has drawn the ire of social media users is the content of the letter.

The letter written by the accused. (Photo: ANI)

Through the letter, the trio justified their behaviour by saying that the heavy work burden cannot be equated to ragging.

"You are all aware of the workload in residency and do you really believe that being burdened with work is ragging? If the heavy workload is given in the name of ragging, then we all have been ragged or have ragged someone while performing basic duties," the trio wrote.

The three medicos were subsequently suspended by the hospital and an enquiry launched to probe whether Payal Tadvi was a victim of ragging, casteist and professional harassment.

The hospital has also issued show-cause notices to the unit head Dr SD Shirodkar and head of the department Dr Yi Ching Ling, in the matter.

A city in protest

The suicide, which sent shock waves through Mumbai, has stirred many protests. Tribal and student organisations have demanded justice for the young doctor.

A social media campaign called #JusticeForPayal has also gained momentum in which prominent personalities from all over India have demanded justice for the deceased medico.

The protestors have appealed to the authorities to take stringent administrative and penal action against the accused for their acts which drove Payal Tadvi to commit suicide and abruptly ended a budding medical career.

Dalit and left parties stage a protest in Mumbai. (Photo: PTI)

Maharashtra State Women's Commission has sent a notice to the dean of Nair Hospital.

The commission has taken suo motu notice of the incident and has sought a report of the incident within eight days.

Protest by Bahujan Vanchit Aghadi outside Nair Hospital regarding suicide of Dr Payal Tadvi #JusticeForDrPayal #JusticeForPayal #JUSTIN pic.twitter.com/oxGVdMY5t1 Mustafa Shaikh (@mustafashk) May 27, 2019

Family alleges murder

Demanding justice for Payal, her family staged a protest outside Nair Hospital on Tuesday.

The family said they want the government to intervene in the case.

"We want the government to intervene, the police are not taking any action. It is possible Payal was murdered by the three women doctors," said Salman Tadvi, Payal's husband.

Family members of Payal Tadvi. (Photo: PTI)

Payal Tadvi's suicide has once again raised an important question about India, does formal equality allow to see each other as equals?
