Nair Hospital Suicide Case: BMC suspends gynaecology HoD, 3 resident doctors

Dr Payal Tadvi

Maharashtra State Commission for Women

Slew of protests

Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi

Protest at Nair hospital

The BMC has suspended the head of department, gynaecology, of Nair Hospital Dr Yi Ching Ling and three resident doctors, who were allegedly responsible for the suicide of. There are growing protests by students and tribal organisations over the suicide of Tadvi on May 22, allegedly after casteist slurs.The notice issued to Ching Ling was signed by deputy commissioner Sunil Dhamne on May 27 and the ones issued to three residents Hema Ahuja, Ankita Khandelwal and Bhakti Mehare were issued by the dean of Nair Hospital.The notice issued to Ching Ling said that prima facie, it was found that Tadvi and her relatives had complained about the mental torture and as HOD, she did not take any action. The notice also says that the working atmosphere in the department was not good and no efforts were taken to improve it. The notice said that Ching Ling was seriously negligent and since a police investigation is ongoing, the administration was suspending her. She has also been instructed not to practice privately.The notice issued to Ahuja, Mehare and Khandelwal says that they have been absent since May 22. It says the three doctors have left their hostel rooms in the hospital premises without permission and not turned up for probe by BMC and police.The Agripada police, which is investigating the abetment of suicide case said they were searching for the three female doctors who have become incommunicado after the incident. Thealso gave a showcase notice to Nair Hospital, asking the hospital to reply within eight days.The Agripada police is investigating into the abetment to suicide case of Dr Payal Tadvi who hanged herself to death on Wednesday in the hostel of Nair hospital. The police have booked Ahuja, Mahere and Khandelwal under Section 306 of IPC (abetment of suicide), Maharashtra Prohibition of Ragging Act 1999 and Prevention of Atrocities Act 1989 for allegedly harassing her.“We have recorded statements of doctors of Nair Hospital and staff and are investigating to find out whom Tadvi had complained to,” said S Veeresh Prabhu, additional commissioner of police, Central Region.The three accused doctors wrote to Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) President and MARD members claiming that they had not ragged Tadvi. They claimed in the one-page letter that resident doctors are under continuous pressure of work and it was this workload, which has been given the name of ragging.“We want the college to conduct a fair investigation to give justice. But this is not the way to do investigation through the police force and media pressure without listening to our side,” they have stated in the letter. MARD had suspended the three doctors on May 24.Close friends of Dr Tadvi say she wanted to quit college, take a break and re-apply afresh for post-graduation. “About six months ago, she told me and a few others who were part of her friend circle at the undergraduate level that she wanted to leave Nair hospital due to the harassment. For that she was even ready to pay the heavy fine of several lakhs of rupees (for quitting a government college seat). She said she would prepare again and take admission in another college. At that time, we had no idea about the extent of the harassment,” said Romil Kakad, a former batchmate.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Many students and rights organisations protested at Nair hospital on Monday demanding the arrest of the three accused doctors. “In a city like Mumbai, a MD level doctor commits suicide because of casteism is a shameful thing,” said Sanjay Pawar from theOrganisations such as Students’ Federation of India, All India Democratic Women’s Association (AIDWA), Democratic Youth Federation of India and Jati Ant Sangharsh Samiti also staged a protest. The Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad, NCP student wing and the Congress also voiced their demand for justice in the case.“The authorities have to be held accountable. There is no redressal mechanism in medical institutes and Dr Tadvi had to take this extreme step. The harassment went on for a year. Doctors speak of being under attack from patients’ relatives, but there is harassment in their own fraternity. Doctors have to rethink their attitudes,” said Sonya Gill, state vice president of AIDWA said.
