Payal Tadvi suicide case: All 3 doctors accused of harassment arrested in Mumbai

"She used to tell me not to give a written complaint against her seniors despite being harassed by them. She would say that doing so would adversely impact their career," said Payal Tadvi's mother.

All three accused in abetting the suicide of Mumbai doctor Payal Tadvi have been arrested by the state police. The trio were senior doctors at Nair Hospital in Mumbai's Agripada.

Early Wednesday morning, the Agripada police arrested Ankita Khandelwal. Previously the police had arrested Hema Ahuja on Tuesday night and Bhakti Mehere on Tuesday afternoon.

The trio is accused of harassing and using casteist slurs against their junior Payal Tadvi which drove the latter to commit suicide. They had been on the run since May 22, when Payal had committed suicide.

All three moved an anticipatory bail application before the sessions court in Mumbai on Tuesday and it is likely to come up for hearing on Wednesday.

The trio has been booked under relevant provisions of the Scheduled Castes and Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, the Anti-Ragging Act, the IT Act and Section 306 (abetment to suicide) of the Indian Penal Code.

A senior police official said, The three doctors are very well educated and moreover they belong to influential families. During the initial investigation in the case, they were available to make statements. However, when there was immense pressure from common people, the victim's family and now politicians they realised that they will be arrested soon and therefore they escaped. We tried to get in touch with them but they were not available. In fact, the three doctors went to apply for anticipatory bail. However, just before that, all three were arrested.

Accused try to trick cops

The first arrest was made in the case of doctor Bhakti Mehare. She had reached court to file for bail but was arrested outside the court premises. Bhakti had reached the court wearing a burka so that she wouldn't be identified.

The second arrest in the case was Hema Ahuja who was caught from Andheri railway station area in the wee hours of Wednesday. The police had proper a tip-off that Hema was going to come at Andheri railway station area to meet someone when they laid a trap and arrested her.

However, the police had difficulty in arresting the accused woman at night. She was taken to Sewri magistrate court then itself after which she was taken into custody.

The third accused Ankita Khandelwal was arrested on Wednesday early morning by the police.

Family, left groups protest

Payal Tadvi hanged herself last Wednesday, following which the 26-year-old's family alleged that the senior doctors tortured her by ragging and hurling casteist abuses as she belonged to a Scheduled Tribe.

Tadvi's parents protested at the state-run hospital in Mumbai where she worked. Other protesters also joined Payal Tadvi's mother Abeda and husband Salman, demanding stringent action against the three seniors.

The Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi, and other Dalit and tribal organisations held protests outside the BYL Nair Hospital.

Abeda asked whether the government would take responsibility for the safety of students like her daughter, who are pursuing higher education.

"Payal used to tell me about the torture which she was facing by her seniors on petty issues. They threw files on her face in front of patients," she said.

"Payal used to tell me not to give a written complaint against her seniors despite being harassed by them. She would say that doing so would adversely impact their career," Abeda said.

She said Payal Tadvi would have been the first woman MD (doctor of medicine) from their community.

Salman, a doctor himself, said it was possible that Tadav was "murdered" by the three women doctors.

READ | Death of merit: How suicide of an Adivasi woman doctor shook Mumbai

Expressing solidarity with the protesters and with Payal Tadvi's family, Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad said he would visit Maharashtra if needed to "fight for justice for our younger sister".

Women's panel takes note

The state women's commission has also taken cognisance of the matter and issued a notice to the hospital authorities.

On Tuesday, it wrote a letter to the Mumbai police commissioner, seeking a thorough investigation in the case.

The panel, which termed the case "very serious", has sought a report from the police within eight days, an official said.

It said there was a need to take stringent action against the accused under sections of abetment to suicide, the SC/ST Act and Anti-Ragging Act, the official said.

Hospital submits report

In a related development, the anti-ragging committee of Nair Hospital submitted its report in Tadvi's suicide case to the Maharashtra University of Health Sciences.

"We have submitted our sealed report to the MUHS," said Ramesh Bharmal, Dean, Nair Hospital, who did not reveal any details of the report, saying it was confidential.

"We are cooperating with the police in their investigation and providing whatever help they want," Bharmal told PTI.

Politicians spring into action mode

In the morning, Minister for Medical Education Girish Mahajan visited the hospital and also met the protesters and parents of the victim, the official said.

The Mumbai Congress demanded that all the three doctors booked in the case be tried in a fast-track court.

A delegation led by of Mumbai Congress president Milind Deora met Joint CP (Law and Order) Vinay Kumar Chaube and made the demand.

In a statement, the Mumbai Congress said Tadvi's suicide was unfortunate and a serious issue.

"The Tadvi family should get justice. The three doctors should be punished severely. A message should go out in Mumbai and Maharashtra that there is no place for casteism in educational institutions," it said.

Meanwhile, Shiv Sena spokesperson Neelam Gorhe said those accused of abetting Tadvi's suicide should be booked under IPC section 302 (murder).

She demanded that Mahajan take a review of all anti-ragging committees in education institutions in the state.

Gorhe said the issue would be raised in the state legislature session starting from June 17.

Accused demand fair probe

The three accused had on Monday sought a "fair probe" in the case.

In a letter to the Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD), the accused said they wanted the college to conduct a fair investigation in the matter and "give justice" to them.

"This is not the way to do an investigation through the police force and media pressure, without hearing our side," the three doctors said in the letter.

The MARD has suspended the three doctors.

"We have credible inputs that the three doctors made casteist remarks against Dr Payal Tadvi, who allegedly committed suicide. We will cooperate with the police for the further investigation," a senior MARD official said.
