Mamata Banerjee to sit on dharna from tomorrow for homeless TMC workers

Trinamool Congress president and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee will sit on a dharna on Thursday to protest against the post-poll violence which has allegedly rendered several TMC workers homeless.



Mamata Banerjee will stage her dharna in front of Naihati municipality in Kolkata. Naihati was among several regions of the state, which witnessed rampant violence in the aftermath of Lok Sabha election results, where BJP increased its tally from one West Bengal seat in 2014 to 18 in 2019. The TMC managed to score victory at only 22 out of 42 Lok Sabha seats in its bastion state.



The TMC claimed that after the election results, BJP workers vandalised shops, burnt fires and ransacked houses belonging to TMC workers in Bijupur and Naihati.



TMC alleged that a number of its party offices have either been taken over or vandalised by BJP workers.



Police sources said TMC workers were beaten up allegedly by BJP supporters in Coochbehar's Sitai, Titagarh in North 24 Parganas and New Town area near Kolkata.



In Coochbehar, the Trinamool alleged its party offices at Bakshirhat, Mahishkuchi, Rampur, Shalbari were vandalised by BJP activists. TMC party office in Sitalkuchi area of the district was also ransacked.



"Since the results came in, BJP workers have either locked down our party offices or vandalised them or set them on fire," TMC's Sitalkuchi block president Abed Ali Miya told PTI.



The BJP, on the other hand, alleged its workers were attacked by TMC activists in the district's Bakshirkuti area during a victory procession.



Interestingly, Mamata Banerjee had on Tuesday accepted the invite to attend the swearing-in-ceremony of PM Narendra Modi at the Rashtrapati Bhawan on Thursday. Instead, she will sit on dharna now.



BJP Bengal chief Mukul Roy earlier alleged that Mamata Banerjee cancelled her visit after Bharatiya Janata Party invited the kin of BJP workers who were killed in the poll violence in West Bengal.
