Stone-pelter killed, 70 protesters injured in separate J&K post-encounter clashes

SRINAGAR: A stone-pelter was killed and 20 others injured in Shopian district , while 50 protesters were wounded in Kulgam district after clashing with security forces at these two encounter sites in south Kashmir on Wednesday.On Wednesday evening, a joint team of Army, CRPF and Special Operations Group (SOG) of J&K Police launched a cordon-and-search operation in Gugloora area of Shopian’s Pinjoora. In a bid to disrupt the operation, a group of Kashmiri youths pelted stones on the search party.Security forces had to use tear gas shells, pellets and live ammunition to disperse the mob, in which 20 protesters were injured. Among those wounded, three with bullet injuries were taken to Shopian district hospital where one Sajad Ahmad Parray of Shopian’s Buderhama was declared brought dead, said a police officer.A search operation is underway in the region, where three to four terrorists are believed to be holed-up in a house. Sources said Hizbul Mujahideen commander Riyaz Naikoo is among those trapped.Earlier in the day, around 50 stone-pelters were injured in clashes with security forces following a pre-dawn encounter in Tazipora area of Kulgam district. Two terrorists, however, managed to flee with help from the protesters.A joint team of Army, CRPF and SOG had launched a cordon-and-search operation in Mohammadpora village, when holed-up terrorists opened fire at the search party. Security forces bombed the house in which the terrorists were hiding. The duo got buried in the debris but survived.Meanwhile, hundreds of Kashmiri youth thronged the encounter site and started pelting stones at the security personnel. Violent clashes ensued, in which 50 protesters were injured after forces used tear gas shells, pellets and live ammunition to disperse the mob. The operation had to be called off.As soon as the forces withdrew, the holed-up terrorists emerged from their hideout. The stone-pelters lifted the duo on their shoulders while chanting pro-Azaadi and pro-Islam slogans. The two later escaped with help from the protesters.Kulgam chief medical officer Dr Fazil Kochak said 44 out of the 50 people received at the Mohammadpora primary healthcare centre had minor injuries and were being treated at the facility itself. Six others, meanwhile, were shifted to Srinagar for advanced treatment.Internet services were snapped in Kulgam in view of the security situation.
