Cong leaders again reach out to Rahul; he stays unavailable

‘Don’t quit’ clamour grows; workers hold rally outside his residence



The clamour against Congress chief Rahul Gandhi quitting from the top post kept growing on Wednesday, as party leaders and workers across the country continued to make entreaties to the leader.



Four days after Rahul conveyed his decision before the Congress Working Committee (CWC) to resign from his post, the party has not only continued to refuse to even look at other possible alternatives but has also come together in its appeal to Rahul to rethink his decision.



After requests from Congress allies such as RJD supremo Lalu Prasad Yadav and DMK chief MK Stalin, Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy on Wednesday said he would meet Rahul on Thursday and request him to stay on as the party chief. Kumaraswamy and Rahul are likely to run into each other at Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s swearing-in ceremony on Thursday but a separate meeting at Rahul’s residence is also possible, sources told Mirror.



However, the Congress chief has been unavailable to senior leaders of his party who have been trying to reach out to him in a bid to make him change his mind. On Wednesday evening, as former Chief Minister and Delhi unit head Sheila Dikshit led a massive rally of party workers outside Rahul’s residence, sources said she did not manage to meet him and left an appeal with his office to reconsider his decision.



“I have given him the message that he should not resign. We want him to continue on his post. Otherwise, it will cause us immense pain. We have conveyed that to him,” Dikshit told reporters on her way out. Earlier in the day, she had said, “He (Rahul) has done good work. Winning and losing are part of life but it is important to keep fighting. We had lost during Indira Gandhi’s time also. We have lost and we are analysing our defeat. We will work on our mistakes.”



Hundreds of party workers gathered outside Rahul’s residence, appealing to him to continue in his position, while some leaders sat on a hunger strike. The Delhi police detained those on hunger strike but later released them.



Meanwhile, in Rajasthan, the 198-member executive committee comprising elected MLAs, Pradesh Congress Committee members and other senior leaders met to pass a resolution backing Rahul’s leadership and asking him to overhaul and restructure the party. “The resolution (rejecting Rahul’s resignation) passed by the CWC has been backed by the executive committee and we have unanimously appealed to him to continue his leadership and whatever changes he wants to bring at whichever level he should do it. Rahul Gandhi has worked hard inside and outside the Parliament… We have told everyone to start a mass contact programme to go back to the villages and towns and connect with them. This is not the last election that we have contested,” Rajasthan Congress chief Sachin Pilot said soon after the meeting.


