Cops ask twin towns’ jewellery stores to boost their security

In the wake of recent incidents involving armed robbers, police think it’s wise to install cameras, keep iron rods among other things



In wake of the audacious loots at jewellery stores that have taken place this year, the Pimpri-Chinchwad police have asked the shop owners to install safety alarms, closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras and even keep iron rods. The jewellers have adhered to these suggestions in a bid to augment their security quotient.



Furthermore, they feel it is the need of the hour as at least 10 incidents have been reported in the twin towns — which boast of around 1,000 stores — over three months. Pimpri-Chinchwad police commissioner R Padmanabhan told Mirror, “We have asked all jewellers to install CCTV cameras, safety alarms and keep iron rods at their stores. Armed robbers had struck these outlets and few of them succeeded in looting them. The safety measures have been formulated to ensure better security.”



These simple tools seem to have worked in foiling a recent attempt at Nigdi, where two armed robbers fired at the store owner. When they were trying to loot more jewellery, the owner, Sachin Oswal, attacked them with an iron rod. They fled the spot. However, they still managed to take away gold worth Rs 5 lakh.



Oswal said, “When they came with arms, I realised that I had to fight them myself. They could have looted ornaments worth more than what the four gold chains cost. But, we put up a fight. Ever since cops have instructed the jewellers on safety, we have installed cameras, a safety alarm and iron rod at the store.”



Cops from all the stations in Pimpri-Chinchwad held a meeting in phases to convey the importance of security. It has resonated with several shop owners like Shyam Chavan of Ashwini Jewellers at Dapodi. He said, “We have recently put safety alarms, while cameras were installed a few years ago. After the Nigdi robbery came to fore, we have kept an iron rod as well. Jewellers need some weapon for their protection because when the armed robbers storm into the stores, we have nothing to defend ourselves.”



These stores are often targeted by inter-state gangs, an instance of which was witnessed at Rahatani on March 7. The owner of Punekar Jewellers was fired at and three kilograms of gold was snatched. After scanning the camera footage and relying on the description of the accused — collected from various shops — the police busted the Haryana gang. Such incidents have instilled a sense of alertness among jewellers like Niraj Bafna of Chinchwad. He said, “Our association also held a meeting with the police recently and expressed our concerns about the incidents. We haven’t received these instructions yet but we have all security measures in place.”



The police stated that the jewellers were advised to follow safety measures. They have assured increased vigilance around jewellery stores, ATMs and commercial centres. Moreover, the cops have advised them to keep a watch on the suspicious movements and people around their stores.



CP Padmanabhan added, “The robbers first survey the spot for days, before planning robberies. We have asked them to keep someone outside their store to keep a watch on the people besides their existing security setup. They should be aware of those trying to gather information and keeping an eye on the store activity.”


