Second day of 8th All India Convention for the ‘Hindu Rashtra’

Will raise my voice against the atrocities on Bangladeshi Hindus till my last breath! – Adv. Rabindra Ghosh, President, ‘Bangladesh Minority Watch’, Bangladesh

Vidyadhiraj Hall, Ramnath Temple, Goa : The state of Hindus in Bangladesh is pitiable. Rape, loot and arson of Hindu houses, destruction of temples have become a daily affair. The population of Hindus which was around 18-20% at the time of Bangladeshi independence has sunk to 1 to 8% in many places. The Bangladeshi government is apathetic towards the problems of Hindus. The Indian government should shed its lethargy and take steps to protect us Bangladeshi Hindus. Adv. Rabindra Ghosh, President, ‘Bangladesh Minority Watch’, Bangladesh said that we will raise our voice against the atrocities on Bangladeshi Hindus till our last breath. He was addressing the delegates during the first session of the second day of 8th All India Convention for the Hindu Rashtra on 30th May. Shri. Ajay Singh (International President, World Hindu Federation), Shri. Gururaj Prabhu (HJS Coordinator for Prayag, UP), Shri. Guruprasad Gowda (HJS State Coordinator, Karnataka) were present on the dais.

Adv. Ghosh further said that ‘the term ‘Islamic State’ has been included in the constitution of Bangladesh. We petitioned the Government of India about the atrocities on Hindus in Bangladesh, but nothing came of it. It is only due to the grace of God that we are able to work to safeguard the Hindus there’.

Highlights

Adv. Rabindra Ghosh showed visuals of atrocities on Hindus in Bangladesh. Testimonials by women who were victims of gang-rapes, attacks by jihadi mobs on Hindu settlements, arson and destruction of temples shed light on the horrors that Bangladeshi Hindus have to face. On behalf of the delegates Shri. Kartik Salunkhe reassured the Bangladeshi Hindu delegate that ‘we firmly stand by our Hindu brethren in Bangladesh. We will put in our best efforts to ensure they get justice’. The delegates expressed their support for the Bangladeshi Hindus by shouting slogans like ‘Bangladeshi Hinduon par ho raha atyachar, nahi sahega Hindusthan !’ (India will not tolerate atrocities against Bangladeshi Hindus!)

Able to work to safeguard the Hindus only due to the grace of God ! – Adv. Rabindra Ghosh

Adv. Rabindra Ghosh expressed that ‘It is only due to the grace of God that we are able to work to safeguard the Hindus in Bangladeshi. My spiritual practice is to keep working for the sake of Hindus there!’

Further he posed the question – ‘What can be done to stop the atrocities being heaped on Hindus in Bangladesh?’ and proceeded to answer it with ‘The only way to protect the Hindus in Bangladesh is to obtain the blessings and goodwill of Saints’. Adv Ghosh has approached everyone from the police to the administration seeking protection for the Hindus but has not received positive responses from any quarter. Adv. Ghosh’s talk showed his emotion that now only God can help the Hindus in Bangladesh. Adv. Ghosh’s love for the common Hindu and intense desire to help Hindus despite being attacked and grievously injured numerous times was inspiring to the proHindus.

Messages by various Saints to the convention were read out at the start of the day’s sessions. Shri. Guruprasad Gowda (HJS State Coordinator, Karnataka) read HH Das Maharaj’s (Sindhudurg) message and Shri. Vinod Gadikar (HJS Coordinator, Ratnagiri) read HH Ulhasgiri Maharaj’s (Ratnagiri) message. Shri. Santosh Alshi (HJS State Coordinator, Gujarat) felicitated HH Chandrakanth Maharaj Shukla.

A Marathi news Channel ‘ABP Maza’ hurt the sentiments of crores of patriots by airing a programme ‘Swatantryaveer Savarkar – A hero or villain ?’ on the anniversary of Swatantryaveer Savarkar on 28th May. By raising a question whether the news Channel ‘ABP Maza’ will dare to air a programme ‘A hero or villain ?’ in the name of Mohandas Gandhi or Jawaharlal Nehru, the demand that BJP Government should confer ‘Bharat Ratna’ on Swatantryaveer Savarkar and honour his extreme sacrifice for the motherland was made in the Convention.

ProHindu organizations should unitedly display their strength ! – Shri. Ajay Singh, International President, World Hindu Federation

‘Hindu Dharma is superior among all the religions. It concerns the uplift of every living being. Hindu Dharma should be protected and propagated. Hindu numbers are declining across the world. There are numerous organizations which are working for Hindus. They should all unite and display their strength.’

Shri. Ajay Singh spoke about the inception of World Hindu Federation and its work in India and abroad.

The Hindu soul is becoming radiant due to Hindu Janajagruti Samiti ! – Ajay Singh

Hindu Janajagruti Samiti is doing the important task of teaching Hindu values to Hindus. The Hindu soul is becoming radiant due to this !

Divine indications that the Hindu Rashtra will be established across the globe !

When the session on ‘steps to unify the Hindus on a global level’ was underway, a few monkeys jumped across the auditorium roof. During the session, Shri. Ajay Singh was talking about Nepal, that it is Sita’s maternal home. Hanuman also crossed the borders, went to Lanka and participated in the task of establishing Ram Rajya. So Shri. Singh said that now Hanuman sent us a message through these monkeys that Hindu Rashtra will not be limited to India, it will break borders and spread across the globe.

Anti-India forces have gained a foothold in Nepal ever since it became a secular democracy ! – Gururaj Prabhu

A deep conspiracy uprooted the monarchy in Nepal and instead forced a democracy there. The citizens there did not oppose this unitedly. China is trying hard to swallow Nepal. Hundreds of churches have sprung up to convert the Hindus and Buddhists there. When democracy was dumped on Nepal, the people asked for Nepal to be declared a Hindu Rashtra in the constitution; the politicians betrayed the people by sticking in ‘Secular’. When Nepal had a monarchy, Sanatan Dharma enjoyed protection. But antiIndia forces have gained a foothold in Nepal ever since it became a secular democracy !

The respect that Nepalese have for Sanatan Sanstha and Hindu Janajagruti Samiti !

Nepal respects Sanatan Sanstha and Hindu Janajagruti Samiti. Shri. Gururaj Prabhu said that the Nepalese harbor the sentiment that these organizations are working selflessly to establish the Hindu Rashtra.
