MH-VARSITY-PUNERI PAGADI

Protest against Puneri pagadi at Pune university convocation

Pune, Jan 11 (PTI) Student activists shouted slogans

against the use of 'Puneri pagadi', a traditional headgear

associated with the city, during the 114th convocation

ceremony of Savitribai Phule Pune University here Friday.

Police detained at least five students following the

protest.

Some student organisations had opposed the varsity's

decision to replace the cap-and-gown worn during convocation

with the traditional kurta-pyjama and Puneri pagadi.

They allege that by introducing Puneri pagadi, the

varsity is toeing RSS' and Hindu right-wing's agenda.

Some leaders have alleged that Puneri pagadi is mainly

associated with Brahmins.

One of the students who was detained said the varsity

has first mandated kurta-pyjama and Puneri pagadi for all the

students attending the convocation.

"After we objected, they revoked the notification and

said only guests at the ceremony will wear Puneri pagadi. But

we had warned that if even guests were seen donning the

pagadi, a donkey wearing Puneri pagadi will be paraded on the

campus," said Akash Zambare Patil of the Nationalist Student

Congress, NCP's student wing.

"After seeing guests wearing Puneri pagadi, students

brought a donkey on the campus and put Puneri pagadi on its

head," he said.

Asked why they were opposed to Puneri pagadi, Patil

said the varsity is named after social reformer Savitribai

Phule, who along with her husband Jyotirao Phule opened the

doors of education to the marginalised masses.

"Our demand was if you want to replace the convocation

cap, replace it with Phule pagadi (the kind of pagadi Jyotirao

Phule wore), otherwise continue with the old dress," he said.

Senior police inspector Dayanand Dhome of

Chatushringi police station said five or six students were

detained for raising slogans. They were released later, he

added.

A senior varsity official said Puneri pagadi was worn

only by the guests on the dais.

"The varsity decided to go ahead with kurta and pyjama

for students instead of the gown, however, the cap was not

replaced. Only guests wore Puneri pagadi," he said. PTI SPK

KRK KRK
