Article 15: Shocking 2014 Badaun gangrape that inspired Ayushmann Khurrana starrer film

New Delhi:

The trailer of Article 15 was dropped last day and shook the nations with the grim reality of reigning caste discrimination in rural India. Ayushmann is seen as a police cop who has taken the charge of investigating the case and you would see the harsh reality through the trailer.

The movie that narrates the tragic tale of two teenagers from Scheduled Caste gangraped and hanged from a tree on asking for a raise of Rs 3 is loosely based on the 2014 Badaun rape case that took the nation by storm. The director Anubhav Sinha too has earlier stated that the movie is inspired from the 2014 horrofic incident and has tried to portrary certain glimpses incidents that happened actually during its investigation by CBI.

The movie title derives from Article 15 of the Constitution, which states that the State or any citizen should not discriminate anyone based on their religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. The Constitution is the basis on which the country needs to be run, Ayan tells Nishad (Mohammed Zeeshan Ayub).

Here's remembering the tragic story of two Badaun girls for whom justice is yet to be served.

On the morning of May 27, 2014, two teenage girls were found hanging from a mango tree in UP’s Katra village, Badaun district. The news of the horrific incident spread like fire.

Angry over police apathy in registering the FIR, the villagers protest by blocking traffic with dead bodies on Ushait-Lilawan Road and also demand suspension of all the policemen posted in Ushait Police station

Two persons, including a policeman, are arrested. One of the accused Pappu Yadav has been arrested, while two other accused Brijesh and Awadhesh have been identified and other two are still at large

On June 6th, a SIT was constituted and on June 12, the CBI filed an FIR and began investigation into the case.

While different angles were being probed into the mysterious death of the girls, on November 27, 2014, almost after a five month probe and conducting further forensic tests, CBI claimed that inferences drawn from latest tests contradicted earlier findings.

In an unexpected turn of events, the CBI enquiry claimed that the girls were neither raped nor murdered, but had committed suicide.

The reason cited was that the older of the victims had been caught in a compromising position with one of the accused, 19-year-old Pappu Yadav

The charges against the accused were dropped. An appeal is pending before the Additional District Judge in Badaun district.

Article 15 will see Ayushmann Khurrana in the never seen before cop avavter and from the trailer it is quite evident that the actor has done to his sensational role.

For all the Latest Entertainment News, Bollywood News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
