Rahul Gandhi demonstrated fearless leadership against Modi government: Sonia Gandhi heaps praises on son

Rahul Gandhi demonstrated fearless leadership: Sonia Gandhi | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: United Progressive Alliance (UPA) chairperson Sonia Gandhi on Saturday heaped praises on son and Congress chief Rahul Gandhi, saying he demonstrated his fearless leadership, by taking the Modi government head-on.

Speaking at the Congress Parliamentary Party (CPP) meet, Sonia further lauded Rahul for highlighting the "injustices carried out against farmers, workers, traders and small businesses, youth, women and the marginalised sections of the society".

“I also take this opportunity to whole-heartedly thank Rahul Ji for his valiant and relentless campaign. As Congress President, he has given his all and toiled night and day for the Congress party. He demonstrated his fearless leadership, by taking the Modi government head on,” she said.

The UPA chief who was elected as the Chairperson of Congress Parliamentary Party (CPP) on Saturday also thanked Congress leaders for fighting one of the hardest elections.

'We were up against election machinery with all odds stacked against us – unlimited resources, the ability to manipulate public opinion and the spread of mischievous propaganda. I congratulate you for standing up successfully for the values and ideals of the Congress party,” she noted.

“Our karyakartas are our front-line soldiers. They have worked selflessly for the last five years. They ensured that the India we stand for is spread far and wide, to every corner of our great country. I want to thank them for their innumerable sacrifices in the face of unprecedented hostility from the ruling party,” she added.

The UPA chief went on to praise her son for rejuvenating the Congress in many states including Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, where the party won the Assembly elections last year.

Sonia also said that the Congress party under Rahul’s leadership has fought bravely to expose the government’s misdeeds despite having only 44 members in the previous Lok Sabha, and about 55 in the Rajya Sabha.

Calling for coordination and cooperation with like-minded parties, the UPA chief said, “We must remember that our numbers in the Rajya Sabha will be challenged, and therefore it is even more important to ensure better. The issues we raise in Parliament must resonate in the minds of our Party workers and with the public.”

She also urged the party leaders to set the agenda in Parliament, ensure consistency and relentless follow-up of issues that matter, including through Standing Committees and other parliamentary forums.

“We are not going to let our guard down. We must hold the Government accountable to their promises. Progress is currently being measured through manufactured data. Progress must be measured with truth. We will continue to fight for truth and transparency,” Sonia added.

She also assured to fulfill the responsibility of an alert and responsible opposition to strengthen democracy and safeguard the Constitution. “We will hold the government accountable in Parliament. We will be at the forefront of the fight for the rights of the people, both in Parliament and on the streets,” she asserted.

Sonia also asked the party workers to draw appropriate lessons from the defeat in the national elections and said, “In an unprecedented crisis, lies an unprecedented opportunity.”

“It is up to us to grasp it with humility and self-confidence, drawing the appropriate lessons from our defeat. The people of India expect us to honour their mandate by renewing and reinvigorating ourselves. Undeterred by the many challenges that lie ahead, we will rise again,” she said.
