Telangana Conngress workers threaten indefinite hunger strike until Rahul Gandhi withdraws resignation

TPCC sit outside party office in Hyderabad I Photo credit: Times Now | Photo Credit: Times Now

Hyderabad, Telangana: From blood-written letters to warnings of suicide, Congress workers are pulling all stops in urging their party president Rahul Gandhi who is adamant on resigning from his position. On Saturday, Telangana Pradesh Congress Committee (TPCC) workers said they will sit on an indefinite hunger strike until Rahul Gandhi takes his resignation back.

The warning comes a day after TPCC general secretary Bollu Kishan and former MP V Hanumantha Rao observed a day-long fast here Thursday, urging Rahul to continue as party president.

The fast was held in the premises of Gandhi Bhavan, Congress headquarters in Telangana. Speaking at the end of the fast, TPCC president and MP-elect N Uttam Kumar Reddy said the party needed the leadership of Gandhi at this crucial juncture.

"...The well-wishers and sympathisers of Congress party would be about one crore in Telangana. Through this fast, all of us are making only one appeal, in one voice, to Rahul Gandhi ji. Your leadership is needed to the country and party at this crucial juncture," Reddy told the gathering.

Though it was a fact that Congress lost in the Lok Sabha polls, there were many reasons for it, he said.

The TPCC President alleged BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi won the elections by taking up nationalism as their agenda and not talking about issues of employment, agriculture and economy.

Taking the onus for Congress’s debacle in the Lok Sabha elections 2019, the Congress president said he will step down. Failing to capitalise on jobs losses, the proposed NYAY scheme and alleged corruption in Rafale deal which the grand old party used as poll plank in the elections, Congress was able to add just seven seats from its 2014 seat tally of just 44.

Congress received a massive drubbing in the recently concluded Lok Sabha elections, witnessing one of the lowest seat tallies at 52 while the Bharatiaya Janata President (BJP) at 303 seats, was back with even as higher number of seats from 2014.


