Death of a tractor driver: Congress MLA sits on hunger strike against his own government in Rajasthan

Congress MLA and former DGP Harish Meena | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: Congress MLA and former Director General of Police (DGP) Harish Meena launched an indefinite hunger strike against his own government in Rajasthan for the death of a tractor driver who was allegedly thrashed by policemen in Tonk district on Wednesday.

Meena has alleged that even after his dharna the state government is not doing anything to bring the perpetrators to justice.

The MLA has been on dharna for the last three days demanding justice for Bhajanlal Meena, who died under suspicious circumstances in Laxmipura village in Tonk district.

The family members of Bhajanlal's family have claimed that he was brutally assaulted by the cops due to which he died.

While the cops have termed his death as ‘accidental’ protesters have alleged that cops were responsible for his death.

The MLA is sitting on dharna with the protestors and the family members of the deceased in Nagarfort village along with the body of Bhajanlal.

Talking to the media, before starting his hunger strike, Harish Meena said that he had conveyed his message to the state government but nothing happened in the last three days after which he started his indefinite hunger strike.

Meanwhile, BJP's Rajya Sabha MP Kirorilal Meena also arrived at the venue of the dharna and announced that a huge protest will be launched on June 5 if the demands of the protestors are not met.

Taking a jibe at the Ashok Gehlot-led Congress government BJP MLA and deputy leader of opposition Rajendra Rathore claimed that the state government's days were numbered as even its own MLAs are forced to sit on dharna against their own government.

BJP state unit chief Madan Lal Saini alleged that the Congress government was intentionally trying to suppress the matter.

He also said that a three-member panel has been formed to probe the incident and added that it will submit its report within three days.
