Metro workers on hunger strike over unpaid dues

The state of affairs continues to remain grim for the employees of Hindustan Construction Company Ltd (HCC)-Al Fara’a, a joint venture, who were working towards completing a project awarded to the companies by MahaMetro. In April this year, Mirror had reported that work on the first route of the Pune MahaMetro project between Pimpri and Swargate had come to a standstill owing to 100 odd staffers employed with HCC-Al Fara’a, protesting over unpaid salaries for the past five months.



Now, the matter seems to have hit a complete roadblock, and as a last resort the employees have been forced to stage hunger strike as their dues, pending since January 2019, have still not been cleared, now running into its sixth month. Around 60 employees have announced to go for an indefinite hunger strike until all their dues are cleared. Also, these workers were forced to relinquish from their duties as Maha- Metro reduced the scope of the project that was handed over to the companies to construct metro stations in Pune and Pimpri-Chinchwad.



The project was descoped, stating reasons of inconsistency and delayed progress, and has now been handed over to Shapoorji Pallonji, another construction giant, which apparently has assured the Metro authorities to close the project well within time.



Speaking to Mirror, an employee of HCC-Al Fara’a, who was part of the execution team, said, “The company is hell-bent on breaking our unity, but right from the senior manager to an office boy, we stand united in our suffering meted out by the organisation. On May 31, I was informed by the management that I will not be paid what I was previously assured and have to settle for a three-month salary instead of promised six-month remuneration.”



While B Abhijeet, another employee, said, “Previously, we were given false assurances, stating that all our dues will be cleared at the earliest; however, dates have come and gone, but they have failed to keep their word. I was called by the management and told that they will clear all my dues in a day’s time if I was ready to pull off from the impending hunger strike. I rejected the offer because there are many others like me who are suffering, and ideally everyone should get compensated for the hours they have put in.”



“Some people have received a twomonth salary, while some have received three-month pay. There is no parity or rule followed by the authorities. We still haven’t handed over our resignations as we feel that they will not pay us the remaining amount if we submit our resignations.”



The employees apparently are now debt-ridden as they do not have any money or a job. Since they have not yet received a reliving letter from the employer, the employees are also finding it difficult to find another job. Commenting on the issue of payment delay, Hemant Sonawane, MahaMetro’s general manager (corporate communications), said, “We have cleared all the dues from our end and now it is the company’s responsibility to ensure that the employees receive their dues. We have paid one installment that we were supposed to and have also written to them a couple of times, asking them to clear the payments.”



Mirror tried to reach out to both HCC and Al Fara’a individually through calls and emails; however, there was no response from either of the stakeholders.
