No intention of imposing Hindi, says Centre after Tamil Nadu leaders warn of protests

The draft on the new education policy was proposed and prepared by a panel constituted by Prakash Javadekar (in pic) when he was the HRD minister. (Photo: PTI)

The Central government on Saturday clarified that it has not taken a decision on the draft education policy and has no intention of imposing Hindi or any other language. The government also said that the three-language system under the draft New Education Policy (NEP) is just a recommendation and not a policy.

The Centre's response came amid Tamil Nadu opposition parties' objection to the three-language formula for schools in the state as stated in the draft policy and said that the state will follow only two-language policy. They also warned of protests over the inclusion of Hindu in non-Hindi speaking states.

The draft was proposed and prepared by a panel constituted by Prakash Javadekar when he was the HRD minister in the previous government. The draft suggested the inclusion of Hindi in all the non-Hindi speaking states in the country.

The 500-page report states that non-Hindi speaking states would include the regional language - English and Hindi - while states, where Hindi is spoken, would have English and another modern Indian language in addition to Hindi.

The policy states: "Students will be required to attain proficiency in discussing their major in at least one Indian language through an appropriate written project or presentation in that language."

Reacting to the developments, Information and Broadcasting Minister Prakash Javadekar said the government has not taken any decision on the draft education policy. He also said that there will be no imposition and "all languages will be promoted".

"There is no intention of imposing any language on anybody, we want to promote all Indian languages. It's a draft prepared by the committee, which will be decided by the government after getting public feedback," Prakash Javadekar told news agency ANI.





"Modi government has always promoted all Indian languages. Therefore, there is no case or intention of imposing any language on anybody. We want to promote all Indian languages. There should be no misunderstanding on the issue that this is a government policy. It is a draft prepared by the committee which will be decided by the government only after we get public feedback," he said.

Parties in Tamil Nadu, including the DMK, on Saturday opposed the three-language formula for schools in the state, as stated in the draft national education policy presented by K. Kasturirangan Committee to the central government.

Speaking to reporters in Chennai, DMK Lok Sabha member Kanimozhi said her party would oppose any such move. "I warn BJP any such move will cause them a huge disaster," DMK leader MK Stalin said. MDMK leader Vaiko warned of a "language war".

Another DMK leader said that any attempt by the Central government to force Hindi will not be tolerated by anyone in the state. "The DMK is ready to face any consequences to stop Hindi being forced on people," Trichy Siva, DMK Rajya Sabha MP, said.

AMMK leader TTV Dhinakaran said, "Imposing Hindi on non-Hindi speaking states will destroy pluralism. This would make non-Hindi speakers second class citizens."

Actor-turned-politician and Makkal Needhi Mayyam (MNM) chief Kamal Haasan also said that although he has acted in many Hindi films, the language should not be imposed on anyone. "Those interested can learn anything they want," he said.

Reacting to the language row, Union Minister DV Sadananda Gowda said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his first meeting with the newly elected MPs, said that regional languages and regional issues should be given priority. "India is one," Sadananda Gowda quotes PM Modi as saying.
