Gone to serve notice over illegal parking lot, MC staff attacked

Ludhiana: The building branch staff of Ludhiana municipal corporation, including assistant town planner Vijay Kumar, were attacked by a group of people on Saturday when they had gone to serve a notice for illegal construction in a plot being used as illegal parking lot near the judicial courts complex.

According to officials, two class IV employees who went to serve the notice were also kept hostage and the ATP and his team were allegedly manhandled when they came to help of the duo.

The MC employees claimed that Jaspal Singh, whose relatives owned the plot, worked as a constable in the police and attacked them with a sharp-edged weapon. The MC staff handed over Jaspal Singh and another person to police.

Earlier, the building branch had sealed this parking lot following a complaint from area residents, who had alleged nuisance and parking mess inside the residential locality. But the men running the parking lot again made it operational and even installed a gate from other side. An illegal shed was also under construction in the plot.

Two employees Jagga Singh and Ravinder Kumar had gone to serve this notice to Jaspal Singh on Saturday. When he refused to accept the notice, they pasted the notice outside the parking lot.

But the employees of the parking lot nabbed them and held them captive inside the parking lot. Heated arguments took place when the ATP reached the site. A scuffle broke out among the MC employees and owner’s employees, but the MC employees were successful in catching hold of Jaspal Singh. The police are investigating the matter.

ATP Vijay Kumar said, “Class IV employees were sent to hand over the notice only. The owner of lots could have simply refused to take the notice.” He said the assaulters attacked them with sharp-edged weapons and hit him on his hand as well. He said they brought him to the police station for action and will get a case registered against him.

On the other hand, Jaspal Singh alleged that there was a dispute over this property in the family and MC employees were unnecessary harassing him. He refused that he attacked anybody and alleged that it was MC staff who attacked him.

On April 24, a team comprising building branch officials from zone B had gone to demolish the illegal colony on Tibba Road near the MC garbage dump and a private developer Gurnam Singh had hit their car from the rear. He had also abused and slapped building inspector Kashish Garg. The developer is yet to be arrested. The MC employees had staged protests demanding the arrest of the developer, but the matter was hushed up during elections.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
