NBCC: Demolition in Netaji Nagar by NBCC violates green norms: Activists, Real Estate News, ET RealEstate

Dear @ImranHussaain and @ArvindKejriwal, demolition activities continue in Netaji Nagar,in complete violation of se… https://t.co/s5DbUeU6Nv — Vimlendu Jha (@vimlendu) 1559374674000

NEW DELHI: Activists on Saturday alleged that demolition activity is going on in Netaji Nagar in violation of environment laws and without environmental clearance from Delhi Pollution Control Committee.Vimlendu Jha, an environmentalist and the founder of Swechha, took to Twitter and alleged: “...demolition activities continue in Netaji Nagar, in complete violation of several laws to be monitored by DPCC, without any environmental clearance. We request you to take strict action against NBCC .”The tweet was addressed to Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal and environment minister Imran Hussain.“It’s an absolute state of lawlessness and high-handedness by NBCC. The GPRA matter has been in the highest court of Delhi for almost a year. They reprimanded for erroneous Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), leading to cancellation of the previous EIA, with absolute stay on Naoroji Nagar redevelopment. Without an EIA in hand, with regard to the other six colonies, they are continuing to demolish the structures (demolition as per the ministry’s own definition is also part of construction/preparation of land). DPCC should have taken suo motu cognizance of the matter and stopped NBCC from continuing any work, but it hasn’t,” said Jha.Activists say that the demolition activity is in complete violation of Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution Act), 1981, and Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution Act), 1974, under the jurisdiction of DPCC. “It is also in violation of the Environment Protection Act, 1986 (under which the EIA notification, 2006 is issued), which can be monitored by Delhi State Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA),” said Bhavreen Kandhari, activist and a member of Delhi Tree SOS.NBCC officials, however, told TOI that they have the necessary clearance from the MoEF for the demolition activity.“We have the required environment clearance. It has not expired. Our approval is from the MoEF. For smaller projects, we need to take it from DPCC,” NP Agarwal, senior executive director in-charge of the project, said.Last June, there was huge furore over the redevelopment of Sarojini Nagar , Netaji Nagar, Thyagaraja Nagar, Mohammadpur, Kasturba Nagar, Naoroji Nagar and Srinivaspuri. NBCC was on its way to pull down the old residential complexes — built in the 1950s — to replace them with highrise residential buildings, commercial spaces and a World Trade Centre in those areas.AAP spokesperson and Delhi MLA Saurabh Bharadwaj said, “These projects are under the central government and we had protested against the cutting of 18,000 trees. Now, when it’s clear that environment clearance for this project is under challenge, the Centre should direct its contractor to stop the work. Delhi government is also examining amicable ways to stop any illegal construction. However, we do not want any confrontation with the Centre.”
