BJP mixing religion with politics through 'Jai Shri Ram' slogan, says Mamata Banerjee

KOLKATA: Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee on Sunday evening said that she had no problem with any political slogan and criticized the BJP supporters "who are trying to spread hatred ideology through one section of media through fake video, fake news, misinformation and disinformation to create confusion and to suppress truth and reality."The CM on her Facebook page wrote that she had no issues with "Jai Shri Ram" slogan, though on Thursday during her visit to Bhatpara she had to face Jai Shri Ram slogan and she came down from her car to accost those who were shouting slogans.Even the slogan shouters were arrested by the police under Sec 341 and 506 IPC, as they had blocked the convoy of the CM and had tried to abuse her. But later all "the 10 BJP workers were released on personal bond, after it became viral on social media that the BJP workers were arrested for chanting "Jai Shri Ram".Even on Sunday, when Kolkata's mayor Firhad Hakim went to attend a Kirtan he was greeted with "Jai Shri Ram" slogan by some people while the mayor offered floral tribute. But he remained calm and did not react violently.The CM wrote "From Ram Mohan Roy to Vidyasagar to other great social reformers, Bengal has been a seat of harmony, progress and forward thinking. But now, the misconceived strategy of BJP is targeting Bengal in a very negative manner.""I have no problem, regarding any particular slogan of political parties in their rallies, and for their party purpose. Every political party has their own slogan. My party has Jai Hind, Vande Mataram. The Left has Inquilab Zindabad. Others have different slogans. We respect each other," the CM stated.The CM also said that "Jai Sia Ram, Jai Ram ji ki, Ram naam Satya hai" etc have religious and social connotations. "We respect these sentiments. But BJP is using religious slogan Jai Sri Ram as their party slogan in a misconceived manner by way of mixing religion with politics.""We do not respect this forcible enforcement of political slogans on others in the name of so called RSS which Bengal never accepted."This is a deliberate attempt in Bengal to sell hatred ideology through vandalism and violence which must be opposed, the CM opined."One can fool some people sometimes, but cannot fool all the people all the time.This is high time that proper action is taken to restrain political workers not to indulge in activities of creating unrest, chaos, violence and disruption of normal life by taking recourse to misplaced ideologies in the so called name of religion to create divide among the people. If all other political parties start resorting to these sort of divisive and disruptive activities, then the entire environment would become highly vitiated and counterproductive. We have to and would oppose such moves of BJP very strongly in order to keep secular character of the country as enshrined in our constitution," she said.
