UCSD seeks advice from Dalai Lama about creating an Institute for Empathy and Compassion

A delegation of physician-scientists from UC San Diego met with the Dalai Lama in India last week to seek his advice on creating an Institute for Empathy and Compassion, an idea that’s been gaining support on the La Jolla campus.

The party was led by Dr. David Brenner, who as vice chancellor for health sciences has been searching for more effective ways to broadly cultivate empathy and compassion in health care, especially as it applies to the training of doctors.

Brenner also has been promoting studies that explore how compassion and a nurturing environment can affect the development of the human brain and a person’s mental health, subjects that also interest the Dalai Lama, who is 83.

On Wednesday, Brenner posted photos of his meeting with the Dalai Lama on Facebook. But he didn’t provided details of the meeting, which was held in Dharamshala, India, where the Tibetan spiritual leader lives in exile.

Advertisement

UCSD is seeking help from an old friend in turning to His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama (Tenzin Gyatso), who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his nonviolent efforts to protect his homeland, Tibet, from being dominated by China.

The Buddhist monk visited the University of California San Diego in 2012 during his “Compassion Without Border” tours. He returned in 2017 at the request of Chancellor Pradeep Khosla to give the commencement address. During both visits, he met with the university’s leading scientists to talk about everything from how kindness and compassion can affect a person’s physiology to the social impact of climate change.

His appearance was not entirely welcomed at UCSD, which has about 5,300 students from China. A small number of students protested, claiming that the Dalai Lama has tried to divide China, causing great pain.

But overall, his receptions in La Jolla have been warm. And UCSD is once again seeking his counsel.

The latest discussions may involve an expansion of UCSD’s existing Center for Science and Education of Empathy and Compassion, or a new institute that operates separately, and on a much broader scale. University officials are expected to provide more detail later this week.
