After retirement, judges preach what they seldom practised

Days before becoming Chief Justice of India, Justice Ranjan Gogoi in his Ramnath Goenka lecture had agreed that independent judges and noisy journalists were democracy’s first line of defence but modified it slightly to say that “not only independent judges and noisy journalists but even independent journalists and sometimes noisy judges” were needed to guard the ethos and values of democracy . Eight months before the lecture, Justices Gogoi, Madan B Lokur and Kurian Joseph led by Justice Jasti Chelameswar held an unprecedented press conference to accuse then CJI Dipak Misra of wrongdoing. They provided no evidence. The then CJI endured the ignominy silently.Captain of the rebel judges Justice Chelameswar and his “johnnies” (as Justice Chelameswar had referred to the other three judges just before the January 12, 2018 presser) shook the pillars of the highest court, created cracks in the vaunted brotherhood among judges and provided activist lawyers the license to heap ignominy and create doubt about the judges’ integrity.The presser scripted no tangible reforms. Later, Justice Gogoi smelled a rat in the course being charted by Justice Chelameswar with help from politicians in Congress, Left parties and activist lawyers. By the time the design reached its inglorious finale, with the Congress-led opposition filing a historic notice of removal against the CJI in Parliament, Justice Gogoi had distanced himself from the flow of events. Justice Gogoi believes in the Orwellian concept of free speech: “Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two makes four.” When he said ‘noisy judges’ were needed in democracy, he meant sitting judges living up to their oath to do justice without fear and favour and having the courage to call a spade a spade.In India, it has become a trend with some retired judges to make the loudest noise about perceived violation of procedures. As judges, they routinely advise all and sundry to practice what they preach but after retirement, they quickly forget the ‘preach what you practice’ sermon.Recently, Justice Lokur, followed by Justice Chelameswar, wrote articles criticising the procedure adopted by the Supreme Court in setting up an in-house committee of Justices S A Bobde, Indu Malhotra and Indira Banerjee to inquire into an unprecedented sexual harassment complaint against CJI Gogoi.Justices Chelameswar and Lokur became SC judges in October 2011 and June 2012, respectively. Both had spent considerable time as judges and chief justices of various high courts before joining the SC.On November 6, 2013, a law intern wrote a blog accusing retired SC judge A K Ganguly of making inappropriate sexual advances towards her nearly a year earlier in December 2012. The then CJI set up an in-house inquiry panel of Justices R M Lodha, H L Dattu and Ranjana Prakash Desai to inquire into it.There were several glaring procedural lapses — a retired judge is not amenable to an in-house inquiry procedure, majority of male judges in the panel was not in sync with the Vishaka judgment guidelines to deal with sexual harassment complaints, lawyer’s assistance was not extended to the complainant, the SC did not make public the in-house inquiry report which found prima facie truth in the complaint, and, the ‘sexually harassed’ law intern refused Delhi Police ’s repeated requests to lodge an FIR. Though Justices Lokur and Chelameswar were firmly entrenched as SC judges by November 2013, why did they not protest against the improper procedure followed by the in-house panel?Procedure-sensitive Justice Lokur, while heading a bench hearing a case relating to Manipur fake encounter killings, had brushed aside the judiciary’s golden dictum of “innocent till pronounced guilty” to rap the CBI for allowing ‘murderers’ (Army personnel) to loaf around. Probably, he had intended to say that the CBI was not expediting investigation against those accused of fake encounters. But in one verbal shot from the bench, he branded all the accused as murderers, without trial. Justice Lokur has been associated with computerisation of the judiciary and headed the SC’s E-committee. In November 2016, then CJI T S Thakur unceremoniously replaced him with retired Rajasthan HC CJ Sunil Ambawani. Justice Thakur’s successor Justice J S Khehar reinstated him. What procedure was followed on both occasions, no one knows.Justice Lokur retired on December 31, 2018. At his farewell, CJI Gogoi had fondly recalled his more than 50-year friendship with Justice Lokur and referred to him as his “right hand”. To make the “right hand” happy, CJI Gogoi allowed Justice Lokur to continue in the E-committee despite the latter ceasing to be an SC judge. Justice Lokur did not question the procedure under which he was allowed to continue in the E-committee. The CJI has sanctioned him an official car, 200 litres of petrol per month, a driver and a peon for being part of the committee. Though Justice Lokur was sanctioned these perks since January, not a single meeting of the E-committee has been held since January.We had earlier written about how Justices Chelameswar and Lokur bartered transfer of their favourite judges from one HC to another in the collegium meetings. Procedure and transparency was far from their minds when they were part of the SC collegium which wields the power to select persons for appointment as judges and transfer of judges.Nearly 11 years ago, an FIR was lodged by a jeweller with a police station in Delhi accusing a media personality, who was the wife of a then powerful politician, of taking jewellery without paying for it. The complainant said the media personality told him that some of the jewellery was meant to be “gifted to Mr Chelameswar in Hyderabad”. Procedurally, there should have been an inquiry into it. It could still be done, with the precedent of the Justice Ganguly incident.
