Thousands march in London to mark 35th anniversary of Operation Bluestar

LONDON: Thousands of British Sikhs marched through London on Sunday chanting “Khalistan Zinbdabad” at an annual remembrance march and freedom rally held in memory of the those killed in Operation Bluestar in Amritsar The demonstration, organized by the Federation of Sikh Organisations, marked the 35th anniversary of June 5, 1984, when the Indian Army had stormed the Golden Temple in Amritsar to evict armed militia holed up inside. There has been no independent public inquiry into Margaret Thatcher ’s involvement in it, despite the release of classified documents five years ago implicating UK government.The rally began in Hyde Park with speeches and then participants marched on Trafalagar Square where a huge stage and sound system had been erected. Before they arrived a huge screen was showing moving pictures of the marchers as a voice blasted out a narrative claiming the Indian state has “failed to prosecute those responsible for the deaths in Operation Bluestar” as well as the police responsible for the “subsequent extra-judicial killings and disappearances” in Punjab.Tourists and British people sunbathing on the Square’s fountain as well artists sketching on the pavement nearby carried on, baffled by what was going on.Just after 2pm around 10,000 British Sikhs, men, women and children, many with orange turbans on, marched into the square chanting “Khalistan Zindabad” and “What do we want? Justice”. They listened to talks by a variety of people speak from the stage. Several hundred of the participants wore ‘Referendum 2020’ T-shirts and carried yellow ‘Khalistan’ flags.One of the protesters India-born Jarnail Singh, 64, from Slough, who moved to Britain in 1976 and watched Operation Bluestar unfold on TV here, said: “I joined this rally because Sikhs have had no justice since 1947. When India was divided after independence the British should have divided it into three and given Punjab our own nation.”Parmjit Singh, 54, from Twickenham, said: “I come here to remember the people who lost their lives in 1984 at the hands of the Indian government. Thatcher sent in the SAS to do a recce beforehand and that’s why we need to have a public inquiry”.A book called ‘Sikh Martyrs’ was launched at the event which details all the Sikhs who died in 1984 with their photos and biographies.Sukhjeevan Singh, spokesperson for Sikh Council UK, said, “This call for our own nation is not that we are power-hungry or want land, it’s about self-respect and dignity. Punjabi is not even a compulsory language in our state. We have been promised a public inquiry into 1984 by various political parties but because the Tories are the same party as Thatcher they have been very slow about it.”Davinder Singh, principal advisor to the Sikh Federation UK, said the key issue was that former PM David Cameron had rushed the Heywood Review, which had limited scope and was “a “whitewash”.Declassified files in 2014 revealed that Britain had sent an SAS officer to India in February 1984 ahead of Operation Blue Star to draw up a plan to remove Sikh extremists from the Temple. This provoked uproar among the Sikh community.The subsequent Heywood review found no record of any assistance to the June 1984 operation called ‘Blue Star’ by the Indian Government other than the limited military advice provided in mid-February. But the UK government did not release four files. In June 2018 Judge Shanks ordered for those files to be released. Three out of four were released in July 2018, but only 40 pages from them.
