I have no plans to join any political party as of now: Shah Faesal

by Muhammad Younis

Srinagar

As of now, Shah Faesal is yet to make a decision about his choice of politics. From tomorrow onwards, he is, however, going to go to the field and meet people.

“I do not have any plans to join any political party as of now,” Faesal told reporters at a press conference that was held in a Srinagar hotel. “I will go to the field first. I will be happy to contest coming elections. I will make the decision of joining any political party after talking to people.”

Faesal, the first civil services topper from Kashmir, announced his resignation on January 9, in protest against “unabated killings” and “marginalisation of Indian Muslims” in the Valley.

A day after, he said his next course of action depends on what the people of Kashmir want, especially the youth.

It was earlier speculated that Faesal would join the National Conference and contest the General Elections from Baramulla. But he said he has no such immediate plans.

“To be honest, Omar Abdullah has never approached me to join him; rather it was me who has gone to him many times for suggestions,” said Faesal.

Faesal termed his resignation from the civil services as a “small act of defiance” aimed at reminding the central government of its responsibility towards the state.

“I will always be a proud former member of the service, but the right to life of the Kashmiri youth should be respected. I am doing this to protest the denial of justice to my fellow-Kashmiris and the lack of political initiative in the state,” he said at a press conference in Srinagar.

Faesal also criticised the BJP government’s attacks on the state’s “special position and identity”, and said that it was indulging in such activities for electoral gains in the rest of the country.

“The rise in lynch mob nationalism in our country also dejects me. There are also attempts to play one region of the Jammu and Kashmir against another,” he told reporters.

About joining Hurriyat, he said that as Hurriyat doesn’t believe in electoral politics and thus won’t be able to give him the opportunity in executing whatever his plans are. Moreover, Faesal said that he was trained in governance.

Faesal described Prime Minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan, and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal as his inspiration.

“I wish if the youngsters of Kashmir give me support, I will do the retake of Kejriwal and Imran Khan in the state,” he said.
