Tamil Nadu's historical struggle against imposition of Hindi in territory

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Anti-Hindi sentiments have once again flared up in Tamil Nadu with the draft National Education Policy 2019 suggesting that the three-language formula needs to be implemented in its spirit throughout the country, promoting multilingual communicative abilities for a multilingual country. The draft policy prepared by a panel led by eminent scientist K Kasturirangan states that non-Hindi speaking states would include a regional language (Tamil), English and Hindi, while states, where Hindi is spoken, would have English and another modern Indian language in addition to Hindi.

Cutting across the parties, all the prominent leaders in the state have condemned the draft policy. Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) chief MK Stalin, taking a strong aversion to the draft policy, said the recommendation would “divide” the country. Meanwhile, the Tamil Nadu government said it would continue with the two-language formula – English and Tamil. However, Minister of Human Resource Development Ramesh Pokhriyal denied that the government was planning to impose Hindi in schools in Tamil Nadu.

History of anti-Hindi agitation

The first agitation against the imposition of Hindi in Tamil Nadu took place in 1937 when the Congress government led by C Rajagopalachari (Rajaji) asked for the introduction of compulsory teaching of Hindi in the schools of the Madras presidency. As per the provisions of the Government of India Act of 1935, the colonial government had introduced a measure of self-government in the provinces. Under its aegis, a ministry headed by Rajagopalachari came to the helm of affairs in the multi-lingual Madras presidency which included areas from all the southern states. Among the most impassioned opponents of the imposition of Hindi was Periyar (EV Ramaswami Naicker) who viewed this as an attack on the Tamil language and the Tamil literary tradition as well.

The opposition to Hindi was largely a reaction against caste. Brahmins, not more than 3 per cent of the presidency’s population, had grabbed a great number of government jobs. They were dominant in law and medicine and also accounted for the bulk of the Congress leadership.

In February 1940, the government issued a notification bringing to an end the provision for compulsory teaching of Hindi in schools. The anti-Hindi campaign ceased, only to erupt again twenty-five years later in 1965.

When the Constitution had come into force on January 26, 1950, it had provided for a 15-year waiting period before Hindi would become the sole official language of the nation. In the interim period, both Hindi and English would function as official languages. On January 25, 1965, the students of Madras University took to streets, protesting against the imminent imposition of Hindi over English as mandated by the Constitution. The 15-year period was to come to an end on January 26, 1965. Over 50,000 people marched peacefully in Madras.

For close to two weeks, the state seethed and boiled and only by mid-February did the situation return to a semblance of normalcy when forced by the resignation of two Tamil ministers from his ministry,Lal Bahadur Shastri went on radio and assured the people that he would abide by Nehru's promise to keep English in use as long as the people wanted.

The DMK under CN Annadurai came to power with a thumping two-thirds majority in 1967, ousting the Congress government. Even celebrated leaders like the then Chief Minister M Bhaktavatsalam and national Congress president K Kamaraj tasted defeat. The Congress has never held power in the southern state since then.

Agitation against use of Hindi on social media

The Ministry of Home Affairs in 2014 ordered that the government employees and officials of all ministries and departments, who had social media accounts, should use Hindi, or both Hindi and English, giving priority to Hindi. This move drew sharp criticism from all the political parties, leading to protests. As a result of the protests, the government allowed the continued official usage of English.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
