Here is the latest news from The Associated Press at 11:40 p.m. EDT

Estimated read time: 2-3 minutes

This archived news story is available only for your personal, non-commercial use. Information in the story may be outdated or superseded by additional information. Reading or replaying the story in its archived form does not constitute a republication of the story.

LONDON (AP) — British Prime Minister Theresa May is giving President Donald Trump a gift that underscores the trans-Atlantic special relationship _ and the international order the president often derides. May and her husband, Philip, have presented Trump with a framed, typescript draft of the Atlantic Charter, the declaration signed by British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt in August 1941 setting out common goals for the world.

SAN FRANCISCO (AP) — The House Judiciary Committee is launching a bipartisan investigation into competition in the digital industry. The committee's statement Monday, coming as news emerged of possible antitrust investigations of the Silicon Valley giants, didn't name any companies. But it was clearly aimed at Big Tech.

WASHINGTON (AP) — A federal judge has denied a request by the House to prevent President Donald Trump from tapping Defense Department money for his proposed border wall with Mexico. The president's victory is muted by a federal ruling in California last month that blocked construction of key sections of the wall. At stake is billions of dollars that Trump wants to fulfill a signature campaign promise.

VIRGINIA BEACH, Va. (AP) — The leadership of Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam is being tested by the mass shooting in Virginia Beach, where a city worker opened fire on his co-workers, killing 12 people and wounding several others. Northam weathered a scandal over a decades-old blackface photo in his medical school yearbook. Now he says he's got the leadership needed to respond to the massacre. The Democrat wants more gun regulation, but his previous gun-control package went nowhere in the Republican-controlled legislature.

LANSING, Mich. (AP) — Authorities investigating Flint's water crisis have seized from storage the state-owned mobile devices of former Gov. Rick Snyder and 65 other current or former officials. Documents obtained through a public records request show search warrants were sought two weeks ago by the attorney general's office and signed by a Flint judge.

Copyright © The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

×

Tags World
