‘Reservation has reduced the quality of education’

Citizens are campaigning under the banner of Save Merit Save Nation against the constitutional provision to uplift minority communities



Reservation for minorities has been a hotly debated topic for decades, and examples of Rohith Vemula and Payal Tadvi make one affirm the need for it. However, members of a few organisations from the city have come together to run an anti-reservation campaign, opposing the constitutional provision. Dalit rights activists have, however, called the move an attempt by the members of upper castes to take away the benefits of reservation.



While some citizens are busy holding vigils for Payal Tadvi, members of the ‘Save Merit Save Nation’ campaign believe that reservation has reduced the quality of education and workforce in the country.



Volunteers of this statewide campaign met in Pune on Sunday where they not only criticised the reservation policy, but also stated that a large number of people from the open category are getting negatively affected. Citing this, the group has demanded that the limit of 50 per cent reservation should not be crossed. They have suggested that only one generation of the family should enjoy the benefits of reservation. Also, benefits should not be given for admissions in post-graduation courses. Another demand of the campaigners is that the government should publish the number of citizens who have benefited from the reservation policy.



Speaking to Mirror, Vishwajeet Deshpande, convenor of the group and Parshuram Mahasangh said, “Recently, meetings were held in Nagpur and Akola, and a protest was also held at the latter. We are planning protests on similar lines in Pune as well. We want reservation to be limited and to be removed eventually. We want the state government to take a decision before the Assembly polls.”



Claiming that Payal Tadvi was a victim of this mindset, Nitish Navasagare, a Dalit rights activist said, “The argument that reservation is anti-merit and eventually anti-national is ridiculous. We should not forget that reservation is the one affirmative policy recognised by the Constitution to create an egalitarian society.”



Alleging that there is no fair ground for the reserved communities yet, Navasagare added that the campaign talks about academic merits but fails to mention the societal and cultural status of the minorities.



Seconding Navasagare, Sanjay Dabhade, another Dalit rights activist, said, “It is only the narrative of the upper caste members that reservation is affecting merit. It is more important to annihilate the caste system to save the nation instead of demanding the withdrawal of reservation.”


