Pride: Google Doodle marks Pride Month with latest Google Doodle

Google Doodle celebrates 50 years of LGBTQ pride

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Pride is the movement for equality and an end to discrimination for the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (or questioning) and others (LGBTQ+) community. 2019 marks 50 years of prides, marches and events in commemoration of the Stonewall Riots in New York. Five-day impromptu demonstrations were led against police in 1969 after popular LGBTQ+ pub Stonewall Inn was raided in Greenwich Village. The protests are considered to be the birth of the LGBTQ+ movement.

At the time, such raids were common in gay bars but this was the first time individuals fought back in sizeable numbers. The Stonewall Riots inspired similar movements across the United States and around the world. The First Pride parades were held in 1970 in New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago and San Francisco. This year, they will span 174 cities in 46 countries.

Pride: Google Doodle celebrates 50 years of Pride today

Pride is now an international month-long celebration held every year in June. Gay pride culture is typically represented by the rainbow colours of the Pride flag, which adorn the Google icon today. The upbeat video does not focus on the Stonewall riots but on the birth of the flourishing LGBTQ+ movement depicted by colourful characters marching with heart signs and music. As the decades roll on, the Google Doodle timeline shows the swell in support from the world.

Pride: Pride will be celebrated in 174 cities across 46 countries this year

The banners and Pride Movement symbols become more numerous as they are held aloft by packed marchers in front of cheering crowds. Doodler Nate Swinehart explained what the project and the making of the Doodle meant to him. He explained: “The Pride Parade is a symbol of celebration and liberation for the entire LGBTQ+ community. “From its early days of activism on Christopher Street in New York City, to the worldwide celebrations of today, it has empowered and given voice to a bright and vibrant community.

Pride: Parades are held every year in June for Pride month
