Durex India: Durex India ad promoting women sexuality generates online heat, Retail News, ET Retail

BENGALURU: Surf, HDFC Bank, DDI, Zomato, Swiggy have all faced intense trolling for supporting secular values. But perhaps for the first time, a company is getting into hot water over women’s empowerment and sexuality.#BoycottDurex and #BanDurex has been trending on Twitter with thousands of tweets from Indian men and conservative right-wingers. The issue started on May 29, when Durex India tried to promote the idea of women’s sexuality and happiness with its hashtag #OrgasmInequality. The tweet got 5.2K likes and 850 retweets. "Nearly 70% women in India don't orgasm during sex," said the company’s Twitter campaign, which was aimed at putting the spotlight on a woman’s pleasure.The campaign also focused on other issues like women faking orgasms to keep their male partners happy, while denying themselves, with the hashtag #IFakeditToo and #Fakeorgasms on Twitter.Many male tweeters took it as an affront to their masculinity, while women tweeters felt Durex’s statement was pure gold. "#BoycottDurex because your fragile Indian male ego cannot handle that your 15 second performance didn't get the respect it deserved," said women tweeters.Funnily, men tweeters have also been tweeting #SayYestoKohinoor, unaware that both the Durex and Kohinoor brands are owned by the same company, Reckitt Benckiser.Twitter was also awash with jokes like "Our population is way too high to #BoycottDurex. Men, kindly don't let your fragile ego come in between birth control."Some protesting men tagged the Prime Minister's office, Home Affairs minister Amit Shah and others, demanding the company apologise. Actress Swara Bhaskar also faced intense trolling, as Durex India shared an interview of hers, where she talks about how pleasure should not be one-sided in bed, but should be shared by both male-female partners. The actress also talked about why women need to stop faking orgasms. Social media influencers like Abhijit Iyer-Mitra (41.9k followers) and Rishi Bagree (127.8K followers) joined in trolling Durex and Swara Bhaskar.Durex India had also roped in actress Pooja Bedi, comedian Kaneez Surka, social media influencer Kusha Kapila and others for its campaign. But others did not face as much vitriol as did Bhaskar.
