Fresh bout of bickering reveals cracks in Rajasthan Congress

The Congress is facing fresh crisis in Rajasthan after Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot said in a TV interview that his Deputy and PCC president Sachin Pilot should take the responsibility for my the defeat of his son and the party’s candidate in Jodhpur, Vaibhav Gehlot.

Congress leaders in the State see the interview as a clear message from Gehlot against any dissident activity against him.

Officially, the Congress and Gehlot blamed media for creating unnecessary issues.

Congress chief spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala said: “Gehlot talked about the collective responsibility of the government and party for the failure. A section of the media has become blind admirers of the BJP. They don’t hear anything but the songs of praise for the BJP.”

Gehlot, too, tweeted a part of the interview where he talks about the collective responsibility.

A Congress leader from Rajasthan, however, termed the interview as surprising. “It was quite immature of Gehlot to say that. The Congress in Rajasthan hasn’t seen such rivalry in its history. Gehlot has made it clear that he doesn’t want Pilot neither in the organisation nor in the government,” the leader said.

Pilot camp irked

Gehlot’s statement has irked the camp belonging to Pilot. Pilot is likely to apprise the party leadership in Delhi about the recent developments. Pilot’s camp believes Congress President Rahul Gandhi made a mistake by making Gehlot the Chief Minister. They believe that it was Pilot’s hard work that brought the party to power and inability of Gehlot hampered the party’s chances in the Lok Sabha polls. Gandhi’s criticism that Gehlot was more keen on the victory of his son is also seen as a “positive response” by the faction led by Pilot.

The fight between both the leaders have resulted in public bickering. “The BJP is making every efforts to unseat Gehlot,” said another Congress leader owing allegiance to Pilot. Pilot’s camp has given an impression that the bickering is backed by the BJP.

Meanwhile, Congress MLA and ex-DGP Harish Meena had launched a hunger strike against the State government over the death of a tractor driver, who died allegedly after being thrashed by the police. BJP leaders also supported the protest.
