Students pitch in for a greener city on eve of Environment Day

Delhi has been battling with pollution and global warming as heat wave conditions have worsened the air quality. The city has been the most polluted capital in the world stated a report by Green Peace.

Ahead of the World Environment Day, celebrated on June 5 every year, children stepped out in South Delhi's Sarojini Nagar to voice out their concerns.

Last year, a massive Chipko movement took place in Delhi as 16,500 trees were to be axed as a part of a housing redevelopment model by the National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC).

Environment activists, however claim that demolition activities are still taking place despite a stay by the court.

Children from Delhi and Gurugram marched in the scorching sun against the enormous chopping of trees a day before the World Environment Day to stimulate the government and wake citizens up, forcing them to think about the environmental implications in the coming years.

"It's really difficult for us to step out with oxygen masks on. It's not just human development that we should focus upon but our health, animals and temperature. Such massive tree massacres in a place like Delhi when pollution has been all time high should be dealt with more sensitively," said Aman Sharma, a school student.

"We are the future of our country and we'll have to face extinction if right steps are not taken. We are the kids who are facing the repercussions of the decisions taken by our predecessors and if the government doesn't wake up now we're on the edge of a collapse. The time is now and we need to take some action," added Anees Kandhari, a student.

"Environment day isn't just for a day, it's every day. Little things like switching the lights off and thinking of environment can bring a change. If we children are so concerned about our future, why don't the decision makers empathise with our plight?" asked Manya Sharma, a student.

It's ironical that children had to step out in the heat, with masks on and stimulating the government to wake up. The environment is something that we live in and breathe.

If protests are the only way to celebrate World Environment Day then our system sure needs a wake-up call to develop not just technology and infrastructure but work for the bounties nature has bestowed us with.
