Despite having tickets, passengers denied travel on Delhi-Guwahati flight; protest against Air India

Over 20 passengers travelling on Air India Delhi-Guwahati flight today were denied boarding passes as the flight was overbooked | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Passengers with confirmed tickets were denied boarding passes to board an Air India plane which was on its way to Guwahati from Delhi. The horror was reported from Terminal 3 of Indira Gandhi International Airport. As per the initial reports, around 20 passengers were off-loaded from Delhi to Guwahati flight. Later, the passengers started shouting slogans against the national carrier.

The passengers claim that they were denied boarding passes as the flight was overbooked.

This comes after thousands of passengers were left stranded at IGI and Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport after the national carrier faced a massive glitch in passenger services system which led to network-wide delays and rescheduling of flights.

The problem was reported after Air India's passenger services system server operated by global airline IT major SITA was affected while carrying out maintenance related work.

Due to this problem, around 149 flights of the national carrier including Air India, Air India Express and Alliance Air were delayed. Alliance Air and Air India Express are subsidiaries of the national flag carrier which caters to the domestic and Asian destinations.

Issuing a statement SITA said that the operational disruptions occurred due to complex system issue while server maintenance was taking place.

Meanwhile, the Centre is likely to kick-start the two-stage bid process for selling the entire 100 per cent equity stake in Air India as early as July 7.

The government is going to come out with the preliminary information memorandum (PIM) inviting expression of interest (EoI) by the first week of July. Apart from offering 100 per cent stake to private investors, more loans of the national carrier would be transferred to a special purpose vehicle (SPV) to further sweeten the pot, reported IANS.

Last year, the government had initiated the process to sell majority 74 per cent stake in the national carrier but the plan failed as no private investor turned up for the bid.
