Hunt launched for 4 accused after techie robbed of Rs 5 lakh

Two suspects named; two others, including a woman, are as yet unidentified



After an IT engineer was allegedly looted for around Rs 5 lakh at his residential society’s office in Hinjawadi on Monday during daylight hours, police teams on Wednesday launched a hunt in Pune and neighbouring districts for the four accused, including one woman.



The incident took place around 4.30 pm at the Blue Ridge Society in Hinjawadi, where victim Sandeep Talluri (32), a software engineer, resides.



Police said that Sandeep had gone to his society office to pick up some of his luggage, where the accused were hiding inside and pounced on him. They then allegedly robbed his ATM cards from his pocket, stealing Rs 90,000 from one card and another Rs 1.9 lakh from the other. The sum was transferred to the account of ‘Bedi Guesthouse’, where one of the accused works. Further, they also snatched Sandeep’s gold belongings that he was reportedly wearing.



Cops named two of the accused as Angaz Rizwan and Abdul Karim, while the other two accomplices are yet to be identified. All four are absconding at the moment after the complaint was filed.



Inspector Yashwant Gaware of Hinjawadi police station informed, “Angaz is a real estate broker while the three others aid him in his business. He brokered an apartment for Sandeep, who was staying at the society on rent. There were some issues between the accused and Sandeep and the latter had to leave the premises. However, the accused had grabbed his luggage and dumped it in the society office. Angaz also works for Bedi Guesthouse, where he transferred the sum taken from Sandeep.”



He added, “When Sandeep came to the society office to collect his bags on Monday, the accused were present and assaulted him. They claimed some monetary transactions were pending between both parties and looted Sandeep of his money and gold. One of the accused is a woman who had lodged a case of sexual harassment against Sandeep before this incident.”



The accused have been booked for charges under section 390 (robbery) of the Indian Penal Code.


