Free bus, metro rides for women: Union minister accuses Delhi CM of making false promises

PM Narendra Modi-led Union government and CM Arvind Kejriwal-led Delhi government are once again in crosshairs, this time over promise of free Delhi Metro and bus rides for women.

MoS for Housing and Urban Affairs Hardeep Singh Puri told India Today TV that Arvind Kejriwal may have announced the free rides, but neither the Central government nor the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation had received any proposal related to the scheme.

He claimed that Arvind Kejriwal suffering from "broken window fraud".

"There are two types of syndrome - broken window syndrome and broken window fraud. I think Kejriwal is suffering from the latter," Hardeep Singh Puri told India Today TV.

"Kejriwal has a budget of Rs 50,000 crore. He is neither using it for Swachhta in Delhi nor is he giving Delhi citizens benefits of Ayushman Bharat scheme by the Central government. But now he wants to give a freebie of RS 1,200 crore. This needs to be debated. BJP is all for women. But this is not a scheme. Kejriwal has made an announcement first but DMRC or us haven't received any proposal as of yet," Puri said.

Union minister Hardeep Puri also claimed that Delhi government has failed to bring enough buses on Delhi roads, which renders free bus ride for women also unrealistic.

"To make bus travel free, there should be enough buses in the first place to cater to passengers. There's a sanction of 11000 buses then why they are not on the Delhi streets, Kejriwal should answer that first," Hardeep Puri said.

Defending the promise of free rides, AAP government minister Kailash Gahlot accused Hardeep puri of lying.

"Hardeep Puri is simply lying. There are a number of meetings, which have taken place between the DMRC and Delhi transport department, and even at the moment, a search meeting is taking place to finalise the blueprint. Government has the budget for such schemes," Delhi transport minister Kailash Gahlot told India Today TV.

"The cabinet note is being prepared to be put up before the Delhi cabinet as soon as possible. All modes and feasibility are being studied by the DMRC and the daily transport departments and several meetings between the officials are also taking place," he said.

Kailash Gahlot warned Union government against creating roadblocks in the project. ""If The Union government stops this move [of free rides], this will go against people and work we are doing. Delhi government does not need their approval," he said.

Delhi transport minister also defended AAP government's efforts to increase the size of DTC bus fleet. "Government has secured cluster buses which will start arriving later this month. It has approved tenders for 1000 standard floor buses and 1000 electric buses."
