Australian film producers take another stab at making it in the region

“It is a challenging, engaging story ... but also a universal story of how poverty dehumanises people,” Caplan says.

In recent years a weak dollar and generous tax incentives of up to 40 per cent have helped turn Australia into a growing market for Australian-Asian co-productions.

“There are a lot of attractive reasons for making films in Australia,” says Gary Hamilton, who helms the Australian sales and production company Arclight Films, which has made a concerted effort to carve out a presence in Asia and in particular China – the world’s fastest growing movie market.

“We are looking at stories between Australia and China that work,” says Hamilton, with casting under way for an Arclight-backed big budget Chinese-Australia survival movie to be produced in Queensland. “We are looking for authentic stories that are relevant to China.”

Australian-Chinese co-productions in the decade to 2018 totalled $8.2 million, according to Screen Australia. Australia also has co-production treaties with South Korea and Singapore.

A still from the 1992 production, Turtle Beach. Alamy

Advertisement

Australian filmmakers have a long and sporadic history of trying to focus or provide a perspective on Asia, stretching back to movies such as Peter Weir’s 1982 drama The Year of Living Dangerously, starring Mel Gibson. Ten years later came Stephan Wallace’s Turtle Beach, featuring US-Chinese actress Joan Chen.

The influx of Chinese immigrants into Australia over the past two decades and the consequent growth of Chinese communities in the nation also helped inspire films about the travails of migrant life, including from Asia.

This began in 1996 with Clara Law’s multilingual tale of a Hong Kong family moving to Australia, Floating Life, and also Tony Ayres’ 2007 film The Home Song Stories, which was nominated for an Academy Award and also featured Joan Chen.

Bruce Beresford directed the 2009 film Mao's Last Dancer. supplied

Two years later came Bruce Beresford’s Mao’s Last Dancer, about the journey of a young Chinese boy from an impoverished background to the heights of global fame as a dancer.

Up until recently, however, the number of Australian-Asian themed films has been relatively few.

Advertisement

But as movies such as Buoyancy demonstrate, the future of Australian cinema might increasingly lie outside the country, including in the fast-paced motion-picture markets of Asia.

Arclight unveiled plans at last month’s Cannes Film Festival to link up with two Chinese investors – China Film Co and TaiHang Pictures – to produce a new action thriller, Strike Back, which is based on true story of Chinese national heroes.

The company has also successfully managed to manoeuvre itself around the often formidable barriers to gaining a foothold in the Chinese film market, notably the heavy hand of Beijing’s censors.

“[Working in China] is very complicated,” Arclight producer Ying Ye says. “But we managed to get in early so we established contacts with filmmakers, the censorship board and the authorities.”

In June 2017, the Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts, which seeks to promoting locally made film and TV, launched the Asia International Engagement Program to boost the relationship between the Asian and Australian film businesses.

This introduced an award for Best Asian Film and other measures to pave the way for collaboration between Australian and Asian filmmakers.

Advertisement

“The screen industry is now inherently international,” Caplan says. “This is driven by technology and is starkly apparent in the streaming market where one title can be available same-day, globally.

“So although English-speaking markets remain our primary customers, new ways to access non-English speaking markets are emerging and becoming increasingly lucrative,” she says.

A prime example of the increase in the number of global releases is Hotel Mumbai, a thriller about the 2008 terrorist attacks on India’s Taj Mahal Palace Hotel and which premiered at last year’s Toronto Film Festival.

Directed by Australia’s Anthony Maras, the movie was shot in Adelaide and included an international cast, including Dev Patel and Armie Hammer.

“These are films which concern the politics of our region,” says Robert Patterson, executive producer with the Australian screen and multi-platform production company, Arenamedia.

Patterson says movies such as Buoyancy are Australian cinema at its best. “They open our eyes to the struggles around us.”
