Maharashtra SSC Result 2019 Declared: MSBSHSE announces Class 10 results; scorecard available at mahresult.nic.in-India News , Firstpost

Maharashtra Board SSC Result 2019 Declared: The Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education (MSBSHSE) has declared the results of the State Secondary Certificate (SSC) or Class 10 exams today.

Maharashtra Board SSC Result 2019 Declared| The Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education (MSBSHSE) has declared the results of the State Secondary Certificate (SSC) or Class 10 exams today. The results are available on the official website mahresult.nic.in

This year, the Maharashtra board held the Class 10 SSC exams between 1 March and 22 March. Candidates can access hard copies of their results, along with their certificates, at their respective schools.

Follow the steps below to check the Maharashtra Board SSC results 2019:

Step 1: Visit the official website mahresult.nic.in.

Step 2: On the homepage of the official site, you will find the latest announcement of the SSC results.

Step 3: Click on "SSC Examination Result 2019".

Step 4: You will be redirected to a new page, where you will have to enter details like your roll number and your mother's first name.

Step 5: Click on "view result".

Step 6: You will be able to see your scores now.

Step 7: Save your results and take a print out for safekeeping.

Click here to follow LIVE updates on MSBSHE Class 10 results

In 2018, as many as 17,51,353 students appeared for the SSC examinations. Of them, 89.41 percent cleared the exam. The Maharashtra board had declared the results of 2018 SSC exam on 8 June.

Candidates who fail to pass the Class 10 board exams can sit for supplementary tests in July. Instructions for the supplementary exams will be released only after the results are declared.

About Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education (MSBSHSE):

The MSBSHE conducts the Maharashtra SSC Class 10 exams every year. The board has nine divisions which are primarily located at Pune, Mumbai, Nasik, Aurangabad, Kolhapur, Nagpur, Latur, Amravati and Ratnagiri.
