From 2 rapes per hour in India in 2007 to 4 cases per hour now - Are we failing Nirbhaya again?

File picture: Students hold placards during a candle-light protest | Photo Credit: PTI

The nation was shocked to hear of the brutal gang rape of Nirbhaya on 16th December 2012. The outraged masses took to the streets and there was widespread indignation, which resulted in innumerable candle marches, protests and dharnas. Parliament was rocked by fiery debates, members demanded prompt and strict punishment to the guilty - the kind that would act as a deterrent. As a consequence, Justice Verma Commission was constituted, that carefully examined various aspects of the matter in great detail, took the public opinion from a large cross-section of society and as a result, the Thirteenth Criminal Law Amendment Act was passed by Parliament on 2nd April 2013 after considerable deliberations.

This act revised the Indian Penal Code, Criminal Procedure Code, Indian Evidence Act. A corpus of Rs 1,000 crores was earmarked by the Centre to be allotted to the states for empowerment, safety and security of women and the girl child. A nation in deep anguish expected path-breaking improvement in the security ecosystem for women. But this, tragically, did not happen.

The Nirbhaya fund till date remains underutilised, only 42 per cent of the funds have been released since 2015. India needs more than 1,000 Special Courts to try cases of rape.

There are glaring fault lines in the safe environment of women. The non-utilisation of the Nirbhaya fund has had a cascading effect. The Special Courts were not constituted and there was an inexplicable delay in trials and judgements leading to emboldening of the accused. The number of reported rape cases shot up by 88 per cent in the last decade. From two rapes per hour in the country in 2007 to four rape cases per hour as of now. The depressing statistics indicate 37 crimes committed against women every hour, which shows the rate has doubled in the last 10 years.

The conviction rate of rape was 44 per cent in 1973, and this came down drastically to 18.9 per cent in 2016, the lowest in the last 10 years. This requires a course correction because the entire exercise of Justice Verma Commission has come to naught if the crime is increasing, and punishment is declining. The explanation that an increase in crime is due to free and fair registration is unconvincing in the light of the prevailing sense of insecurity all over.

By way of example, a new section was added in the Indian Penal Code, which is Section 166-A. This important section was incorporated, primarily to deal with police officers who have been negligent in their duty in matters pertaining to crime against women. It is a pathetic state of affairs that barely a few cases have been registered under this provision, which gives the impression that there is a tendency in higher-ups to ignore the serious lapses of the ground staff in the field and police stations.

Another area that requires to be addressed is a large number of acquittals, leading to the discharge of even die-hard repeat offenders. The police leadership would do well to identify all cases that appear to be compromised due to negligence or complicity or both. It would serve the interest of justice to prepare acquittal reports in such cases, fix responsibility and deal with bad investigations and poor prosecutions administratively.

Another neglected area is the constitution of grievance redressal committees in every organization, that has more than ten employees, as per the provisions of Prevention of Sexual Harassment at Workplaces Act. It has been reported that a very large percentage of organisations DO NOT have this committee in place and a vast number have not subscribed to the norms prescribed by the act especially in the appointment of a woman as the Chairperson.

It has recently come to light that there is poor security cover for women employees who are picked up and dropped late for work, and women travellers who are commuting at odd hours. Is there any arrangement to reinforce the patrolling and the pickets along deserted and vulnerable stretches? Ms Veena Gupta of FSAI has done extensive and elaborate work on this issue and a very functional, user-friendly app is likely to be introduced for women travellers to make their travel anxiety-free. This app is programmed to address issues like harassment, eve-teasing by contacting the nearest police station and the police control room so that assistance is made available promptly and there is the minimal scope of non-registration of complaints. Arvind Kejriwal proposes free travel for women at a hefty cost to the exchequer. It would have been prudent to designate special police officers, as per the provision of Section 18 of Police Act, from amongst volunteers and co-travellers. This would come at zero cost and save crores of funds of public money and also address his promise of providing Marshals for safety.

It is a matter of satisfaction that the first database of Sex Offenders is ready with the National Crime Records Bureau, incorporating details of 4.5 lakh convicts, charged with rape, gang rape, eve-teasing etc, incorporating details like photographs (in most cases), Aadhaar, PAN number, address, age DNA samples, fingerprints etc. India is the ninth country in the world to compile these figures.

There is so much that can be accomplished with just nominal and often zero investment. The administrative tragedy is that we have failed to use the funds and technology which were readily made available by a horrified nation. It’s a sorry state of inept implementation of the law, non-application of mind and a cavalier approach by a callous administration. It's simple and basic to put the most sensational cases of the district in fast track courts and monitor their progress daily and ensure a conviction, through proper prosecution and production of evidence. It will be a game-changer if there is a concomitant increase in conviction in 727 districts of the country.

In the case of Rafique versus State of UP, Justice Krishna Iyer remarked, ”A murderer kills the body, but the rapist kills the soul”. This is a permanent and irreparable physical, mental and emotional damage that is inflicted upon a woman and her family.

Surprisingly, we still have activists who are vehemently opposing the death sentence pronounced by the Bombay High Court to the gang-rape accused of the horrific Shakti Mills compound case of 2013!

Vikram Singh is a guest contributor. Views expressed are personal.
