Cosmetic Surgery Market to Grow In Size, Revenue By Trends and Market Opportunities Analysis, Forecast To 2023

MRFR’s “Cosmetic Surgery Market” research report shows extensive profits towards 2023. Growing demand of liposuction and reconstructive surgery Boosting growth of market globally. Report provide top players exclusive data, with recent market size, share, growth insights and business opportunities to 2023.

Global Cosmetic Surgery Market Information; by Surgery Type (Liposuction, Eyelid and Nose Surgery, Body Contouring (Tummy Tuck, Breast Lift, Others), Facial Reconstruction, Cosmetic Implants (Breast Augmentation, buttock Implants, Chin & Cheek Implants) and others) – Forecast to 2023

Get Free Sample @ https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/sample_request/3157

Global Cosmetic Surgery Market – Insights

The Cosmetic Surgery Market is thriving on various social and cultural factors. Cosmetic surgery is a medicinal discipline where the focus is on improving the look via surgical and medical technique. It can be performed on any part of the body. The aesthetic appeal it adds is helping the market gain attention from diverse sectors.

The increasing awareness about reliability and effectiveness of cosmetic surgery has fueled the demand for the same, for instance, The American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery estimates an increase of 6.5% in the total number of cosmetic surgical procedures in 2013 with almost 1.9 million surgeries performed. The health-related factors that will catapult the growth of the market are rise in obesity, the growing safety margin of cosmetic surgery, growing number of cosmetic surgery hospitals, etc.

Other factors that will catalyze the boom in the market are advanced treatment such as silicone implants, rising per capita income, increased affordability, presence of skilled surgeons, proven results, medical tourism, minimum risk, etc. The growing acceptance of cosmetic surgery among the male gender also holds the potential to drive the market growth.

Global Cosmetic Surgery Market – Key Players

Key players profiled in the report are

Johnson & Johnson

Valeant Pharmaceuticals International

Cutera, Inc.

Syneron Medical Ltd.

Allergan, Inc.

Genesis Biosystems, Inc.

Industry News:

Cutera, Inc.

It has recently launched two new products to expand its robust product portfolio, viz. Juliet™ and Secret RF®. Juliet™ uses laser technology for delivering two modes of energy to the vaginal area. The first mode stimulates the remodeling of collagen and the second mode stimulates the damaged tissue which helps the patients with improved sexual function and better vaginal health. Women who are experiencing menopause phase, the ones who have undergone breast cancer treatment or women interested in enhancing vaginal health can benefit from the surgery. Secret RF®, on the other hand, revitalizes, rebuilds, and firms up tissue for treating wrinkles and scars using Cutera’s new fractional radio frequency (RF) microneedling device.

Get Discount on Report @ https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/check-discount/3157

Global Cosmetic Surgery Market – Segments

The Global Cosmetic Surgery Market has been segmented based on surgical procedures, non-surgical procedures, and region.

Major surgical cosmetic procedures comprise lipoplasty, cosmetic ear surgery, cosmetic eyelid surgery, gynecomastia treatment, breast augmentation, abdominoplasty, breast reduction, and breast lift. Among these, breast augmentation and lipoplasty are the most popular surgeries. The number of breast augmentation process has increased owing to the reintroduction of silicone gel breast implant in 2006 by FDA. These procedures are costlier than non-surgical procedures and thus have to depend on insurance coverage.

Non-surgical procedures comprise laser therapy of leg veins, cosmetic injectables, sclerotherapy, laser hair removal, and skin rejuvenation. Among these, cosmetic injectables are expected to dominate the market during the assessment period. Cosmetic injectables can be sub-segmented into hyaluronic acid, poly-l-lactic acid, calcium hydroxyapatite, botulinum toxin type A, and collagen. Skin rejuvenation is further sub-segmented into noninvasive tightening, intense pulsed light laser treatment, Fraxel, chemical peel, and dermabrasion.

Global Cosmetic Surgery Market – Regional Analysis

By region, the market has been segmented into North America, Europe, Asia Pacific, and, Middle East and Africa.

The market penetration is highest in North America segment owing to technological advancements, huge investments in research & development, innovation, increased awareness, acceptability of cosmetic surgery, etc. The U.S. is the primary contributor in this segment. Nowadays, a shift towards the Asia Pacific and Latin America is growing owing to the medical tourism industry.

The Asia Pacific region exhibits enormous potential owing to the presence of countries like China, Japan, and, India. China will demonstrate the steepest rise in market contribution in this segment followed by Japan and India. The use of augmented reality technology by Japan for performing and evaluating the performance of cosmetic surgery is propelling the market growth. The availability of reliable cosmetic surgeries has increased the demand in India.

Although the Cosmetic Surgery Market in the Middle East and Africa segment is in its preliminary stage, it will grow moderately owing to factors such as changing lifestyle, increase in disposable income, etc.

About Market Research Future:

At Market Research Future (MRFR), we enable our customers to unravel the complexity of various industries through our Cooked Research Report (CRR), Half-Cooked Research Reports (HCRR), Raw Research Reports (3R), Continuous-Feed Research (CFR), and Market Research & Consulting Services.

In order to stay updated with technology and work process of the industry, MRFR often plans & conducts meet with the industry experts and industrial visits for its research analyst members.

Contact:

Market Research Future

Office No. 528, Amanora Chambers

Magarpatta Road, Hadapsar,

Pune – 411028

Maharashtra, India

+1 646 845 9312

Email: salesteam@marketresearchfuture.com
