Ludhiana loot: Ludhiana: Domestic helps escape with cash, jewellery worth lakhs after tying up employer

LUDHIANA: Hired a week ago, two domestic helps escaped with cash and jewellery from their employer's house in Gurdev Nagar. The accused tied up the employer after giving her sedative and escaped. While fleeing they also took the CCTV recording and mobile of the employer in which she had kept the scanned copy of ID proofs of the accused.The incident happened at around 4PM when the woman, Reeta Dhanda, 56, was alone at home. Later, when her husband Manoj Dhanda came home, he found the main door of house open. On entering the house, he found his wife unconscious and tied up on a chair. He rushed her to hospital and sounded police.Assistant commissioner of police (ACP- Civil Lines) Mandeep Singh said that the family had one domestic help Sumit who was hired six months ago. Few days ago when Sumit asked for leave, the employers asked them to provide another domestic help before going on leave. On Sumit's recommendation Dhanda family hired Mann, 32, and Sarita, 22- of Nepal, a week ago after which Sumit went on leave."In one week both accused scanned the entire house like where the cash and jewellery were kept. On Thursday afternoon, the son and the daughter-in-law went on vacations after which Reeta Dhanda was alone at home. The accused first gave her food-laced with sedatives and tied her on chair. They also called their two accomplices and escaped with cash and jewellery. The family is yet to confirm the amount of stolen cash and jewelry" added official.When asked if the family has got the police verification of helps done, the ACP said, "The woman had kept the scanned ID proofs of both Sarita and Mann in her phone. However, they had not got the verification done. Even verification of their former help Sumit was not done."CCTVs are installed in four adjacent houses also, but three are non-functional and one could not capture anything.Meanwhile, a case has been registered by division number 5 police.
