'Water wars' intensify, Madhya Pradesh police told to guard tankers

Home department monitoring situation: Jaivardhan

BHOPAL/INDORE: With water wars intensifying in unprecedented June heat, the home department has ordered police to escort all water tankers and guard water sources.While BJP says it's yet another sign of mismanagement by the Congress government, minister for urban administration Jaivardhan Singh said the decision was taken to maintain law and order after clashes were reported during water distribution in some areas.Home minister Bala Bachchan told media in Indore that police escorts are only for "sensitive places", where a flare up is possible. "This doesn't happen everywhere. I have asked officials to be alert," he said. Indore SSP Ruchi Mishra said this is already being done. "Whenever we are alerted by the administration and IMC officials about areas where there can be a flare up, we deploy police," she said.Eight people were injured in Panna on Thursday over a water battle. In Indore itself, fights broke out twice over water over the past week.Two men were seriously injured after a clash in Krishnanagar Colony of Vijay Nagar on June 5. A day earlier, a water tanker driver was beaten up by people in a Khajrana locality for not supplying them first.Such fights have been reported from across the state, and frequently so, spurring the government to order police protection. On Thursday, the home department ordered all SPs to be alert for clashdering police protection.“We need to maintain proper supply and distribution of water in all districts. The home department is monitoring supply and keeping an eye on water sources to control any untoward incident. We are trying to keep the situation normal with the help of the home department. There is no fearamong public anywhere,” Jaivardhan Singh told reporters on Friday.Officials have been ordered to “take control” of water sources during distribution."We will keep a watch in every district to check untoward incidents during water supply. We are developing a network to collect information,” said Bachchan. This es during water supply.There have been agitations and protests against government officials at some places. Local politicians are spearheading demonstrations and egging on people to protest with pitchers and urns, say officials.The department collected feedback from collectors, police officers and PHE officials before oris yet another round in the political slugfest between BJP and Congress over supply and power cuts.“It is unfortunate that police have been deployed to monitor water supply in the state. This reminds of old days when Congress failed to cope with a similar situation. They are using police intelligence to check power cuts, district force to monitor water crisis. The government has failed utterly in serving the public,” BJP state president Rakesh Singh told reporters on Friday.The BJP has also targeted chief minister Kamal Nath, alleging that Congress leaders are “ignoring the crisis”.“The CM and minsters will have to get involved to cope with the situation but they are busy with their personal interests,” Singh said.
