Aligarh: SIT arrests wife, brother of main accused for role in conspiracy to brutally murder infant girl

Students took a candle march to protest against the murder of a minor girl in Aligarh at Rajasthan University in Jaipur on Friday | Photo Credit: BCCL

Aligarh: As the special investigative team (SIT) formed to probe the gruesome murder of a two-and-a-half-year-old girl proceeds with its investigation, bone-chilling details have begun coming to light regarding the execution of the crime which shook the nation. Police on Saturday made two more arrests in the case, the brother and wife of the prime accused. Reports suggest that the two arrested today have been charged with criminal conspiracy.

Senior superintendent of police (SSP) of Aligarh confirmed the fourth arrest and said that the girl's body was wrapped in a cloth owned by the main accused's wife. On Friday, top officials with the Uttar Pradesh Police confirmed that the culprits will be charged with relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act along with the National Security Act (NSA) and the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

The SSP also said that a team of police officers met with the girl's parents who are demanding that the main accused be hanged unto death. Reacting to the speedy investigation into their daughter's death, the girl's grieving parents demanded justice for their only child. The mother told media outlets that one of the accused is a paedophile and had sexually assaulted his own daughter.

Anoop Kaushik,General Secretary, Aligarh Bar Association: We stand with the family of 2.5-year-old girl who was murdered in Tappal & no advocate will appear in Court for the accused. Advocate from outside will not be allowed to fight the case. We will fight for the child. pic.twitter.com/cwuiaQvwbz — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 8, 2019

Details pointed out by the SIT paint a gory picture of the manner in which the girl was treated by the culprits. Going by inputs, the minor was playing with her friends outside her aunt's home when she was kidnapped by the accused. She was then taken to his home where she was mercilessly thrashed as is stated in the post-mortem report which has identified injuries inflicted to the body as the cause of death.

Reports also suggest that the child's body was kept in a refrigerator before it was dumped right outside the homes of one of the accused from where it was recovered. However, the same is yet to be confirmed pending a forensic science lab (FSL) report.
