Kin perform delivery in absence of doc, woman loses baby

Ludhiana: Two days after a 27-year-old woman lost her premature baby as her mother-in-law was compelled to carry out her delivery allegedly in the absence of a doctor or nurse in the Ludhiana civil hospital, the senior medical officer (SMO) on Saturday admitted to the lapses and declared formation of a board to probe the incident and find out who were responsible for the negligence.

The family members of Ramandeep Kaur, who belonged to Rajgarh village, Raikot tehsil, even submitted a written complaint with SMO Dr Geeta, giving details how the patient was given raw treatment since she was admitted to the hospital, which allegedly led to the death of her child.

With her condition deteriorating, Ramandeep had been referred to the Ludhiana hospital from the community health centre, Pakhowal, on Thursday.

Her husband Sukhdeep Singh said, “We reached the hospital at 2pm, but till 8pm, the staff did not attend to her properly. All this while, she was in severe pain. Unable to bear the pain, Ramandeep got up and sought medical attention from the hospital staff herself. But she was not given even a stool to sit. And when she started bleeding, the staff told her that the doctors will attend to her soon.”

Her husband also claimed that when Ramandeep was wailing in pain, a nurse sniped at her saying, “You need to wait as the doctor is coming.”

“Nurses said some ‘Waddi’ madam will attend to her. Meanwhile, she was administered glucose, but soon she started writhing in pain. No doctor or nurse turned up except some students pursuing Diplomate of National Board (DNB) course.”

“In the absence of the doctor or nurses, my mother herself had to perform the delivery of my wife in the emergency ward at the hospital,” he further claimed.

The incident also led to protest at the hospital and the police had to intervene to pacify the protesters. The family claimed that the hospital refused to hand over the body without autopsy.

The family was handed over the body on Saturday afternoon when the family approached the police.

SMO Dr Geeta said, “I admit there was no doctor to help the pregnant woman. We will form a board to check who was at fault and action would be taken against those found guilty.”

“The baby was 18 weeks old and the water bag in the womb had gotten loose. Under these situations, it had to be a natural delivery.”

She said, “It is fact that there is too much workload for the existing staff due to heavy rush and staff crunch at the civil hospital.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
