Kochi Corporation's park construction on alleged encroached land halted after protests

Kochi Corporation's park construction on alleged encroached land halted after protests

Environmental activists attempted to clear structures in the park after alleging that it was being constructed on the encroached Chilavannoor backwater.

news Protest

Construction on a park in Kochi has been halted after a group of environmental activists stood in protest against it. The construction work, undertaken by the Kochi Corporation, was stopped after activists alleged that the park would encroach upon the Chilavanoor backwaters.

Under the banner of Anti-Mafia People’s Squad, the environmental activists attempted to clear the ongoing park construction, which is taking place on land sandwiched between DLF Riverside Apartments in Vytilla and Chilavannoor lake. Several Kochi activists have alleged that the piece of land was once part of the lake, but has been encroached as it was filled in over the past few years.

Following the protests, revenue officials of the Kanayannur Taluk in Kochi stopped work of the park until further notice. "A meeting has been scheduled by the Additional District Magistrate (ADM) with corporation officials and other concerned parties. Till then, work on the park has been stalled," an official with the Kanayannur Taluk told TNM.

“This portion of land, which measures at least 50 cents, was filled up in the past few years. Apart from the recent stop memo given for the construction work of the park, two stop memos were earlier given for filling up this portion of land. But now, the corporation is claiming this land and is constructing a park in the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) region without any permission from Kerala Coastal Zone Management Authority (KCZMA),” environmentalist Cheshire Tarzen told TNM.

The park is being constructed by the city corporation under the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (Amrut) scheme, at a cost of Rs 1.26 crore. But recently, a stop memo was issued for the work by the Poonithura Village officer.

As part of their protest against the alleged encroachment on Sunday, activists demolished some portions of the wall built by the Kochi Corporation. According to reports, a scuffle between the People's Squad activists and local police officials was averted after revenue officials assured the group that they would look into the allegations of encroachment and legality of the construction.

“We had given a letter to District Collector and village officer of Poonithura that we will clear the construction in the encroached area under Article 51 A(g) of the Indian Constitution. But no one replied to our letter. The officials did not even stop us or deny that this is encroached land. This shows that they all know the truth, but do not want to do anything about it,” alleged CR Neelakandan, an environmentalist and member of the Anti Mafia People’s Squad.

Article 51A (g) imparts fundamental duties to the citizens of India to “protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife, and to have compassion for living creatures.”

On the complaint given by RTI activist Cheshire, the Ombudsman for local self government, has called for a meeting on June 16 to evaluate the issue.
