Bengal clashes signal return to perilous path of 2009

Bengal clashes signal return to perilous path of 2009 The BJP is threatening to make Sandeshkhali the pivot of a movement against the Mamata Banerjee government

| Sandeshkhali | Published 09.06.19, 09:55 PM

State BJP leaders and newly elected MPs jostled with police on Basanti Highway for nearly three hours on Sunday, insisting they be allowed to ferry the bodies of two slain party supporters from Sandeshkhali to Calcutta to be garlanded and cremated. Eventually, the BJP dropped the plan after a mix of heated exchanges and calmer negotiation. The bodies were taken back to Nazat village in Sandeshkhali, North 24-Parganas, some 60km from Calcutta, to be cremated on Monday.

Advertisement

At least four people were feared killed on Saturday evening as Trinamul and BJP supporters allegedly clashed with guns in Sandeshkhali. Trinamul claims one of its supporters was slain and six remain untraceable, while the BJP claims four deaths and one disappearance among its ranks. The BJP is threatening to make Sandeshkhali the pivot of a movement against the Mamata Banerjee government and have lined up multiple protest programmes, including a 12-hour bandh in Basirhat in North 24-Parganas and a “black day” in the entire state on Monday and a big rally in Calcutta on Wednesday. Some political analysts were reminded of the sudden worsening of law and order in Bengal after the 2009 Lok Sabha polls, in which Trinamul breached the Left citadel and bagged 19 of the 42 seats, one more than the BJP haul this time. “The 2009 results proved that the Left was losing its grip. It was followed by a worsening of law and order. Something similar is happening now,” political scientist Biswanath Chakraborty said. He said Bengal had a history of non-official actors from the ruling party playing a key role in maintaining law and order, which caused the civil and police administration to become dependent on their political masters to tackle any difficult situation. “So, when ruling party leaders become weak in their fiefs, which has happened in places like Sandeshkhali, the police fail to handle escalations that go beyond a point,” he said. The site of clashes on Saturday evening is just a few kilometres from the Bangladesh border.
