The final frontiers: India must focus on cyber and space war capabilities in its defence modernisation

India’s first ever simulated space war exercise dubbed IndSpaceEx, slated to happen in July, underscores the newfound seriousness in thwarting threats posed to our space assets by rival nations. In March, India had launched an anti-satellite (A-Sat) missile to take down an imaging satellite creating a measure of deterrence for vital Indian interests in space that include communications, navigation, earth observation and surveillance satellites. Subsequently, a tri-service Defence Space Agency is taking shape which could even become a Space Command when its space war capabilities mature.

Like in other areas, China has a head start demonstrating its A-Sat capabilities in 2007 and only some days ago launching multiple satellites from a ship at sea. India’s civilian space programme is going great guns, with a human spaceflight and a lunar landing on the anvil. But for too long there has been ambivalence towards channelling some of these advances towards defence requirements, due to residual ‘pacifist’ considerations. However India lives in a tough neighbourhood, sharing borders with nations such as Pakistan and China who are, moreover, specialists in asymmetric warfare. They will look to probe India’s weaknesses rather than play to its strengths.

In future, it could be cyber warfare or space that is used to cripple us if we do not bolster capabilities in these areas. Such changing paradigms also negate the need for a large standing army and even make weaponry like battle tanks 20th century vintage. It is commendable that the Integrated Defence Staff will oversee the space war exercise. But it is unfortunate that we are still a long way away from a unified military command.

Countries like the US and China have seen the operational advantages of integrating the army, air force and navy into various theatres under a single command. Military modernisation is the need of the hour in India, but progress is slow. Too much money is being spent on salaries and pensions, leaving precious little for acquisitions or technology development. General Bipin Rawat’s attempts to trim the army met stiff resistance from within. Shifting focus to cyber and space warfare is also an opportunity to rope in the private sector and create a large vendor pool that can address India’s future defence acquisition needs. Above all, the government must gear the armed forces to fight the battles of this century – rather than the last one.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
