No floral procession, no VVIPs: Girish Karnad's last wishes honoured in cremation

No floral procession, no VVIPs: Girish Karnad's last wishes honoured in cremation

Legendary actor and playwright, Girish Karnad passed away at his residence in Bengaluru on Monday morning at the age of 81.

news Death

Honouring his last wishes, there was no floral procession or visits by VIPs following the demise of noted Kannada playwright, actor, and author Girish Karnad.

"After a discussion with his son, it was made clear to us that his last wish was to not have any floral procession, VVIPs or visits of any dignitaries. Hence, it will be a simple affair and we will be leaving for the crematorium in Frazer Town at 1 pm, and his cremation will be at 2 pm," DCP, Bengaluru Central, Devaraja D told TNM in Bengaluru.

Girish Karnad passed away at his residence in Bengaluru on Monday morning at the age of 81. Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy announced a holiday for government offices, schools and colleges on Monday following his demise. Schools will individually take a decision on sending students home today. Kumaraswamy also announced that the legend will be cremated with state honours in Bengaluru, and also announced a three-day mourning period in the state.

The actor and playwright’s death prompted reactions from many writers and politicians, including Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and President Ram Nath Kovind.

Read: Lost a 'crown jewel' of Indian art: Writers, politicians mourn Girish Karnad's death

He is regarded as one of Kannada literature's foremost playwrights having written classics like Yayati, Tughlaq, Hayavadana and Nagamandala. He has also acted in Kannada and Hindi films. He famously reprised the role of Swami's father in the television adaptation of Malgudi Days, a series of short stories written by RK Narayan, which aired on Doordarshan in the 1990s.

In recent years, he was frequently seen in protests held in Bengaluru including at the 'Not in My Name' protest in 2017 and on the anniversary of the death of journalist Gauri Lankesh. He was present at the protests despite having a tube around his nose for respiratory issues.

Read: Girish Karnad passes away, end of an era in Indian theatre and cinema
