PM Modi conferred with the Maldives' highest honour; what you should know about 'Rule of Nishan Izzuddeen'

PM Modi was conferred The Most Honourable Order of the Distinguished Rule of Nishan Izzuddeen during his visit to the Republic of Maldives. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, during his two-day visit to the Island country, was conferred with the Maldives' highest honour "Rule of Nishan Izzuddeen". The Maldivian President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih bestowed the prestigious award on PM Modi during a ceremony.

"The Most Honourable Order of the Distinguished Rule of Nishan Izzuddeen" is the Maldives' highest honour accorded to foreign dignitaries, Maldives' Foreign Minister Abdulla Shahid tweeted.

Here is a partial list of dignitaries who have been conferred with this highest honour of the Maldives before PM Modi:-

Duke of Edinburgh, Earl Mount-baton (1972)

President of South Korea Chun Doo Hwan (1984)

Commonwealth secretary general Sir Shridath Ramphal (1989)

Prince of Saudi Arabia Talal bin Abdulaziz Al Saud ( 2009)

President of Palestine Dr Mahmoud Abbas (2013)

During his visit, the prime minister inked six key agreements with Solih. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed on hydrography, health, passenger and cargo services by sea, capacity building in customs and civil service training. Besides this, a technical agreement between the Indian Navy and the Maldives National Defence Force was also signed on sharing ‘White Shipping Information’, which will enable an exchange of prior information on the movement of commercial, non-military vessels.

The joint statement issued by both the countries said that PM Modi and Maldivian President Solih inaugurated a ‘Coastal Surveillance Radar System’ to strengthen maritime security in the Indian Ocean region.

India's relation with the Maldives touched a new low during the then Maldivian President Abdulla Yameen's stint in office. Indian workers were denied work visa and Male's bonhomie with Beijing had increased, leading to a rough phase in the India-Maldives relation. Some reports say that ousted President Abdulla Yameen 's engaging Beijing on infrastructure projects trapped the Maldives into heavy debt.

Yameen lost a presidential election in September 2018 and now faces charges of money laundering in the island nation's biggest-ever corruption scandal. He had first come to power in 2013. The island nation of nearly four lakh was governed for nearly five years by the Yameen regime and there were allegations that it was an authoritarian government that practised state repression, intimidation and surveillance. Media was gagged, opponents were thrown into jail, no voicing of dissent was allowed.

About nine months ago, President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih unseated him with the backing of former Maldivian president Mohamed Nasheed (exiled in the five years of Yameen's rule) who could return to Male after the regime changed. However, right after Solih’s Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP) stormed back to power in April this year, India's relation with the Island country seems to be getting back on track.
