They want to turn Bengal into Gujarat: Mamata Banerjee attacks BJP

A day after violent clashes between Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Trinamool Congress (TMC) activists claimed the life of at least four party workers in Basirhat, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Monday accused the BJP of spreading lies.

"Bengal is not Gujarat. In UP, kids have been murdered. We will not let it happen. After BJP win, they are trying to create unrest in Bengal. BJP national leaders are creating problems [as part of] a conspiracy. We will not bow down to these forces," Mamata Banerjee said.

Mamata Banerjee's strong reply came after several BJP minister slammed the TMC government in West Bengal.

Supporters of BJP in Basirhat blocked roads to protest against the state's ruling party and demanded punishment for people who killed at least three BJP party workers.

After reports of failing law and order in the state, the home ministry also questioned the state government over the recent deterioration in law and order and expressed "deep concern". In reply, the Mamata-led government said the situation was "well under control".

Speaking to India Today TV, BJP leader and West Bengal in-charge for the party, Kailash Vijarvargiya said, "I have apprised BJP President Amit Shah on phone on latest violence and our workers being targeted in West Bengal."

Mamata Banerjee also advised media to act responsibly.

She said, "Media should play the role with responsibility. There are only two people dead but channels are running four dead. BJP is giving advertisements so you are running in their favour."

Commenting on the violence, West Bengal Governor Kesari Nath Tripathi told India Today TV that his meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Amit Shah was about the prevailing law and order situation in the state.

"It was a courtesy call. It was a meeting to extend greetings. I also apprised them about the current position in West Bengal," Tripathi said.

On the possibility of President's Rule in Bengal, Tripathi said the central government has to consider if demand arises.

"I didn't discuss anything on President's Rule with PM or HM," he said. "These are all political statements made by parties in West Bengal. I would request all the parties to maintain peace and law and order situation in the state," he added.

Meanwhile, the BJP observed a "Black Day" in West Bengal along with a 12-hour shutdown in North 24 Pargana's Basirhat subdivision to protest against the atrocities against its workers.

The BJP took out rallies in several parts of the state, with BJP workers sporting black badges.

The situation remained tense in Basirhat. BJP and TMC workers had clashed in Sandeshkhali area of Basirhat on Saturday.

The BJP took out protest rallies in the district subdivision, demanding immediate arrest of the culprits involved in the killings of its workers.

A huge contingent of police personnel has been deployed in the area to avoid any untoward incident, police said.

The BJP has claimed that five of its workers were killed, whereas the ruling TMC claimed that one was killed.

Also Read | Centre questions West Bengal's law and order situation after violence, TMC calls it political controversy

Also Watch | Centre's intervention needed in West Bengal?
