Marathi literary meet not new to controversy

Marathi Granthkar Sabha

Mahatma Jyotirao Phule

social revolutionary

Union Minister YB Chavan

Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Sahitya Sammelan

ByIn 1865, only 661 Marathi books were published. Of these, 230 were collections of poems. With a view to steering the nascent writing and publishing industry, Justice Mahadeo Govind Ranade, a social reformer, scholar and Marathi author, took the initiative of organising the first Marathi literary conclave in 1878. It was held under the banner of. He invited, a, for the meet. Mahatma Phule not only rejected the invite but also condemned the organisers for taking a soft line on the issue of caste exploitation and accused them of perpetuating the Brahmin hegemony.It is no coincidence that in the last 141 years only a handful of non-Brahmin writers have presided over the annual jamboree. Till the 1970s, this annual literary conclave was considered to be a non-political literary gathering of mutual admiration community. During the Emergency, Ms Durga Bhagwat in her presidential address raised a banner of revolt against the government whenwas on the dais. After the conclave, Ms Bhagwat was arrested under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act.The revocation of the invite to English litterateur Nayantara Sehgal just a few days before the inauguration of the 92ndat Yavatmal by the organising committee is the latest controversy that the literary meet has landed itself in. Right from the first Marathi Granthkar Sammelan, every annual Marathi literary meet has been embroiled in one controversy or the other, major or minor.The annual Marathi literary jamboree is a marketing event for the state government. With a few exceptions, the welcome speech is delivered by a minister, and the chief minister is invited as a special guest. This year’s event at Yavatmal is no exception. The state government has sanctioned Rs 50 lakh for this gathering, and the organisers say the total cost of organising the meet is more than Rs 3.5 crore. This gap is bridged by the state-level and local sponsors. They happen to be non-aided educational institutions that run professional courses such as engineering or medical or the sugar cooperatives or politicians, who have to build their empires from the state coffers.The litterateurs and other invitees invited for the three-day gathering are entitled to expenses for travel, stay and food. The delegates register themselves by paying a nominal fee that covers the meals. Huge pandals are erected and/or auditoriums are booked for poetry reading, lectures, seminars and other such activities. The visitor turnout is quite high, with the book exhibition being the main attraction of the event. As most of the bookstores in the big and small cities are filled with textbooks, people flock to literary festivals to buy fiction and non-fiction books.Election or selection of president for the annual gathering has always been contentious and controversial. Earlier, it was Marathi Sahitya Parishad, Pune that was organising this annual event. After the formation of Maharashtra state, four literary societies – Marathi Sahitya Parishad of Pune, Mumbai Marathi Sahitya Sangh, Vidarbha Sahitya Sangh of Nagpur and Marathwada Sahitya Parishad of Aurangabad came together to form the apex body called Akhil Bharatiya Sahitya Mahamandal. Besides, Marathi literary societies from Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and other places, also joined them. Akhil Bharatiya Sahitya Mahamandal is the apex body that used to elect the president of the annual literary conclave. Each of these literary societies has its own headquarters, branches, members, journals, and publications. They play a critical role in developing Marathi literary taste. All these literary societies are dependent on the government funding directly or indirectly. Therefore, the state government takes a keen interest in this annual jamboree. The government can penetrate the election or selection processes and also the organising of the event through one or the other literary society. This year, Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Sahitya Mahamandal selected Ms Aruna Dhere, who has to her credit researched papers, poetry, and other writings. It also invited Ms Sehgal to inaugurate the event that started on Friday. However, the host organisation of the event is Dr VB Kolte Sanshodhan Kendra Va Vachanalaya, Yavatmal, a research centre and library named after the noted writer.The host opposed the Mahamandal’s decision of inviting Ms Sehgal and revoked the invitation. It was not the host, but the BJP government in the state operating from behind the scenes that was responsible for denying Ms Sehgal the honour. Ms Sehgal, it may be recalled, was the first to return her Sahitya Akademi Award in protest of the 2015 Dadri mob lynching that resulted in Purskar Wapsi (return of the award) movement against the Modi government.In her inaugural speech that she was to deliver, Ms Sehgal openly condemned the BJP government at the Centre, holding it responsible for tearing apart the syncretic culture of the Indian subcontinent.Her speech was published as soon as her invitation was revoked by the organisers. Several groups are holding a public reading of her speech in the town squares across the state. Several writers and poets have announced their decision to boycott the Yavatmal conclave.The annual Marathi literary jamboree does not contribute to Marathi literature; it is a marketing event for politicians and publishers. The litterateurs are hardly at the centre-stage though the presidential address does capture the headlines of Marathi newspapers.On the eve of one such Marathi sammelan in Mumbai, the Shiv Sena supremo had made the mockery of the litterateurs by calling them oxen. There is hardly any genius in the presidential addresses of this meet. Still, several writers, book lovers and readers take a keen interest in the event. Albert Einstein’s quote – difference between genius and stupidity is that genius has its limits, aptly applies to this literary gathering.is a senior independent journalist
