MSU researchers patent new anti-cancer drug

New anti-cancer drug was tested in Germany twice

VADODARA: In what is being claimed as a major medical science breakthrough, a team of scientists from MS University has successfully developed an anti-cancer drug that can be used to treat breast cancer After years of efforts, the team from faculty of pharmacy has developed the novel compound which was synthetically prepared in laboratory. The team, which had invented the drug in 2010, finally received patent last week.Oncologists usually prescribe combinations of two varieties of drugs to patients suffering from breast cancer. These are steroidal and non-steroidal drugs. In the steroidal compound category, there is only one drug – exemestane – which is available to treat breast cancer patients. This drug, which is currently available in market, was developed in the West.“This new drug is similar to one of the category of compounds which are known as aromatase inhibitors. Aromatase is an enzyme responsible for synthesis of female hormones in the body. These hormones are responsible for breast cancer. If we stop their activity, we can prevent growth of breast cancer cells,” said professor M R Yadav, who along with Dr Prafulla Sabale and Dr Prashant Murumkar, had started working on the project in 2006.“Although there are other non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors, the human body develops resistance to these drugs in due course of time. At the same time, they have side effects like osteoporosis . We have developed the new compound to counter this resistance and minimize the side effects. The new drug can be used without resistance,” he said.In course of their research, the new drug was tested twice in Germany - once on cell lines of breast cancer and second time on the aromatase enzyme. The enzyme was isolated from pregnant ladies and the drug was tested on them.“The results were positive during both the tests,” said Yadav. “Now, that the patent office of Government of India has issued patent certificate, we will test the drug for toxicity on animals and later on healthy human beings. We have already done computer simulations on the enzyme.”“It took nine years for us to get the patent. We had applied for the patent in 2010. Within 48 months, we had to go for examinations, which we did,” said Murmurkar.“They send us queries on three aspects – novelty, innovativeness and commercialization of the drug. After these three aspects got satisfied, we became eligible for the grant of the patent,” he said.“After examinations, we were also called for hearing at the patent office in Kolkata. We satisfied all their queries and finally the patent was granted on June 6,” he said.
