Don’t need lip service, facilitate our return, Pandits tell govt

editorial@tribune.com

Aamir Khan

Tribune News Service

Tullmulla (Ganderbal), June 10

As a sea of devotees thronged the shrine of Ragnya Devi for Mela Kheer Bhawani celebrations here on Monday, displaced Kashmiri Pandits censured successive regimes for not doing much to facilitate their return to the Valley.

Regretting that a scare had been created about visiting Kashmir, the Pandits said they were overwhelmed by the response from local Muslims and the time was right for the Centre to take concrete steps towards making their return possible.

“Successive governments have only made hollow promises and not done anything to bring peace....nothing has been done for our return or rehabilitation either. Today, we want to appeal to our (Muslim) brothers to let us live. Yes, we have extreme voices and some Pandits are yet to come out of shock (post migration out of Kashmir).....but we want to be part of peace and we have to walk together,” said Satish Mahaldar, a devotee from New Delhi.

“We are overwhelmed by the affection shown...In fact, when a few locals saw us in tents, they said they were ready to provide us Rs 20 lakh for constructing our accommodation here,” he stated.

Kamal Chowdhary, originally from Rainawari area of the city, regretted that a fear had been created outside. “Today, we are seeing more rush of devotees as compared to last year. Hospitality received was great....only traffic jams bothered us and frequent stops by security forces. We told them we don’t need security.... a scare has been created about Kashmir outside but we felt safe,” he said.

Rajeev Dhar, originally from Kanipora, Baghat, said if the government wished, it could do anything. “Our return to our homeland is not impossible. We were given a warm welcome by the locals,” said Dhar.

Meanwhile, a group of Muslims even held a rally on the shrine premises to welcome the Pandits.

“We took out this rally to welcome Pandits. We wanted to give a message of Kashmiryat....Kashmiriyat is incomplete without Pandits. We wanted to tell them that this festival is not just for Hindus....but Kheer Bhawani Mela is for all, including Muslims and Sikhs,” said Future Forum International state coordinator, Umar Bhat, who led the group of volunteers.
