Youth Congress activists stage protest against 'The Accidental Prime Minister' in Kolkata, vandalise multiplex

Youth Congress activists stage protest against 'The Accidental Prime Minister' in Kolkata, vandalise multiplex

Protests by Congress workers across the country against Anupam Kher-starrer 'The Accidental Prime Minister'.

Youth Congress activists on Friday staged protests against the screening of the film "The Accidental Prime Minister" in two multiplexes on Friday disrupting shows, allegedly tearing the screen of one plex.

They stormed into Inox multiplex located in Quest Mall, south Kolkata on Friday evening during the screening of the movie 'The Accidental Prime Minister' and vandalised the cinema hall. Congress supporters in huge numbers rushed into the hall, tore apart the screen and asked everyone to leave.

Also Read: 'The Accidental Prime Minister' review

However, the West Bengal Congress disapproved the action and said the party would never "oppose freedom of speech", which it values deeply as part of its ideology.

A group of 15 Youth Congress activists staged a protest outside a multiplex chain located on Ganesh Chandra Avenue Friday afternoon and burnt posters of the film. They also raised slogans against the actors and the producer of the film.

#WATCH West Bengal: Congress workers protested and raised slogans at Inox, Quest Mall in Kolkata against #TheAccidentalPrimeMinister. The protest started while the film was being shown at the theater. (11.01.2019) pic.twitter.com/BVNTAt5fbV — ANI (@ANI) January 11, 2019

Another group, flaunting party flag, started protests when the late evening show began at another multiplex in south Kolkata and allegedly tore the screen scaring the audience.

The film, which was released on Friday, features actor Anupam Kher as former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. The film is based on Singh's then media adviser Sanjaya Barus 2014 memoir of the same name and details Singh's relationship with the Congress party's Gandhi family.
