The Accidental Prime Minister: Anupam Kher hits back at Rahul Gandhi as his supporters vandalized a theatre

Anupam Kher’s The Accidental Prime Minister has been a major point of controversy ever since the trailer hit the internet. Now, the film has hit the screens and viewers have been appreciating the powerful acts put up by Anupam as former Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh and Akshaye Khanna as his media advisor Sanjaya Baru. Yesterday, news came in that Congress workers entered and vandalized a movie theatre in Kolkata to protest over the release of the film The Accidental Prime Minister. The videos of the incident have gone viral.

Congress has been attempting to block the film's release ever since the trailer released. Anupam took to Twitter to give it back to the Congress leader, Rahul Gandhi. He wrote, “Dear @RahulGandhi. I don’t think your supporters who vandalised a theatre playing #TheAccidentalPrimeminister read your tweets about #FreedomOfExpression.” He also shared the video of the same. He also added, “Intolerance of the people who pretend to be tolerant. Cong workers vandalise theatre over 'The Accidental...' screening.”

Check out the tweets here:

Anupam Kher has been mentioning again and again that there is no political agenda behind making this film. The movie revolves around Singh's life, the economist and politician who served as the Prime Minister of India from 2004 to 2014 under the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) Government.

In an exclusive interview with us, director Vijay Gutte said, “It's not a propaganda film and it can't be. No filmmaker will waste his two years to make a propaganda film. If it's made, it will not true to be its creativity. I have stuck to the book and whatever the content of the book is what the film has. The book is in the public domain since 2014. The content of the book was carried by the channels. We announced the film one and a half years ago and we didn't hide to make the film. We shot in Delhi and we have shot in Mumbai.”
