Lalu Prasad turns 71: Was called Mahatma by girls, wanted to become doctor but frogs scared him

The political canvas of Bihar in the past three decades cannot be imagined without Lalu Prasad in it. His political career has seen ups and downs, fame and backlash, victories and defeats.

Starting his political journey as an MLA, Lalu Prasad went to serve as a two-time chief minister, a Lok Sabha MP, a Rajya Sabha MP and a Union cabinet minister. While he has been an active politician for three decades, as a child Lalu Prasad wanted to become a doctor. Politics was far from what he wanted to be involved in.

On the occasion of his birthday (June 11), here are some interesting aspects of Lalu Prasad's early life:

Why Lalu decided not to become doctor

In his autobiography, Gopalganj to Raisina, Lalu Yadav writes: "After being admitted in the school, I wanted to become a doctor. But my friend Basant informed me that I will have to take Biology to become a doctor. Then I came to know that to clear the exams, I will have to operate upon frogs during practical test. I hated frogs and operating upon them. I then decided that I won't become a doctor."

How a vendor changed Lalu's destiny

Lalu Prasad writes that his childhood was spent braving hardships. In the absence of sufficient clothing, he could not bathe every day. During winter, he would sleep on a bed of dry grass to keep himself warm. Food was another scarcity at home.

It was in these days that a life-defining incident occurred in Lalu Prasad's life. Describing it Lalu writes that once a vendor visited their village. As a prank, he picked his bag and threw it in a well. The vendor went berserk. When Lalu's mother found that he was the one who did it, she sent him to his brother in Patna.

Lalu's brother, Mukund, used to live in the watchmen's quarters in Patna. Lalu writes that he didn't want to leave the village at that age but his mother had decided he must.

Some say that had this incident not happened in Lalu Prasad's life, he may have not left his village so soon and shifted to Patna. It is probable that he would have remained in the village for a long time and his life would have taken a different journey altogether.

When Lalu first wore shoes

In Patna, Lalu Prasad was admitted to the Upper Primary School, Sheikhpura. There he joined the National Cadet Corps (NCC), which is where he wore a pair of shoes for the first time. He writes that the motivation to join NCC was that NCC cadets were given uniforms and shoes.

As a child, Lalu Prasad became popular for his ability to give speeches and mimic others. In college, he was popular among woman students who would call him "Lalu Mahatma" for his image. Lalu Prasad used to help students, especially woman students.

When Lalu fooled RSS workers using puri-jalebi

During his college life, Lalu Prasad was very active in student politics. He says he was very inspired by Jai Prakash Narayan, popularly known as JP. He moved like a shadow behind JP.

Lalu Prasad writes, "Once JP asked me to convince students to court arrest to protest against the then government. That was a time when people would be very scared of prisons. But any how I managed to convince 17 people, most of who were members of the ABVP and RSS, for this. I told them a close friend has organised a special feast at his house on Patna where puri and jalebi would be served. They agreed to come. I seated them in a police bus that would take them to Buxar jail. But the moment the bus reached Buxar, all 17 got off the bus and fled away."

ALSO READ | When CBI asked for Army help to arrest Lalu Prasad but failed

ALSO READ | Lalu Yadav and Nitish Kumar: Friends? Enemies? No, they are the ultimate frenemies

ALSO WATCH | When Raju Shrivastav mimicked Lalu Yadav in front of him
