Severe sea erosion in Kadalundy as heavy rain lashes district

Boy drowns in river; bus shelter razed to ground; control rooms opened in taluks

Three families were evacuated in Koyilandy on Tuesday and one boy drowned in the Kadalundy river as different parts of Kozhikode district received heavy rain in the past two days due to the advancing of the southwest monsoon. The district administration has opened control rooms in all taluks.

There is severe sea erosion in Kadalundy in Kozhikode taluk and camps have been set up for evacuation. A 17-year-old boy died at Kadalundykkadavu after he was caught in the whirlpool. His name was given as Mussamin, son of K.P. Salam of Kadalundy. Mussamin had come to the river bank along with his friends on Monday evening.

He had just completed Plus Two course from a vocational higher secondary school, Tanur, and was planning to go for higher studies. Personnel from the Indian Navy had to be called in on Tuesday after inclement weather prevented rescue works. Mussamin’s body was recovered from near the Kadalundikkadavu bridge. Meanwhile, local residents staged a protest as they claimed that the Navy personnel had reached the spot late.

The situation is similar at Valappil, Moonnukudikkal, and Ezhukudikkal in Chengottukavu village in Koyilandy.

The coastal road connecting Kappad and Koyilandy has been partially damaged. A bus shelter in the area was razed to the ground, high-mast street lights are not functioning, and retaining walls of the road were destroyed in many parts.

Staff of Uralungal Labour Contract Cooperative Society are making temporary arrangements there. Irrigation Department has been asked to strengthen sea walls and the Kerala State Electricity Board has been asked to install street lights.

The control room numbers are 0495-2372966 (Kozhikode), 0496-2620235 (Koyilandy), 0495-2223088 (Thamarassery), 1077 (Kozhikode collectorate), and 0496-2522361 (Vadakara).

The India Meteorological Department has predicted heavy rain on Wednesday too and an orange alert has been issued for Kozhikode district.
