Political parties condemn Capt over failed rescue operation

Ludhiana: Following the death of two-year-old child Fatehveer Singh, who had been stuck in the borewell since June 6, political parties are condemning the state Congress government and blamed chief minister Amarinder Singh for the failed rescue operation in Sangrur.

Even as the Youth Akali Dal leaders staged a protest near the railway station on Tuesday, Lok Insaaf Party MLA Simarjit Singh Bains also held the state as well as central government guilty for the death of the small kid. The Youth Akali Dal (YAD) leaders, who were accompanied by school kids, staged a protest against Punjab government and Amarinder Singh for failure in saving Fatehveer. On Tuesday, the leaders gathered near the central fire station and staged a protest while holding bucket in their hands.

They also prayed for the departed soul of Fatehveer. Youth Akali Dal district president Gurdeep Singh Gosha alleged that negligence of the district administration of Sangrur and the state government were responsible for the tragedy. He further said that if some political leader, minister or officer had got stuck in a borewell, then the administration would not have taken so long to take him or her out.

He added that it was shocking that in the 21st century the rescue teams were still using buckets to dig out a parallel bore for rescuing the child. He said the CM was least bothered about the rescue operation because he was enjoying holidays during those days. Gosha said that the Army was not called for the rescue operation on the very first day and untrained staff of the NDRF, that too without required machinery and technical assistance, started the rescue operation.

Meanwhile, MLA Simarjit Bains said the Centre as well as the state government were responsible for this tragedy. He said the central government had been boasting about digital India but there was no technique with which child could have been rescued quickly. He claimed that the government should take the responsibility for this incident. Bains, however, requested the political parties not to give political colour to this incident just for their selfish motives.

However, on the other hand, Congress leader Parminder Mehta criticised MLA Simarjit Bains for citing this incident for political purpose. Mehta said instead of holding anybody responsible, he should have helped the rescue teams on the spot, only then he could utter words about anybody.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
