Didi-BJP faceoff intensifies in West Bengal; BJP workers holding march in Kolkata lathi-charged - WATCH

Clashes at BJP's protest march in Kolkata | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: The turf war between the Bharatiya Janata Party and Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's Trinamool Congress intensified in West Bengal on Wednesday as the former organised a march to Kolkata Police headquarters in the capital. The BJP took to streets to protest against the killing of its workers while alleging a complete breakdown of law and order in the state.

As BJP workers, who started the march at around 12 noon from central Kolkata's Subodh Mullick Square and were marching towards Lalbazar, reached Bepin Behari Ganguly Street, the police deployed there tried to stop them. When the protesters didn't relent, the cops baton-charged and used water cannons and tear gas against the BJP workers.

The BJP had earlier said that the march was likely to see the participation of nearly one lakh supporters.

West Bengal: Kolkata police baton charge at BJP workers on Bepin Behari Ganguly Street. They were marching towards Lal Bazar protesting against TMC govt. pic.twitter.com/NZrYcTspeo — ANI (@ANI) June 12, 2019

Two years ago, the BJP had organised a similar march to the Kolkata Police Headquarters, during which clashes were witnessed between BJP workers and cops.

To prevent a repeat of such scenes, the Kolkata Police had put in place tight security at all major crossings. Meanwhile, Lalbazar - where the Kolkata Police headquarters is located - was turned into a fortress.

"Barricades have been put up at all the important junctures across the nine possible entry points to Lalbazar," a senior police officer was quoted as saying by IANS news agency. "Personnel armed with water cannons and tear gas shells will be posted at various points," he added.

Separate reports said Kolkata's key areas like Sealdah and Howrah stations may get choked due to the presence of a large number of people.

The political slugfest between the BJP and the ruling Trinamool Congress has increased in West Bengal post the Lok Sabha elections, in which the BJP won an unprecedented 18 out of the total 42 seats. The TMC had to settle with 22 while the Congress won the remaining two seats.

The BJP has alleged a spurt in violence against its men post the results and blamed Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee’s party for the same.
