Bengal: People from ‘a particular community’ behind violence, says Mukul Roy; sparks row

We do not see religion in patients: Doctors

KOLKATA: BJP leader Mukul Roy waded into a controversy on Tuesday, when he said people of a “particular community” were behind the NRS Hospital violence.Roy’s statement elicited protests, including from doctors protesting against the assault on their colleagues, who criticised the “twist” he gave to an “act of hooliganism”.Trouble broke out at NRS after a patient from a “particular community” died and his family members went on the warpath on the hospital campus, Roy said, adding that Trinamool Congress men sided with the patient. “Trouble broke out at NRS over the death of a patient from a particular community. Trinamool men led the rampage inside the hospital. They beat up a doctor who is now in coma. The CM could not get the time to pay a visit to the hospital. Is she trying to shield a particular community?” Roy said. The patient whose death sparked the NRS violence was Tangra resident Mohammad Sayeed.Immediately after blaming the “particular” community, Roy also gave the name of the doctor who was in coma (Paribaha Mukherjee) but kept mispronouncing the name till someone — sitting behind him at the press meet — corrected him.“We will not let parties play politics and gain mileage out of this issue. The assailants are hooligans and they belong to no religion or community. How can someone try to communalise the incident?” a junior doctor from Medical College participating in the protest said.“Members of other communities, too, including my own, have attacked my colleagues,” the junior doctor, who was not from the “particular community” Roy referred to, said.“We are angry with the government for not taking any tangible step to ensure security for doctors despite meeting different doctors’ forums several times and assuring security. But, at the same time, we do not support statements by politicians that have communal connotations,” oncologoist Sharadwad Mukhopadhyay said.“What has happened is extremely unfortunate and the focus should now be on improving the infrastructure and security at our state hospitals. I would appeal to all doctors and those in positions of power not to add any communal twist to this fracas,” cardiac surgeon Kunal Sarkar said.“This is something that only a politician can say. Not a single doctor or a doctors’ organisation will speak like this. We never see religion in the patients we treat,” a senior doctor, among the protesters, said.IMA national president and Trinamool MP Shantanu Sen said he would not like to comment on such “a blatant attempt to give communal overtones to this issue”. “This is something that his (Roy’s) party has in its DNA. They will try to bring up this issue everywhere. The problem at hand is not specific to Kolkata, Bengal or even India. We need strong laws. A doctor cannot perform under fear or intimidation,” he added.“It is unfortunate that some people are trying to play politics by blaming a particular community for hospital attacks. They should, instead, be putting pressure on the government to enhance infrastructure, increase manpower so that services in government hospitals can be improved,” Kabiul Hoque of Junior Doctors’ Unity said.
