Journalist thrashed, dragged & urinated upon by Railway Police,SHO suspended

Home >> Meerut Journalist thrashed, dragged & urinated upon by Railway Police,SHO suspended

A team of policemen led by SHO Rakesh Kumar and a contingent of local journalists was at the spot covering the derailment story when an argument broke out. SHO Kumar attacked Amit Sharma in one of the several videos of the incident that has gone viral on social media.

MEERUT: In yet another case of police brutality on journalists , a mediaperson with a local news group, was allegedly assaulted by Shamli GRP SHO and his aides on Tuesday evening.The incident happened after two wagons of a goods train derailed near Dhimanpur in Shamli at around 9pm on Tuesday.

A team of policemen led by SHO Rakesh Kumar and a contingent of local journalists was at the spot covering the derailment story when an argument broke out. SHO Kumar attacked Amit Sharma in one of the several videos of the incident that has gone viral on social media.

#WATCH Shamli: GRP personnel thrash a journalist who was covering the goods train derailment near Dhimanpura tonight. He says, "They were in plain clothes. One hit my camera&it fell down. When I picked it up they hit&abused me. I was locked up, stripped&they urinated in my mouth" pic.twitter.com/nS4hiyFF1G — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 11, 2019

The News 24 journalist, locked up in the GRP station, can be heard narrating the ordeal. He dubbed the attack as a retaliation for a negative story. Accused inspector/SHO Rakesh Kumar sat on chair and kept confronting other journalists protesting against the incident. pic.twitter.com/dVSPrGKog7 — Piyush Rai (@Benarasiyaa) June 11, 2019

Later, Sharma was attacked by one of the aides of the SHO who was present at the spot.According to local journalists, also witnesses to the incident, Sharma was not only beaten but dragged to the local GRP station and locked up. The victim also claimed that he was stripped by the cops and Rakesh Kumar urinated in his mouth.

"The SHO attacked me in vengeance after I ran a story which upset him. He initially attacked at the spot and threw my mobile phone away. He later abused, assaulted stripped and urinated in my mouth," Amit Sharma said.

Reacting to the allegations, UP police have condemned the incident and DGP OP Singh has suspended SHO Kumar and a constable. "We have come across a video where a journalist has been beaten up & put up in a lock up. DGP UP OP Singh has ordered for immediate suspension of SHO GRP Shamli Rakesh Kumar & Const. Sanjay Pawar. Strict punishment shall be accorded to policemen misbehaving with citizens," UP police tweeted.

We have come across a video where a journalist has been beaten up & put up in a lock up. DGP UP OP Singh has ordered for immediate suspension of SHO GRP Shamli Rakesh Kumar & Const. Sanjay Pawar.

Strict punishment shall be accorded to policemen misbehaving with citizens. — UP POLICE (@Uppolice) June 12, 2019

A huge ruckus ensued at the GRP police station in Shamli where scores of journalists had gathered to protest the attack and detention of Shamra. The protest continued on Wednesday morning as several organisations led by local mediapersons continued protest at the GRP police station premises.

This comes days after a Delhi based journalist Prashant Kanojia was arrested for his `objectionable` post against UP chief minister Yogi Adiyanath. The episode turned into an embarrassment for UP police department after wife of the incarcerated journalist approached Supreme Court for relief. Rapping UP govt for their highhandedness in the arrest of the journalist, the apex court ordered Kanojia`s immediate release.In Video: Shocking: Journalist thrashed by GRP cop, goons in Shamli
