News Digest: A sharp, speedy recap of the day's headlines

Mumbai: Have you missed any news today? Here are the top national, international headlines of the day.

5 CRPF jawans killed in Anantnag: Five CRPF personnel were killed and four other security personnel suffered injuries on Wednesday when terrorists carried out an attack on a busy road in Anantnag district of south Kashmir, officials said in Srinagar. A terrorist was killed by security forces personnel and an AK series assault rifle was recovered from him.

READ | 5 CRPF personnel killed in terrorist attack in J&K; 1 terrorist gunned down

First woman UP bar council chief shot dead: Uttar Pradesh Bar Council president Darvesh Singh was allegedly shot dead Wednesday in the court premises here by a lawyer who then tried to kill himself, police said. Singh, who was elected to the post two days ago, had come for a visit to the Civil Court when she was attacked around 2.30 pm.

READ | UP bar council chief shot dead by colleague, 2 days after her election

Congress meet: In the absence of members of the Gandhi family, senior Congress leaders on Wednesday informally met to take stock of the political situation, sources said.

READ | Congress leaders meet ahead of Parliament session, excluding Gandhi family

Dust storm brings flights to a halt: Flight operations at the Delhi International Airport were suspended for around 35 minutes as a severe dust storm hit the city Wednesday evening, airport officials said.

READ | Delhi airport's flight operations suspended for around 35 minutes due to dust storm

AN-32 wreckage: The AN-32 aircraft that went missing with 13 people aboard last week slammed into the face of a mountain very close to its summit in Arunachal Pradesh's Mechuka region, a new photograph released by the Indian Air Force shows.

READ | New photo suggests AN-32 aircraft slammed into mountain

Prashant Kanojia goes free: Journalist Prashant Kanojia was released from Lucknow jail Wednesday, a day after a Supreme Court's directive to set him free immediately on bail.

READ | Journalist Prashant Kanojia released from Lucknow jail

Cyclone Vayu: Cyclone ‘Vayu’ intensified into a cyclonic storm on Tuesday and is likely to hit the Gujarat coast on June 13 morning, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) said.

Read | Cyclone Vayu to hit Gujarat tomorrow; schools, colleges closed

UP journalist thrashed by cops: The journalist has been identified as Amit Sharma of News 24. The GRP personnel who were present at the spot, abused, kicked the journalist.

“I was locked up, stripped and they urinated upon right into my mouth,” Sharma said.

Read | 'Urinated in mouth, stripped': UP journalist faces wrath of cops

PNB scam: The Royal Courts of Justice in London on Wednesday denied bail to Nirav Modi. It was his fourth attempt to secure bail in the ongoing extradition case which failed after the judge said there is compelling evidence that he has tried to interfere with witness statements.

Read | Nirav Modi's bail plea rejected for fourth time by UK High Court

Chandrayaan-2: Addressing a media briefing, Indian Space Research Organisation Chairman Dr K Sivan said that the Chandrayaan 2 Mission will be launched on July 15 early morning at 2 hours 51 minutes.

Read | Chandrayaan-2, India’s second moon mission, to take off on July 15

PM Modi's travel plan to SCO: Prime Minister Narendra Modi's aircraft won't fly over Pakistan on its way to Bishkek in Kyrgyzstan for regional meet Shanghai Cooperation Organisation that starts on Thursday, the foreign ministry said.

Read | PM's aircraft not to fly over Pakistan while travelling to Bishkek: MEA

US-Mexico issue: US President Donald Trump on Tuesday stood by his comments that part of the migrant deal with Mexico announced over the weekend had yet to be made public, even after Mexican officials’ unveiled new details of the agreement.

Read | 'Biggest part of deal with Mexico has not been revealed,' tweets Trump

Who will be BJP president?: Amit Shah, who is now the Union Home Minister may continue as BJP president until the organisation elections in the party are over.

Read | Amit Shah may continue as BJP president till December: report

Hong Kong against new extradition law: Violent clashes again broke out in Hong Kong on Wednesday as police tried to stop protesters storming the city's parliament, while tens of thousands of people blocked key arteries in a show of strength against government plans to allow extraditions to China.

Read | Protests grow fierce in Hong Kong over extradition law, attempt to storm Parliament

Kolkata doctors on strike: Government hospitals in Bengal are in turmoil on Wednesday following a complete shutdown and senior doctors join protests into the second day over the attack of one of their colleagues in NRS Medical College and Hospital.

Read | Bengal doctors strike enters day 2, govt hospitals on shutdown

Azam Khan's dissent on madrasas being connected with mainstream education: Samajwadi Party (SP) leader Azam Khan has stoked a controversy by saying that "madrasas do not breed a nature like that of Nathuram Godse or a personality like Pragya Singh Thakur."

Read | Madrasas don't breed nature like Godse, Pragya Thakur: Azam Khan

Maoists arrested: The Gadchiroli Police have arrested senior naxal leaders Narmada and her husband Kiran from Sironcha, the border town adjoining Telangana’s Adilabad.

Read | Maoist leaders Narmada, her husband arrested in Gadchiroli

Government bans arms traders: The Ministry of Defence (MoD) has banned all transactions and dealings with fugitive arms dealer Sanjay Bhandari's firm Offset India Solutions (P) Ltd and its Group companies as well as functionaries until further orders.

Read | Government bans dealings with fugitive arms dealer Sanjay Bhandari

Ex-FBI leaders to testify on Mueller report: The House Intelligence Committee has invited two former leaders of the FBI’s national security branch to testify about the counterintelligence implications of Mueller’s investigation.The move makes it easier to sue Trump administration officials and potential witnesses.

Read | Ex-FBI leaders to testify on Mueller report, Russian threat
