Attack on Dalit youth: Protests erupt in Gundlupet

MYSURU: A day after a video of a dalit youth being thrashed and paraded naked in Gundlupet taluk went viral on social media, various organisations held protests demanding arrest and severe punishment to the accused involved in the crime.According to sources, though the incident took place on June 3, it came to light only after a video of the same went viral.On Wednesday, members of Dalit Sangharsha Samithi led by its convener Bettaiah Kote held a protest near the deputy commissioner’s office. Shouting slogans against the accused, the protesters demanded the arrest of all involved in the crime.“If they had a problem with a dalit entering the temple, they should have called police. We condemn the district administration and the police for not initiating action against the accused persons,” he said. The protesters also submitted a memorandum to the deputy commissioner’s office.The Karnataka Dalit Sangarsha Samiti held a protest in front of taluk panchayat office in Gundlupet. The protest was led by district convener K Nanjappa Basavanagudi. “The government should immediately arrest all the accused persons involved in the incident,” he demanded.Another dalit organisation also held a protest infront of Dr BR Ambedkar’s statue opposite Town Hall. They shouted against the state government. “Even after 70 years of Constitution, the dalits have been facing humiliation in the society. We will hold a nationwide protest if the accused persons are not arrested,” they said.Meanwhile, district convenor of DSS, a dalit organisation, Choranahalli Shivanna, alleged the police are soft on the accused persons. “We are holding a bandh next week in protest against the attitude of police,” he said. However, progressive thinker Mahadeva Bharani said a delegation would be meeting chief minister H D Kumaraswamy and deputy CM G Parameshwara and demand that steps be taken to prevent such incidents. They will also demand that the deputy commissioner, SP and police inspector be transferred.Save Constitution Karnataka Abhiyan president Padma too said that they would be holding a state-wide protest against the incident in coming days.
