8th All India Convention for ‘Hindu Rashtra’- 2019 concluded successfully.

8th All India Convention for ‘Hindu Rashtra’- 2019 concluded successfully.

Successful conclusion of 8th All India Convention for ‘Hindu Rashtra’.

The 8th All India Convention for the ‘Hindu Rashtra’ was organised by Hindu Janajagruti Samiti from 27th May to 8th June at Shri Vidyadhiraj Meeting Hall of Shri Ramnath Temple. 174 Hindu organisations from 25 States committed for establishing the ‘Hindu Rashtra’ !

HJS Media | Ramnathi (Ponda) Goa | June 11, 2019:: The Constitution of our country is said to be ‘Secular’. However, as per Article 370 of the Constitution, the word ‘Secular’ can’t be inserted in the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir. The result is strange that our country is secular, but the J & K state is not. If the Constitution gives freedom of expression & freedom of religion to every citizen of India, how can the demand for the ‘Hindu Rashtra’ be unconstitutional? In comparison, the act of Mrs. Indira Gandhi in 1976, that of inserting the words ‘Secular’ and ‘Socialist’ in the Constitution vide 42nd Amendment is purely unconstitutional. She declared emergency and put leaders of opposition parties behind bars. The powers of the judiciary and media were also restricted during this time. Contrary to this, the concept of the ‘Hindu Rashtra’ is ancient and encompasses the universe and is directed at the welfare of the world. It is very much constitutional. Such a confidence was expressed in the 8th All India Convention for the ‘Hindu Rashtra’. ‘Secularism’ in India means appeasement of minorities. Hindus are frustrated due to Secularism. The speakers expressed their views that BJP Government that came into power with Hindu votes, should take decisions in the interests of Hindus.

The 8th All India Convention for the ‘Hindu Rashtra’ was organised by Hindu Janajagruti Samiti from 27th May to 8th June at Shri Vidyadhiraj Meeting Hall of Shri Ramnath Temple. In this Convention, more than 520 representatives of 174 devout Hindu organisation in 25 States of India and Bangladesh had participated. Devout Hindu organisations showed wholehearted commitment in the mission of establishing ‘Hindu Rashtra’. They will work unitedly in that direction. In the Aegis of this Convention, ‘National Advocates’ Convention’ was held on 27th and 28th May. On 28th May, the first ‘Businessmen’s Convention’ was also organised. From 29th May to 4th June, the ‘All India Convention for the ‘Hindu Rashtra’ was held for devout Hindus. It included a one-day ‘Social Media Conclave’ on 2nd June. From 5th to 8th June, ‘Training and Convention for Organisers of Hindu Rashtra’ was held.

The Convention served as a platform for detailed discussions on problems affecting Hindus at national and international level, including the Government control over temples. The Supreme Court on two occasions had raised questions about how the ‘secular’ Government of India can look after the management of Hindus’ temples ? Why does the Government that is enthusiastic about taking over temples shy away from taking over churches and mosques ? The Government controlled temples are in quite pathetic state. Several temple managements are corrupt. The traditions, customs and ritualistic practices in the temples which are taken over by the Government are being interfered with and altered. The devout Hindus will never tolerate this. A management committee of Hindus should be constituted for temples; and Shankaracharyas, Dharmacharyas, devout advocates, representatives of religious organisations, etc. should be appointed into this committee. Authority to take decisions concerning temples be given to this committee and not to the secular Government. To raise these demands, the devout Hindus spread across the country are going to come together to carry out a nationwide campaign by the name of ‘Mandir-Sanskruti Rakshan Abhiyaan’, declared Sadguru (Dr.) Charudatta Pingale, the National Guide of Hindu Janajagruti Samiti.

Toiling hard to label Sanatan a terrorist organisation by using ‘Goebbels techniques’ !

‘Sanatan Sanstha exposed financial discrepancies in Dr. Narendra Dabholkar’s trust and found out illegal deposits made by the Marxist Communist Party in the Cooperative bank under Govind Pansare. Due to this, the progressives along with investigating agencies are making Sanatan Sanstha and Hindu Janajagruti Samiti a target. Furthermore, they are trying hard to term Sanatan a terrorist organisation by using ‘Goebbels techniques’. Leftists have killed many devout Hindu leaders and activists in Kerala and Karnataka but that is not discussed anywhere. The only thing in news is the killings of Dabholkar, Pansare, Gauri Lankesh and Kalburgi and that pro-Hindu organisations are terrorists. Lack of evidences are causing delay in filing cases in the Court. The cases are neither being heard. But we’re sure that the innocence of Sanatan will be proved in coming days, said Shri. Ramesh Shinde, National Spokesperson of Hindu Janajagruti Samiti.

India should abandon its indolence and make efforts to protect Hindus in Bangladesh !

‘Rapes on Hindu women, looting and arson of Hindus’ houses, vandalising temples, etc. have now become common in Bangladesh. Hindus were 18 to 20% of the population of Bangladesh at the time of its formation. It has now come to 2- 8% in many districts. The Bangladesh Government is inactive in protecting Hindus. The Indian Government should abandon its indolence and make efforts to protect Hindus in Bangladesh’, demanded Adv. Rabindra Ghosh, President, ‘Bangladesh Minority Watch’ from Bangladesh.

Shri. TR Ramesh of ‘Temple Worshippers Society’ in Tamil Nadu said, “Because of the bravery displayed by Marathas, Hindus in Tamil Nadu and Odisha have are surviving today. Unfortunately, this is no where mentioned in the history. Lakhs of acres land owned by the temples in South India has been taken over by the Government. In Kerala alone, 4 lakh acres temple land has been usurped by the State Government”.

Resolutions passed at the Eighth All India Convention for ‘Hindu Rashtra’ !

1. All devout Hindu organisations participating in the Convention will work through lawful means towards declaring India a ‘Hindu Rashtra’. Insertion of the word ‘Secular’ in the Indian Constitution by unconstitutional means should be replaced by the word ‘Spiritual’ and India be declared a ‘Hindu Rashtra’.

2. The Convention wholly supports Nepali Hindus in their demand of declaring Nepal a Hindu Rashtra.

3. The Centre should seriously take into consideration the sentiments of Hindu society and construct Shriram Temple in Ayodhya, in addition to enforcing stringent laws for a nation-wide ban on cow-slaughter and religious conversions.

4. The atrocities on Hindus in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka be investigated by the Government of India and the International Human Rights Commission. Hindus who have faced atrocities in Pakistan-Bangladesh and taken refuge in India be given Indian citizenship.

5. A Union Territory by the name of ‘Panun Kashmir’ be formed in the Kashmir valley to rehabilitate the exiled Kashmiri Hindus. Article 370 and Article 35-A from the Constitution of India be revoked with immediate effect.

6. The Centre should abolish Government’s control over temples across India and hand over the management to devotees. A Central Management Committee be formed with powers to take decisions in matters related to tradition and ritualistic practices in temples.

7. The Centre should rename the cities, towns, roads, etc. that are currently named after foreign invaders. A ‘Central Commission for Naming’ be formed with immediate effect for suggesting the names that are in line with India’s glorious cultural legacy.

8. The Centre should take conclusive steps to ensure that innocent seekers of Sanatan Sanstha are not harassed by investigating agencies in cases of the killings of atheists. A ban be declared on the usage of the non-existent ‘Saffron Terror’.

9. The Eighth All India Convention for the ‘Hindu Rashtra’ protests against the unconstitutional ban imposed by misusing the law, on Sriram Sene’s founder Shri. Pramod Muthalik on entering Goa.

10. The Convention protests against the CBI arrest of the National Secretary of Hindu Vidhidnya Parishad Adv. Sanjeev Punalekar and Parishad’s RTI activist Shri. Vikram Bhave. We demand their immediate release with full dignity.

11. A Marathi news Channel ‘ABP Maza’ hurt the sentiments of crores of patriots by airing a programme ‘Swatantryaveer Savarkar – A hero or villain ?’ on the anniversary of Swatantryaveer Savarkar on 28th May. The Convention lodges a strong protest against the TV channel and demands that BJP Government should confer ‘Bharat Ratna’ on Swatantryaveer Savarkar and honour his ultimate sacrifice for the motherland was made in the Convention.

Common action plan by the participating Hindu organisations !

1 To conduct Hindu Rashtra-Jagruti Sabha in 51 places !

2. Monthly ‘Rashtriya Hindu Andolan’ to start in 16 new places !

3. Confirmation on conducting ‘Hindu Rashtra Sangathak’ Workshops in 26 places !

4. Organising ‘Spokesperson Workshop’ in 38 places !

5. Organising ‘Hindu Rashtra-Jagruti Baithak (Hindu Rashtra Awareness Meet)’ at 236 places !

6. Organising nationwide ‘Spiritual Practice Workshop’ at 27 places, ‘Right To Information (RTI) Workshop’ at 23 places, ‘Social Media Workshop’ at 23 places and Shouryajagaran Camps at 18 places !

…

Courtesy:: HJS.
