West Bengal: Despite Mamata Banerjee’s warning, junior doctors refuse to resume work; decide to quit en masse

Kolkata: Juniors doctors of NRS Medical College and Hospital stage a demonstration as they continued their strike protesting an attack on a colleague at the hospital | Photo Credit: IANS

Kolkata: Unfazed by West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee’s warning to resume work by 2 pm, the agitating junior doctors across the state on Thursday decided to quit en masse. The Trinamool Congress had warned the agitating doctors of action if her order was not followed.

Earlier today, the West Bengal CM visited the state-run Seth Sukhlal Karnani Memorial (SSKM) Hospital at around 12.10 pm and called the agitation of junior doctors a conspiracy plotted by Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Communist Party of India (Marxist).

She first gave the doctors a four-hour deadline to resume work, but later revised it to 2 pm.

Doctors across West Bengal have stopped working at the OPDs (outpatient departments) since Tuesday in protest of the attack on two junior doctors by the family members of a dead patient in Kolkata's state-run Nil Ratan Sarkar (NRS) Medical College and Hospital on Monday night.

The West Bengal CM today reached SSKM Hospital and instructed police to vacate hospital premises, underlining that no one besides patients should be permitted on the campus.

"The junior doctors' agitation is a conspiracy by the CPI(M) and the BJP," said Banerjee, who also holds the Health and Family Welfare portfolio.

She alleged that outsiders had entered medical colleges and hospitals to stir disturbances.

The TMC supremo further accused the BJP of trying to give the strike a communal colour. "The BJP, with help from the CPI(M), is indulging in Hindu-Muslim politics. I am shocked to see their love affair...BJP chief Amit Shah is encouraging his party cadre to create communal tension and run propaganda on Facebook," said Banerjee.

The doctors, meanwhile, chanted "we want justice" slogans before the CM.

Notably, senior BJP leader Mukul Roy had claimed that members of a particular community had attacked the attack on doctors and blamed Trinamool Congress for the chaos at the hospitals.

The Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) held a press conference and condemned the incident. The BJP's student wing also slammed the state police for taking no action in the matter. In the press brief, the ABVP revealed that they have asked for West Bengal Governor's intervention into the incident.
