Didi vs doctors: Monday night visuals of violence at NRS Hospital that sparked doctors’ strike in WB - WATCH

Protests erupted after relatives of a deceased patient clashed with doctors at NRS Hospital (Visuals from video) | Photo Credit: Times Now

Kolkata: The face-off between the Trinamool Congress government and the junior doctors in Kolkata escalated on Thursday after 53 agitating junior doctors quit en-masse and submitted resignation letters. However, the state government rejected the mass resignations.

Junior doctors in state-run and private hospitals in Bengal have been on strike since Tuesday to protest against the assault of one of their colleagues at Kolkata’s Nil Ratan Sarkar Medical College and Hospital (NRS) on Monday.

Times Now accessed the visuals of violence on Monday night at the NRS Hospital which triggered the doctors’ protests, that has left the healthcare system in Bengal crippled for the last three days.

Visuals showed the aftermath and chaos after relatives of a deceased patient clashed with doctors of the NRS Hospital, in which a junior doctor was injured.

A state of anarchy looms over Bengal’s healthcare as doctors across the state agitated against the Monday incident.

The flashpoint between the doctors and the state government was triggered on Monday night when grieving relatives of an 82-year-old man, who had died at the NRS Hospital, attacked a junior doctor at the hospital.

The assaulted doctor, Paribaha Mukherjee sustained a head injury and was admitted in an intensive care unit at Kolkata's Institute of Neuroscience.

The incident prompted doctors to go on strike, demanding round the clock security at all hospitals and that the assaulters should be arrested.

As a result, outpatients' departments at all state-run hospitals in Kolkata and many of the major hospitals in the state remained closed on Wednesday.

On Thursday, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee visited SSKM Hospital in Kolkata, where she directed protesting doctors to resume work by 2 pm and warned that the state government would take stern action if the doctors ignored her orders.

“The government will not take any responsibility for those who would not do so (join duty). They will also have to vacate the hostels (if they don’t join work),” Banerjee said.

However, the doctors hardened their stand, with junior doctors and a few senior professors of Sagore Dutta Hospital and doctors of NRS Hospital submitting mass resignations to the government. A delegation of the junior doctors also met Governor KN Tripathi on Thursday regarding the issue. Their resignations, however, were not accepted by the government.


