G7CR Technologies recognised as 2019 Microsoft Country Partner of the Year for India

G7CR Technologies recognised as 2019 Microsoft Country Partner of the Year for India

G7CR Technologies was recognised for providing outstanding solutions and services, as well as representing excellent subsidiary engagement in India.

Atom Information Technology

G7CR Technologies India Pvt Ltd on Wednesday announced that it has won the 2019 Microsoft Country Partner of the Year Award for India. The company was honoured among a global field of top Microsoft partners for demonstrating excellence in innovation and implementation of customer solutions based on Microsoft technology.

Awards were presented in several categories, with winners chosen from a set of more than 2,900 entrants from 115 countries. G7CR Technologies was recognised for providing outstanding solutions and services, as well as representing excellent subsidiary engagement in India.

Dr. Christopher Richard, Founder and Managing Director, G7CR Technologies, said, “Our business focus is quite simple -- creating value for our customers, partners and employees. Receiving the Microsoft Country Partner of the Year Award is a significant acknowledgement of our value-driven services.”

The Microsoft Country Partner of the Year Awards honour partners at the country level who have demonstrated business excellence in delivering Microsoft solutions to multiple customers over the past year. This award recognises G7CR Technologies as succeeding in effective engagement with its local Microsoft office while showcasing innovation and business impact, driving customer satisfaction, and winning new customers.

Speaking on the occasion, Gavriella Schuster, Corporate Vice President, One Commercial Partner, Microsoft Corp said, “We are honoured to recognise G7CR Technologies of India as a Microsoft Country Partner of the Year. G7 CR Technologies has distinguished itself as an exemplary partner, demonstrating remarkable expertise and innovation to help customers achieve more.”

G7CR Technologies India is an Expert Azure Managed Services Partner driving cloud transformation for over 800+ businesses across India. G7CR provides cloud hosting services on Microsoft Azure packaged with all related support services for free. The services include managing cloud servers, monitoring cloud deployments, cloud architectural design, cloud security services, cloud governance services, 24x7 telephonic support and implementing advance technologies like power BI, analysis services, artificial intelligence, bots and machine learning.

G7CR has been recognised globally for its technical capabilities driving cloud success journeys for businesses from industry verticals such as Banking, Insurance, Manufacturing, Healthcare, PSUs, Education, Retail and IT.
