Major embarrassment for Mamata: Didi's nephew, Kolkata Mayor's daughter join docs' protest against WB govt

Major embarrassment for Mamata: Didi's nephew, Kolkata Mayor's daughter join docs' protest against WB govt

As a young Bob Dylan wrote almost sixty years ago, ‘our sons and daughters are indeed beyond our control’. Perhaps TMC leaders would do well to realise that one should get out of the way, if one can’t lend a hand, because the times are a changing.

In Bob Dylan’s seminal classic The Times a Changin’ there’s a very significant line about rebellion which goes: “Come mothers and fathers. Throughout the land. And don't criticize. What you can't understand. Your sons and your daughters. Are beyond your command. Your old road is. Rapidly agin'. Please get out of the new one. If you can't lend your hand. For the times they are a-changin'”

Didi vs Doctors: Rage spreads from Kolkata to Delhi, Mumbai and other cities, medical services hit

On Thursday, as the junior doctors’ stir after one of their colleagues was heinously attacked, the TMC learned the hard way that even their sons and daughters were beyond their command.

Read: Ashamed to be a TMC supporter, says Shabbha Hakim

While the doctors’ protest in Kolkata has evoked reactions across the country – from the Indian Medical Association to AIIMS’ doctors expressing solidarity – even TMC supporters and their kin weren’t far behind in expressing their displeasure.

Mass Resignations continue, HC asks Bengal govt to reply

First, Kolkata Mayor Firhad ‘Bobby’ Hakim’s daughter wrote an angry Facebook post wondering why the police was quiet even as truckloads of goons attacked doctors. She took to Facebook and wrote, “For those who do not know doctors in government and most private hospitals are boycotting OPD but are still working in emergency. For those saying, ‘Ono rugider ki dosh’ meaning what is the fault of patients, please question the government as in why the police officers posted in government hospitals do little to nothing to protect doctors.”

Watch: Mamata Banerjee’s nephew leading a protest rally against the government. Dr. Abesh Banerjee who himself is a junior doctor with government run KPC hospital can be seen in a video protesting and showing solidarity with junior doctors of NRS @dna @ZeeNews @WIONews pic.twitter.com/21SyXlgMAI — Pooja Mehta (@pooja_zeenews) June 13, 2019

Adding, “Please question why goons are still surrounding hospitals and beating up doctors? We have a right to peaceful protest. We have a right to safety at work.”

But even if that wasn’t rebellious enough, Mamata’s own kin could be seen leading the protest. On a day that the West Bengal CM threatened junior doctors by stating they’d be thrown out of their hostels, her brother’s son could be seen leading the charge. A video has surfaced which shows her nephew and brother’s son Dr Abesh Banerjee leading a protest showing solidarity with agitating doctors. Abesh, who is the son of Mamata’s brother Kartick Banerjee, is a doctor with KPC Medical College and Hospital. Sources say Abesh led a protest rally on Wednesday from KPC hospital to the NRS hospital.

As a young Bob Dylan wrote almost sixty years ago, ‘our sons and daughters are indeed beyond our control’. Perhaps TMC leaders would do well to realise that one should get out of the way, if one can’t lend a hand, because the times are a changing.
