Moonbound: Scientists getting free rein in space should get to run things on the ground too

Eleven years after India launched its comprehensive lunar exploratory mission, becoming the fourth country after the US, Russia and China to join this elite club, its second mission to the Moon is coming up, on July 15. Chandrayaan 1 made global headlines by helping confirm the presence of water on Moon. The Indian Space Research Organisation also grabbed its slice of glory with Mangalyaan, for making it to the red planet on its first shot and at a bargain basement price. Now Chandrayaan 2 will soft-land a rover to gather intel on the Moon, unravelling its mysteries while also boosting ties with Nasa. It has a far more complex mission than Chandrayaan 1 which only included an orbiter and an impactor. Most importantly, this is all building up to the ambitious Gaganyaan project, where India is targeting a manned mission to space by 2022.

In a country where gender inequality continues to drag down social and economic progress, what is quite remarkable about Chandrayaan 2 is that this interplanetary mission has a woman project director and a woman mission director. In fact women comprise around 30% of the team in charge of the mission. Even during earlier Isro missions like Mangalyaan, the launch images grabbed attention for the number of women in the control room. Not only does this break worldwide stereotypes of rocket science being the domain of men, it offers an encouraging glimpse of Indian organisations that do right by women and are much the better for it.

Once upon a time space missions could be considered national vanity projects. Today they are an existential necessity. Because satellites today control a countless number of critical Earth functions such as communications and weather mapping. Given the reality that space is no longer a distinct entity outside human lives, it is welcome that India and Isro are upping their space game. This is a national security imperative now. But the kind of unconditional support for science that Isro has been getting needs extending across the country.

This week saw farmers in Maharashtra protesting against the Centre’s ban on GM crops. This is a telling case. Activists on the left and the right have joined forces to block science in agriculture. But politics shouldn’t override scientific judgment. Until India continues to suffer this malaise, it will keep falling behind on patents and technological innovation. The Modi government should let science bloom everywhere.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
