Didi vs Doctors: Protest spreads across India, Harsh Vardhan asks Mamata not to make it 'prestige issue'

Didi vs Doctors: Protest spreads across India, Harsh Vardhan asks Mamata not to make it 'prestige issue'

A day after Mamata Banerjee dubbed protesting doctors in wake of attack on interns in NRS hospital on Monday as outsiders, the rage of the medical community is spreading far and wide. It is not only confined to hospitals in West Bengal now.

Mass Resignations continue, HC asks Bengal govt to reply

Doctors in the national capital Delhi are also on strike on Friday to protest against the barbaric attack on two interns in NRS hospital in Kolkata where their skull was badly hit. While a mob of 200 attacked the doctors protesting death of an octogenarian, so far only five have been arrested. Doctors are striking with the single point demand that state government has to ensure their security. Some doctors in Mumbai have also joined strike protesting the brutal attack on their fellow colleagues in Kolkata.

Across the country, from Kerala to Bihar, from Chhattisgarh to Rajasthan, doctors are attending protest marches to make their voices heard.

Major embarrassment for Mamata: Didi's nephew, Kolkata Mayor's daughter join docs' protest against WB govt

However, Mamata Banerjee known for her fiesty nature has refused to back down and has blamed BJP and outsiders for the doctor agitation. She has claimed that the state government has taken steps to rectify the 'unfortunate' incident.

West Bengal CM also gave deadline to doctors to join work else their hostels would be vacated. However, doctors have promptly ignored Didi's threat. Both principal and super of NRS medical college have resigned from their post on Thursday.

Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan said, "I'd like to assure all doctors that Govt is committed towards their safety. I appeal to doctors to hold symbolic protests only & continue to carry out their duties".

"Despite getting beaten so badly, doctors have only asked her (Mamata Banerjee) to provide them with adequate security and also demanded action against the perpetrators of the violence as per the law," Vardhan said.

"But instead of doing that, she warned them and gave an ultimatum which angered doctors across the country and they proceeded on strike. So if the chief minister acts in a sensitive manner in such a grave scenario, patients across the country will not suffer. I plead to the West Bengal chief minister to not make this an issue of prestige," he said. Doctors from AIIMS and other institutions also met him and submitted their list of demands.

So while medical services are hampered in some of the metros, in other places the doctors are taking part in symbolic protest as solidarity to their attacked brethren in Kolkata.

‘Ashamed as a TMC supporter’: Kolkata Mayor’s daughter Dr Shabba Hakim lashes out at Mamata govt over doc strike

Calcutta HC on Friday refused to pass any interim order in this case. It said that the state government has to find out a way to ensure that doctors resume their work. It asked state government to apprise them about steps taken on 21st June.

With agency inputs
