Goa doctors protest in solidarity with Kolkata medicos

As part of a nationwide call, resident doctors at Goa's biggest government hospital on Friday staged a protest in solidarity against the brutal attack on a doctor at a major Kolkata hospital.

"The association of resident doctors of Goa, on behalf of all our junior and senior residents, strongly condemn the brutal and inhumane act of violence on an on-duty doctor at NRS Medical College and Hospital, Kolkata," the Goa Association of Resident Doctors President Veeresh H.M. told the media on Friday here.

The protest at the Goa Medical College will be held till 5 p.m.

He also said that doctors will continue to attend emergency services at the state Health Ministry-operated facility.

Veeresh claims that there was "total lack of support with regards to this matter of the assault from the West Bengal health authorities and Kolkata Police.

He has demanded the immediate arrest of the accused.

"It really makes us wonder how doctors are supposed to work in such dangerous, insecure and life-threatening environment," Veeresh said.

Meanwhile, Panaji's Manipal Hospital, one of the largest private hospitals in Goa, also participated in the protests with its doctors, management and staffers wearing black badges, black shirts and tops as a mark of protest.

"Manipal Hospital doctors and management are fully supportive of the West Bengal doctors who are suffering due to violence against them at the top medical college there, by wearing black badges on arms and black shirts," a senior oncologist at the private facility, Shekhar Salkar, said.

The protests in the state-run NRS Hospital in Kolkata erupted on Tuesday morning bringing the regular services to a standstill, after a junior doctor was allegedly beaten up by the kin of a 75-year-old patient who died there late Monday night.

The family members of the deceased patient alleged medical negligence. An intern named Paribaha Mukherjee sustained a serious skull injury in the attack and has been admitted in the intensive care unit of Kolkata's Institute of Neurosciences.

--IANS

maya/bc

(Only the headline and picture of this report may have been reworked by the Business Standard staff; the rest of the content is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
