Over 300 doctors resign in West Bengal, demand unconditional apology from CM Mamata Banerjee

New Delhi:

Over 300 doctors on Friday submitted their resignation to the Director of Medical Education and Ex-officio Secretary, West Bengal, over violence against doctors in the state. The doctors have further demanded an unconditional apology from West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee on her warning of strict action if work is not resumed.

At least 27 doctors of North Bengal Medical College and Hospital in Darjeeling resigned over the violence against doctors in the state. In the meantime, a total of 80 doctors of RG Kar Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata submitted their resignation. Also, 175 doctors of the state-run Seth Sukhlal Karnani Memorial (SSKM) Hospital submitted their resignation.

"We the following doctors of RG Kar Medical College have so far been trying our level best to run the hospital service smoothly. You are aware that the present situation is not ideal for patient care service. In response to the prevailing situation as we are unable to provide service, we would like to resign from our duty," the doctors said in a mass resignation submitted before the Director of Medical Education and Ex-Officio Secretary of the West Bengal government. Further the doctors of RG Kar Medical College demanded unconditional apology from Mamata Banerjee.

On the other hand, it is also being reported that the doctors from Calcutta National medical college have submitted their mass resignation.

It is to be noted that several medical bodies including the Indian Medical Association (IMA) had called doctors' strike across the country to protest over rising violence against the medical fraternity after a junior doctor of Nil Ratan Sarkar (NRS) Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata was allegedly attacked by the relative of a patient who died on June 10.

Soon after the doctors went on strike, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee gave an ultimatum to them. The West Bengal CM had given the time limit of four hours to the protesting doctors else she had said that the doctors will be thrown out of hostels. The CM had further stated that the agitation was part of a conspiracy of her political rivals.

However, the protesting doctors defied the ultimatum.

Union Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan and West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi had appealed to the agitating doctors in the state to resume duty in the interest of patients.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
