‘Manikarnika’ to lead more biopics on Indian women

‘Manikarnika’ to lead more biopics on Indian women By Susitha Fernando ‘Manikarnika’:The Queen of Jhansi View(s): View(s):

Both Bollywood and South Indian cinema kicked off the New Year with much awaited biopic movie ‘Manikarnik’, a story on Rani Laxmibai, one of the leading figures of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and her resistance to the British Raj.

Indian period drama based on the life of Rani Laxmibai of Jhansi is directed by Kangana Ranaut who also play the title role. The film is produced by Zee Studios. Other main roles are played by Danny Denzongpa and Suresh Oberoi.

Following the announcement of ‘Manikarnika’s release in this January, the Indian media reported that a number of biopic films on women are slated to be released during this year. Starting with Ranaut’sManikarnik – The Queen of Jhans based on the warrior queen, at least two biopics on women achievers have already being lined up. Among the other biopics that are scheduled for the year 2019 are Chhapaak, based on the life of acid attack survivor Laxmi, and the Shraddha Kapoor starrer Saina Nehwal biopic.

At the production stage the film went through a number of hurdles. The director Sonu Sood leaft on the half way of the project and main actress Ranaut took up the rein of director while playing the titular role. The film also went through a number of public criticism at the stage of production.

In February 2018, while the film was being shot at Malsisar in Jhunjhune, a group of right-wing fringe outfit, the Sarve Brahmin Mahasabha protested against the film claiming that it had distorted the historical facts.

The organisation even demanded that immediate stop of the shooting of the epic biographical film about the respected female warrior.

Responding to the criticism, Kangana had told “I feel people who are not saying good things about me or my film will have to shut their mouths after watching the film and people who are saying good things, their mouths can’t be shut by anyone.”

A CEL release, both Hindi and Tamil versions of ‘Manikarnika’ will be released on January 25 simultanious to the release in India and worldwide.

It will be screened in island wide theatre including Liberty Lite –Colpetty, Capitol – Maradana, Savoy Premier-Wellawatta, City Cinema -Mt Lavinia, Concord-Dehiwala and MC- Jaffna.
