Doctors, medical students protest attack on their counterparts in West Bengal

BHUBANESWAR: Doctors and medical students in the state on Friday staged demonstrations and rally at different medical colleges and hospitals protesting attack on medicos at NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata.Medical students, interns, junior residents and senior residents of AIIMS Bhubaneswar staged demonstration in front of the registration counter of the hospital expressing solidarity to their counterparts in West Bengal . They later took out a rally in the institute campus flaunting placards and shouting slogans like ‘we want justice’ and ‘save doctors’.“Physical violence along with government apathy is unacceptable for any individual in this country. The repeated atrocious acts of barbarism have propelled pan India strike and support to our younger brothers and sisters. We condemn the attack on doctors in Kolkata,” said a statement of Residents’ Doctor Association of the institute.Due to the token dharna, OPD services were affected. Consultation of doctors with patients got delayed. But later the junior doctors joined the senior doctors in the hospital service. “It was a token strike, so treatment of patients was not affected. Emergency and indoor patient service were normal,” said Sachidananda Mohanty, medical superintendent of the AIIMS Bhubaneswar.Members of the Indian Medical Association (IMA) state chapter staged a demonstration in front of the office here protesting attack on the doctors. “Expressing solidarity with doctors in West Bengal, IMA has given a strike call on June 17 across the country. We will discuss with our members and take a call on Saturday regarding this,” said Janmejay Mohapatra, honorary state secretary of IMA Odisha.IMA Rourkela chapter also staged demonstration expressing solidarity to the doctors in Kolkata. “Considering the consistent rise in violence against doctors and medical establishments, the IMA has been demanding for implementation of a national law, which should have a provision of at least seven year imprisonment for the hospital violence," said Ranjan Kumar Dutta, president, IMA Rourkela city chapter.Prabhat Rout, president of Junior Doctor Association of SCB Medical College and Hospital, said junior doctors in all medical colleges in the state showed their solidarity by wearing black badge. “We will call a meeting on Sunday and decide our next course of action,” he added.On Thursday, resident doctors and MBBS students at SCB Medical College and Hospital in Cuttack had burnt effigy of West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee protesting attack on their fellow doctors in the neighbouring state. Junior Doctors Associations (JDA) of all state-run medical colleges has strongly condemned the attack.(With inputs from Mihir Ray from Rourkela)
