Why auto fare hike does not excite drivers

Under the revised fares, riders will have to pay a base fare of `25 for 1.5 km against the existing rate of `25 per initial 2 km of the ride.

The Delhi government notified revised auto rickshaw fares on Thursday with an 18.75 per cent hike on existing rates for auto rides in the national capital.

Under the revised rates, riders will have to pay a base fare of Rs 25 for 1.5 km against the existing rate of Rs 25 per initial 2 km of the ride. Rs 9.5 will be charged for every additional kilometre after the initial 1.5 km against the existing rate of Rs 8 per kilometer.

With only a few months left for the Delhi assembly elections, the move is seen as a measure by the ruling Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) government to woo the 90,000 odd auto rickshaw drivers operating in Delhi.

But will the move really help AAP to get the support of the large section of auto rickshaw drivers ahead of the state election just like they did in Arvind Kejriwal government’s maiden election remains to be seen?

India Today TV took to the streets to find out what auto rickshaw drivers think about the revision of fares by AAP government.

After speaking to several auto rickshaw drivers, it could be safely concluded that the tariff hike hasn’t gone down well with the auto drivers.

Drivers at a local stand in Central Delhi’s Feroz Shah Road criticised the AAP government’s decision. The drivers said that they can’t understand how the government was trying to help them by increasing the fare.

One auto driver said, Our business goes down by half in this scorching heat. And then, they go and increase the fare. How are we going to survive? While another said, They have increased the fare but they have metros and DTC buses free for women. What good is the fare hike for us when you yourself have taken most of our riders away?

Another auto-driver, a heart patient who is already struggling financially said, 80 per cent of the people who travel with us are women. If all of them start taking the metro or the bus for free rides, we wouldn’t even be able to afford a day’s meal.

Some of the auto-rickshaw drivers close to Connaught Place demanded a hike in the fares of their competitors- Ola and Uber, if the government really wanted to help them.

The auto drivers in Sarojini Nagar had a different take on the tariff hike. They appeared happy with the fare hike but said they were confused on how the Kejriwal government aimed to please them after having proposed to make DTC buses and Delhi Metro free for women.
