Doctors across country stand with Bengal colleagues, patients hit

Medical services across the country were hit on Friday with doctors taking to the streets to protest against attacks on members of their community in West Bengal.

Patients had a harrowing time as there was complete shutdown of OPD services and routine surgeries in government hospitals in Delhi, Maharashtra and Bihar through the day.

In other parts of the country, these services were paralysed during the first half when doctors wearing black arm bands staged demonstrations in their respective cities. However, emergency services across the country were exempted from the protest.

In Delhi and many other cities, private hospitals such as Apollo and Ganga Ram Hospital had to shut their OPDs with doctors going on strike. Indian Medical Association has given a call for a nationwide strike on Monday.

Doctors would take out demonstrations across the country on Saturday and Sunday, too, IMA said.

Some doctors met health minister Harsh Vardhan and demanded the safety and security of the fraternity should be ensured in the wake of frequent violence in hospital premises.

In Maharashtra, medical services came to a standstill across 18 government medical colleges and hospitals and hundreds of elective surgeries had to be postponed. At Mumbai's tertiary hospitals like KEM, Sion and BYL Nair, footfall in the OPDs went down by 10-20%, while around 100 elective surgeries were put off.

However an official of the Maharashtra government said while there were delays and patients were inconvenienced, medical services were only partially hit.

Resident doctors at KEM Hospital, Parel, enacted plays on patient-doctor interactions. Doctors from BYL Nair, which has been in news following the suicide by a tribal, Dr Payal Tadvi, walked around Mumbai Central station with placards.

Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) said it would intensify protests if the West Bengal government failed to act against those who had assaulted doctors in that state.

In Bihar, junior doctors who went on strike will resume duty only on Saturday morning. Doctors took out a candle march in Patna demanding justice for the victims of violence in Bengal.

In Uttar Pradesh, resident doctors of Institute of Medical Sciences-Banaras Hindu University went on day-long strike. Medical superintendent Prof S K Mathur said the impromptu strike created panic among patients. "Consultants took charge of the situation and ensured minimum inconvenience," he said.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
