GOLDSTEIN: Trudeau ducks gender question

It was a simple and direct question to Prime Minister Justin Trudeau at a town hall meeting in Regina Thursday, politely asked by a young woman, that spoke volumes about today’s politics.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

About how you don’t have to yell at politicians to be effective in challenging their views.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or GOLDSTEIN: Trudeau ducks gender question Back to video

And about how the prime minister – and politicians in general – routinely brush off questions they don’t want to answer by using the tired, old and cynical political spin technique called blocking and bridging.

It means blocking the question you’ve been asked and bridging away to answering something else.

Media consultants and political handlers think it’s clever.

What it really demonstrates is the politician’s contempt for the questioner, which is fine in Question Period because that’s essentially political theatre, or when a politician does it to the media because it’s our job to interpret political bafflegab.

But it’s insulting when Trudeau does it at a venue where we’re supposed to be impressed, according to his cheerleaders, by his willingness to talk openly and honestly to Canadians in informal settings.

The context for the young woman’s question was Trudeau’s controversial comments at a G20 meeting in Argentina in November on gender equality.

Trudeau said when considering large-scale construction projects like pipelines and highways: “There are gender impacts when you bring construction workers into a rural area, there are social impacts because there are mostly male construction workers, how are you adjusting and adapting to those?”

Many Canadians, especially in Alberta, believe Trudeau was taking an unfair and derogatory shot at oil field workers to burnish his “feminist” credentials by implying they are sexual predators, dangerous to women.
