Resident doctors protest, flay Bengal govt

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, June 14

Members of the Association of Resident Doctors (ARD), PGIMER, today took out a peaceful march and held a non-violent protest from 8 am to 12 noon without compromising on emergency patient services in light of the recent events of barbaric violence against resident doctors in West Bengal.

The protesters flayed the insensitive statements by the West Bengal Government and careless and inhumane attitude of the West Bengal administration.

“We are thankful to the faculty for supporting us in our cause. Being aware of our responsibilities, we had the limited duration of our protest to only 4 hours and had ensured the functioning of ICUs and emergencies. However, if the situation in West Bengal worsens, we will not hesitate to take further stringent measures,” said association president Dr Uttam Thakur.

“We will also like to highlight that such incidents of violence are not isolated and have occurred time and time again in various parts of the country,” he said. Despite the presence of laws, which mandate the arrest of perpetrators of violence under non-bailable sections, little or no action has ever been taken. “We demand stringent implementation of the provisions of the act and that the perpetrators of violence are brought to justice immediately,” he said.

IDA observes black day

Taking part in the nationwide protest against the horrifying act at the NRS Medical College, Kolkata, the Indian Dental Association (IDA) Chandigarh branch, observed a black day. The IDA, Chandigarh, condemned the incident and came out in support of the doctors and hospitals demanding a Central Act against violence on doctors. All members and office-bearers wore black badges. Oral Health Sciences Centre, PGIMER, also stood up in their support and the resident doctors were on strike from 9 am to 12 noon.

Dr Gautam Munjal, president, IDA Chandigarh, said the Chandigarh State Branch stands with the doctors at the NRS Medical College at this time of distress.

Faculty Assn lends support

The Faculty Association (FA), PGIMER, strongly condemned the recent incident at Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital, Kolkata, where two interns were brutally assaulted by relatives of a patient.

The association also urged the Government of West Bengal to take strong action against the culprits. “We feel safety and security of doctors and other healthcare workers are absolutely essential requirement in order to ensure timely patient care and a good learning environment for students,” said the association.

The association, while extending support and solidarity to the ARD, PGIMER, and other fellow colleagues throughout the country, performed their regular duties wearing black badges on Friday as a mark of protest to the graveness of the situation and will continue the same.

“We urge the Central and state governments and the Director, PGIMER, to make standard operating procedures for ensuring safety and security measures of workforce at the PGI and other medical institutions,” they said.

4,804 attended to at OPDs in PGIMER

In a statement, the PGIMER authorities stated that 4,804 patients were attended to at the OPDs on Friday and 34 elective surgeries were performed out of 99 posted. However, all emergency services, including ICUs and operation theatres, functioned normally.
