Junior doctors boycott work, patients suffer

ALLAHABAD: With the stalemate between the West Bengal government and striking junior doctors showing no signs of ending following an attack on a hospital intern by a patient’s family in Kolkata, doctors of various government and private hospitals boycotted work and wore black ribbons to express solidarity with the protest in Allahabad on Friday.The city-wide protest hit patient care services, as citizens were seen standing in queues with no doctors to tend to them in both government and private hospitals.On Friday, doctors of Swaroop Rani Nehru Hospital boycotted work in support of the agitating doctors in Kolkata. The hospital’s junior doctors refused to report for their duties in the out patient department around 1pm. They assembled in the portico of the old building of their hospital and staged a demonstration.Medicos at various government hospitals and private clinics chose to show their support by sporting black arm bands.On June 10, a junior doctor Paribha Mukherjee was attacked by a violent mob at NRS Medical College. He is currently in a critical condition. Over 300 doctors working in government-run hospitals tendered their resignation to protest against the attack on their colleague, even as medical services took a hit in West Bengal. Apart from the Indian Medical Association, the medical professionals in several other states have come out in support of the agitating doctors.“We are sorry that we are not able to help patients coming to the hospital, but the government has to understand that if such attacks on doctors continue, we won’t be able to treat any patients,” said Akash junior doctor at SRN Hospital. The agitating doctors demanded that the government provide more protection to hospitals so as to avoid similar attacks on medical professionals. They also warned that if their demands are not met with, they might even be forced to pull out of emergency cases as well.Doctors associated with Allahabad Medical Association (AMA) attended to patients wearing black arms hands. A delegation of AMA members handed over a memorandum addressed to Prime Minister Narendra Modi to the district magistrate. The doctors demanded for a law against attacks on doctors and violence in hospitals.
