Doctors' Strikes: Mamata Banerjee claims all demands accepted, doctors’ say ‘not true’ - Key developments

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee in her press conference accused senior doctors of targeting her government. Playing the usual blame game the West Bengal CM said that her government was not targeting doctors and alleged that the strikes were not an isolated case. She further added that in the past other state governments had taken stern actions against doctors.

Earlier today, she was supposed to meet the injured doctor but cancelled the meeting after doctors refused to join their respective duties.

Junior doctors’ agitation in West Bengal has entered the fifth day on Saturday, impeding regular services in all state-run medical colleges and hospitals, and a number of private hospitals.

However, emergency services were available at one or two hospitals, including Nil Ratan Sircar (NRS) Medical College and Hospital which is the centre-stage of the entire agitation.

The protest has intensified and all the medicos and medical bodies from different parts of the country supported the agitation by calling strikes as a mark of protest against the assault.

Didi vs Doctors: As it happened

"I do not want to invoke the Essential Services Maintenance (ESMA) Act in the state. I want the junior doctors to resume work as we have accepted all their demands," said Mamata Banerjee.

In her press conference, the CM also slammed Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan for his statements on doctors’ strikes and told him to worry about the rest of the country. “Health is a state subject,” she said.

Siliguri: Junior doctors at the District Hospital continue the protest, one of the protesters says, 'We won't stop the protest until she (West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee) meets the protesters at NRS Medical College & Hospital.' #WestBengal #DoctorsProtest pic.twitter.com/suAjPWBtx8 — ANI (@ANI) June 15, 2019

The MHA has sought an urgent report on the ongoing strike by the doctors saying it had received a number of representations from doctors, healthcare professionals and medical associations from different parts of the country for their safety and security.

As per the data released by the Home Ministry the MHA said expressed concern about the rise in the number of incidents of political violence in West Bengal saying it increased from 509 in 2016 to 1,035 in 2018. As per the report, over 773 incidents occurred in 2019 alone till date. Apart from that, the death toll in the state rose from 36 in 2016 to 96 in 2018 and 26 deaths were recorded in 2019 till date.

Manab Bandyopadhyay, Press Secretary to Governor of West Bengal, Keshari Nath Tripathi: Governor, today, wrote to West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee advising her to take immediate steps to provide security to doctors, & quick investigation of the incidents of assault on doctors. pic.twitter.com/ebcyjnjCRU — ANI (@ANI) June 15, 2019

The Centre has sought a report from the West Bengal government on measures it took to contain political violence in the state. Expressing "deep concern" over the unabated violence in the state over the years the Centre further directed the Mamata Banerjee-led government to investigate the incidents of violence and bring the culprits to book.

Sources said the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) also issued an advisory to the West Bengal government, expressing "deep concern" over the unabated violence in the state over the years.

Mamata Banerjee is set to meet injured doctors who were attacked by family members of the man who died due to a heart attack at Nil Ratan Sircar (NRS) Medical College and Hospital.

The doctors have sought an unconditional apology from Banerjee and have set six conditions for the state government in order to withdraw the strike. “We are not going to the secretariat upon the invitation of the chief minister for the meeting. She will have to come to the Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital and deliver an unconditional apology for the comments she made during her visit to the SSKM Hospital on Thursday,” PTI quoted Arindam Dutta, spokesperson of the joint forum of junior doctors as saying.

Taking to his Twitter handle the Union Health Minister wrote: "Heinous repeated attacks on doctors across India esp WBengal have led to this situation. Govt must pass a Law to make any attack on Docs a non-bailable offence with min 12 yr jail. Draconian Clinical Establishment Act that treats Docs as criminals must be withdrawn."

Indian Medical Association (IMA) delegation has met Union Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan over the ongoing strike of doctors in West Bengal. The minister had earlier urged the government to pass a law that makes any attack on doctors a non-bailable offence.

Striking junior doctors have said that they won't attend a meeting called by Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee at the state secretariat today evening. This is the second time Mamata has invited agitating doctors to meet her.

Today's protest march. From NRSMCH to CNMCH. Thousands of doctors hit the street today in Kolkata.



We want justice!! pic.twitter.com/RaPQCwXN6a — Kamal (@BusbyBoy6) June 14, 2019

The medicos have been protesting since Tuesday demanding security for themselves in government hospitals. This comes after two junior doctors were attacked and seriously injured allegedly by relatives of a patient who died at the NRS Medical College and Hospital due to a heart attack.

Expressing solidarity with the protesting doctors of West Bengal, a number of film personalities, singers, painters, civil right activists and common people on Friday participated in a 2-kilometre march here alongside medicos of various hospitals.

The participants walked from NRS Medical College and Hospital - the epicentre of the protests - to Calcutta National Medical College carrying placards and banners reading "Enough is Enough", "Stop violence against doctors" and "pashe achi" (we are with you), IANS reported.

So far around 119 doctors of North Bengal Medical College and Hospital in Darjeeling resigned over alleged violence against them in the state.

Indian Medical Association (IMA) has called for a nationwide withdrawal of non-emergency services including OPD on June 17 to protest against the brutal assault on a junior doctor in Kolkata. The association has also sought a central law to be enacted to ensure protection for doctors against violence in hospitals.

Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi had called Mamata Banerjee to Raj Bhawan for a meeting to resolve the crisis, however, she did not respond. "I tried to contact the chief minister. I called her up. Till this moment there is no response from her. If she calls me up, we will discuss the matter," said the governor.

It all began on Monday after a 75-year-old patient died of a heart attack at Kolkata’s NRS Hospital after which his family alleged medical negligence. The family members later returned and launched a brutal assault on interns and junior doctors.
