Suspended BRD paediatrician Kafeel Khan stands with protesting doctors in Kolkata, demands strict action

Suspended BRD Medical College paediatrician Kafeel Khan, who has been waiting for the Yogi Adityanath-led UP government to revoke his suspension for the past 15 months, says he stands in solidarity with protesting doctors in Kolkata.

Commenting on the attack on intern doctors at Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital (NRSMCH) in Kolkata, Kafeel Khan said he is "very disturbed and anguished".

"I am very disturbed and anguished at the violence in a hospital in Kolkata against one of our brothers," he said.

"I condemn it strongly and demand strict action against the perpetrators. I extend my full support to show solidarity with resident doctors who are facing violence from people, oppression from administration and neglect from government. We want the Central Protection Act," Khan added.

While Khan supports the symbolic protests called by many doctors' body associations, he made it clear that he will not support the doctors' strike called by the Indian Medical Association (IMA)-which represents nearly 3,50,000 doctors-on June 17 as deprivation of medical services could lead to loss of innocent lives.

In a tweet posted today, Khan also pleaded with the Indian Medical Association to look into his plight and issue a statement in his favour as he is also a part of the doctors' fraternity. It has been over a year since Khan was granted bail by Allahabad High Court which found no evidence of medical negligence on his part.

Dear @IMAIndiaOrg

I have been running from pillar to post for over 2 yrs now

Inspit of high & supreme court order neither @myogiadityanath paying my dues nor revoking my suspension

Plz issue a statement for me too.

I am also from your fraternity. I also have a family to feed?? pic.twitter.com/A217RtyAhK Dr kafeel khan (@drkafeelkhan) June 15, 2019

Meanwhile, the ongoing protest by doctors in Kolkata has caused inconvenience to a lot of patients and families who have been left in the lurch.

As scores of young doctors continue to protest against the Mamata Banerjee-led state government, a newborn has already died in Agarpara, West Bengal due to lack of treatment. The baby's father Abhijit Mallik told ANI: "It is my bad luck. My child died due to lack of treatment. He was not attended by any doctor because of their strike."

Many others on social media have also requested the doctors' fraternity in West Bengal and other parts to continue their protest but attend to the needs of the patients who have no involvement in the incident which triggered the episode.

Two junior doctors, Paribaha Mukhopadhyay, and Yash Tekwani, were beaten up by the family of a 75-year-old man, Mohammad Shahid, after he passed away earlier this week. Mukhopadhyay sustained a serious skull injury, triggering massive protests by the doctors' community in West Bengal. `

Soon, the protest spread across the country, and reputed medical organisations have now come out in solidarity with protesting doctors in the state. Over 150 doctors have already resigned in West Bengal while others on duty have been wearing black bands and helmets to protest against the attack on the intern doctor.

Doctors have not only asked for better security arrangements outside hospitals but also asked Mamata Banerjee to apologise after she warned junior doctors of strict action if they do not perform duties assigned to them.
