No ‘honest initiative’, say agitating Bengal doctors after Mamata Banerjee extends olive branch

Mamata the state government has not invoked the Essential Services Maintenance Act (ESMA) even after five days of strike by the junior doctors and appealed to them to rejoin service immediately.

Kolkata doctors’ protest: Protesting doctors in West Bengal rejected Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee’s appeal to end their agitation on Saturday evening saying there has been no ‘honest initiative’ initiative from the CM to address their grievances. “No honest initiative by chief minister, will continue agitation,” junior doctors’ joint forum said in a statement shortly after Mamata Banerjee announced that the state government has accepted all demands put forth by the agitating doctors. Speaking at a press conference in Kolkata, Mamata Banerjee urged the junior doctors to resume duty and normalise health services which has been hit hard across the state by the strike.

“We’ve accepted all their demands. I had sent my ministers, principal secy to meet the doctors, waited for 5 hours to meet doctors delegations yesterday and today, but they did not come. You have to give respect to the constitutional body,” Mamata said.

Also Read: ‘BJP asking doctors not to treat Muslim patients’: Mamata Banerjee gives Kolkata doctors’ strike communal colour

“I do not want to invoke Essential Services Maintenance (ESMA) Act in the state. I want the junior doctors to resume work as we have accepted all their demands,” she added.

Meanwhile, West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi has written to Mamata Banerjee asking her to take steps to provide security to doctors in the state.

Also Read: After communal twist to doctors’ protest, Mamata Banerjee has this message for UP and Bihar

Mamata’s announcement came hours after the striking junior doctors turned down the CM’s invitation for a meeting at the state secretariat to resolve the deadlock.

The doctors, who were protesting against the assault on two of their colleagues at NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata, sought unconditional apology from Mamata and had set six conditions for her government to withdraw their agitation.

The strike by Kolkata doctors received nationwide support from the medical community. The Indian Medical Association (IMA) had also called a strike across India on June 17 with withdrawal of non-essential health services.
