TDP MLAs stage shirtless protest over ex-CM Naidu being frisked at Vijayawada airport

TDP MLAs stage shirtless protest over ex-CM Naidu being frisked at Vijayawada airport

Former Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu was frisked at the Vijayawada airport and denied VIP treatment while boarding his flight on Friday.

news Controversy

Workers of the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) led by two MLAs, staged a shirtless protest in Visakhapatnam on Saturday, a day after their party's President and former Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu was frisked at the Vijayawada airport and denied VIP treatment while boarding his flight on Friday. After being frisked, Naidu had to travel in a bus along with other passengers, to reach his flight.

Visakhapatnam South MLA Vasupalli Ganesh Kumar and Visakhapatnam East MLA Velagapudumi Ramakrishna alleged that the BJP and YSRCP were resorting to witch-hunting, adding that the attitude of authorities was not only 'insulting', but also compromised on Naidu's security as he enjoys 'Z plus' category security.

Speaking to ANI, Vasupalli Ganesh Kumar said, "Chandrababu Naidu was frisked like a common man. He went inside the airport without security and pilot vehicles. He has served the state as Chief Minister for 14 years and remained under Z+ category security throughout. If anything happens to him, the state will be burned."

The protesters also appealed to Andhra Pradesh Director General of Police (DGP) Gautham Sawang to restore Naidu's security cover and ensure that such an incident was not repeated.

Earlier in the week, TDP leader and former state Home Minister Chinna Rajappa said that Naidu never had to face this situation though he was in opposition for many years. He demanded the central and state governments to ensure proper security to Naidu.

Currently, Naidu is under 'Z Plus' category protection and his security detail includes members from the elite National Security Guard (NSG) apart from Andhra Pradesh police's Intelligence Security Wing, for which exemptions can be made at airports, either on the basis of protocol, or on grounds of security.

Naidu had survived a claymore mine attack by Maoists on October 1, 2003 in Tirupati. The Z+ category is considered only second to SPG cover; the highest in the country, and involves round-the-clock personal security with NSG commandos and an escort, a pilot and tailing vehicles.
