Mumbai: Private hospitals to join IMA’s nationwide strike; will boycott routine work from 6 am on Monday

Doctors in private hospitals in Mumbai have decided to join the IMA strike on Monday (representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: In the wake of the ongoing agitation by junior doctors in West Bengal, many of the top private hospitals in Mumbai have announced that they will suspend their outpatient services on Monday to participate in the countrywide protest against the assault on doctors.

Many top-notch private hospitals have also decided to join the strike called by the Indian Medical Association (IMA) on Monday (June 17).

Thousands of physicians and specialists will not provide non-emergency services for 24 hours beginning from 6 am on Monday.

The strike will also be observed by Imaging centres, which will also not carry out routine work throughout the day.

As per the Times of India, the Asian Heart Institute (AHI) in Bandra, Holy Spirit Hospital in Andheri and the group of Fortis Hospitals in the city have said that they would close down their OPDs on Monday.

The Indian Radiological and Imaging Association (IRIA) stated that radiologists would also not perform routine CT scans, MRIs, x-rays and other imaging services, except in the case of emergencies.

Members of the All India Ophthalmological Society have also been asked to withdraw non-emergency services. All 11,000 members of the Association of Medical Consultants (AMC) will also support the strike call by IMA and boycott routine work on Monday, AMC reported.

Speaking on this, Dr DK Khanna, medical director, Holy Spirit said, "This decision to participate in the shutting down on non-essential services is to express out total dismay about the way healthcare workers and institutes are treated. Security is a basic right."

However, services in government hospitals in Mumbai are expected to remain unaffected.

Meanwhile, several private and government hospitals in Delhi-NCR have also announced that they will boycott routine work for day on Monday, as part of the IMA's call for strike from 6 am on Monday to 6 am on Tuesday.

Safdarjung Hospital, Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, RML Hospital as well as government facilities in Delhi such as GTB Hospital, Dr Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital, Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Hospital and Deen Dayal Upadhyay Hospital will participate in the strike on Monday.


