Delhi: Tempo driver attacks policeman with sword, cops respond with brutal beating | Watch video

A video of the incident which occurred in north Delhi has gone viral. (Photo: Screenshot)

A police officer was injured after allegedly being attacked by a tempo driver with a sword following an accident between their vehicles on Sunday in New Delhi's Mukherjee Nagar, police said.

A video of the incident which occurred in north Delhi has gone viral. In the video, the tempo driver is seen threatening the policeman with the sword and injuring him when he tried to catch it.

In retaliation, the cops thrashed and beat the tempo driver with a stick and kicked him in the face, as can be seen in the video.

According to a senior police officer, the accident between a Gramin Sewa Tempo and a police vehicle occurred in the evening, leading to a brawl between a police officer and the tempo driver which soon turned violent.

The tempo driver attacked a police officer on the head with a sword. The tempo was driven dangerously and caused injuries to a policeman in the leg, the officer said.

The matter is being enquired by a senior police officer, police said.

Several onlookers caught the incident on tape and the videos immediately went viral. Sikhs in massive numbers immediately came onto the streets to protest against police brutality.

Protests in Delhi after sikh man beaten up by police in Mukherji Nagar area. #Delhi pic.twitter.com/A15JidPyIT June 16, 2019

AAP MLA Jagdeep Singh tweeted the video of the incident and said, "A brutal action done by Delhi Police where they do not have constitutional right to behave like this with anyone. Arvind Kejriwal, Manish Sisodia, I request to Delhi Government as well as another concerned authorities to take a very strict action against this case."

A brutal action done by delhi police where they do not have constitutional right to behave like this with anyone @ArvindKejriwal @msisodia i request to delhi government as well as another concerned authorities to take a very strict action against this case. pic.twitter.com/No1ZBvoyST Jagdeep Singh (@MLAJagdeepSingh) June 16, 2019

Another AAP representative Jarnail Singh also slammed the incident on Twitter and called for the suspension of the policeman who beat the tempo driver.




