Wrong diagnosis: Doctors’ grievances need a combination of law enforcement and supply enhancement

A vigilante assault on two junior doctors at West Bengal’s NRS Hospital last week – following a patient’s death – has triggered unprecedented disquiet among the country’s medical fraternity. Bengal’s public health system has, for all practical purposes, collapsed. The situation remains unsettled on account of an impasse between chief minister Mamata Banerjee and protesting junior doctors, according to whom Mamata is siding with the vigilantes rather than protecting doctors. Doctors in other states too went on strike. This may be out of solidarity with doctors under assault in Bengal, but also due to anxiety about their situation. After all, political populism is not confined just to Bengal.

The turmoil among doctors can be seen as symptoms of two systemic issues. One, the breakdown of law and order in Bengal. Even after Lok Sabha polls, political violence in the state has continued unabated. The assault on junior doctors at NRS reflects a deeper malaise in the state’s governance. Mamata now needs to go the extra mile to defuse the situation and get doctors back into hospitals. It needs to be accompanied by an effort to restore order in the state and ensure doctors receive adequate police protection.

The other systemic issue relates to shortage of medical professionals, an outcome of bad policy. Government data shows that India’s doctor-population ratio is 1:1472 compared to WHO’s minimum norm of 1:1000. It’s estimated that there are less than a million active doctors in India. In a backdrop of general scarcity, prevailing policies make matters worse. There is a growing incidence of non-communicable disease, but some important ones can legally be treated only by specialists. However, Indian medical education system is not geared to enhance the number of specialists. This can be fixed by sensible de-licensing.

India has around 600 district hospitals which can be upgraded to teaching hospitals. In a similar vein, other solutions to increase the supply of doctors have come from the medical fraternity. Another way to enhance supply is to provide a pathway for experienced nurses to deal with basic problems. Tackling supply shortage calls for long-term reforms and curtailing MCI’s power. The immediate need however is to restore law and order in Bengal and assure doctors everywhere that violence against them will not be tolerated. It is unacceptable to have patients become collateral damage.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
