All-India doctors stir: IMA announces medicos' strike, protests at headquarters

Keeping patient care in the centre, AIIMS Resident Doctors Association (RDA) has decided not to go on strike. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Doctors across the nation have been staging a protest to support their colleagues in Kolkata, West Bengal who have been on on strike after two junior doctors were attacked by the kin of a patient over a case of alleged negligence at the NRS Medical College and Hospital on Tuesday. After the doctors at the All India Insititute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) gave a 48-hour ultimatum on Saturday to Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee to meet demands of medicos in strike in West Bengal, healthcare services at several government and private hospitals in the national capital are likely to take a hit on Monday.

Doctors across the state-run hospital have decided to boycott work for a day as the Indian Medical Association (IMA) had given a strike call for today, June 17. News agency PTI reported that the IMA members will also stage a protest at its headquarters in the national capital.

The hospitals which will stage protests in Delhi include Safdarjung Hospital, Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, RML Hospital, GTB Hospital, Dr Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital, Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Hospital and Deen Dayal Upadhyay Hospital.

Gujarat: Indian Medical Association today has called for a nationwide strike of doctors in the wake of violence against doctors in West Bengal; Doctors at Sir Sayajirao General Hospital in Vadodara hold protest outside Out Patient Department pic.twitter.com/Ya6NS3CE3x — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

PTI reported that the IMA said that no elective surgeries will be conducted and all outpatient departments (OPDs) and ward visits will be withdrawn for 24 hours from 6 am on Monday to 6 am Tuesday. However, emergency trauma services and the emergency operations theatre will be functional.

Dr. S Debbarma,General Secy,IMA Tripura Unit:All Tripura Government Doctors’ Association & IMA Tripura to stop providing all OPD services for 24-hrs,today,as mark of protest against recent violence against doctors in West Bengal; except OPD services all services will be rendered pic.twitter.com/4nRi6Y2klB — ANI (@ANI) June 16, 2019

The news agency report further mentioned that an official statement released by AIIMS said that it will not participate in the nationwide strike called by the IMA, but will take out a protest march from 8 am to 9 am on Monday. Keeping patient care in the centre, AIIMS Resident Doctors Association (RDA) has decided not to go on strike.
