Doctors strike LIVE: West Bengal doctors formally call off strike after meeting Mamata Banerjee

Doctors’ strike Today India LIVE News Updates: Doctors in Kolkata had been protesting since Tuesday against the assault on junior doctors by relatives of an elderly patient who died on Monday night during the course of treatment.

Doctors’ strike Today India LIVE News Updates: After assurances from West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee, the agitating junior doctors in Kolkata formally called off their week-long strikes. They had met the CM in the evening where she assured a number of security measures a number of issues were discussed. During the meeting, she asked the police officers, who were present in meeting to appoint nodal officers for hospitals in the state for the security of doctors.

Earlier in the day, the Indian Medical Association (IMA) called for a nationwide doctors’ strike to express solidarity with the junior doctors agitating in Kolkata against the assault on their colleague. The doctors in Kolkata have been protesting for the last seven days demanding stern action against those involved in Monday night’s attack on junior doctors at Kolkata’s NRS Medical College.

A formal announcement on withdrawal of the strike is likely to be made from the epicentre of the protest, the NRS Medical College and Hospital.

IMA secretary general RV Asokan said that all non-essential services including OPD will be withdrawn for 24 hours starting 6 am on Monday. The emergency and casualty services, however, will continue to function. He added that doctors will not go home until the government gives them an assurance that concrete measures will be put in place for their safety and security. The IMA had launched a three-day pan-India stir, beginning Friday to express solidarity with the doctors. Alone in Kolkata, over 450 doctors have resigned so far against Mamata Banerjee’s inaction.

Doctors in Kolkata were protesting since Tuesday against the assault on junior doctors by relatives of an elderly patient who died on Monday night during the course of treatment. Doctors were demanding safe working conditions and action against the those behind the violence.

Live Blog Highlights Doctors in West bengal had been on strike since June 11 The doctors in West Bengal have been on a strike since June 11 after two of their colleagues were attacked and seriously injured allegedly by relatives of a patient who died at the NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata. Madhya Pradesh doctors boycott work; OPD services hit Doctors in Madhya Pradesh Monday stayed away from attending OPD services in hospitals across the state in response to the nationwide strike call given by the apex medical body IMA in support of the agitating medicos in West Bengal, leaving patients in the lurch in the state. What Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan says?

Amid protests by the medical fraternity across the country over violence against doctors in hospitals, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan on Monday has assured that the the government will “revisit” the issue of drafting central law on safety of doctors in hospitals and healthcare facilities. OPDs of Tripura hospitals affected OPDs in government and private hospitals in Tripura remained closed on Monday as more than 1,000 doctors joined the nationwide strike in solidarity with their colleagues in Kolkata who are potesting on the issue of security. Formal announcement to end strike soon An assurance to call off the strike came at a meeting West Bengal CM Banerjee striking doctors at the state secretariat. “We are satisfied with the meeting,” a representative of the doctors said,while assuring the CM that the strike is going to be called off. A formal announcement on same will be made from the epicentre of the protest, the NRS Medical College and Hospital. Medical facilities affected in UP Even as large number of doctors from both private and government hospitals went on strike in solidarity with their West Bengal counterparts, medical services were severely hit in Uttar Pradesh capital. Many resident doctors from three government hospitals and thousands from private hospitals took part in the strike on a call by Indian Medical Association. Long queues in Kerala hospitals Long queues near (OPDs were seen in several government hospitals across the state. Some patients said they didn’t know about the strike and have been waiting for hours. “We left our homes at 3 am and do not know if the doctors will attend on us,” a patient at the government hospital here said. Doctors boycott work for 2 hours in Kerala government hospitals Healthcare services were affected across Kerala as doctors of state-run hospitals boycotted work for two hours on Monday and those in private facilities participated in a 24-hour nationwide strike being observed in support of protests by the medical fraternity in West Bengal. Protesting doctors assure to withdraw strike During the meeting with Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, striking doctors have assured to withdraw the protest in West Bengal after holding talks with their colleagues at NRS hospital in Kolkata. Junior doctors have urged for exemplary punishment for those involved in assault on doctors The representatives of of junior doctors have urged for exemplary punishment for those involved in assault on doctors at NRS Medical College and Hospital last week. The CM also directed formation of grievance redressal units in all government hospitals. What representatives suggest CM? During themeeting, Chief Minister Minister Mamata Banerjee asked a police officer to take note of a suggestion made by a representative that a helpline number and an email to report an assault must be set up in hospitals. The meeting is currently on at Nabanna in Kolkata. Doctors are coming out with anumber of suggestions which the CM is listening. State government allowed two channels to cover the meeting West Bengal Government which agreed to protestors demand that meeting should be held in the presence of media, permitted only two regional news channels to cover the meeting between them and the CM. CM continues to listen to grievances Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee continues to listen to the grievances of the representatives of doctors at Nabanna. Meeting is on after six days of strikes by doctors, who are demanding protections for them, after a ruckusbroke out last week after a 76-year old passed away during treatment. a doctor was severely beatedn up by the relatives of the deceased after which doctors went on strikes. Even IMA has called for 24-hour strike, OPDs cannot have more doctors: Mamata Mamata Banerjee, during the meeting of with doctors said that not more doctors are possible in OPDs, as if this is done than who will take care of emergencies. She further said that doctors with each speciality are normally recruited in doctors. Patients depending on their problems meet them. Who all at the meeting? Apart from West Bengal health secretary, MoS Chandrima Bhattacharya and state officials, 31 junior doctors are at meeting with Banerjee. During the meeting, CM announced that grievance cell will be formed in all government hospitals in the state. SC to hear plea on safety of doctors tomorrow The Supreme Court has said on Monday that it will here a a plea seeking safety and security of doctors in government hospitals in the country tommorrow. 125 police personnel deployed in inside NRS hospital: Health secretary Rajiv Sinha Rajiv Sinha, the health secretary of the state, said that the state government will deploy 125 police personnel more inside the NRS hospital to enhance security. The Chief Minister asked protesting doctors to frame a package to set up reinforced gates in emergency departments of hospitals. No doctor has been arrested: Mamata Banerjee No doctor has been arrested by the police in the incident, Mamata Banerjee tells doctors. The meeting is currently on in nabanna where doctors are meeting with CM where both parties are on discussion, trying to end the impasse prevailing in the state as well as rest of the country. Mamata directs Kolkata Police to deploy a nodal police officer in every hospital

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee directs Kolkata Police commissioner Anuj Sharma to deploy a nodal police officer in every hospital, during the meeting with representatives of doctors at Nabanna. Five arrested so far, says Mamata During the meeting, Mamata said five people have been arrested after the meeting. A representative from Cooch Behar said, “We want you to stand with junior doctors and support them. If you tell them, that it is not right to attack the doctors, it will ll be better,” Mamata said reply, “We have always condemned the attack on doctors.” Mamata Banerjee urges doctors not to leave West Bengal West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee continues her meeting with striking doctors. During the meeting, she urged doctors community to serve West Bengal and not leave the state. Mamata Banerjee meets doctors, says want to resolve the issue in a peaceful manner Mamata Banerjee meets protesting doctors at Nabanna. During the meeting the CM says she wants the issue to be resolved in a peaceful manner. The meeting is on since last few minutes. Only two from each medical insitutes have been allowed to be part of the meeting. What level of security IMA is demanding for doctors? According to the IMA, 19 states have already passed legislations with regard to safety and security of doctors and in 2016, an inter-ministerial committee’s recommendations document was signed by the IMA with the central government. The medical body said that hospitals should be declared as safe zones. Structured safety measures, including a three-layer security, CCTV cameras and restriction of entry of visitors should be well defined and enforced uniformly across the country in all sectors. Patients bear brunt as junior doctors continue stir in West Bengal Patients have been facing the heat of junior doctors’ protest in West Bengal as services remained affected in state-run hospitals and colleges for the seventh day on Monday. Services in emergency wards, outdoor facilities and pathological units of many hospitals have been hit. The doctor’s strike began after two of their colleagues were assaulted at the NRS Medical College and Hospital by family members of a patient, who died on Monday night. Indian Medical Association writes to Amit Shah The Indian Medical Association (IMA) has written to Home Minister Amit Shah demanding enactment of a central law to check violence against healthcare workers. On Saturday, Health minister Harsh Vardhan, along with a letter to all Chief Ministers, also attached a copy of the Draft Act provided by the IMA –the Protection of Medical Service Persons and Medical Service Institutions (Prevention of Violence and Damage or Loss of Property) Act, 2017. Doctors in Punje join nationwide stir Doctors in Pune on Monday joined the nationwide stir called by the Indian Medical Association to protest against attack on two junior doctors in Kolkata last week. Maharashtra: Indian Medical Association (IMA), Pune protests at KEM Hospital over violence against doctors. pic.twitter.com/9QIPkn0vTm — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019 Odisha: OPD services affected as doctors go on strike Doctors in several hospitals across Odisha resorted to ceasework on Monday in response to a nation-wide strike called by the Indian Medical Association (IMA). Emergency and indoor services remained operational while services at the outpatient departments (OPD) were affected in several hospitals. Junior doctors stayed away from the OPD and other non-essential health services in government medical colleges and hospitals at Berhampur, Sambalpur and Cuttack. Kerala: Doctors boycott work for 2 hours in govt, private hospitals Healthcare services across Kerala were affected as doctors of state-run hospitals boycotted work for two hours on Monday and those of the private hospitals supporting the 24-hour nationwide strike being observed in support of the protests in West Bengal. Long queues near Outpatient Departments (OPDs) were seen in several government hospitals across the state in the early hours of the day. Some patients said they didn’t know of the strike and have been waiting for hours. Don’t resort to agitation, Puducherry govt tells doctors The Puducherry government has directed the medical fraternity not to resort to agitation to protest against the attack on two doctors in Kolkata recently. Director of Health and Family Welfare Services KV Raman said the members of the Indian Medical Association have been asked not to go on strike, as such conduct would be a violation of the conduct rules governing civil servants. Doctors in the Union Territory are governed by the Central Civil Servants’ Conduct rules. Meanwhile, doctors say that a dharna has been planned for an hour in front of the Indira Gandhi Government General Hospital and Research Institute on Monday to protest against the attack of two doctors in NRS medical college and hospital in Kolkata last week. Doctors take out silent protest march in Goa Several doctors in Goa boycotted work on Monday and took out a silent protest march from the Azad Maidan to Panjim market to condemn the attack on some of their colleagues in West Bengal. In response to the strike call given by their apex body IMA, the non-essential medical services were suspended in various government and private hospitals of the coastal state. Mamata Banerjee to meet two representatives from each medical college at 3 pm today West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee will meet the agitating doctors at 3 pm today. She will meet two representatives from each medical college in the state at Nabana. Earlier, ANI wrongly reported that the meeting has been deferred till Tuesday. Lucknow doctors join story Doctors at King George’s Medical University (KGMU) in Lucknow are on strike in wake of violence against against doctors in West Bengal. Lucknow: Doctors at King George’s Medical University (KGMU) are on strike in wake of violence against against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/MY8WFfTyhE — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 17, 2019 Mamata Banerjee to meet doctors on Tuesday in Nabana News agency ANI reported that West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee will be meeting two representatives from each medical college of the state in Nabana on Tuesday. Centre mulls specific law for protection of doctors Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan on Saturday asked states to consider enacting specific legislation for protecting doctors and medical professionals from any form of violence. The IMA has demanded a comprehensive central law in dealing with violence on doctors and healthcare staff. It said that security measures and the determinants leading to violence should also be addressed. 40,000 doctors boycott work in Maharashtra More than 40,000 doctors in Maharashtra are boycotting work on Monday as part of a strike call given by their apex body IMA in support of their agitating colleagues in West Bengal. Doctors, from various government and private hospitals in the state, are mainly boycotting the OPD (Out-Patient Department) and other non-essential health services. SC to hear plea for safety and security of doctors on Tuesday The Supreme Court on Moday said that it will hear a plea on Tuesday seeking safety and security of doctors in government hospitals. Doctors in West Bengal and other parts of the country are protest against assault on two junior doctors at a stare-run hospital in Kolkata last Monday night. Keep protest symbolic: Karnataka govt urges doctors Karnataka Health Minister Shivanand S Patil ha appealed to the doctors in the state to keep symbolic their protest to express solidarity with their West Bengal counterparts. “I fervently appeal to the government and private doctors to keep their agitation symbolic without putting patients in trouble. The people of the state will also support you if you keep your agitation symbolic and I believe that you will not put the poor patients of the state in trouble,” Patil said in a letter written to Karnataka unit of IMA. Why doctors are protesting in West Bengal? Junior doctors in West Bengal are on strike since June 11 after two of their colleagues were reportedly attacked and seriously injured by relatives of a patient who died at the NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata. In a show of solidarity, medical practitioners across the country chose not to work, leaving patients in the lurch. Emergency, casualty services to continue to function: IMA The Indian Medical Association (IMA) is the apex medical body. It has said that all outpatient departments (OPDs), routine operation theatre services and ward visits will be withdrawn for 24 hours from 6 am on Monday to 6 am Tuesday. Emergency and casualty services will continue to function. Barring AIIMS, doctors at Safdarjung, lady Hardinge, RML doctors join strike Doctors at the Centre-run Safdarjung Hospital, Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, RML Hospital as well as Delhi government facilities such as GTB Hospital, Dr Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital, Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Hospital and Deen Dayal Upadhyay Hospital will not function on Monday.
