Morning walkers stop concrete work at Taljai, claim step will harm ecology of the hill

After concretising paths at Pashan tekdi Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) is planning the same at Taljai hill. In the past couple of days, the PMC’s road department has started laying crushed stone on the hill where native tree plantation drive has been done by regular morning walkers. The PMC has a plan to install paver block in the paths at a cost of crores of rupees. However, timely intervention by citizens on Saturday forced PMC to stop work.



The citizens have claimed that the concrete will choke the trees and will create adverse impact on the ecology of the forest on the hill. The various morning walkers’ groups across Sahakar Nagar have planted over 20,000 trees on the hill in the past decade.



Over 2,000 morning walkers visit the Taljai hill for their daily exercise. They also conduct tree plantation drives. On Thursday many of these walkers spotted heavy machines being used to dump and scatter crushed stone on the hill area next to the Taljai Devi temple. These people immediately contacted other members and informed them about the proposed concrete work on the hill. The crushed stone was spread all around the trunk of the trees.



Talking to Pune Mirror, Manisha Date of Green Leaf group, said, “Over 2,000 people visit the hill on a daily basis. We saved many trees by working hard. But this plan of concrete road and footpath has disturb us. We decided to make viral the photographs of PMC’s act. Many of us started calling local corporators to stop the work.”



“PMC has a plan to create road with footpaths, solar park and a parking lot which is unnecessary. Huge debris is also being dumped,” she said.



Vinod Jain, a tree activist, said, “Taljai is the only place remain in the city where greenery has been developed with the efforts of morning walkers and not by the PMC or forest department. By imposing various constructing activities, PMC is destroying the environment and lungs of the city. We will continue our protest till withdrawal of the project.”



Rahul Mane, a local resident said, “I personally planted 1,200 neem trees. But PMC with help of some corporator is trying to spend public money on concrete road and paver blocks. The road department and Building construction department is involved in these useless projects.”



“Instead of creating round space around the trees, the contractor is choking the trees. As per the rule , this place cannot be converted into any concrete project. Only biodiversity park is allowed,” he said.



Mahesh Wable, the local coprorator said, “ We have asked RT Date, the contractor to remove all the debris and stone crush as soon as possible. We have also sent the photographs of cleaning work to these morning walkers, which is already started. There is no plan to build any concrete roads, as claimed by them.”



Mahesh Shelke, engineer with the road department, said, “The footpath work was going on near the temple. The crushed stone belongs to the paver blocks. We will ensure no tree is affected by the work. Each tree will be guarded by a trench.”



When questioned Yunus Pathan, assistant commissioner of Sahakar Nagar ward, said, “There are specific instructions from the municipal commissioner to avoid choking of tree by laying concrete. We will send a team of horticulture mistris on Monday to inspect the site. Necessary precautions will be taken to save the trees.”


