AIIMS doctors join IMA protest to support agitating Kolkata medicos, strike to go on till 6 am tomorrow

AIIMS doctors to go on strike till 6 am tomorrow | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The resident doctors of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) will go on strike from 12 noon today till 6 am tomorrow in solidarity with the protesting doctors in West Bengal. The emergency services including casualty, ICU and the labour room will remain operational.

Earlier on Sunday, the Indian Medical Association (IMA) announced that it will hold a 24-hour-long nationwide protest on Monday and suspend all non-essential services, including OPDs, starting from 6 am.

The resident doctors of AIIMS have called for the strike to support the West Bengal junior doctors who have been protesting for the past few days after an attack on two of their colleagues by the relatives of a patient who died at Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata on Monday night.

Delhi: Resident Doctors' Association of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (#AIIMS) holds protest march against violence against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/A2TyjiM8PO — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

The strike, which entered its seventh day on Monday, has brought the medical services in the state to a standstill.

Earlier on Saturday, the resident doctors of AIIMS and Safdarjung Hospitals had issued a 48-hour ultimatum to West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee asking her to meet the demands of the state's agitating doctors, failing which they would go on an indefinite strike, news agency PTI reported.

On Saturday, the protesting doctors had set six conditions for the Bengal government to meet to call off the strike. They also sought an unconditional apology from Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for her statement that “outsiders” are creating ruckus at the behest of the BJP and the CPI(M).

Banerjee, who visited the SSKM Hospital in Kolkata on Thursday, warned the protesting doctors to call off their strike.

Banerjee had on Saturday asked the agitating doctors to meet her at the state secretariat to resolve the issue, however, they turned down her invitation and asked her to come to the NRS College and Hospital for the meeting.
