Bengal govt agrees to in-camera meeting with doctors, all eyes on Nabanna: 10 updates

New Delhi:

Amid the ongoing strike called by the Indian Medical association, there seems to be a flicker of hope that the Bengal impasse between doctors and Mamata Banerjee government will end soon. News Nation has learnt that the West Bengal government has decided to allow media for the crucial meeting at Nabanna today. Meanwhile, the Hospital across India are facing major trouble with the doctors associated with the Indian Medical Association going on 24-hour strike today. The single day strike has been called to show support for protesting doctors in West Bengal. Now, the resident doctors at the AIIMS, Delhi have also joined the strike. Earlier on Sunday, the AIIMS' Resident Doctors Association had said that "keeping patient care in the center, hospital services would not be disrupted & shall continue as usual for now. In case the lock-jam does not end, we will be forced to resort to escalation of the protest."

Here are 10 latest updates from this crucial story:

1: The strike will mean that non-essential services such as OPDs and diagnostic check-ups will be affected. There are no reports on doctors at private hospitals participating in the strike. The IMA’s decision to go on the strike today came after the Union Health Minister asked states to consider enacting specific legislation for protecting doctors and medical professionals from any form of violence.

2: Today, the West Bengal government wrote to the junior doctors asking them to reach Nabanna to meet Mamata Banerjee. Earlier, the doctors had rejected the invite as they insisted on media presence during meet.

3: The IMA has been demanding a central law to protect doctors and other medical staff within hospital premises across India.

4: In a previous statement, the IMA had said that, “The gruesome incident in NRS Medical College, Kolkata is of barbaric nature. Dr Paribaha Mukharjee who was brutally attacked is critical and fighting for his life. IMA condemns the violence perpetrated on a young doctor. Entire medical fraternity expresses our solidarity with the Residents who are on strike. Our National President, Dr Santanu Sen has visited all the medical colleges in Kolkata and has been in touch with the government and the police which has led to the arrest of four culprits in this regard. National President Elect Dr Rajan Sharma and Honorary Secretary General Dr RV Asokan are travelling to Kolkata to identify with the Residents. IMA Headquarters hereby declares All India Protest Day on Friday 14.06.2019.”

5: The strike is seen as a fallout of the ongoing tension in Bengal where the junior doctors are protesting against Mamata Banerjee government.

6: While there has been no tangible movement in the stalemate, both sides appeared to have softened their stance.

7: The junior doctors have now said that they will meet the Bengal Chief Minister provided the interaction is held in-camera. The Mamata government has ruled out any media presence and asked for a closed-door meet.

8: Sources, however, told News Nation that the Trinamool Congress chief had asked the doctors to meet her at Nabanna (State Secretariat) at 3 pm on Monday. Sources added that Banerjee rejected the doctors demand of media's presence covering the meeting. To end the impasse, two medical representatives from 14 colleges will meet the CM today. Chief secretary, additional and principal secretary health and the director of Medical Education will be present at the meeting.

9: Services continued to remain affected for the sixth day on Sunday in the emergency wards, outdoor facilities and pathological units of many state-run hospitals and private medical facilities in the state, leaving several patients in the lurch.

10: Junior doctors across the state are observing a strike in protest against an assault on two of their colleagues at the NRS, allegedly by the family members of a patient who died on Monday night last week.

(With agency inputs)

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
