Millionaire businessman made bizarre £1,000 offer to £3-an-hour paperboy

Kuldip Singh made more than £1.5million by supplying illegal workers to three horticultural firms without a valid licence

A seemingly respectable and well-known Post Office owner was running a business supplying illegal workers to firms.

Kuldip Singh, of Hull, East Yorkshire made more than £1.5million sourcing employees for three horticultural firms without a valid licence.

The Border Force Immigration Crime Team discovered Singh illegally supplied workers to three East Riding firms through his companies Diamond Employment Agency and Opiecare Ltd between November 2006 and June 2008.

Despite his licence application being refused he continued to supply workers illegally.

Image: MEN Media) MEN Media)

An investigation was launched into Singh's finances under the Proceeds Of Crime Act after the prosecution determined he needed to hand over £1.5m.

Singh was sentenced to six months' imprisonment, suspended for two years, in 2009 after admitting offences under the Gangmaster Licensing Act.

The prosecution was the first of its kind in the country under laws brought in to protect workers from exploitation after Chinese workers drowned while collecting cockles at Morecambe Bay.

If any of the firms he supplied with workers asked to see his licence, Sign referred them to a colleague who did have a licence. But the arrangement was a sham as the licence did not cover Singh to supply the workers.

Sign was ordered to sell his business, his family land in India and six cars to pay back the money he made through his crimes.

Image: MEN Media) MEN Media)

After being banned from selling any of his property by the court pending a proceeds of crime hearing, Sign took a very bizarre path in an effort to hang onto his assets.

Just a month before the court made its final ruling, Singh tried to sign over his shop, which was valued at more than £100,000 and was his main source of income, to his paperboy

The brazen postmaster tried to hand over his shop to a paperboy in an attempt to hide his assets to con financial investigators into believing he had no money.

He offered to pay the youngster, who earned £3 an hour delivering papers, £1,000 to take over his shop and become a director.

The paperboy only realised something was amiss when Singh tried to put his name on the water bills and asked him to sign contracts with his suppliers.

Singh claimed he did it because of the "bad publicity" surrounding his conviction and denied a charge of contempt of court.

But he was jailed for three months for contempt of court for the audacious attempt.

Still he failed to pay back the money and ended up being jailed for three and a half years for default of payment.

Image: Hull Daily Mail/MEN Media) Hull Daily Mail/MEN Media)

He also tried to avoid paying back the money by transferring the £244,363 family home on nine acres of land in India into his wife's name.

Singh claimed his elderly mother lived on the land in India and it was only worth £7,437. However, enquiries to the British High Commission confirmed the land was worth almost £250,000.

After hearing evidence in 2012, Judge Jeremy Richardson QC, sitting at Hull Crown Court , found him guilty, describing it as a "crude" attempt by Singh to conceal his assets.

He said: "It was not a sophisticated enterprise but it was utterly deliberate.

"That sad state of affairs rests firmly at the doorstep of this defendant."

Singh, who received British citizenship in 1985, was forced to sell his business, estimated to be worth £56,750 and his six cars valued at £9,025.
