Kerala doctors join nation-wide strike, emergency services not affected

Kerala doctors join nation-wide strike, emergency services not affected

The doctors, from private as well as government hospitals, in the state took part in the 24-hour strike in solidarity with the protesting doctors in Kolkata.

Health Protest

Doctors in private and government hospitals in Kerala took part in the nation-wide 24-hour strike on Monday in solidarity with the protesting doctors in Kolkata. However, the strike did not affect the emergency health services in the state since the doctors did not keep away from emergency wings in government hospitals for a long time.

The protests came after a doctor was brutally attacked in Kolkata last week by relatives of a deceased patient the hospital had been treating.

Though outpatient (OP) wings in private hospitals were not working, in great relief for patients, services were not disrupted in OP wings in government hospitals and medical colleges across the state. Emergency healthcare services like casualty and intensive care units functioned normally even in private hospitals.

OP wings in government hospitals across the state started functioning from 10 am instead of 8 am, while in medical colleges, doctors stayed away only for an hour from the OP wing.

“We came to know about the strike through radio the previous day, so we were not sure if the OP section would be functioning. But when I called the hospital and enquired, they asked me to come around 10 am. By the time I reached the hospital, there was a bit of crowd as OP had started late, but everyone was able to see doctors quickly,” says Seema Rajan, a resident of Paravur, while waiting to buy medicines at the General Hospital in Ernakulam.

“It doesn’t look like the doctors are on strike, it looks like any other working day at the hospital,” says Sarojini, a resident of Parakadavu, who had come for her check-up after a heart surgery at the hospital.

But a section of patients who did not know about the strike had to wait about an hour in the OP wings of government hospitals.

In parts of the district, doctors took to the streets to show their support. In the state capital Thiruvananthapuram, doctors marched to Raj Bhavan and held an hour-long dharna from 10 am. Meanwhile in Kochi, doctors under the banner of Indian Medical Association (IMA), conducted a public meeting in Vanchi Sqaure at High Court junction.

Speaking about the importance of the strike, IMA state president Dr ME Sugathan told TNM that it was the need of the hour. “The incident which happened in West Bengal is not an isolated one. Similar things have been happening in Kerala also. Though Kerala has an act to stop such untoward incidents – Kerala Health Service Persons and Healthcare Services Institutions (Prevention of Violence and Damage to Property) Act 2012 – a central law is necessary. Only then will people stay away from atrocities against medial staff,” he says.

IMA Kerala also expressed its gratitude to the people who cooperated with the strike. “We have collected reports from our branches, but we not found any troublesome incident in hospitals as part of the strike,” Dr Sugathan says.
