Committee calls for show of strength on Cauvery issue

The Cauvery Rights Retrieval Committee has called upon the people of the delta region to participate in large numbers in the protests organised against projects threatening their livelihood.

It will not suffice to hold demonstrations with only a few persons taking to the streets as representatives of the public, the committee said.

In a resolution passed at its special general body meeting held here on Saturday, the committee alleged that the fertile agricultural region of delta was being planned to be converted into a chemical extraction zone.

Various projects such as laying of pipelines by Gas Authority of India Limited were being executed across the region to make it unfit for cultivation and living. However, farmers were resisting the moves by organising demonstrations in a democratic manner only to be arrested by the State government, which was “clandestinely extending support” to the Central government and oil companies.

Such being the reality, resistance from a group of persons and organisations championing the cause of public could not bring forth the desired result, the committee observed and called on the people to take part in large numbers in the protests against the implementation of inhumane projects set to directly affect the livelihood of people.

The Central government, which has to implement the Supreme Court and Cauvery Water Management Authority directions, had failed to implement the authority’s recent direction to release 9.2 tmc of water in the Cauvery from the dams in Karnataka.

While politicians belonging to ruling and Opposition parties in Karnataka remained united in protecting the interests of their State on the issue by trying to postpone the implementation of the recent CWMA direction, the State government and the opposition parties in Tamil Nadu remained silent.

Thus, the participation of people in large numbers in the protests organised for protecting the livelihood of Tamils was the need of the hour.

The committee had decided to organise demonstrations on July 2 at more than 100 places in six districts of Cuddalore, Nagapattinam, Tiruvarur, Thanjavur, Pudukottai and Tiruchi to assert the rights of Tamils over the Cauvery water and to protest against the implementation of projects that threatened the livelihood of the people.

The committee would step up its protest after the demonstrations if the demands — release of water in Cauvery and abandoning of hydrocarbon projects proposed in delta region — were not met, said committee coordinator P. Maniarasan.
