Private hospitals shut shop in Karimnagar

Government hospitals and PHCs function as usual

Private hospitals, nursing homes and clinics downed their shutters on Monday in support of the all-India strike call given by the Indian Medical Association (IMA) condemning attacks on doctors in West Bengal.

The junior doctors of Chalmeda Ananda Rao Institute of Medical Sciences (CAIMS) and Prathima Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS) participated in the one-day strike. However, private hospitals attended the emergency cases.

There was no impact of the strike on government headquarters hospital and urban and primary health centres in various parts of the district as government doctors attended duty as usual.

Denouncing the attacks on doctors, the IMA Karimnagar Chapter organised a meeting at IMA Hall here on Monday.

At the meeting, IMA district president Polladi Srinivas Rao, secretary G.V.S. Tirupathi Reddy, IMA State president-elect E. Vijayander Reddy, Telangana Hospitals and Nursing Homes’ Association (THANA) State president Satyasagar Rao, district president Ravi, IMA State vice-president B.N. Rao, FOGSI leader M. Vijayalaxmi and others demanded that the Union Government bring in a legislation to punish those who attack doctors and cause damage to hospitals.

They said doctors spend years studying medicine just to save lives and they would not harm their patients at any cause. They said the doctors can effectively discharge their duties only when there was conducive atmosphere for them to do so. They added that the relation between patients and doctors would only sour if the attacks on hospitals continue unabated.

Meanwhile, the members of Indian Dental Association (IDA) Karimnagar Chapter staged a dharna wearing bandages on their head condemning the attacks on the doctors.

IDA district president K. Chandrashekhar, secretary Trinath Reddy, IDA State president-elect Basa Srinivas and others were also present.

NIZAMABAD Special Correspondent adds: Hospitals, both public and private, remained closed across the erstwhile Nizamabad district following the doctors’ strike on Monday. They demanded the government to take a stern action against those who attack doctors.

Doctors and medical and dental students boycotted work and staged a dharna in front of Government General Hospital here. All the medical associations — THANA, TGGDA, JUDA, ASI, API, AOL, HRDA, ENT, FOGSI, PATS, TOSA and IPS — participated in the protest.

Only emergency services were exempted from the boycott. Outpatient wards at the GGH wore a deserted look following the strike. Students of Meghana Institute of Dental Sciences, Mallaram, joined the protesting doctors and medicos and expressed solidarity to their cause.
