Patients suffer as doctors go on strike across India

PTI

New Delhi

Healthcare services were severely affected across the country on Monday as doctors wearing helmets and forming human chains went on a strike in solidarity with their protesting colleagues in West Bengal.

A large number of patients and their relatives, caught unaware of the strike, were seen waiting outside various hospitals, appealing to authorities for help.

The Indian Medical Association has given the nationwide call to withdraw non-emergency healthcare services after junior doctors in West Bengal went on a strike against a brutal attack on their colleagues by the relatives of a patient who died during treatment.

In many government and private hospitals across the country, out-patient departments remained closed and scheduled surgeries were postponed. However, emergency services remained operational.

“Those patients or their relatives who take the law into their hands should be strictly dealt with. While we understand the pain of the doctors, is it justified that patients who travel hundreds of kilometres to get treatment at the PGI suffer like this?” asked an elderly patient visiting the OPD at the PGIMER in Chandigarh.

Amid protests by the medical fraternity across the country, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan said the government will

“revisit” the issue of drafting a central law regarding the safety of medicos at healthcare facilities.

Vardhan said he has already written to all states requesting Chief Ministers to consider enacting specific legislation for protecting doctors and medical professionals from any form of violence, along with suggesting a model law proposed by the IMA.

Outside a government hospital in Thiruvananthapuram, a patient said, “We left our homes at 3 am and do not know if the doctors will attend to us.”

The protesting doctors are demanding a comprehensive central legislation to check violence against doctors and other medical professionals at hospitals. They also urged the West Bengal governments to fulfil the demands of the striking doctors and resolve the matter amicably at the earliest.

In the national capital, doctors at government and a few private hospitals boycotted work and staged protests. Doctors at the premier All India Institute of Medical Sciences, who had earlier decided not to strike, too joined the stir after a doctor was allegedly manhandled by a patient’s attendants.

Members of several resident doctors associations also took out marches on their campuses to lodge protest.

More than 40,000 doctors in Maharashtra boycotted work, according to an IMA official.

Similar reports came in from other states, including Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala.
