Patients flood government hospitals in South Karnataka as private hospitals shut OPDs

MYSURU: The nationwide strike by doctors remained peaceful in south Karnataka, though it adversely affected the functioning of private hospitals as their OPDs remained shut throughout the day. However, emergency services were available to patients.In the city, 1,200 to 1,300 patients visit K R Hospital every day. However, on Monday, due to the absence of OPD in private hospitals, the number went up to 1,400.Those who came to K R, Cheluvamba and other government hospitals didn’t face much difficulty, but patients visiting private hospital OPDs had a hard time. Though the management of most private hospitals had announced in advance that the OPD would not be functional on Monday, many still thronged their OPDs. The private hospitals had decided to close their OPDs from 6am on Monday to 6am on Tuesday in solidarity with the doctors in West Bengal, who were attacked by the relatives of a patient.Dr Nanjundaswamy, superintendent (incharge), KR Hospital, said: “We had held multiple meetings nearly a week ago. Though our junior doctors were staging protests, we had roped in additional staff and were ready to handle any number of patients. Usually, on an average, 1,200 to 1,300 patients visit KR Hospital while on Monday, due to the shutdown of OPD at private hospitals, the number crossed 1,400.”Dr M S Jayanth, secretary, Indian Medical Association , Mysuru said: “To show solidarity with the doctors of West Bengal, all private hospitals in Mysuru had closed their OPD. The dentists and those working in labs too joined the protest . All labs were also closed. Till Tuesday morning 6am, the OPD will remain closed at all private hospitals. However, the doctors at all private hospitals are attending emergency cases.”In Chamarajanagar, most private hospitals didn't open their OPDs. In the town, doctors took out a protest march, seeking a Central act to protect doctors on duty.As private hospitals didn't open their OPDs, there was a huge rush of patients at Chamarajanagar Institute of Medical Sciences. The hospital authorities said they had made elaborate arrangements to manage the extra rush.In Kodagu also the situation was not different. There was a huge rush at Kodagu Institute of Medical Sciences as the OPDs were not available in private hospitals and the clinics.According to health department sources, the situation was near normal.In Hassan, doctors took out a protest march and medical students demanded stern action against those who attacked the doctors in West Bengal. They urged the Central and state governments to ensure the safety of the doctors working in government hospitals.In Chikkamagaluru and Shivamogga too the doctors held a protest march. The OPD in private hospitals were disrupted by the strike. Patients searching for clinics and doctors were a common scene.
