Healthcare services in city hit as doctors go on strike

Ludhiana: Healthcare services remained crippled in the city as government and private doctors went on a 24-hour strike from 6am on Monday. No death of patient due to shutting down of OPD services was reported, even as 20,000 bore the brunt of the strike.

On a protest call given by Indian Medical Association (IMA) against beating of doctors in West Bengal, Ludhiana hospitals — including DMC, CMC, Oswal, SPS and G T B hospital, among others — suspended all services, except emergency and ICU. All nursing homes and clinics, too, remained close. The civil hospital, however, remained partially off due to Kabir Jayanti.

There are over 800 doctors working in the city’s 16 government hospitals, 325 nursing homes and 20 private hospitals.

At 10am, over 600 doctors gathered at IMA House in BRS Nagar and marched from Bai Bala Chowk to Bharat Nagar Chowk, raising slogans — “Stop violence against doctors”, “Save the saviour”.

IMA president, Ludhiana unit, Dr P S Jassal, said, “The government must take measures to check violence against doctors. In the absence of protection laws, doctors are shying away from taking up critical and complicated cases. This is a loss to society.”

DMCH managing society secretary Prem Kumar Gupta said, “Violence against doctors has increased manifold. There are several reports of medical professionals being roughed up, even killed, by patients’ disgruntled attendants. The IMA awaits formal communication from the Government of India on central law to check violence against doctors and hospitals.”

Senior medical officer Dr Geeta Kataria said, “We wore black badges to support the cause. Doctors have given a memorandum to the DC.”

DMCH’s Dr Sanjeev Uppal said , “About 75% doctors face verbal or physical abuse on hospital premises. We serve the ailing humanity and want to work in a non-threatening environment.”

The protest gave patients a tough time. While many returned home on seeing ‘No OPD’ boards outside hospitals, some were told about the stir after hours-long wait.

“Even as I had taken an appointment, I was not allowed to meet my doctor at Rana Hospital on Pakhowal Road. Later, I was told that my appointment has been rescheduled,” said Satinder Kaur, a resident of Sarabha village.

“A month ago, I had undergone an operation at Global Heart Hospital, Ferozepur Road. After making me wait for nearly two hours, the hospital authorities asked me to come on Tuesday. I was given a week’s medicine, which got over on Sunday. As I could not meet my doctor, I will have to skip my medication Monday,” said Jorah Singh of Barnala.

An elderly couple, Veena Kumari and Om Prakash of Batala, waited for four hours at Deep Hospital in Model Town. “I am suffering from a kidney ailment and much in pain. But no doctor attended to me,” said Prakash.

Even as DMC resumed OPD services from 12noon to 3pm, several patients were not aware of it.

“My father, Surendera Singh, is suffering from food poisoning. Before coming to DMCH, I called it up many a time, but in vain. As my father’s condition deteriorated, I brought him here around 9.30am, but no doctor attended to him. After waiting for a couple of hours, we returned home,” said Varinder Singh, who had come from Mukeriyan.

“I have come to DMCH for my parents’ check-up. But the OPD is closed today. We should have been informed about it,” said Mohit, who came from Udhampur.

Figuratively speaking

Hospital — everyday footfall at OPDs

Oswal Hospital — 400

CMCH — 1,200

Deep Hospital — 250

Deepak Hospital — 300

Raghunath Hospital — 450

Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital — 700



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
