After Bike Bot, another Ponzi scam in taxi decoy

GREATER NOIDA: A couple has been booked for allegedly duping a man of over Rs 8 lakh on the pretext of double returns in Kasna , police said on Monday. The duo used a modus operandi similar to that used in the Bike Bot scam, they said.The victim alleged that he was asked to invest a minimum sum of Rs 62,000 in an electronic taxi aggregator business — ‘Go Way’. He was promised Rs 10,000 every month for one year.However, no money was sent to his account even after investing Rs 8.6 lakh. The police were informed on Sunday when the victims staged a protest outside the company office on Sunday. Anil Sen (40) and Meenu(35) from Greater Noida had their office at GNS Plaza, Site 4 in Kasna.Deepesh Sharma, a local businessman from Bulandshahr, told the police that he came in contact with the couple 20 days ago.“One of my relatives introduced me to the scheme. I then met the couple when they showed me a few electric cars and scooters. The accused said they plan to bring these on road as taxis,” said Sharma.The complainant added that he invested Rs 8.6 lakh in the scheme and introduced his family members as investors “The scheme appeared good to me. They offered double returns in one year so I invested a good amount. However, as soon as my cheques got encashed, they stopped taking my calls and switched off their mobile phones,” Sharma alleged in the complaint.He alleged that the company has around 5,000 investors, who lost their money. “I am filing a complaint to call out to other investors,” he said.Meanwhile, the police have registered a case under sections 406 (criminal breach of trust) and 420 (cheating) of the IPC . “We are investigating other details of the case along with the total number of investors duped . It will also be investigated whether it is connected with the Bike Bot scam,” said Vaibhav Krishna, SSP Gautam Budh Nagar.Luxury carsIn the Bike Bot case, the four-day remand for the main accused, Sanjay Bhati, got over on Monday. Police said Bhati had confessed to have bought around 170 luxury cars registered in the name of the parent company, Garvit Innovators Pvt Ltd, from the money that was collected from investors.“They bought around 170 luxury cars, including Jaguar, Audi, Brezza, TUV 500, Nexon, Land Rover, and around 25 Fourtuner cars that were all registered in the name of the company,” said Vinit Jaiswal, SP (rural).The officer added that most of the money was invested into cars and other forms of investments, which are currently being verified.“There were around 12-15 position holders in the company and most of these cars were given to them. The accused,Vijay Pal, owned an Audi while Sanjay himself owned a Jaguar. We are also investigating the other forms of investments that the perpetrators have made out of the duped money,” Jaiswal added.
