Encephalitis outbreak: Angry relatives protest against Nitish outside Muzaffarpur hospital

Children protest against the death of over 100 children due to encephalitis in Bihar. (Photo:ANI)

Bihar chief minister Nitish Kumar on Tuesday visited the Sri Krishna Medical College and Hospital (SKMCH) in Muzaffarpur in the wake of deaths of over 100 children due to suspected encephalitis.

The chief minister, who faced protests from the relatives of patients, visited the hospital two weeks after Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) outbreak in the state.

Protesters raised 'Nitish go back' slogans as they alleged that government failed to control the situation. "Nitish Kumar took two weeks to visit Muzaffarpur -- just 70 km from Patna," one of the protesters said.

On Tuesday, the toll reached 108.

#WATCH Locals hold protest outside Sri Krishna Medical College and Hospital in Muzaffarpur as Bihar CM Nitish Kumar is present at the hospital; Death toll due to Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) is 108. pic.twitter.com/N1Bpn5liVr ANI (@ANI) June 18, 2019

According to a release issued by the district administration on Monday, 18 deaths were reported from Kejriwal hospital in the district and 85 from Sri Krishna Medical College and Hospital (SKMCH).

The chief minister interacted with the doctors and the parents of the ailing children. His visit comes amid outrage of people and constant attack from the Opposition leaders.

The disease has affected children falling under the age group of 1-10. Maximum casualties have been reported from Sri Krishna Medical College and Hospital (SKMCH) in Muzaffarpur.

Earlier, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan also visited the hospital in order to review the ongoing situation, where patients are being treated in large numbers.

Harsh Vardhan spoke to the media after visiting the hospital and ensured that the doctors are doing their best to treat the children suffering from the deadly disease.

Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan had visited the patients on Sunday and assured their families of all possible help from the Centre. The disease is locally known as 'chamki fever'.

Also Read | Encephalitis deaths: Lapses behind Bihar's brain fever horror

Also Watch | Death toll in Bihar due to encephalitis rises to 103
