OPDs remain closed as 10,000 doctors across northeast join IMA strike

GUWAHATI/DIBRUGARH/SILCHAR/IMPHAL/AGARTALA/ITANAGAR: Medical services across the northeast were severly hit on Monday as over 10,000 doctors stayed away from work because of the strike called by the Indian Medical Association (IMA) in the wake of the assault on two junior doctors in a Kolkata hospital on Tuesday. All outpatient departments in government medical hospitals and a large number of private hospitals remained closed. However, emergency services remained unaffected.In Assam, about 3,000 doctors and medical officers, who are members of the IMA, joined the protest. The Assam unit of IMA demanded that the state government should take steps to turn hospitals into "safe zones", by installing CCTV cameras and putting a restriction on any unauthorized entry.Doctors of Gauhati Medical College and Hospital staged a sit-in demonstration, demanding safety and better working conditions for themselves."Outpatient departments, including laboratories and other diagnostic facilities, were closed in all private, government and public health institutions. Doctors staged demonstrations, held protest rallies and dharnas, and didn't open their clinics. However, emergency services, critical care and indoor services continued without any interruption during the period," said IMA's Assam state branch president, Satyajit Borah and honorary general secretary, Hemanga Baishya in a statement.Health minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said, "We condemn the attack on doctors in West Bengal. But our doctors must also keep in mind the interests of the patients. The patients should not suffer at any cost."In Dibrugarh, non-emergency medical services at the Assam Medical College and Hospital were hit due to the doctors' protest. "Safety and security in the hospitals have been a matter of great concern and need to be addressed. IMA has been demanding a national law against hospital violence. It has declared a zero-tolerance policy against violence on doctors and healthcare professionals. Hospitals should be declared as safe zones and have safety measures like CCTVs and restriction on unauthorized entry," said Dipak Kumar Bhattacharya, president of IMA Dibrugarh branch.A member of the Junior Doctors' Association said, "We are providing emergency services on humanitarian grounds. Only OPDs remained closed for the day."Healthcare services across Barak Valley and in Dima Hasao district of Assam were also badly hit. With doctors sitting on protest, the OPD of Silchar Medical College and Hospital (SMCH) did not function throughout the day. SMCH principal-cum-chief superintendent Babul Kumar Bezbaruah said services in emergency and indoor patient department remained unaffected. OPDs also remained closed during the day at Cachar Cancer Hospital and Research Centre, Lion's Eye Hospital in Silchar and private nursing homes.In Imphal, a large number of doctors, nurses and staff, under the aegies of Manipur State Branch of IMA, joined the protest. President of Manipur State Branch of IMA, Shyamkumar Laishram, condemned the attack on junior doctors in Kolkata. Doctors and medical staff sat on protest, carrying banners reading "Doctors are not enemy", "We want a national law against hospital violence", "Doctors can only treat but not save life", " Justice must be given to the culprit" and "We stand for Dr Paribaha Mukherjee of NRS Medical College".In Agartala, healthcare services were severely affected, with doctors and medical staff joining in the protest wearing black badges. The Tripura branch of IMA and the All Tripura Government Doctors' Association extended their support to nationwide protest. OPD services remained suspended in almost all major hospitals, including the Agartala Government Medical College.Arunachal also presented a similar picture, with OPDs remaining closed in all hospitals, including Tomo Riba Institute of Medical and Health Science (TRIHMS) in the state capital. IMA Arunachal Pradesh unit, led by president Dr Lobsang Tsetim and secretary Dr Jego Ori, joined in the protest.TRIHMS doctors addressed a meeting, highlighting the atrocities on doctors in the state. Arunachal health minister Alo Libang, however, made a fervent appeal to doctors to carry out their duties and ensure treatment to patients during the day while wearing black badges to register their protest.
