Sword is Mightier Than Lathi? Bunch of Cops Struggling to Handle a Sword Wielding Sikh Driver

Sword is Mightier Than Lathi? Bunch of Cops Struggling to Handle a Sword Wielding Sikh Driver

New Delhi: There is a saying that a “Pen is mightier than Sword”, but in this incident which happened in Delhi, shows that a “Sword is mightier than Lathi?” (Police Stick). The incident which was caught on camera has gone viral, and many have condemned the Delhi Police for brutally beating up father and son on the street. In the video, which was forwarded to me on Whatsapp shows the driver of a tempo was seen threatening the policeman with a sword and injuring him when he tried to catch it. In retaliation, the cops thrash and beat the driver with a stick and kicked him. Even several people walking by caught the incident on camera and shared it on social media. Sources reveal that now after the incident, three Delhi policemen have been suspended over the brutal beating of a man in the street following a fender bender in India. Viral footage of the altercation sparked a protest and police investigation.

The incident reportedly occurred after a taxi driver, Sarabjeet Singh and his 16-year-old son Balwant Singh bumped into a police vehicle in Mukherjee Nagar, New Delhi, on Sunday. What appeared to begin as tense words between an officer and the driver escalated into a chaotic street brawl involving dozens of cops and weapons, with footage videoed by bystanders. The Sikh, a Gramin Sewa tempo driver and his son were brutally beaten up by Delhi Police outside Mukherjee Nagar police station on Sunday. The video gained attention to such an extent that immediately Sikhs in massive numbers came to protest against the policemen’s’ behaviour.

In the videos, the policemen dragged on the Sikh man ruthlessly. The driver was seen being beaten with a stick and was kicked in the face. The son of the driver who pleaded with the police officer not to beat up his father, but the policeman refused to listen. In the meantime, the Delhi Police in a statement said: “The alleged incident followed an accident caused by a Gramin Sewa tempo to a police vehicle. Thereafter, a police officer was also assaulted on the head by the tempo driver with a sword. Further, the tempo was driven dangerously and caused injuries to a policeman in the leg”.

On the other hand, it is very surprising to see a dozen of cops were not able to control an elderly man, even though he had a sword. However, a man seen in the video, clad in black pant and white shirt, alone was handling the Sikh man, while the police were pretty scared to come near to him, instead were simply beating him with their lathi from far. What a shame that a bevy of Delhi police couldn’t handle one single man for such a long time, while the incident was captured on mobile cameras by people. You could even see a cop with an assault gun, but didn’t do anything rather than watch what was happening. Smart and Active Delhi Cops, I guess?

But the incident received wide criticism against Delhi cops for manhandling an elderly person and his son. Clips of the violence drew outrage online, with stunned viewers criticizing the “shameful incident” and “brutal action” by police. Delhi politician Manjinder Singh Sirsa publicly defended the father and son, tweeting that the “old man did not harm any police officer” and claiming the sword was pulled out in self-defence. One tweeter message read, “A #Sikh auto driver and his son brutally beaten up by Delhi Police in Mukherji Nagar of Delhi. @AmitShah @narendramodi can anyone answer? What action has taken against culprits? Exemplary punishment should be given to responsible. they should be punished publicly”.

Another tweeter message said, “Shame on you @DelhiPolice @CPDelhi you people are a real disgrace. See how your brave men are beating an elderly Man and his Son shame Delhi police”. Yet another message on tweeter said, “Everyone can see- the old man did not harm any police officer. In fact, his son, a 16-year old was not at all aggressive yet they both were beaten mercilessly. We stand on our demand – each and every police officer involved to be rusticated”. “Shameful incident of @Delhi Police ruthlessly beating up Sarabjeet Singh & Balwant Singh over a petty issue. Request HM @AmitShah to ensure justice” read one more tweeter message

In the meantime, it is learnt that Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh has condemned the incident and has sought Union Home Minister Amit Shah’s intervention in the matter. In conclusion, in my perspective, by looking at the footage on the video, the bunch of cops who came to the rescue of their colleague could have easily handled that single-handed driver, even though he was wielding a small sword- but our “BRAVE?” Delhi cops seemed like they were weak or timid to control ONE person in his sixties-what a shame? It was also a shame to see the cops running with fear, chased by the Sihk driver. That’s my opinion- what do you have to say? Send in your thoughts…

Inputs from The Tribune
