Encephalitis or Nitish Kumar govt, who is to blame for deaths of children in Bihar?

Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar visiting a hospital in Muzaffarpur, where more than 100 children have died of encephalitis - locally called chamki fever.

Muzaffarpur is one of the four cities of Bihar that the Nitish Kumar government wants to develop into a smart city. Currently, the city and Nitish Kumar government are smarting under the deaths of more than 100 children due to acute encephalitis syndrome (AES).

The health department of Bihar is yet to pinpoint the exact cause of these deaths. At best they are clueless with many finding a shield in the litchi (also spelt lychee) theory of encephalitis deaths as it deflects the blame from Nitish Kumar government to a seasonal fruit. Most victims are from lower socio-economic group which supplies almost all labour force to litchi orchards.

Encephalitis is a disease that causes inflammation of brain. It leads to fever and associated neurological conditions like confusion, mental disorientation, delirium or even coma. In Muzaffarpur, many victims of encephalitis had very low sugar levels.

Filth, dry heat wave and scanty rainfall are empirically associated with the outbreak and spread of AES, which is not a single disease but a compendium of diseases caused by virus (notably Japanese encephalitis), bacteria, fungi, parasites, other microbes and even chemicals and toxins.

Nitish Kumar and his health KRA

The government cannot have control over heat and rainfall but cleanliness and healthcare fall in its domain. Muzaffarpur is a living testimony that Nitish Kumar's government has failed in fulfilling its health KRA.

Nitish Kumar has built his political image on the perception of "sushasan" (good governance). Two key elements of good governance connected with outbreak and spread of encephalitis are filth and medical care.

Bihar drew a blank in the Swachh Survekshan Report 2019 released by the Centre in March this year. Not one town in its 38 districts featured in the 100 cleanest cities of the country. Bihar is the third most populous state of the country.

Protest against the Nitish Kumar government over unabated spell of deaths of children due to encephalitis in Muzaffarpur. (Photo: Twitter/@ANI)

Patna was the cleanest city of Bihar holding 70th rank among the 73 surveyed in 2016. In 2017, Patna was ranked 262 among 434 cities and in 2018, it slipped to 312th among 500 cities. A tour of Muzaffarpur districts leaves no doubt that Patna must be a clean city in Bihar.

Another case in point here is the doctor-patient ratio. According to the Health Workforce in India, a report by the World Health Organisation, the qualified doctor-patient ratio in Bihar in 2001 was 13.7 per lakh population. Back then, the WHO also stated that of all medical practitioners in Bihar only 26 per cent were qualified doctors.

Nitish Kumar came to power in 2005. And, in March last year, state Health Minister Mangal Pandey told Bihar assembly: There is one doctor for 17,685 persons. In other words, there is 5.6 doctors for one lakh population in Bihar.

Shortage of doctors is being cited as one of the reasons for high mortality among the AES patients in Muzaffarpur.

Health in Smart City of Muzaffarpur

According to the Smart City Proposal paper prepared by Bihar government, doctor-patient ratio in Muzaffarpur is 80:1 lakh patients (not population). It has four large hospitals in the city, 46 nursing homes and 175 medicine shops.

Ambulance services are available on Dial 108 helpline but they are only six in number. The paper has set a target of having 200 doctors for one lakh patients.

Why Muzaffarpur qualified for a smart city in Bihar is explained when overall picture is seen. Reports say that 17 of the 38 districts have no more than three government doctors for every one lakh people.

Siwan, which borders Uttar Pradesh and not very far from encephalitis-affected Gorakhpur, has just one doctor for one lakh people. Sheikhpura, for the record, has the highest number of eight doctors per one lakh population.

To get a sense of what these numbers mean, the WHO's prescription could be touchstone. It advises governments to maintain a ratio of one doctor for every thousand persons or 100 for a lakh.
