Amid encephalitis breakout, Nitish Kumar orders to covert SKM hospital into 2500-bed

New Delhi :

Hours after visiting state-run Sri Krishna Medical College and Hospital (SKMCH) in Muzaffarpur to stalk of the situation arising from the outbreak of Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES), Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar on Tuesday issued to convert the hospital into a 2500-bed hospital.

The SKMCH, where the maximum number of causalities because of encephalitis disease took place, currently has 610 beds. Of the 107 victims, 88 died at SKMCH and 19 at the private Kejriwal Hospital.

“Bihar CM gave directions to convert Sri Krishna Medical College & Hospital (SKMCH) into a 2500-bed hospital and 1500 beds should be arranged immediately in the 1st phase. A 'dharmshala' will also be built there for relatives and families,” news agency ANI reported.

The chief minister, who visited the hospital with Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Kumar Modi, also said that environmental study should be conducted of affected areas and analysis should be done.

Meanwhile, several activists from different staged a protest outside the Bihar Bhawan and demanded the resignation of Nitish Kumar. They accused the Centre and the Bihar government of not being serious about containing the outbreak, and said the healthcare system in the state was mismanaged.

Many held placards with the message "Give adequate compensation to affected families". Other banners asked Kumar and Bihar Health Minister Mangal Pandey to resign.

"Ayushman (Bharat) ki jumlebazi band karo," another read.

Several women activists raised slogans against Kumar, who once was called 'sushashan babu' because of his governance, and Prime Minister Narendra Modi outside the Chanakyapuri-based Bihar Bhawan.

A delegation of the activists later submitted a memorandum to the resident commissioner of Bihar in New Delhi. The memorandum was addressed to Kumar.

With PTI Inputs

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
