Student’s death: Police await autopsy report, lab result

The cause of the death of G. Sathyapriya (20), a college student who died after being treated by a Siddha practitioner, as alleged by her parents, can be confirmed only after the receipt of the post-mortem report and laboratory examination results of the drugs she had consumed, the police said on Tuesday.

The Selvapuram Police said that samples of the drugs which Siddha practitioner K. Gurunathan had prescribed to Sathyapriya, a third year student of Government Arts College in Coimbatore, were lifted by the District Siddha Medical Officer C. Dhanam on Monday and sent to a government laboratory in Chennai for examination.

“The District Siddha Medical Officer checked whether the prescribed drugs were prepared by Mr. Gurunathan or procured from a registered manufacturer. The cause of the death of the student can be ascertained only after getting the the post-mortem report and the laboratory examination result of the drugs,” said a police officer.

As of now, the police have registered a case under Section 174 of CrPC (unnatural death).

Meanwhile, the Association of Tamil Nadu Registered Siddha Practitioners submitted a petition to the District Collector, seeking freedom of work and protection at their workplace.

The petition said that the allegations levelled against Mr. Gurunathan, also the president of the association, by the kin of the deceased student were baseless. The petition said that the allegations were aimed at damaging the image of the Siddha system of medicine and its practitioners.

It said that Mr. Gurunathan was a registered practitioner of Siddha and the girl had undergone allopathy treatment before coming to him with complaints of irregular menstruation.

The members of the Students Federation of India and a section of students of Government Arts College on Tuesday staged a protest outside the campus seeking a detailed investigation into the death. They wanted the government to provide compensation to the family of the student.
