Indian Army soldiers thrash traffic cop, school bus driver in full public glare – KashmirWatch

CNS reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

Srinagar, June 18, CNS: People raised pro-freedom and anti-India slogans after Indian Army soldiers allegedly thrashed a traffic cop near Pohru Crossing at Nowgam Bypass here in the outskirts of Srinagar city.

Eyewitnesses told news agency CNS that a young traffic policeman Mudasir Ahmed faced the wrath of army soldiers from 20 Rashtriya Rifles deployed on the Bypass when he allowed a civilian vehicle to cross the road.

“The armed angry soldiers without any provocation pounced upon the traffic cop and hit him with gun buts and lathis. One of the soldiers hit his head. When a couple of locals tried to intervene, they were too beaten up,” said an eyewitness.

Witnesses said that locals came forward to help the victim cop when blood started oozing out from his head. He was later shifted to hospital for treatment. The victim cop has been identified as Mudasir Ahmad, a resident of Balhama Srinagar.

The incident sparked protest from locals who raised anti-India and pro-freedom slogans.

Meanwhile, army soldiers thrashed a school bus driver and a couple of shopkeepers in Zawoora area of Shopian district in south Kashmir. A video showing terrifying school children crying inside the school bus after the soldiers beat up the driver of the school bus.

Local eyewitnesses said that soldiers thrashed shopkeepers without any provocation. They said besides thrashing a number of shopkeepers, a school bus driver identified as Gulzar Ahmed Rather, son of Mohammad Akbar Rather, a resident of Narpora Shopian was beaten up by the army personnel for no reason at all.

Eyewitnesses said that a school bus associated with Rainbow International High School was picking up the students from Zawoora area; a posse of army personnel from Shadaab Karewa Camp Shopian caught hold off the driver and thrashed him badly.

In a video, viral on social media, a student can be seen saying; “our bus was parked at one side of the road, a group of army personnel suddenly appeared on the spot and started thrashing our driver without any reason, he was beaten with an iron chain resulting in grave injuries to his eye and forehand,” he said.

“They even threatened us of thrashing as well, if we create any noise or inform people about the incident.” In the video, terrified kids can be seen weeping.

Following the incident, a protest demonstration was held by the students and locals demanding action against the erring army men.

Despite repeated attempts, Srinagar based Defense Spokesperson didn’t pick up the phone. (CNS)
