Rajkot: Family of nine arrested for seven murders

RAJKOT: In one of the biggest crime detections of Saurashtra, nine of a family were arrested for allegedly executing seven brutal murders , five robberies and four burglaries in the last two years.The crimes were committed in village of Amreli, Bhavnagar, Ahmedabad rural and Surendranagar, and masterminded by husband-wife duo Chandu Jilya and Bavli alias Uji. Their son Vishu alias Nanu was also involved in the crimes, said Ashok Kumar, deputy inspector general of police (DIG), Bhavnagar range. Others arrested were Falji Sadhmia, Haresh Jilia, Kalu Jilya Kishan Vaghela, Mukesh Sadamia and Mukesh Vaghela. All the accused are residents of Botad and Vallabhipur and they were caught from Lathidad village.They were nabbed in a joint operation by the Amreli and Bhavnagar district police.On June 9, the gang had brutally attacked an old-aged couple near Dared village of Amreli district and looted their gold ornaments and mobile phone total worth Rs 1.52 lakh. The couple had suffered severe injuries in the attack.The team of special operation group, and local crime branch was monitoring the gang.Ashok Kumar said, “Chandu and his wife Bavli used to carry out a reccee of vulnerable people and families, mostly living in isolated places on the outskirts of villages. They used to visit the target families on the pretext of asking some address or drinking water. Later, they used to strike.”In many cases, the victims were fast asleep when attacked by the gang. The gang members never used mobile phones while committing the crimes.Amreli deputy superintendent of police, M S Rana, said, “The gang never carried sticks or pipes to attack people, but instead they used ot chop branches of acacia trees on the way to the spot. These branches were used as weapons. “Uji the only woman of the gang used to dress up as a male,” he said.After executing the crime, they used to disperse and meet at the pre decided place. “They generally used bikes to move around and kept the looted booty with the woman. Police on the patrolling duty usually don’t frisk women.”Their prime intention behind the brutal attacks on people was loot. They attacked people badly so that the victims could not counter them and in this process, many died.In this nine crimes, the value of looted booty was around Rs 5.85 lakh out which police recovered valuables worth Rs 4.90 lakh. This included gold and silver ornaments, mobiles and a motorcycle.“We suspect more people are involved the murders and loots. The accused have sold the booty at various places in Botad and Shihor and it is still to be recovered,” DIG Ashok Kumar said.The DIG will request Director General of Police (DGP) Shivanand Jha to reward the police officers who arrested this gang.
