Forget Smart City, MC unable to pay salaries to staff

Ludhiana: What to talk about development works in the city, the civic body is unable to even pay salaries to its staff of the previous month. Civic authorities are blaming the delay in receiving GST instalment from the state government, because of which they are unable to pay salaries to employees. Councillors too did not get their remuneration for the past month. Last year also, MC was in deep financial trouble. But at that time, the system had got streamlined, as the GST instalments were coming in regularly.

MC has more than 7,000 employees working in various posts. The civic body clears the salary of Class IV employees first of all, and then the rest of the employees get their salary. Every month, MC pays around Rs22-23 crore in the form of salaries to staff, and Rs1.5-2 crore goes for pension. One councillor gets Rs17,000 as remuneration, and there are 95 councillors in MC. Besides, the civic body has to also clear more than Rs178 crore to contractors working for them.

The unrest among employees is also increasing, and union members are getting phone calls from employees for taking up the matter with the authorities to stage a protest at MC offices. One of the employees claimed salaries were very important for staff because they had to pay their EMIs to banks, and when they do not get their salaries, the banks declare them as ‘defaulters’. He said apart from this, to buy things of daily requirement too, money is required.

Meanwhile, Congress councillor Gurdeep Neetu said: “We did not get remuneration for May due to some financial issues with MC. The officials do not pay attention to recovery drives properly, due to which MC is in such a poor condition these days. If there is no money even for salaries, then how will the city develop?”

Since MC is again facing a financial crisis, mayor Balkar Sandhu and MC commissioner KP Brar conducted meetings for the recovery of property tax, water supply and sewerage dues, and also fines from building violations on Tuesday evening. The officials dealing with property tax recovery have been told to clearly issue sealing notices to defaulters by July 30.

First, they will serve recovery notices, and then an advertisement will be given in the newspapers for sealing and auction of properties of defaulters. In addition, the officials have been told in no uncertain terms to achieve their set targets at any cost.

On Tuesday, Congress MLA from East constituency, Sanjay Talwar, wrote a letter to the mayor and commissioner for paying attention to development works in the wards in his constituency. The MLA said contractors had left their works half-way through in many areas, and residents were complaining about it to him as well as the councillors. He has asked both the mayor and commissioner to blacklist contractors who were not functioning effectively.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
