Students protest outside Mumbai college, demand removal of principal over sexual harassment claims

Female commuters observing Black Day in protest against the sexual harassment of women in BMTC buses in Bengaluru (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: Protests were held on Tuesday outside a leading college in Mumbai with demonstrators seeking action against the principal who was named in a sexual harassment complaint dating back to February of this year. Scores of members of student organisations gathered outside the college in Andheri (West) area and demanded that the principal be suspended and arrested by police.

According to reports from the time of the incident, the principal was accused of sexually harassing a psychologist who was visiting the college for a conference in February. Sections of the media have also reported that the man in question was accused by a teacher in the college where he was previously employed. However, the principal has denied any such allegations, terming them baseless. He even went further to allege that the accusations against him have been levelled with malicious intent.

Among those seen at the protest on Tuesday were members and volunteers of the Prahar Students Organisation and Nationalist Students Congress. Ajay Tapkir, secretary of the Prahar Students Organisation told Times of India that Mumbai Police have failed to act against the accused despite an official complaint and the college has allowed him to continue with his position. The complainants in both of these cases have also found an advocate in Shiv Sena Member of Legislative Council Neelam Gorhe.

The MLC had demanded the principal's resignation earlier this month, citing the hardships which the woman who accused him in his previous job had to face. She lost her job after raising the issue and has been following up on the investigation since 2007, said Gorhe. Senior inspector Pandrinath Wavhal with the Juhu police said that the case is under investigation but no details can be revealed in this regard.

Meanwhile, the accused principal told the national daily that a complaint against him was dismissed by the university's women's commission after which a teacher from the college where he was previously employed filed a complaint against him at the Tilak Nagar police station in 2018 over an alleged incident which took place in 2007. He also revealed that the second complaint against him was filed in January 2019 for an alleged incident in October of 2016.


