Trishul vs Cross: Hindu outfit stages protest in Kerala's Idukki

The problem started when on June 15, a trident was planted in front of a cross in Panchalimedu -- famous for religious tourism

A Hindu outfit led by Antarrashtriya Hindu Parishad (AHP) outfit on Wednesday took out a protest march in Panchalimedu in Kerala's Idukki district claiming encroachment of government land by St Mary's church. The problem started when on June 15, a trident was planted in front of a cross in Panchalimedu -- famous for religious tourism.

Panchalimedu is one of the most frequented tourist spots in the state. The hilltop is known for a temple and 14 holy crosses situated there. A few days ago, members of a Hindu right wing group placed a trident near one of the crosses alleging that the Christian community has been trying to encroach upon government land.

However, the local administration denied such allegations. President of the local governing body, Binu told India Today TV that external elements are trying to create tension in the area.

"Usually devotees from all communities come and they don't have any problem with each other. During the last Easter, some devotees kept a wooden cross, which they had carried as part of a ritual, on the hill top. This is the usual practice every year. This time some people are trying to create unnecessary issue over this," said Binu.

Sunu, president of the temple trust said that this is part of a larger conspiracy. "Both the temple and cross have been here since time immemorial. Both the cross and the temple are on government land which is now being managed by tourism promotion council."

Jose Mathew, representative of the church body told India Today TV that the allegation has been made to sabotage tourism prospects. "Neither us, nor the people here have any problem. Some people are unnecessarily trying to create tension here," he said.

The trident erected by the Antarrashtriya Hindu Parishad was removed by the district administration. The local police have registered a complaint against the people who erected the trident on charges of attempts to cause communal tensions.

ALSO READ: CPM leader’s son booked for rape, cheating

ALSO WATCH: Kerala didn't vote for us but it is as much mine as is Varanasi: PM Narendra Modi
