Encephalitis deaths: Police detains protestors outside Bihar Bhawan in Delhi

Angry protesters, who demanded immediate action by the government, were seen shouting slogans and holding placards that read, "If lives of our kids don't matter, what will" and "Punish all the culprits". (IANS photo)

Outrage over death of more than 100 children due to acute encephalitis syndrome in Bihar has reached Delhi. On Wednesday, protestors outside Bihar Bhawan in Delhi were detained by police after chaos broke out in the statehouse premises.

Several activists from different organisations have been staging a protest outside the Bihar Bhawan. The protestors have been demanding the resignation of Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar as more than 100 children have died due to Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) in the state.

Speaking to India Today TV, the protestors said, "We want Bihar CM and health minister to step down with immediate effect taking moral responsibility for acting late."

Angry protesters, who demanded immediate action by the government, were seen shouting slogans and holding placards that read, "If lives of our kids don't matter, what will" and "Punish all the culprits".

Fresh deaths due to acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) have been reported in Bihar's Muzaffarpur district, taking the total number of casualties to 114.

Medical professionals rushed to Muzaffarpur

A release by the state health department said 11 medical officers posted in Darbhanga, Supaul and Madhubani had been instructed to leave for Muzaffarpur immediately to help the local health authorities in tackling the outbreak.

Three paediatricians posted in other districts have also been pressed into service, while 12 nurses have been directed to report to the civil surgeon of Muzaffarpur.

SC accepts plea on AES

Meanwhile, the Supreme Court on Wednesday agreed to hear a plea seeking a direction to the Centre to urgently constitute a team of medical experts for the treatment of the children in Bihar's Muzaffarpur, who are suffering from suspected Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES).

"The deaths of children are a direct result of negligence and inaction on the part of the respective state governments of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Union of India in handling the epidemical situation which arises every year due to the outbreak of AES also called Japanese encephalitis," the plea said.

Nitish Kumar met with protest on visit to hospital

Amid growing criticism of the state government, Bihar CM Nitish Kumar had on Tuesday visited the SKMCH hospital in Muzaffarpur, where he faced protests by angry people over the deaths.

Nitish Kumar, Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Modi and local MLA Suresh Sharma went inside the ICU to meet the patients before holding an impromptu review meeting with the hospital authorities and other state Health Department officials.

In the meantime, scores of people gathered outside the hospital and started shouting slogans like "Nitish Kumar go back", as they vented their anger over the chief minister for visiting the area after the number of casualties had crossed the three-digit mark.

Centre's officials visit Muzaffarpur

A team of Union health department officials visited the district over the weekend and clarified that AES was an umbrella of symptoms, unlike Japanese Encephalitis which was a viral infection.

The symptoms include high fever, convulsions and extremely low level of sugar in the blood. Among the factors said to trigger the syndrome are malnutrition.

Moreover, the litchi grown in Muzaffarpur is said to contain a toxin which can cause a drop in blood sugar levels if consumed by a malnourished child.
