Lucknow: Six MBBS students booked for thrashing shopkeeper over deodorant spray, suspended by institute

The brawl started after the medical students entered a shop and one of them opened the seal of a deodorant. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Lucknow: Six MBBS students have been suspended by the Ram Manohar Lohia Institute of Medical Sciences after they allegedly indulged in a brawl with a shopkeeper in Uttar Pradesh capital Lucknow.

The brawl started after the medical students entered a shop and one of them arbitrarily opened the seal of a deodorant container and sprayed a part of its contents on his shirt. When the shopkeeper protested, the students got into a verbal duel with him and allegedly thrashed him.

The six students have been identified as Avinash Tripathi, Shatrughna Kumar, Arush Bharti, Kamta Prasad, Imran Ahmad and Arpit Guglani.

According to a report in Hindustan Times, a preliminary probe conducted by the Institute's inquiry committee has found the students guilty of the misdemeanour. An official of the Institute said the students will remain suspended till further orders.

"An MBBS student went to a store and asked for deodorants. The student opened the seal of a bottle and sprayed over his body in excess quantity. This was objected to by the shopkeeper. The angry medical student then called some of his friends and beat up the shopkeeper and vandalised the shop,” the report quoted a senior police officer as saying.

According to the store owner Ranjit Yadav, about two dozen students forcibly entered the shop and beat him up. He also alleged that the miscreants fled with valuables looted from his store.

Prof SS Rajput, Dean of the Institute said an inquiry committee has been formed to thoroughly probe the matter and submit its report within 15 days.

However, the students have denied the claims of the shopkeeper. One of the accused students approached by the newspaper claimed that the store owner is levelling false allegations against them and that it was he who first abused the students. The student has also termed the FIR by the shopkeeper as bogus.

"The fact is that the shopkeeper pulled down the shutter and locked the students and his staff mercilessly beat up medical students. We will also lodge FIR against the shopkeeper,” the student has reportedly told HT.
