Hindu Munnani cadre held for protests

A group of Hindu Munnani members were arrested here on Wednesday when they attempted to head towards the railway junction to hold a demonstration protesting “hurdles created by a section of people to impede construction” of a temple at Nirmala Nagar in Thanjavur.

The cadre were arrested near the District Collectorate complex on Tiruchi Road where they assembled to receive their State President, Kadeswara C. Subramaniam, around 3.30 p.m.

Enquiries revealed that a group of residents decided to construct a temple for worship on a piece of land measuring about 30,000 sq ft in their residential area in early 1990s. This was objected to by a minority religious society, which claimed ownership of the vacant plot.

The issue was taken to the High Curt court, which ruled in favour of the group that proposed to construct a temple on the vacant land. Subsequently, the Supreme Court, without passing any orders against the lower court orders, directed the appellant, the minority religious society, not to take up any construction activity on the piece of land.

In the meantime, the appellant filed a fresh suit in the Madras High Court, Madurai Bench, in 2016 seeking to clarify who was the title holder of the land based on available revenue records.

Tension gripped Nirmala Nagar area recently after the Hindu residents started to revive the temple construction activity. At the same time, the minority religious society approached the Revenue authorities seeking to stall construction activity by pointing to the pending case at the Madurai Bench and urged the revenue and police authorities to ensure that there was no tresspass on the land.

Accusing the minority religious society of attempting to “subvert” the apex court ruling, the Hindu Munnani decided to hold a demonstration on Wednesday, which was prevented by the police. About 13 members of the outfit, including its State president, were taken into custody.

Later in the evening, a group of around 30 Hindu Munnani members courted arrest in Thanjavur near the Infant Jesus Church on Pudukottai Road, where they staged a road roko demanding that the construction of the temple at Nirmala Nagar be allowed.

On Wednesday, secretary of the Diocese of Thanjavur Society, Jhon Zacharias, convened a press meet at the Thanjavur Bishop’s house and claimed that as per the revenue records the said land, bought by the late Bishop, R.A.Sundaram in 1960, still stands in his name and belonged to the Diocese of Thanjavur Society.

Meanwhile, the Peravurani police arrested a group of six members of Hindu Munnani on Wednesday evening as the latter staged a demonstration near the Periyar statue demanding the release of their State president.
