I’m part of INC, not ‘Siddu’ Congress: Roshan Baig

Suspended Cong. leader says he is being targeted for ‘speaking the truth’

Senior Congress leader and Shivajinagar MLA R. Roshan Baig, who was suspended from the party on June 18 on charges of anti-party activities, has said that he is still a disciplined soldier of the Indian National Congress, but not of “Siddu [Siddaramaiah] Congress.”

Speaking to reporters here on Wednesday, he said: “I have been punished for speaking the truth.”

While over the past few days, Mr. Baig has been accusing the State Congress leaders of being responsible for the party’s drubbing in the Lok Sabha polls, his suspension also comes in the backdrop of his alleged role in the I Monetary Advisory (IMA) scam that has left thousands of investors in dire straits.

Arguing that his comments against the party leaders were also the opinion of thousands of party workers, he said: “What I spoke is the truth and if speaking the truth is anti-party activity, let it be. I have not spoken against AICC president Rahul Gandhi.”

“In a democracy, open and transparent discussions are required to strengthen the party. Closed-door discussions within the four walls of a hall will not help,” he said.

Noting that Mr. Gandhi had offered to resign as AICC president taking responsibility for the poll defeat, Mr Baig said: “...but when we criticise the leaders in the State for the party winning only one seat in the Lok Sabha polls, such action is being taken.”

Mr. Baig alleged that he was being selectively targeted for speaking the truth. Mr. Baig said: “K.H. Muniyappa, who is a senior Dalit leader in the party, was defeated in Kolar by those within the party but no action is being taken against them. At Mandya, our party leaders openly met and campaigned for Independent candidate Sumalatha. Ramesh Jarkiholi has been continuing his tirade against the party. No action has been taken against him.”

He said he will discuss the issue with senior leaders Ramalinga Reddy, Mr. Muniyappa, Mallikarjun Kharge, and H.K. Patil, and supporters. “After that, I will take a call on whether I need to go to New Delhi,” he said.

Mr Baig had recently hit out at Karnataka Congress leaders for the party’s dismal show in the Lok Sabha polls. He had said Mr Siddaramaiah’s “arrogance” and Mr Gundu Rao’s “immaturity” was responsible for the “flop show”. He had also called AICC general secretary in charge of Karnataka K C Venugopal a “buffoon”.

He had even Baig dropped hints of quitting the party and appealed to Muslims to “compromise” with the situation on the BJP-led NDA returned to power at the Centre.

The KPCC had issued a show-cause notice to the MLA for his conduct, to which he had not responded.

On allegations that he had a role in the IMA scam, Mr. Baig refused to comment stating that the matter was before a Special Investigation Team.

On Wednesday, students of the Government V.K. Obaidullah School at Shivajinagar, which had been adopted by IMA Group of Companies, staged a protest outside Mr. Baig’s house demanding posting of teachers appointed by IMA.

Mr. Baig said the protest was instigated by the old IMA teachers and staff, who now want their services to be absorbed by the government.

“The government posted 29 teachers recently and functioning of pre-primary classes is the problem now. I plan to approach NGOs such as Infosys Foundation, Mohandas Pai Foundation, or Rotary Club and request assistance in running pre-primary classes,” he added.
