Conference-cum-International Buyer-Seller Meet underway in Imphal

Our Correspondent

Imphal, June 19 (EMN): In an effort to promote export of agricultural products from the North-eastern region, the second Conference-cum-International Buyer-Seller Meet was inaugurated in Imphal on Wednesday, June 19.

The two-day conference is organised by the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) in association with North Eastern Regional Agriculture Marketing Corporation (NERMAC) after successfully holding the 1st International Buyer-Seller Meet at Guwahati on March 5.

Secretary Dr Anup Wadhawan of Union Ministry of Commerce, Chairman Paban Kumar Borthakur of APEDA, Principal Secretary JC Ramthanga of Horticulture and Soil Conservation of Manipur, Managing Director Pankaj Prasad of NERMAC besides dignitaries, delegates from abroad, and different parts of the country and the state attended the programme.

In his inaugural speech, Commerce Secretary Dr Anup Wadhawan said the NE region has huge potential that can be capitalised considering its agricultural and horticultural produce, strategic location neighbouring the South East Asian countries and can offer big opportunities for trade and economic activity.

The government of India is always ready to support the efforts of the state government and to work together through several windows available to promote exports, he said. The first and foremost entry point is the export strategy through which we need to fill the gaps in infrastructure and logistics and regulatory requirements.

In his welcome address, Chairman APEDA Borthakur stated that India’s total agricultural product exports is valued at 38 billion US dollar for the financial year 2017-18, out of which 50% is contributed through APEDA’s products.

Though the NE is endowed with a conducive environment for production of various fruits and vegetables, he expressed that the export rate is however below its true potential.

On the other hand Principal Secretary Ramthanga stated that agriculture and horticulture are the most significant sources of income for the people of the state.

The meet which is being participated by 20 international buyers from the South East Asia, Gulf Countries and neighbouring countries, is expected to provide platform for meetings with international buyers with the exporters and exporters with the progressive farmers / growers to explore the opportunities and prospects of exports from the Northeast region more particularly from Manipur.

The international buyer seller meet which is a part of the initiative to bring NE India high on the export map of the country, will conclude by organising a field trip to Bunglon pineapple field in Churachandpur district and Loktak Lake, the largest freshwater lake in Northeast and Keibul Lamjao, the only floating national park in the world on Thursday.
