As Tamil Nadu reels under water crisis, political blame game continues | 10-point guide

With borewells and wells going dry in parts of Tamil Nadu, the demand for water has gone up manifold prompting people to depend on private water tanker operators for their needs. (Photo: G Jaison)

As Tamil Nadu's water crisis reached its peak, political blame game continued with the opposition blaming the state goverment for the shortage and Chief Minister K Palaniswami downplaying the acute water scarcity.

The DMK, which is the principal opposition in Tamil Nadu, blamed the AIADMK government for its "negligence," and "administrative failure" that led to the water crisis in the state. The DMK said it would hold protests on June 22 across Tamil Nadu to urge the state government to take steps on a war footing to address the severe water shortage in the state.

Meanwhile, Tamil Nadu CM K Palaniswami downplayed the water crisis in the state and claimed that the "issue was not as big as was being made out, especially in the media". He said drought and deficient monsoon had resulted in depletion of groundwater levels.

Tamil Nadu is reeling under acute water crisis for the past several months after Chennai's Porur Lake, which is considered one of the main sources of water, reached its lowest level. Four major lakes of Chembarambakkam, Poondi, Red Hills and Cholavaram that supply water to the city are almost dry.

Here are the highlights of the Tamil Nadu water crisis:

1. Around 400 DMK workers were arrested on Wednesday for trying to stage a protest demanding Municipal Administration Minister SP Velumani's resignation for his alleged failure to resolve the water crisis in Tamil Nadu. The protest was led by party Singanallur MLA N Karthik, along with former minister Pongalur N Palanisamy. The DMK workers held bright plastic pots over their heads to make a vivid display of the protest against the water crisis. Police said the protesters were arrested since there was no permission to stage the demonstration.

2. CM Palaniswami said all steps are being taken to supply water and urged the media to not to create an "illusion" of water scarcity. "The media should not create an illusion of water scarcity using some stray incidents," Palaniswami said. He said though lakes feeding Chennai have dried up, steps were being taken to ensure supply of drinking water, with efforts to augment it from Veeranam lake in Cuddalore district.

3. Tamil Nadu Fisheries Minister D Jayakumar said politicising water crisis was not acceptable and that the government has been making up for the deficit created by successive failed monsoons. He maintained that the government would be able to manage the crisis until the northeast monsoon, which brings rains to the state between October and December.

4. The Madras High Court came down heavily on the Tamil Nadu government for not taking adequate measures to address the severe water scarcity in the state. The High Court observed that the government did not take adequate measures even though monsoon failure was predicted. The court directed the Public Works Department (PWD) secretary to submit a state-wide comprehensive report on the number of reservoirs in the state, steps taken for desilting, amount sanctioned, and status of those works.

5. The water crisis in Chennai and in several other places in Tamil Nadu has affected the construction sector severely, said realty players. "We are not able to get good water fulfilling quality parameters from the ground hence we are forced to buy tanker water which is very costly and increases the cost of construction," Varun Manian, Managing Director, Radiance Realty Developers India Ltd was quoted as saying by news agency IANS. The shortfall in supply has delayed construction timelines and the handing over of the properties.

6. Officials of some of the big IT companies that have their development centres in Chennai's Old Mahabalipuram Road said that they are minimising the usage of white or fresh water while the grey or treated water is being used for flushing toilets, according to IANS report.

7. The reservoirs -- Cholavaram (full capacity 1,081 mcft) and Redhills (3,300 mcft) -- which cater to Chennai's water needs are dry while the storage at Poondi reservoir is 24 mcft as against the full capacity of 3,231 mcft, according to the Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board (Chennai Metro). The Chembarambakkam lake (full capacity 3,645 mcft) has a water level of a mere 1 mcft.

8. The recent report of NITI Ayog on groundwater level said that 21 Indian cities including Chennai will run out of groundwater by 2020, affecting around 100 million people. It also said that 40 per cent of India's population will have no access to drinking water by 2030. Three rivers, four water bodies, five wetlands and six forests have completely dried in Chennai despite having better water resources and rains than any other metro cities, the report said.

9. Municipal Administration and Rural Development Minister S P Velumani said water supply has been stepped up from the earlier 450 MLD (million litre per day) to current 525 MLD and it will be continued till the onset of monsoon.

10. Deficit rainfall during the 2017 northeast monsoon and failed monsoon in 2018 has resulted in depletion of ground water levels and near drying up of major waterbodies, and has pushed residents at the mercy of water-tanker operators. With borewells and wells going dry in parts of Tamil Nadu, the demand for water has gone up manifold here prompting people to depend on private water tanker operators for their needs.

(With inputs from agencies)
