DMK members detained for staging rally to demand regular drinking water supply

COIMBATORE: Police on Wednesday detained 512 DMK members , including Singanallur legislator N Karthik, for demonstrating in front of the Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation (CCMS) office demanding regular supply of drinking water. Of those detained, 118 were women.Police on Wednesday morning denied permission for the protest though Karthik had announced the plan earlier this week.The demonstrators gathered in front of the CCMC office carrying empty plastic pots. Karthik said they staged the protest seeking water supply for all areas at least once in three to four days. “Also, as minister for municipal administration S P Velumani had not taken proactive measures to handle the water situation in the state, we demand his resignation,” he said.They protested against the municipal body for giving the 24X7 drinking water supply project to the France-based firm Suez India Private Limited.Later the protesters were detained and lodged in the Nal Aayan Marriage Hall in Town Hall. The MLA and other detained members were let off at around 10.35pm. Karthik said, “Several areas in the city have been hit by water shortage. Residents in areas such as SIHS Colony, Singanallur, Ondipudur, Kurichi, Sundarapuram, Vadavalli, Peelamaedu, Neelikonampalayam, Varadharajapuram, Kavundampalayam and Saravanmpatti have not been getting proper supply.”However, later in the day, Coimbatore corporation commissioner Sravan Kumar Jatavath said in a release that drinking water was being supplied to all wards in the city. “The city needs 265.70MLD drinking water per day. But as the storage in the Siruvani Dam has reduced, we are supplying 181MLD per day from Pillur and Bhavani,” he said in the release.The release added that for 17 out of 24 wards which were being supplied Siruvani water, Pillur water is now being supplied. “For 20 wards, drinking water is being supplied for four hours once in four to six days. For 37 wards, drinking water is being supplied once in six days and 43 wards were being supplied drinking water for six to eight days for six to eight hours,” the release added. It said water for non-drinking purposes was being supplied from 2,042 bore wells.
