Encephalitis outbreak grips Muzaffarpur as Bihar fails to save over 145 innocent lives: 10 points

ii. Experts believe that consumption of unripe litchi containing a high concentration of toxin could be behind the AES outbreak in Muzaffarpur. AES is an umbrella term of infections that cause swellings in the brain. The symptom of the disease typically include headache, vomiting and complications include memory loss, coma and even death. iii. The Congress on Wednesday described the deaths of children in Bihar due to AES as a "national horror story" and even demanded accountability from the Centre and the state government. Party spokesperson Gaurav Gogo said that while Prime Minister Narendra Modi talks of India being the fastest growing economy in the world, the reality is that these children have died in Muzaffarpur due to deficient health infrastructure. iv. Public grief gave way to outrage as angry people raised slogans against Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar on June 19 when he visited a hospital in Muzaffarpur district, where over 117 children had died so far due to AES. v. Union Health minister Harsh Vardhan said the Centre is constantly monitoring the situation and supporting the state health authorities in managing the crisis. "While the Centre is extending all support to the state for the containment and management of the recent surge of Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) and Japanese Encephalitis (JE) cases, I shall be going to Muzaffarpur tomorrow to take stock and review the situation at the site with the state government," he said. vi. Bihar Health department has ordered for distribution of ORS packets among the children so that they can take it before going to bed which would help in maintaining blood sugar level in the children. The deaths have taken place especially in malnourished children and also in poor and impoverished families. vii. Arvind Kejriwal-led Delhi government on Wednesday offered all possible assistance to Bihar to deal with the increasing cases of children dying due to AES. AAP government was ready to send a team of doctors, paramedics, medicines and ambulances to Bihar. Hitting out at the central government, AAP leader Satyendar Jain sought to know as to why no child was getting medical treatment under its Ayushman Bharat programme. viii. A group of protesters gathered outside the Bihar Bhawan in New Delhi demanded the resignation of Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and the state's health minister Mangal Pandey over the issue. Torab Niazi, National Youth General Secretary of Jan Adhikar Party that organised the protest demanded that Rs 25 lakh pe given to the families of the deceased children. ix. Nitish Kumar expressed condolences over the children's deaths in Muzaffarpur. "I am very pained with the children's deaths in Muzaffarpur. We are very hurt and pained. The Health Department has sent its team to Muzaffarpur which would take stock of the measures being taken to tackle the disease," he said x. AES also known as Chamki fever, a viral infection, is a bunch of diseases that include hypoglycemia, dyselectrolytemia, chicken pox, Japanese Encephalitis positive and AES unknown. AES outbreaks are routine in areas in and around Muzaffarpur during summer, and mostly affects children below 15 years of age.

The Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) in Bihar has so far claimed lives of more than 145 innocent children and the state and union government are scrambling to deal with the outbreak of the disease. At present, more than 400 children detected with AES have been admitted to various hospitals and most of the deaths have been attributed to low blood sugar level (hypoglycemia). Muzaffarpur district has been in the news lately as maximum of deaths have taken place in the eastern state of Bihar for more than two decades. Health experts have long been dumbfounded by the root of the encephalitis outbreak, commonly known as brain fever, which largely attacks undernourished children by blocking their ability to produce enough blood sugar, which can lead to death. According to recent update, death toll due to AES have rose to 117 in Muzaffarpur alone - 98 deaths at Sri Krishna Medical College and Hospital (SKMCH) and 19 deaths at Kejriwal Hospital. With so much happening in the National Democratic Alliance (NDA)-ruled state, we bring to you 10 major highlights in the big story:Supreme Court on June 19 agreed to hear a plea seeking a direction to the Central government to urgently constitute a team of medical experts for the treatment of the children. A vacation bench of justices Deepak Gupta and Surya Kant will hear the the plea next Monday after the petitioner's counsel sought an urgent listing of the matter.
