Whizdom Club by MQDC India gives budding Indian entrepreneurs a global platform at Techsauce Summit in Thailand

Whizdom Club by MQDC India gives budding Indian entrepreneurs a global platform at Techsauce Summit in Thailand

• Whizdom Club by MQDC India has given new opportunities to Indian entrepreneurs by engaging them in a global event, opening international connections • 5 winners of Whizdom Club by MQDC India’s Innovation Challenge shared their unique business ideas

Bangkok, 20 June 2019 – Whizdom Club by MQDC India, under Magnolia Quality Development Corporation Limited (MQDC), today announced the participation of budding entrepreneurs from India at Techsauce Global Summit 2019 in Thailand.

MQDC India, which focuses on students, young professionals, and startupreneurs, has brought 5 winning teams from its ‘Whizdom Innovation Challenge’ to present their new business ideas to tackle global issues.

Techsauce Global Summit is a leading tech and startup conference set to attract about 20,000 investors, startups, and participants on 19-20 June 2019 at Centara Grand at CentralWorld.

‘Whizdom Innovation Challenge’ was held in New Delhi from 13 March, attracting over 100 online entries from business schools, colleges, businesspeople, and independent individuals with innovative business plans for health, lifestyle & wellness, education, real estate & construction, and agritech.

Mrs. Suchitra Durai, Ambassador of India to Thailand, said: “I would like to congratulate the winning teams of ‘Whizdom Innovation Challenge’ and the ‘Brand Ambassadors’ for being a part of this global event today. It’s an excellent initiative by MQDC to provide a global platform to these budding entrepreneurs from India. The idea of having an India Pavilion at Techsauce Summit is a good step towards further strengthening India-Thailand partnership. I would like to wish success to the winners for their future endeavours.”

Mr. Keerin Chutumstid, President of the Property & Service business group at MQDC, said: “MQDC has always been at the forefront of creating global property. It has always been a leading and innovative global property developer, fostering sustainability and well-being for all. With this initiative, we also aim to promote ongoing engagement with the Indian startup community and so nurture them. With the mission of fuelling the entrepreneurial lifestyle, MQDC will soon be entering India, to offer inspiring spaces for those who aspire to focus on connected learning.”

Ms. Chulamas Jitpatima, Vice President of MQDC India, said: “The idea behind ‘Whizdom Innovation Challenge’ was to give these budding startupreneurs a global platform. We were encouraged by the overwhelming response to ‘Whizdom Innovation Challenge’, as all the teams came up with innovative ideas and business models. Considering the opportunities in India, we also plan to invest and launch ‘Whizdom Club’, an inspiration hub to nurture entrepreneurship and innovation for a bright future for young professionals.”

Innovation Challenge winners:

Mrs. Tulika Gupta, Fresco Eggs, said: “We are excited to be a part of the Whizdom Innovation Challenge. Being a part of this journey has been a new learning experience. Whizdom Innovation Challenge has given me an opportunity to introduce ‘Fresco Eggs’ at an international platform. I would like to thank the panel members for believing in our long-term business plan. We are really looking forward to the mentorship and workshops that Whizdom Innovation Challenge is offering to help develop entrepreneurs like us.”

Mr. Anil Bhatnagar, Synapptra Technologies, said: “Whizdom Innovation Challenge has given us an opportunity to showcase our business idea at a global platform. We are really overwhelmed by this opportunity and are all set to make the world a better place with our innovation: ‘Synapptra Technologies’. Under this initiative, we aim to create future-ready infrastructure by offering smart and energy-efficient buildings, with the use of AI, data computing, and sensors.”

Mr. Sanyam Gupta, co-founder of RealTell, said: “For an early-stage startup like us, winning the innovation challenge has been a great learning experience. Our mission is to help offline retailers globally grow their business through dynamic pricing, and the platform provided by Whizdom India takes us one step closer to achieving it. We are excited about the upcoming opportunity and would love to explore the potential of our product in Thailand.”

Mr. R. Biswas, GuideRatna Travel Tourism, said: “We are extremely excited about the new phase of our journey with the Whizdom Innovation Challenge in Bangkok. Whizdom Club has given us a global platform to present our business innovation idea, which will help us take our business to a new level.” Mr. Sanjay Maurya, Urban Air labs – Ubreathe, said: “Addressing the issue of indoor air pollution, Urban Air lab’s ‘Ubreathe’ aims to redefine the way we breathe. We would like to express our gratitude to Whizdom India and the panel members for understanding the importance and potential of our innovation ‘Ubreathe’. We are extremely excited about the opportunity to present our innovation idea at a global platform amid a global audience”.

Ms. Oranuch Lerdsuwankij, CEO & Co-Founder, Techsauce, said: “We are extremely delighted to have MQDC India on-board for this year’s Summit. As startups are one of the themes of the Summit, the 5 winners of the Whizdom Innovation Challenge are just the right fit! Also, we strongly believe that Techsauce will be a great





platform for these budding entrepreneurs to get first-hand experience of a global event. We are looking forward to having MQDC as a part of our forthcoming initiatives and engagements.”

The top 10 teams were picked from applications from across India for the contest’s ‘Pitch Day’ in New Delhi on 13 May. During this grand finale, teams presented innovative ideas and business models for global or local challenges. The presentations examined how to achieve a large-scale socioeconomic impact. The winners were announced in association with The IndUS Entrepreneurs (TiE), TurningIdeas Ventures, and Venture Catalysts. MQDC India has also picked 5 young, dynamic, and committed ‘Brand Ambassadors’ from India’s best colleges and universities to represent Whizdom Club India at their campuses for a year. The students will get a chance to intern at MQDC’s offices in Delhi and Bangkok, among other benefits.





Techsauce Global Summit is an initiative by Techsauce, the leading technology business media and publication in Thailand. The summit is a diverse cultural festival that goes beyond technology into music and fashion, engaging communities such as social entrepreneurs, musicians, artists, filmmakers, athletes, LGBTQ, and more! This year’s summit will cover engaging topics such as deep technology, AI & data, blockchain, startups, Google for startups.
