All four reservoirs providing water to Chennai completely dry, doing everything to solve water crisis: TN CM

Edappadi Palaniswami | Photo Credit: ANI

Chennai: Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami chaired a high-level meeting to address the water woes faced by the resident in the state. Later, while addressing a press conference he said that all the four reservoirs that provide water to Chennai are completely dry which is why the state is facing such a severe water crisis. He also claimed that the government will be bringing water via rail from Jolarpettai for which Rs 65 lakh has been allocated.

The state government is operating additional tankers to deliver water to most affected areas, said the CM.

On the allegation of VIPs including him getting water tankers the CM said: "It is wrong to say that I get two lorries of water daily. I have a huge house where many people visit and there is a huge staff. I have to provide water for them."

He further said that the state did not receive enough water from Krishna river from Andhra Pradesh as share.

Tamil Nadu's opposition Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) is also going to launch a massive protest at district headquarters tomorrow against the AIADMK government for its failure to address the water shortage crisis in the state.

Issuing a statement the DMK urged the state government to take all necessary steps to ease the people's suffering and added that they will hold protest in all the district headquarters on June 22.

Several places in Chennai and Tamil Nadu are suffering from water shortage and due to lack of rains, the groundwater levels have also gone down.

In April, Stockholm Water Prize and Magsaysay awardee and water activist Rajendra Singh slammed the previous Modi regime and added he was disappointed with all the political parties as none of the parties gave importance to water shortage issue.

Vijila Sathyananth, AIADMK MP, in Rajya Sabha: #TamilNadu is a water deficit state.The only major river system in the state is Cauvery river system. Only solution is that Centre should take complete authority of mngmt of water of Cauvery. The release of water should be immediate. pic.twitter.com/qE5Ptzox7T — ANI (@ANI) June 21, 2019

"In the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, the now-ruling BJP had made many promises, but nothing happened. Now, when it's election time again, parties are promising water conservation. But none of them has spoken on how they are going to curb the rising droughts and floods in the country and its aftermath,” IANS quoted Singh as saying.

Also known as “waterman of India”, Singh said that a ministry won't help solve water problems in the country and added that water literacy needs to be increased to make people aware of the water crisis.

Recently, the United Nations in its report said that developing countries need to invest heavily in post-secondary education and research to tackle the global water crisis which usually is concentrated in wealthy countries.

The Prime Minister had recently written a letter to all the Gram Pradhans urging them to hold a meeting with other villagers with focus on water conversation. Making a strong pitch for rainwater harvesting during the forthcoming monsoon the PM added that water shortage in rural areas was a major cause of concern for him.

Meanwhile, Punjab is planning to prepare a comprehensive master plan for the conservation and management of water resources and has partnered with Israel which is a global leader in water solutions and management.

The agreement between Israel’s national water company Mekorot and the government of Punjab government was signed this April after Chief Minister Amarinder Singh’s visit to the country in October 2018.

Mekorot will submit the final report of the master plan in 18 months which is October 2020.
