Triple talaq: As Opposition protests bill in Lok Sabha, Azam Khan says SP supports what's written in Quran

File picture: Samajwadi Party MP Azam Khan | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: As the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government on Friday introduced the fresh triple talaq bill in Lok Sabha, Samajwadi Party leader Azam Khan on Friday said that his party supports what is written in the Quran.

The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Bill 2019 is the first legislation to be introduced in the 17th Lok Sabha by the Narendra Modi government in its second term.

Last year, the bill was passed in the Lower House. However, it got lapsed after the dissolution of previous Lok Sabha with the bill pending in Rajya Sabha.

The opposition members registered their protest against the Bill, saying it was violative of the Constitution.

"No religion has given more rights to women than Islam. 1,500 years ago, Islam was the first religion to have given the right of equality to women. Today, we witness the lowest divorce rate and the lowest cases of violence on women in Islam. Women are not burnt or killed", said Rampur MP Azam Khan.

Calling triple talaq a religious issue, not a political one, Khan said that “nothing is more supreme for a Muslim than Quran. On marriage, on divorce, for everything, the Quran has clear instructions and we follow it.”

While introducing the bill today, Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said that the legislation was imperative for gender equality and justice.

"This is not a question of religion but about justice to women," Prasad said, adding that 543 cases of triple talaq were reported in the country.

"This is a question of dignity of women and we are committed to (safeguard) it," he said.

Also Read: Man issues triple talaq to wife on WhatsApp after she refuses to give their son to his sister

Meanwhile, Congress leader Shashi Tharoor opposed the triple talaq (instant divorce) bill, saying it does nothing to benefit Muslim women. "Instead of protecting Muslim women, the Bill criminalizes Muslim men."

All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) president Asaduddin Owaisi and Revolutionary Socialist Party's NK Premachandran also opposed it.
