N. Chandrababu Naidu: 35 years on, 'foreign trouble' is back again to wreck TDP

Major jolt for Chandrababu Naidu, four TDP Rajya Sabha MPs join BJP

HYDERABAD: 'Foreign trouble' is back to haunt the Telugu Desam Party (TDP). This is the third time that the TDP is in a deep political crisis since its formation in 1982, and on two occasions the party president was on foreign tour at the time of the crisis. On one occasion, the TDP supremo was away from the state capital.In a surprise move, four of the six Telugu Desam Party (TDP) MPs in Rajya Sabha joined the BJP on Thursday in the presence of its newly-appointed working president, J P Nadda. The MPs, including Y S Chowdary, C M Ramesh, Garikapati Mohan Rao and T G Venkatesh, also gave a letter to Vice-President and Rajya Sabha chairman, M Venkaiah Naidu, requesting him to allow the TDP parliamentary party to merge into the BJP.August is generally regarded as a 'month of bad omen' in TDP circles, as party founder NT Rama Rao had lost chief ministership twice in August. This time, the crisis has knocked at TDP's doors two months earlier. The party had, however, survived the earlier two crisis though Rama Rao could not retain power on one occasion. The TDP was in power on two occasions.The TDP plunged into a political crisis for the first time in August 1984. Rama Rao, who was the chief minister then, went to the USA for heart surgery. In his absence, a political coup was meticulously planned and executed by his cabinet colleague Nadendla Bhaskar Rao. Rama Rao had the strength in the state assembly but he had to take to the streets to force the governor to conduct a floor test. Bhaskar Rao resigned a month later and Rama Rao was reinstated as CM.In the second political crisis in August 1995, Rama Rao was away in Srikakulam district launching 'government-at-people's-doorsteps' programme, when his son-in-law and then revenue minister N Chandrababu Naidu executed a political coup, dethroning him from chief ministership. Naidu then took over the reins of undivided AP. Rama Rao, who was forced to form NTR-TDP, died in January 1996 before the general elections held in May.The latest crisis has come at a time when incidentally TDP supremo and former Andhra Pradesh chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu is holidaying in Europe. Chowdary, Ramesh and Rao were among Naidu's closest aides.The TDP was virtually decimated in the recent general elections as it won only 23 assembly seats in a House of 175. Also, the party got just three Lok Sabha seats out of 25. Sources close to Chowdary told TOI that at least 12 of the newly elected TDP MLAs and one Lok Sabha MP were in touch with BJP leaders and could switch sides any time.
