'Cut money' whip will create chaos: TMC MP

NEW DELHI/KOLKATA: Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee 's instruction to her party functionaries to return the "cut money" they had taken from beneficiaries against delivery of state government schemes may "create confusion and trouble" within the ranks, according to Trinamool's Birbhum MP Satabdi Roy."Didi (Mamata Banerjee) has taken steps and that's fine. But there will be more chaos on returning 'cut money' because a person who has taken it directly is only the front man. There are others who are behind the wings. They have also taken their share. So the money has to be returned according to this chain," Roy said on Thursday, sparking a controversy in Trinamool circles.The MP's fears came true within hours when a Trinamool leader and a party councillor in Sainthia, Birbhum were mobbed by residents demanding return of "cut money" allegedly paid to the duo for houses under the Pradhan Mantri Aawas Yojana.The demand for return of "cut money" had even led to a clash in Birbhum's Dubrajpur on Wednesday. Wage labourers here alleged that a group of Trinamool leaders took "cut money" from them for enlisting them in the 100-day job schedule. As many as 50 people in Sainthia demonstrated outside the house of Krishna Das claiming that they gave the money two years ago and she had taken it on behalf of councillor Manas Singha.The villagers complained that Rs 30,000 - 40,000 had been taken from each PMAY beneficiary."We came to claim the cut money from the Trinamool leaders after Mamata Banerjee directed the return of such sums. However, Krishna Das left his home promising us that he would return our money within a week," said protestor Jyotirmoy Das.The incidents, apparently, unfolded as Satabdi Roy had feared. "Those who could not get the 'cut money' earlier, will nag those who took it to return the money. There is chance of trouble. Didi should look into this," Roy had said."It should not be the case that those who were taking 1% or 2% of the total amount of schemes are reined in, but simultaneously shares of those who now take bigger amounts go up. This will only sow confusion in the party," the Birbhum MP had said.
