Students avoid protest over pagdi on day of convocation

After Savitribai Phule Pune University’s (SPPU’s) 114th convocation ceremony held in January this year took an ugly turn over students refusing to don the Puneri pagdi (turban), with pupils holding protests and disregarding the change in the dress code for the annual event, a day before the 115th convocation ceremony was scheduled, students’ unions and general public shared messages urging students not to interrupt and disturb the ceremony by any means.



One of the students, who had protested against the introduction of the Puneri pagdi the last time a round had demanded students wear the Phule Pagdi instead and officially sent out a letter to the varsity, stating, “I will not interfere during the convocation ceremony happening on June 21 and make sure that the decorum of the education programme is maintained.”



Kuldip Ambekar, a student activist who had sloganeered during the convocation held on January 11, said, “While we still have intellectual differences wherein we believe that the Phule pagdi is much more befitting the occasion over the Puneri pagdi since it reflects and symbolises the thoughts of Mahatma Phule, who played a pivotal role in bettering our education system. We do not want to disrupt an academic programme of this stature.”



The 115th convocation ceremony was held on June 21saw Bertrand De Hartingh, counsellor for education, science, culture, Embassy of France in India, country director, French Institute in India, preside over the convocation ceremony as chief guest. SPPU did change the dress code for the 115th convocation ceremony, where Puneri pagdi was offered only to the chief guest and chairperson Nitin Karmalkar, vice chancellor SPPU.



Santosh Shinde from Sambhaji Brigade, who had earlier objected to the Puneri pagdi, insisted that there should be no interruptions to the programme and also made sure to spread the messaged to others a day before the event took place. Shinde said, “The university being an educational institute, there should be no commotion while the ceremony is in progress. Although ideologically, we are quite sure of our stand. We believe that academics in the varsity should be respected.”



Another student from SPPU who had also opposed to the imposition of the Puneri pagdi the last time around, said on the basis of anonymity, “We received messages on WhatsApp groups, urging that convocation programme not be interrupted. While we still believe that the Phule Pagdi is a more apt choice for the event, I think the messages asking us to restrain from agitating at the do are also justified.”



While the changed dress code of wearing Indian attire like kurta, pajama and uparna (traditional sash) remained the same as last time, the only difference was the pagdis for the people on the stage. Talking about the change, Prafulla Pawar, registrar, SPPU said, “The university made a slight change to the dress code, keeping the Puneri pagdi only for the chairperson and the chief guest. We appreciate the support extended by the students’ organisations and maintaining the dignity and decorum of the academic institute.”
