Fishermen protest, pray, search for missing boat

fishing boat

rescue operation

fishing community

Bangalore

Hijacked say locals; officials say boat with seven on board developed snag and sankWhile fishermen suspect that theSuvarna Thribhuja has been hijacked, officials part of thesay the boat may have developed a technical snag or may be have hit an object and sank. Families of the seven fishermen on-board the boat that left Malpe harbour on December 13, however, have not lost hope.On Sunday, fishing activity was brought to a standstill and markets wore a deserted look in the coastal districts as theheld a protest, demanding an intensive search for the boat and its crew.A senior officer toldMirror plastic containers have been found and are suspected to belong to the fishing boat. It is suspected that an incident occurred on December 15 between 2 am - 6 am, but what actually happened is not clear. Sources said that on the same day, the Navy had arrived and checked with fishermen if there was any boat accident. The incident is suspected to have taken place near Malvan.The vessel may have probably sunk, but the fishermen suspect that some miscreants from the Malwan region may have kidnapped the crew. In case of kidnap, the challenge would be to hide a huge boat for so long when the state government, central government, Goa and Maharashtra governments are working on this case along with local fishermen.There are no leads indicating a kidnap, an officer investigating the case said.Nithyanand Kotian, brother of Chandrashekar, the owner said, "We have received information that the home department has some leads, but we have not received any confirmation yet.We are also searching the area. Two weeks ago we searched the Maharashtra side now we are searching areas. We feel that the support that we are receiving from the government is not sufficient. Since search operations have been conducted, several fishing boats too have been looking for leads. We suspect that the boat could be hijacked. The chances of it crossing the Indian borders are less, but cannot be ruled out. The last I spoke my brother was on December 14 at 12.45 pm.”Meanwhile, prayers are being offered for the safe return of the fishermen. The community also prayed before demi-god Babbarya Daiva recently.The boat was supposed to return on December 22. The last known communication with boat was on December 16, the boat was located off Goa Coast. In this case, the missing fishermen have been identified as Chandrashekhar Kotian (40), owner and captain of the boat, and Damodar Salian (40) both from Udupi; Laxman (45), Sathisha (35), Harish(28), Ramesh, (30), from Kumta, and Ravi (27) from Manki.
