Tamil Nadu ministers perform yagna to please rain gods, DMK protests against water scarcity

As Tamil Nadu is reeling under the worst water crisis, the ruling AIADMK decided to appease the rain god by performing special yagnas in temples across the state. Senior AIADMK leader and Fisheries Minister D Jayakumar took part in a 'yagna' at a Shiva temple here and planted saplings in the premises of the shrine.

He told reporters that performing yagnas was "an expression of faith", hoping that the Almighty will answer their prayers for rain.

The AIADMK members including senior Tamil Nadu ministers - Sengottaiyan, Sellur K Raju and Madurai North MLA V V Rajan Chellappa - performed pujas at several temples in the state.

Municipal Administration Minister S P Velumani took part in a 'yagna' at Patteeswaram temple in Coimbatore district.

Tamil Nadu: AIADMK organised a 'yagna' at Arulmigu Gangadeeswarar temple in Purasawalkam, Chennai praying for rain. State Minister D. Jayakumar, says, "A drought like situation is prevailing, in this context, we went to the almighty & performed special prayers for rain." pic.twitter.com/F4me7m3Pwb — ANI (@ANI) June 22, 2019

While the AIADMK leaders performed yagnas in the state, the Opposition DMK staged "empty pot" demonstrations, urging the government to take steps to address the issue.

DMK leader and former city mayor Ma Subramanian, who led an agitation here, hit out at the AIADMK, saying executing plans with rationale alone could help address the situation. "Conducting such rituals have no utility," he told PTI.

Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami had recently said that the state government was finding alternative solutions to solve the water crisis. Some of the suggestions he said were bringing water through rail from Jolarpet to Chennai, increase the frequency of water tankers to the highly distressed areas, and accepting the 2MLD water from Kerala which was offered.

While accepting water from Kerala, Palaniswami said that the 2 MLD would not be sufficient and requested for 2MLD water per day.

The state government is currently providing 525MLD of water per day and will be bringing 10MLD of water per day through train from Jolarpet at a cost of Rs 65 crore. At present, the water that is being provided by the state is only half the city's requirement which is 1200MLD.
