TN water woes: ADMK performs ‘havan’ for rain, DMK protests

editorial@tribune.com

Chennai, June 22

As Tamil Nadu reels under the worst water crisis, the ruling ADMK today performed ‘yagna’ in temples across the state, while the Opposition DMK staged “empty pot” demonstrations, urging the government to take steps to address the issue.

Senior ADMK leader and Fisheries Minister D Jayakumar took part in a ‘yagna’ at a Shiva temple here and planted saplings on the premises of the shrine.

He said performing yagnas was “an expression of faith”, hoping that the Almighty would answer their prayers for rain. DMK leader and former city mayor Ma Subramanian, who led an agitation here, hit out at the ADMK, saying executing plans with rationale alone could help address the situation. “Conducting such rituals have no utility,” he said. Municipal Administration Minister SP Velumani took part in a ‘yagna’ at Patteeswaram temple in Coimbatore district.

As Velumani took part in prayers, hundreds of DMK cadres staged a protest, seeking the minister’s resignation for his “failure” to create necessary infrastructure for water supply.

Talking to reporters later, he said the move to bring water from Jolarpet in Vellore district to Chennai would not affect the water availability there. Former Lok Sabha deputy speaker M Thambidurai took part in a prayer in another city temple. Education Minister KA Sengottaiyan participated in a puja at Pachamalai Murugan temple in Erode district.

Cooperation Minister Sellur K Raju took part in special prayers in Meenakshi and Subramania Swamy temples at Madurai. He said Chief Minister K Palaniswami and Deputy Chief Minister O Panneerselvam have asked the 50 district party units to hold prayers in temples for rains.

“Even as they tasked us to hold pujas, rains have started in Chennai. Madurai too will get showers,” Raju said, adding divine power has helped. Transport Minsiter MR Vijayabaskar and Agriculture Minister R Doraikkannu took part in prayers in Aadikumbeshwara and Pasupatheeshwara temples at Kumbakonam and Karur, respectively.

Meanwhile, former Union minister Dayanidhi Maran and DMK senior functionary PK Sekar Babu staged a demonstration with empty pots, demanding that the government ensure drinking water supply to the people.

Former minister and DMK leader KN Nehru led a protest in Tiruchirappallai. Similar protests were held across Tamil Nadu.

The DMK slammed the state government on the water issue for what it called “negligence” and “administrative failure.” It announced that its chief MK Stalin would lead a protest demonstration here on June 24. — PTI
