Chennai water crisis: If they start taking water from Vellore, we will protest, DMK treasurer warns

Duraimurugan also said that if the government cannot solve the problem, then it must step down. (Photo: PTI)

DMK treasurer Duraimurugan has warned that if the Tamil Nadu government takes water from Jolarpettai in Vellore to Chennai, then massive protests will break out in the district.

Duraimurugan said that there will be protests in Vellore if the plan to give water to Chennai was carried out.

Duraimurugan, who is the Katpadi MLA said, "If they start taking water from here (Vellore), then we will stage massive protest here."

It comes after Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi Palanisami stated that the government plans to bring 10 MLD of water to Chennai by railway wagons for the next six months.

Duraimurugan also mocked the state government for performing yagya instead of finding ways to solve the water crisis.

"When people are suffering because of water crisis, the AIADMK government is going to God for help. They have accepted that they can’t solve this issue," Duraimurugan said.

While the AIADMK leaders performed yagnas in the state, the Opposition DMK staged "empty pot" demonstrations, urging the government to take steps to address the issue.

DMK leader and former city mayor Ma Subramanian, who led an agitation here, hit out at the AIADMK, saying executing plans with rationale alone could help address the situation. "Conducting such rituals have no utility," he told PTI.

Duraimurugan also said that if the government cannot solve the problem, then it must step down.

"If they can’t solve a problem, they have to resign. If they don’t, the people will bring them down in a massive manner," Duraimurugan said.

Taking on the DMK, Minister for Municipal Administration SP Velumani said transport of water from Jolarpettai would not reduce supply in the Vellore district.

On Friday, Chief Minister Edappadi Palaniswami had announced that 10 million litre a day (MLD) water would be transported from Jolarpettai in the Vellore district to Chennai by train at a cost of Rs 65 crore.

While the Cholavaram (full capacity 1,081 mcft), Redhills (full capacity 3,300 mcft) and Chembarambakkam (3,645 mcft) lakes that supplied water to Chennai had gone dry, only 20 mcft water was left in the Poondi reservoir (full capacity of 3,231 mcft), according to the Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board.

The Chief Minister also refuted media reports about hotels and schools being shut down due to the water crisis, saying that he has personally spoken to schools and these reports are incorrect.

The state government is currently providing 525MLD of water per day and will be bringing 10MLD of water per day through train from Jolarpet at a cost of Rs 65 crore. At present, the water that is being provided by the state is only half the city's requirement which is 1200MLD.
