Rajinikanth not to vote in Nadigar Sangam polls as postal ballot reaches late

Rajinikanth not to vote in Nadigar Sangam polls as postal ballot reaches late

Actor S Ve Shekher alleged that many outstation artistes will not be able to cast their votes due to a disorganised election process.

Flix Kollywood

As drama surrounding the Nadigar Sangam elections came to an end after the Madras High Court gave its go-ahead for conducting the polls on Sunday, actor Rajinikanth has said that he will not be able to cast his vote.

In a tweet on Saturday evening, Rajinikanth said that he was in Mumbai for a shoot and despite his efforts to receive the postal vote earlier, he received it only at 6.45 pm on Saturday. “I regret that I was unable to cast my vote because of this delay. It is strange and unfortunate. This should not have happened…,” he tweeted.

Following this, actor S VE Shekher took to Twitter to announce his decision to boycott the elections. Accusing the Nadigar Sangam of having a disorganised election process and arrangements, the veteran actor alleged that the condition of hundreds of outstation drama artistes is similar to Rajinikanth’s, as they will be unable to cast their votes. “As a protest for this kind of disorganized election process and arrangements, I am boycotting this nadigar sangam election,” he said.

Dear RAJINI You are not the only person was unable to cast your VOTE , there are 100s of out station Drama artists are in the same condition. As a protest for this kind of disorganised Election Process & arrangements, I AM BOYCOTTING THIS NADIGAR SANGAM ELECTION. https://t.co/0STccWCCUQ — S.VE.SHEKHER (@SVESHEKHER) June 22, 2019

However, actor and candidate Kovai Sarala responded to the allegations of delay in sending postal votes and said that they were dispatched as per law immediately after the elections were announced. However, the delay in postal votes reaching the recipient is due to transit delay, she told reporters.

The elections were initially cancelled after the District Registrar of Societies cast doubts over the electoral rolls prepared for the elections. However, the Madras High Court ordered a stay on the Registrar’s order and gave its green signal for the elections to be held at St. Ebas girls school in Mylapore. The court also ordered the Chennai police to provide security for the elections to be conducted smoothly. This time, Vishal’s Pandavar Ani will clash with the Swami Sankardas Ani led by veteran actor-director K Bhagyaraj.
