Notorious Irani Group Still Active In Assam; Two From Bihar Arrested In Lakhimpur

A CORRESPONDENT

LAKHIMPUR: Lakhimpur Police arrested two notorious members of the Irani group in connection with the snatching of cash Rs 2,20,000 in North Lakhimpur town on May 21. These culprits have been identified as Akash Yadav and Deepesh Das of Bihar.

These Irani group members, as per Lakhimpur Police, looted cash from Malini Kakati, wife of Someswar Dutta, residents of Collegeguri of Gahpur under Biswanath district, on the DK Road of North Lakhimpur town around 11am on May 21. She had kept the cash in her bag after withdrawing it from the North Lakhimpur branch of State Bank of India. These two miscreants came on a bike and snatched the bag from Malini Kakati who was walking along the road with her husband. They dragged the woman around 50 metres along the road as she clutched the bag firmly by the lace. At last, the lace detached from the bag and the miscreants managed to flee away with the money.

Police presented the culprits in the judicial court on Friday and took them to their remand for two days. Regarding their arrest, North Lakhimpur Police Station OC Aditya Kumar Deory stated in front of media persons that the arrested miscreants arrived at Jakhalabondha after fleeing from Lakhimpur via Boibeel Bridge with the money looted from Malini Kakati. They were caught at Jakhalabondha by police.

Further, Pan Bazaar police took them to their remand in connection with a case of snatching Rs 50,000. Then Hojai police took them to their remand for another loot incident. Finally, Lakhimpur police took them to their remand for further interrogation. Akash is the son of Akhilesh Yadav, resident of Routa under Katihar district of Bihar, while Deepesh is the son of Ashok Das, resident of Nayatullah under the same district of the State. Lakhimpur Police further stated that members of the infamous Irani group were involved in bike-car lifting, bag and jewellery snatching across the country as well as the State of Assam, thereby creating havoc among the people.

Meanwhile, a series of cases against the two culprits were registered with No. 529/19 US 392 IPC in North Lakhimpur Police Station, No. 387/19 US 392 IPC at Pan Bazaar Police Station and No. 358/19 US 392 IPC at Hojai Police Station.

Also Read: Teer agent handed over to North Lakhimpur Police by social activists
