Meghalaya & Mizoram BJP units urge PM Modi to rethink Citizenship Bill

Guwahati: With Northeast India witnessing raging protests following the passage of Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016, in Lok Sabha , the BJP units in Meghalaya and Mizoram have asked Prime Minister Narendra Modi to reconsider the bill.BJP MLAs from Meghalaya AL Hek and Sanbor Shullai have submitted a memorandum to the prime minister requesting him to reconsider implementation of the bill.They have requested that the northeastern states must be left out of the bill. The MLAs stated that the bill will adversely affect the tribal belt of Meghalaya. They added that the bill will further encourage illegal influx into the state. Mizoram BJP state unit president JV Hluna told ET, “Prior to Mizoram election in December, I had sent a letter to the Prime Minister opposing the bill. I stand by it and reiterate the same that we are opposed to it.” BJP has one MLA in Mizoram.The BJP-led government in Manipur in a cabinet meeting recently resolved to urge the Centre to exempt Manipur from the jurisdiction of the Citizenship Amendment Bill.The meeting also further decided to urge the Centre to give assent to the Manipur People’s Protection (MPP) Bill, 2018. Chief minister N Biren Singh met Union home minister Rajnath Singh on Saturday and submitted a memorandum urging him to ensure presidential assent to the bill.Manipur People’s Protection (MPP) Bill, 2018, which was passed by the state Assembly on July 23 last year, is awaiting presidential assent.The state government’s memorandum stated that population of the state is only about 0.2 % percent of that of whole India. Manipur has a large number of ethnic groups, each with unique dialects, customary laws and practices. Adequate constitutional protection is considered necessary to protect these small indigenous populations.The Manipur People’s (Protection) Bill, 2018 was passed to protect the interest of indigenous population of the state. Congress in Manipur has stated that Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016, will render Manipur People’s (Protection) Bill, 2018, meaningless and demanded a special session of the assemly. In Assam, Congress spokesperson Mehndi Alam Bora has resigned in protest against the bill being passed in Lok Sabha. BJP has expelled Barak valley party leader Pradip Dutta Roy for his comment that Assamese students will be barred from taking admission in Assam University in Silchar if they continue to protest against the bill.
