Hyderabad Priests Seek Divine Help, Worship Cows To Prevent Child Rapes In India

The entire country is rattled by the increasing number of sexual assault on kids. Visibly angry people are staging protests to make the authorities realise the seriousness of the issue.

In Hyderabad, priests offered prayers to stop such crimes across the country. According to reports, the prayers were conducted in Chilkur Balaji temple. Cows were worshipped by the priests in order to seek divine help.

Priests performed 'Parikrama' with three cows in Chilkur Balaji temple.

ALSO READ: 11-Year-Old Girl Kidnapped, Raped, Head Crushed With Bricks And Body Dumped In Uttar Pradesh

Reuters/Representational Image

"Cow worship has been an old method to combat with any sort of crisis, so we planned to offer prayers in order to curb child rapes cases, being reported in our society," priest Ranga Rajan said.

"Three cows will take three Parikrama rounds around Balaji temple sanctum. The three Parikrama represent words, deeds and thoughts respectively," he added.

Hyderabad: A special prayer was organised in Chilkoor Balaji Temple, Gandipet with three cows today. Priest Ranga Rajan says,"3 cows will do 3 Pradakshina around Balaji temple sanctum to prevent evil thoughts,deeds like rapes. Three Pradakshinams represent words,deeds&thoughts." pic.twitter.com/eIwGLrzo4l — ANI (@ANI) June 23, 2019

Blaming the current education system, the temple priests said, "India has one of the oldest education systems, including the world's oldest literature. Child rape was an alien term in India, but now that we have adapted the western education system and culture, we are witnessing more and more rape cases in India. Newspapers, TV channels and social media are full of these cases nowadays."

ALSO READ: First Convict Sentenced To Death Under Amended Child Rape Law To Be Hanged On March 2

"Children are not safe in our country anymore, we have never heard about any such incident in our old literature. Though we have always heard about women being harassed, now the time has changed, along with women, children lives are also at stake. So to curb such evil acts taking place across the nation, we are performing this ritual today" he said.

Input from ANI
