Policing campuses

Yogi Adityanath

Kanhaiya Kumar

Yogi Adityanath is the Sangh’s chosen one to pioneer moves that will embed its worldview deeper in the hearts and minds of adherents and sympathisers. The Uttar Pradesh chief minister took cow vigilantism to a brutal level that made a meat-eater fair prey to a militant vegetarian zealot. He unleashed the Romeo squads to nab young couples seeking privacy in UP’s restrictive public spaces, but was forced to rein in the private armies when there was an outcry on campuses. Yogi threatened to mobilise the Romeo militia again.On June 19, his government mandated through an ordinance that henceforth private universities will undertake affirmation to national integration, moral building and “desh bhakti” (allegiance to the nation) before being set up. No “anti-national” activities will be brooked, stipulated the UP Private Universities Ordinance, 2019. It isn’t a dog whistle, it’s an open call to other states to police campuses and see they don’t go the way of those that became unseemly spectacles for the Sangh’s gatekeepers, like JNU, Jadavpur and Hyderabad universities. UP has only 27 private varsities and there isn’t a trace of ferment in any of them, but Yogi has got pro-active in the garb of initiating academic “reforms”, whatever they mean. To him, they imply adopting the “best practices” from global universities, that is, bringing fee parity, “quality” education, implementing the UGC norms and ending ad hoc faculty appointments. Nobody can object to the latter set of purposes but “anti-nationalism”? A state government spokesperson, minister Sidharth Nath Singh, was unerringly candid when he said, “What happened in JNU and Jadavpur made it necessary to have some kind of deterrent.”In India, the proliferating private universities are not exactly seminaries for insurrectionists. The expensive fee structures, the limited studentships/scholarships, high residential costs and achic ambience compared to the declassed state universities shut out the vast majority from the hallowed precincts of the private varsities. Union politics and anti-establishment movements are not something one would associate with these entities. Why the paranoia?Hark back to early 2019 and recall an Intelligence Bureau input to the HRD ministry that prevented the Modi government from bestowing institute of eminence status on top-tier private universities such as Ashoka, KREA and Azim Premji University. The IB sleuths identified Ashoka’s Pratap Bhanu Mehta, indisputably a reputed public intellectual, as an unrelenting critic of the government while KREA (yet to start operations) came on the radar of suspicion because the former RBI governor, Raghuram Rajan, was on its board. Rajan is a bête noire to the ruling dispensation. Azim Premji University was picked upon because it funds an inconvenient news portal while institutions such as Bangalore’s Indian Institute for Human Settlements were deemed unworthy because a founder had proposed that the disputed Ayodhya land should be earmarked for nonreligious use and was critical of the 2002 Gujarat communal violence. Not one of the alleged targets was a rebel. If anything, they might not have reached the pinnacles they achieved in their careers had they actively challenged the establishment but clearly it’s hard to please the present day’s power elite. Asking a mild question makes it apoplectic.Student politics is all but dead in UP. The BJP cannot be faulted because it was Mayawati who banned student elections in 2008, when she was the chief minister, to “improve the educational atmosphere in universities and colleges”. An anti-student union mood had already overtaken the country because around the time Mayawati’s diktat was issued, a former Supreme Court judge, Justice Arijit Pasayat, observed that universities and colleges were “infested with part-time students and full-time leaders” and it would make sense to incorporate the study of hooliganism and booth-capturing in their syllabi.Mayawati’s successor, Akhilesh Yadav, lifted the ban but left it to universities to decide if they wanted student elections or not. Ironically, the ABVP is the RSS’ most successful offspring after the BJP and runs an assembly line that minted some of the BJP’s prominent leaders such as Arun Jaitley, Ravi Shankar Prasad, Nitin Gadkari, Rajnath Singh, Amit Shah and JP Nadda, the newly anointed working president. Those like Jaitley, Prasad, Nadda and Sushil Modi, Bihar’s deputy chief minister, cut their political teeth on Jaya Prakash Narayan’s student protests against corruption and the Emergency.Has Prime Minister Narendra Modi forgotten that as a young man, he helped the students’ agitation that started as a spark on an Ahmedabad engineering college campus and spread like a prairie fire, causing the downfall of the then Congress chief minister, Chimanbhai Patel?Student politics is integral to the RSS’ growth but it is politics it would negotiate on its terms and not be dictated byand Umar Khalid. A more practical reason for promulgating the UP ordinance is perhaps because the private universities sought it as an insurance against potential “goondagardi” and politicking.
