TMC vs BJP fight escalates in Bengal: Banerjee’s party says BJP acting like a terrorist organisation, draws sharp rebuke

Bhatpara, which falls under the Barrackpore Lok Sabha seat, has been witnessing frequent violence since the election results were announced on May 23. A TMC citadel for long, Bhatpara was pocketed by BJP’s Arjun Singh in the general elections who crossed over from the TMC ahead of the polls.

There seems to be no end to the war of words between the Trinamool Congress of Mamata Banerjee and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in West Bengal. The TMC has now said that BJP was acting like a terrorist organisation and that it was importing goons from other states to create unrest in the eastern state. The TMC’s rant invited a sharp retort from the BJP which said that Banerjee’s party is trying to convert West Bengal into Pakistan.

Senior TMC minister and Kolkata Mayor Firhad Hakim said that the BJP was spreading communal violence as it was in a great hurry to capture power. Referring to the recent clashes in the Bhatpara of North 24 Parganas district where two youths were killed, the TMC leader said that Bengalis are being forced to leave the area.

“We have been saying this since the Lok Sabha polls that the BJP is behaving like a terrorist organisation in Bengal. They are importing goons from Bihar and Uttar Pradesh to create unrest in the state. We will not let the entire state turn into Bhatpara,” Hakim said.

The Bhatpara town of North 24 Parganas continues to remain tense in the aftermath of two youth being shot dead during the violence at Kankinara Bazar last week. Fresh clashes erupted during a BJP delegation visit to the trouble-torn area on Saturday, despite prohibitory orders under in place. The city wore a deserted look on Sunday even as BJP MP Arjun Singh asked the administration to restore normalcy.

The BJP was quick to respond to the TMC, saying Mamata Banerjee party was trying to convert Bengal into Pakistan.

“The state administration is not at all willing to solve the crisis in Bhatpara. There is a complete lawless situation in the state. They want to convert it into Pakistan, where you are not allowed to chant Jai Shri Ram,” BJP’s Bengal unit chief Dilip Ghosh said.

Ghosh also criticised intellectuals of the state as he questioned their silence. He described them as cowards and opportunists and accusing them of being only interested in getting benefits from the government.

“The entire state is burning. Opposition leaders and workers are being murdered by TMC goons. But the intellectuals of our society are completely silent as they are apprehensive that they might get into the bad books of the TMC if they protest against them,” he added.

Bhatpara, which falls under the Barrackpore Lok Sabha seat, has been witnessing frequent violence since the election results were announced on May 23. A TMC citadel for long, Bhatpara was pocketed by BJP’s Arjun Singh in the general elections who crossed over from the TMC ahead of the polls.

A three-member delegation, comprising BJP MPs SS Ahluwalia, Satya Pal Singh and Vishnu Dayal Ram, had visited the house of the two deceased — Rambabu Shaw and Dharambir Shaw on Saturday afternoon. Fresh tension erupted shortly after the delegation left the area. Reports say that a group of locals agitated against the police and pelted stones at the officials, prompting police to resort to a baton charge to disperse the crowd.
