20 GIFs That Perfectly Describe The Mumbai Mood During Rains

The monsoons are here and while everything looks green and clean all over again, if you are in Mumbai this can induce terror. Apart from enjoying the high tide at Marine Drive and munching on the hot vada pavs on a rainy morning, Mumbai rains also mean three-hour traffic, uncountable potholes, and having to sleep in the office because it’s raining so hard and Uber fare is over two thousand bucks… quite a mess!

Plus let us warn you, rains in Mumbai are NOTHING like what we see in Bollywood movies. Seriously guys, no one puts their heads out of the taxi--a bike might just hit you; nor is the entire city sitting under umbrellas at Marine Drive, holding hands. It’s legit a different kind of struggle.

If you are from the city, we bet you'll relate to these 20 GIFs that describe a Mumbaikar’s schedule during the monsoon, and perfectly reflect the #RainMood.

1. When you wake up to the sound of the rain…

2. … but you look out of the window and see only traffic

3. Plus your boss refuses to give you “another” work from home

4. Your Uber is not only at a four-digit rate but the nearest cab is 34 minutes away





5. You just realised you wore white pants and it’s too late to go back and change…

6. … and the neighbourhood biker was kind enough to speed over a pothole and now your pants are muddy brown

7. You realise you’ve forgotten your umbrella in the auto… again!

8. The train is here but the sea of wet people inside is too much to deal with.

9. Oh, you almost slipped… well, normal!

10. You got caught in a shower just before reaching work. Hello #TeamWetPants.

11. Oh great, someone left their wet umbrella on your desk!

12. There have already been three heavy rainfall warning on the news and it’s only 11 AM.

13. Your food guy refuses to deliver lunch because hello, no one wants to wade through all that muck and rainwater

14. You are constantly distracted by the thunder outside… should you leave early? What if you get stuck at work like last time? Ughhh.

15. You have to deal with everyone who is not in Mumbai sending you photos of flooded Mumbai lanes…

16. …urgh some of them are from 26th July 2005. When will people stop?

17. Great, you now have a cold. Thank you, wet pants and office AC

18. You finally left only to be caught in the rain again...

19. Well at least you reached home and it only took 2.5 hours. Yay!

20. What’s that? Oh, another heavy rain warning tomorrow? Well, goodnight!




