Chennai water crisis: DMK stages protest against AIADMK, submits notice in Lok Sabha

As water scarcity deepens in Chennai, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) on Monday held another protest against the ruling AIADMK government in Tamil Nadu. DMK started its protest in Chepauk as the ruling government continues to struggle in resolving the situation.

The party's president MK Stalin also joined the protest in Chepauk against AIADMK government and demanded a solution to Chennai's water crisis. MP Dayanaidi Maran, and senior leader J Anbazhagan also took part in the protest.

"Give us water, give us water. The pot is here, where is the water?" asked protestors as they continued to press the Tamil Nadu government over acute water shortage in Chennai.

Chennai: Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) holds protest in Chepak, against the #TamilNadu government over acute water crisis in the city; DMK President MK Stalin to join the protest soon. pic.twitter.com/MBnBTKPO85 ANI (@ANI) June 24, 2019

DMK MP TR Baalu has also submitted a notice in the Lok Sabha over the water crisis in Tamil Nadu.

Stalin's party had even protested on Saturday against the deepening water shortage that has severely affected Chennai.

On Sunday, DMK leader Duraimurugan warned the Tamil Nadu government against taking water from Jolarpettai in Velore to Chennai. He said massive protests will break out in the district if such a move is approved.

Duraimurugan, who is the Katpadi MLA said, "If they start taking water from here (Vellore), then we will stage a massive protest here."

Chennai: Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) President MK Stalin joins DMK workers holding protest in Chepak, against the #TamilNadu government over acute water crisis in the city. pic.twitter.com/iEcJDriLAX ANI (@ANI) June 24, 2019

His comments came after Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi Palaniswami stated that the state government plans to bring 10 million litres of water per day (MLD) of water to Chennai by railway wagons for the next six months.

Duraimurugan also slammed the AIADMK government for failing to take adequate action to solve the water crisis in Chennai.

"When people are suffering because of water crisis, the AIADMK government is going to God for help. They have accepted that they can't solve this issue," Duraimurugan said.
