Chennai Water Crisis: DMK stages protest against ruling AIADMK, submits notice in Lok Sabha

New Delhi:

With rising water crisis in Chennai, the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) on Monday staged a protest against the ruling AIADMK government for failing to contain this crisis situation in the state. DMK started its protest in Chepauk, led by party's president MK Stalin. MP Dayanidhi Maran, and senior leader Dayanidhi MaranDayanidhi Maran also took part in the protest.

"Give us water, give us water. The pot is here, where is the water?" asked protestors as they continued to press the Tamil Nadu government over acute water shortage in Chennai.

Meanwhile, DMK MP TR Baalu has also submitted a notice in the Lok Sabha over the water crisis in Tamil Nadu.

Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) President @mkstalin joins DMK workers holding protest in Chepak, against the #TamilNadu government over acute water crisis in the city, reports ANI.#Chennai



📸: ANI



Follow Latest news:https://t.co/Ts8Fq9iSAI pic.twitter.com/qOvkpW0smZ — News Nation (@NewsNationTV) June 24, 2019

Chennai is reeling under a water crisis like never before. A BBC report said that four water reservoirs of Chennai are completely dry. The acute shortage has hit the IT companies, hotels and other institutions. An Indian Express report said that locals are paying anything between Rs 3,000 to Rs 4,000 for a single water tanker. In fact, some other reports had said that major IT companies have instructed their staff to work from home. The BBC report quoted Vinoth Kaligai, the general secretary of an IT workers' association, saying that some firms had told employees to stay at home. "But homes are also running out of water, so what are we supposed to do?" he added.

"Water supply has become erratic now, earlier it was regular. We're suffering. This locality doesn't have piped water supply," a Chennai local was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

In a statement from the party on Saturday, cadres and leaders were urged to participate in the protest in large numbers. On Saturday too, the DMK had held protests at district headquarters across the state to press the state government for necessary action to mitigate the people's suffering.
