With Amarnath Yatra just days away, security forces focus on quick action, IED threat

(This story originally appeared in on Jun 23, 2019)

(This article was originally published by The Economic Times on 24/06/2019.)NEW DELHI: Strengthening Quick Action Teams and convoy movement to improving counter-IED measures, including training and bomb squads, and having better deployment patterns, are some of the steps being taken by the security forces in light of recent terrorist attacks and the oncoming Amarnath Yatra in Jammu and Kashmir, officials said.The issues were raised during a recent assessment on the security situation and the pilgrimage in the state. The need for improving the airborne surveillance by UAVs and helicopters and the Road Opening Party (ROP) between Ramban and Jawahar tunnel were some of the points for consideration for the Yatra and work on them is happening, officials said. One of the two routes for the pilgrimage (from July 1-August 15) passes through the tunnel.The ROP for the Ramban-Jawahar tunnel area is being reviewed in view of the emerging threat of vehicle-borne Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs). The ROP will look at blocking link roads during military convoy movement. Additional troops will also be deployed on the stretch. The move gains importance following a blast inside a private car on the Jammu-Srinagar highway, near the Jawahar tunnel, in March when a Central Reserve Police Force convoy was passing.Although the incident didn’t cause casualties, it triggered memories of the February 14 Pulwama terrorist attack when an explosives laden vehicle rammed into a CRPF bus which was part of a convoy, killing 40 soldiers. Officials said that the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for convoy movement is being revised. Work is being done on having a composition of escort vehicles for handling vehicle-borne attacks. The number of Mine Protected Vehicles and bulletproof vehicles are being increased. The bomb detection and disposal teams and the dog squads tasked with countering Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) are also being improved. More bomb-disposal squads are being trained and will soon be deployed in J&K. Soldiers deployed in the state are also being trained in counter-IED methods.Even for the Amarnath Yatra, more number of bomb and dog squads, besides anti-sabotage teams are being deployed on the yatra route as compared to last year. “There has been an increase in the security arrangements for the yatra this year,” explained an official.Surveillance and communication equipment will also be deployed for the route. More Quick Action Teams (QATs) and troops for night domination and mobile check-posts in addition to the regular deployment will take place. The QATs, which have been provided with specialised equipment, are also an important step against terrorist encounters. These teams have engaged terrorists in at least 30 encounters from January 2018 till March this year. Their equipment and strength will be further improved.Officials explained that terrorist related activities could increase with suicide attacks being a focus for terrorists. Around 115 terrorists have been killed by security forces so far this year in comparison to 257 last year. There are still close to 290 terrorists currently active in J&K. This comprises of cadres mainly from Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jaish-e-Mohammed and Hizbul Mujahideen. Security forces have to also deal with improvement in the arsenal of terrorists. There have been four instances of terrorists using armour piercing ammunition.Grenade throwing and use of IEDs are other main terrorist activities. There have been around seven IED blasts this year, including on an army vehicle that killed two soldiers earlier this month. Last year, there were 10 IED blasts. There have also been 38 grenade blasts this year as compared to 91 in 2018. The number of stone pelting incidents upto early June this year is 237, much less as compared to 1,226 last year and 876 in 2017. However, these activities remain a threat to the yatra, which has faced terrorist attacks in the past.
