Bollywood’s Dial A Protest Group - Karni Sena Now Has A Problem With Ayushmann's 'Article 15'

They burnt a school bus, slapped Sanjay Leela Bhansali, threatened to chop off Deepika Padukone’s nose and created havoc all over the nation back in 2017 during the release of Padmaavat. It took a title change and some VFX effects to hide Deepika’s midriff in a song for the movie to be released after a delay of almost a month. Yeah, just that!

BCCL

But then, Karni Sena’s frivolous protests didn’t stop there. One after the other, they found loopholes in the movies. Even before the release of these films, their apprehensions of what they could show, became a subject of debate and violence in the nation. In the meantime, fake Karni Sena also emerged.

Now, it seems the Karni Sena, after quite some gap, is back in the business. Now, it’s not only threatening Ayushmann Khurrana and director Anubhav Sinha (of Mulk fame) but is also protesting against the release of their upcoming movie Article 15.

screengrab

Anubhav Sinha, the director of the movie, has labelled all this as “bullying”.

“[People] can disagree, but such overt threats must stop, once and for all,” he added while talking to Mid-Day about it.

YouTube

Here’s what Ayushmann Khurrana said about Brahmins protesting in UP over the negative portrayal of the community in the film.

"They have to realise that what they are doing is redundant and a waste of time and energy, they need to see the film and then realise what is right and wrong. In fact, Article 15 has already been certified by the CBFC, which is known to be strict with sensitive content."

Screengrab

What is the fuss all about?

The movie is loosely based on Badaun (Uttar Pradesh) rape case where two girls were raped and hanged. It’s a hard hitting tale that exposes the horrors of caste prejudice in India.

Brahmins are upset over the fact that the story has been "tweaked". With the intention of portraying the accused men as Brahmins, they feel it will defame the community.

Screengrab

Anubhav Sinha, in an interview to Times Now as quoted by TOI, as that Karni Sena should ban the culture of film-making instead of protesting against individuals.

He, furthermore, dismissed the allegations against the movie being disrespectful towards Brahmins and added that a lot of Brahmins have worked in the making of Article 15.

Twitter

Meanwhile, CBFC has cleared Anubhav Sinha’s Article 15 with a U/A certificate. Starring Ayushmann Khurrana in the role of a cop, the movie is scheduled to release on June 28.
