Chennai water crisis worsens as residents get sewage water in taps

Earlier, DMK leaders held a protest in the city over the water crisis in Chennai

Chennai: The water crisis in the city of Chennai in Tamil Nadu has just worsened. Residents in the locality of Villivakkam in Chennai are getting sewage water in their taps. Meanwhile, protesting residents took to the streets demanding accountability from authorities over the issue.

The water released by hand pumps and taps is dark and muddy which looks completely unsuitable for drinking or for any other daily use.

"I have a nine-month-old baby who is suffering from viral infection just because I have been using this water. My doctor has strictly told me not to use wet wipes and wash the baby every time I change the diaper. So how can I use this water knowing that she has a viral infection?" said a local resident.

Earlier, DMK leaders held a protest in the city over the water crisis in the city. Despite the outrage and the protest, a minister from Tamil Nadu government sparked a controversy when he said that there is no water crisis but it's a shortage of water at some places.

Despite the uproar over the crisis, the state government continues to downplay the water crisis in the city. The contaminated water that the residents are receiving is coming from the Metro Water pipelines. Residents earlier claimed that Metro Water had stated that they will get drinking water from the pipes. Since there is no fresh water supply, the residents are forced to use dirty water for their survival.

The residents complained that the water is not only foaming but also smelling bad. Earlier, there was a little bit of contamination in the water but now the colour is almost black. Residents say that repeated complaints to Metro Water department have gone unheard and there is no solution in sight for the issue as of now.

Earlier, Metro Water had rejected the complaints of bad water supply, but when Mirror Now highlighted the issue, the department has now acknowledged the problem and said they will take care of the issue.
