[VIDEO] Tamil Nadu's water crisis intensifies: Chennai residents complain of taps dispensing sewage water

A woman waiting to fetch water in a water pump which is been surrounded by motor pump pipes at a hosing board complex in Mandaveli area of Chennai on Saturday | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Pictures and videos of black, foaming water gushing out of taps in the Villivakkam area can be seen in wide circulation on social media.

Chennai: A water crisis looming over the state of Tamil Nadu has intensified with residents in several parts of the state capital struggling for their daily water needs. Demonstrators, backed by political stakeholders have taken to the streets of Chennai in protest against the state government over its lack of preparation to deal with the scarcity which is disrupting day-to-day life.

Even as the state government is downplaying the situation, residents of Villivakkam area of Chennai claim that the tap water being supplied to them by the Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board is black in colour. Pictures and videos of black, foaming water gushing out of taps in the Villivakkam area can be seen in wide circulation on social media. Reports suggest that sewage water mixed with tap water has led to this civic horror.

In fact, residents of the area claim that water tankers are not being supplied to their locality which has left them with no other option than to rely on tap water for their daily needs. Some even claimed that they are being forced to spend money on private water tankers which are available only at a cost four times the normal rate.

Despite alarm bells going off in the state over the unprecedented scarcity of water, top officials such as the chief minister and members of his Cabinet claim that the present situation is the equivalent of a water shortage rather than water scarcity. However, ground reports clearly show that Chennai is witnessing an unprecedented paucity of water which is a cause for serious concern.

On Monday, leaders of opposition parties organised massive protests targeting the ruling party over their failure to deal with the present situation which has affected the lives of every single resident in India's seventh-largest city. Thousands of locals carrying empty buckets could be seen marching on the streets of Chennai on Monday with Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) leader MK Stalin leading the charge against the AIADMK government in the state helmed by Chief Minister Edappadi K Palanisamy.

In the face of the crisis, the chief minister said that 10 million litres of water will be transported from Jolarpet in Vellore district by train to improve the supply. He further announced that a sum of Rs 158.42 crore has been allocated to the Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board. Meanwhile, AIADMK cadre on Saturday performed 'yagna' in temples across the state in the hope that the almighty might answer their prayers for rain.
