Left, right and centre who supported Emergency, called it festival of discipline

With a radio address in June 1975, Indira Gandhi, then prime minister, proclaimed emergency in the country following a students' movement in Gujarat, a political campaign under socialist leader Jayaprakash Narayan and a court case over her Lok Sabha election.

"The President has declared a state of Emergency. There is no need to panic," said Indira Gandhi in her radio address, and with this, the security machinery clamped on every single dissenter of the government.

JP, as Narayan was known, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, LK Advani, George Fernandes, Chandrashekhar and even MK Stalin, the son of M Karunanidhi, then chief minister of Tamil Nadu were arrested for opposing the Indira Gandhi government. But, not everyone beyond the Congress (O) of Indira Gandhi was opposing the government. It had some big supporters as well.

Communist Party of India

The CPI is the oldest communist party in the country and at the time of Independence, it was formidable Opposition force in national politics. In fact, CPI's was the first government in Kerala to have been dismissed by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru invoking Article 356 of the Constitution.

The CPI, however, tilted towards the Congress when Indira Gandhi was the prime minister. When Indira Gandhi imposed Emergency, the CPI broke ranks with the Opposition and supported the move even though the CPI(M) - its breakaway faction had opposed Emergency.

The CPI, however, distanced itself from Indira Gandhi following her party's rout in the 1977 Lok Sabha election. It denounced Indira Gandhi at the 1978 Bathinda Congress and joined the Left Front alliance of the CPI(M) that was ruling in West Bengal at the time.

In 2015, CPI leadership finally admitted it was a political mistake to support Emergency. CPI general secretary S Sudhakar Reddy said the party had failed to understand political reality of the time. CPI veteran Gurudas Dasgupta was more direct in calling it "a great political mistake."

Bal Thackeray

Balasaheb Thackeray, the strongman of Maharashtra and the founder of Shiv Sena, was one of the staunchest opponents of the Congress. But he surprised many in 1975 by openly supporting the proclamation of Emergency by the Indira Gandhi government.

Shiv Sena has not been apologetic about Bal Thackeray's support to Indira Gandhi's Emergency. Writing in Saamana last year, party spokesman Sanjay Raut said, "If the day when the Emergency was proclaimed by Indira Gandhi is to be called 'Black Day', then there were many such 'black days' under the [current] central government. The day demonetisation was announced should also be called 'Black Day', as it created the economic anarchy."

However, support for the Emergency led to a serious drubbing of the Shiv Sena in the 1978 Maharashtra Assembly and local body elections. It hurt the party to such an extent that founder-chief Bal Thackeray offered to resign at a rally in Mumbai's Shivaji Park. He withdrew his resignation following uproar against it in the party.

Khushwant Singh

Khushwant Singh, the celebrated journalist and author, was one of the few editors of high stature to support Indira Gandhi over the imposition of Emergency. He had criticised Jayaprakash Narayan's call for "total revolution" as undemocratic. In 2000, Khushwant Singh explained his reasons for supporting Emergency in an article, "Why I supported Emergency".

He said, "I concede that the right to protest is integral to democracy. You can have public meetings to criticise or condemn government actions. You can take out processions, call for strikes and closures of business. But there must not be any coercion or violence. If there is any, it is the duty of the government to suppress it by force, if necessary. By May 1975 public protests against Mrs Gandhi's government had assumed nationwide dimensions and often turned violent."

Vinoba Bhave

Bhave was the most noted Gandhian in post-Independent India. Many considered him a spiritual successor of Mahatma Gandhi. He had earned a reputation with his Bhoodan Aandolan whereby he convinced big landowners to donate their lands to the poor and landless farmers when the government's regulation had failed to yield desired results.

Having been a Gandhi, he raised many an eyebrow by supporting Emergency imposed by Indira Gandhi. Vinoba Bhave called proclamation of Emergency as Anushasana Parva or festival of discipline. His support of Emergency led critics to brand his as "Sarkari Sant".

JRD Tata

Industrialist JRD Tata, who was largely apolitical in his public relations, was another high-profile supporter of the Emergency. In an interview to the New York Times, Tata had justified his support to Indira Gandhi over the imposition of Emergency.

He said that "things had gone too far. You can't imagine what we've been through here-strikes, boycotts, demonstrations. Why there were days I couldn't walk out of my office into the street. The parliamentary system is not suited to our needs."
