Rahul Gandhi adamant on resigning as Congress president, told to ‘treat defeat as collective responsibility’

Congress workers demonstrate outside Rahul's residence in Delhi | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Rahul Gandhi on Wednesday remained adamant on his stand to step down as the president of the Congress party, sources have said.

It was reported that at the Congress parliamentary party meeting held today, which was chaired by his mother and United Progressive Alliance chairperson Sonia Gandhi, Rahul remained adamant and said he would not take back his resignation as the Congress chief.

Rahul had offered his resignation as party president at a Congress Working Committee meet post the declaration of the results of Lok Sabha elections, which Congress lost to the BJP.

Taking responsibility for the defeat, it was reported that Rahul asked the senior leadership of the party to find his replacement. Ever since then, he has been determined not to take back his resignation.

Today, at the Congress parliamentary party meeting, all Lok Sabha MPs urged Rahul to take back his resignation and treat defeat as a collective responsibility.

Delhi: Members of Youth Congress and workers of the party demonstrate outside the residence of Congress President Rahul Gandhi urging him to take back his resignation and continue as the party President. pic.twitter.com/KIMvCKuS11 — ANI (@ANI) June 26, 2019

In a related event, members of the Youth Congress and workers of the party also held demonstrations outside Rahul’s residence in Delhi, asking him to take back his resignation and continue as the party chief.

The raised slogans like "Rahul Gandhi zindabad! Rahul Gandhi sangharsh karo, hum tumhare saath hain! Hamara neta kaisa ho Rahul Gandhi jaisa ho!"

In the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party was re-elected for another five-year term. The BJP won 303 seats out of the total 542 that went to polls. The National Democratic Alliance in total bagged 353 seats.

The Congress, on the other hand, could manage to win just 52 seats – just right more than its lowest ever tally of 44 seats that it bagged in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections.

The Congress failed to improve upon its performance despite having inducted another Nehru-Gandhi scion - Rahul’s sister, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra - as the general secretary for Uttar Pradesh (East). Priyanka’s magic too failed to work in Uttar Pradesh, the country’s politically most crucial state, winning just one seat (Sonia Gandhi’s Raebareli).

The party even lost its bastion of Amethi from where Rahul Gandhi was defeated by Union minister and BJP leader Smriti Irani. Rahul got elected to the Lok Sabha from Wayanad in West Bengal.
