Will get Statehood after Cong. comes to power at Centre: CM

‘No other L-G has created troubles for a govt. like Bedi’

The “anti-democratic” and the unconstitutional style of functioning of Lieutenant Governor Kiran Bedi has prompted the Congress to take to the streets of national capital its battle to obtain Statehood for the Union Territory, Chief Minister V. Narayanasamy has said.

The Chief Minister told The Hindu that “no other government in the U.T. has taken such an assertive stand on obtaining Statehood because no other Lieutenant Governor has created so many troubles for an elected government like Ms. Bedi did in the last two-and-a-half years.”

The administrative power struggle in the U.T. started after Ms. Bedi took over as L-G. It had brought all major political parties, barring the AINRC and the BJP, on to the same page.

Although the AIADMK had decided not to join the protest in New Delhi, the Dravidian party was the first to seek the recall of the Lt. Governor, the Chief Minister said.

Exuding confidence in getting Statehood, the Chief Minister said there had been several favourable factors that emerged in the last few years.

Govt. staff support

The government employees were earlier against getting Statehood because of the 70% grant accorded by the Centre as budgetary support. After the size of this grant accorded by the Centre shrunk to 26%, the employees’ association had changed its stand on Statehood, he said.

As an endorsement of U.T.’s demand, the Standing Committee on Home Affairs, which was headed by the present External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj, had given a report recommending Statehood for the U.T.

Ms. Swaraj, who as Opposition leader in the Lok Sabha during the tenure of United Progressive Alliance government, had visited the U.T. to elicit views of political parties, employees association and other outfits. The committee, in its report, had stated that the U.T. was eligible for full Statehood.

Asked whether the non-contiguous geography of U.T. would stand in the way of getting Statehood, the Chief Minister said: “anyway Statehood can be accorded by Constitutional amendment and necessary changes can be made for keeping the four regions together while attaining Statehood. Those issues can be sorted out through deliberations,” the Chief Minister said.

When his reaction was sought on the criticism that the Congress had ignored the demand while in power at the Centre, he said: “If the party comes to power (and it will) in 2019, we will definitely accord Statehood.”

The Chief Minister said the protest in Delhi would be used as a platform to tell the nation about the problems faced by the elected government because of the “deliberate hindrances,” created by the Lt. Governor.
