Jallikattu 2019: Tamil Nadu gears up for its traditional bull-taming event with tighter safety norms

Tamilnadu is ready for Jallikattu | Photo Credit: AP, File Image

This Pongal, Tamil Nadu is getting ready for Jallikattu - a traditional bull-taming event. After worldwide protests by the people in the state in 2017 to lift the ban against Jallikattu, Tamil Nadu is set to host the event on 15-17 January on the occasion of Pongal.

The event will be held in places of historical importance like Avaniyapuram, Palamedu and Alanganallur respectively in Madurai district and all other districts at various places. It was officially announced after getting prior permission from the respective district collectors.

Jallikattu started from Monday across other districts of Tamil Nadu including the one which was inaugurated by Tamil Nadu health minister Dr Vijayabhaskar in Pudukottai.

The preparations are being made to welcome thousands of people who are going to take part in the bull-taming event. As per the district administration in Madurai, 50,000 to 1 lakh spectators are expected to witness the three-day event. Some animal welfare associations, including People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), had requested to ban the event by approaching the Supreme court of India in 2017 January.

Following this numerous leaderless apolitical youths protested across Tamil Nadu and all around the world in various places known popularly as Pro-Jallikattu movement or Thai Puratchi in order to not only save the traditions but also to save the national breeds here. Finally, the Tamil Nadu government lifted the ban and brought a special ordinance to conduct Jalikkattu.

So the preparations are going on in accordance with the instructions given by the Supreme Court. Around 988 Bulls and 836 bullfighters in Palamedu, around 1100 bulls and 848 bullfighters in Alanganallur, around 600 bulls and 596 bullfighters in Avaniyapuram have been approved. All the bullfighters permitted are between the age of 18 to 40 after prior medical tests like blood pressure, body weight and checked for any illness. All the bullfighters should be above 150 centimetres in height and 55 kgs in weight. Bulls and the bull fighters are issued with tokens and those having tokens are only allowed inside the ground. What should be noted is that this is the first time where all the bullfighters are insured under Prime minister National Insurance scheme.

Safety arrangements including water, fire service, ambulance and medical facilities are also done keeping in mind the turnout for the event. Wooden baffles near Vadivaasal where the bulls will come out and fences on the corners of the galleries where the audience sit around and watch the event are safely prepared. Madurai district collector S Natrajan inspected the event place at Avaniyapuram on this Sunday along with Corporation Commissioner Anish Kumar.

District Police Commissioner Davidson informed that 6 deputy commissioners, 15 Assistant commissioners and thousands of other police officials are deputed for duty and enough number of doctors are also available for medical emergencies.

.
