People's mandate can't be 'stifled' in Rajya Sabha: Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday slammed Congress for stalling various important bills in Rajya Sabha in the last five years and said people's mandate cannot be "stifled" in the Upper House just because the ruling party does not have a minority.

Replying to the debate on the President's Address in Rajya Sabha, he urged Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu's to do justice to the ruling party in the context of lack of majority for the treasury benches.

"While opposing things, they (Congress) went to the extent that they mocked the sanitation drive, Jan Dhan scheme, Make in India and even Yoga. The country has seen this negativity in the last five years. It is still here in Rajya Sabha," the Prime Minister said.

Calling Congress' tactics in view of the ruling party's lack of majority in Rajya Sabha as arrogance, Modi said that one has to beg before the opposition to even speak in the Upper House.

"I have to go abroad and I have less time. For this too I have to beg before you. What arrogance is this?" asked the Prime Minister.

Modi said that in a democracy every political party needed to respect each other.

"I know we do not have a majority in the Rajya Sabha but it does not mean that you disrespect the people's mandate which we have got in the Lok Sabha. The country has suffered a lot in the last five years. It pained me a lot," he said.

Seeking Chairman's protection, the Prime Minister said the people have given the BJP a huge responsibility in Lok Sabha to fulfil their aspirations. "We need your help. We expect you would do justice with us," he said.

Invoking former President Praban Mukherjee, the Prime Minister urged the political parties to cooperate with the government on the issues of interest.

"Rajya Sabha is also part of a democratic setup. We do not have the numbers in Rajya Sabha. It does not mean that you will stop important work. You may enjoy letting us down but in the last five years, many of the important works were installed in the upper house. Now, these will again go to Lok Sabha. Exchequer's money will be wasted. We need to move ahead with the spirit of our federal structure. Rajya Sabha has its own duties." Modi said.

The Prime Minister said that Congress may not heed to his request but should hear the former President who had said: "majority has got the mandate to rule and the minority has got the mandate to oppose but nobody has got the mandate to obstruct".

"We need to move ahead with his mantra. It would not be appropriate to stop the work just because you have a mandate in the upper house," Modi said.

He said the voters now were very aware as they not only know what was happening in Lok Sabha but also what was happening in Rajya Sabha.

"They voted this time keeping these facts also in mind," he said.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
