The rise and fall of the crazy star

Known for his determination and negotiating skills, Sir David Ochterlony was one of those British officers who became comfortable in Mughal-Hindustani culture

Among the most colourful Britishers in Delhi in the 19th Century was Major-General David Ochterlony, nicknamed “Loony Akhtar” or crazy star because of his eccentricity, on whom a treatise has been written by ex-CRPF Addl. Director-General Jasbir Singh Gill.

David Ochterlony was born in Boston on 12 February, 1758, the eldest son of Capt. David Ochterlony of Scotland and his American-born wife Katherine Tyler, a niece of Sir William Pepperell. After Captain Ochterlony died insolvent in 1765, the family moved to England where Katherine married Sir Isaac Heard, who was both a father-figure and close confidant to Ochterlony (Jr) throughout his life.

Sir Issac used his influence to send Ochterlony to India as a cadet in 1777. Due to his determination, negotiating skills and understanding of Indian culture, Ochterlony rose through the military ranks, serving under Lord Lake in the battles that released Emperor Shah Alam from Maratha influence. Ochterlony was appointed the first British Resident at Delhi, responsible for the protection of the Emperor and the safety of the city. He successfully defended Delhi in 1804 against an attack by Jaswant Rao Holkar, a Maratha chief, and for his services was bestowed with the Mughal title of “Nasir ud-Daula” (Defender of the State) and appointed permanent Resident at Delhi. One of his favourite summer retreats was Shalimar Bagh, Delhi, where he caught a fatal chill.

Ochterlony’s greatest success came in the Anglo-Nepalese War when he commanded one of four columns under General Hastings that destroyed Kaji Amar Singh Thapa’s Gurka army in 1815. Ochterlony used his knowledge of the terrain and intercepted letters to wage a skilful mountain warfare. He also employed his diplomatic skills by enlisting former enemy troops. For his success, he was created a baronet. When the government of Nepal refused to ratify the Treaty of Sugauli, Ochterlony swiftly moved against it, forcing an immediate ratification of the treaty and bringing the war to an end on 5th March, 1816. For his services, he was Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Bath.

Colourful soldier: A painting depicting Sir David Ochterlony at home | Photo Credit: Courtesy The British Library

In 1825, Durjan Sal tried to seize power in Bharatpur after his uncle Baldeo Singh died, leaving his infant son Balwant Singh as Raja. Ochterlony supported the rightful heir and issued a proclamation for defence of the Raja that was however repudiated by Lord Amherst. Amherst’s lack of confidence is said to have left Ochterlony feeling “abandoned and dishonoured” and to have hastened his death in Meerut on 15 July 1825, and was buried there at St John’s Church, though he had built a mausoleum for himself at the Mughal Mubarak Bagh in Delhi. Incidentally, two months after his demise, Ochterlony’s action at the Bharatpur was vindicated by the Governor-General in Council on the persuasion of Sir Thomas Metcalfe, his great friend and admirer.

It is said that Sir David Ochterlony took the evening air in Delhi followed by his 13 wives, each on her own elephant. It was not unusual for British officers serving in India to become comfortable in Mughal-Hindustani culture. Ochterlony’s courtly and diplomatic manners earned him the trust and admiration of Shah Alam and his retainers. His favourite wife was Mubarak-al-Nisa, an ambitious woman who gave herself many titles including “Begum Ochterlony”. He had six “natural” children with two or more of his Indian wives, but he feared that they would not be fully accepted by either English or Mughal society. His children were part of a new class in India known as Anglo-Indians.

His only son was Roderick Peregrine Ochterlony, born in 1785. Roderick had both an English and Mughal education. In 1808, he married Sarah Nelly, daughter of Col John Nelly of Bengal at Allahabad. Mubarak Begum, Sir David Ochterlony’s favourite wife, fought against the British during the great Indian rebellion of 1857, demonstrating the drastic breakdown in British-Indian relations caused by racism, segregation and oppression. By then the India that Ochterlony had made his home no longer existed. The Begum built a beautiful little mosque in Lal Kuan, Delhi, which is known as Mubarak Begum-ki-Masjid.

Neemuch was a British Cantonment established by Ochterlony after taking the land from Maharaja Scindia in 1818. Construction of a fort was also started in 1819 which was completed in 1837. He built a British Residency at Neemuch which was known as “Ochterlony House”. This was his official residence for three years. A plaque on it in English, Urdu and Hindi reads: “This house was built by Maj-Gen Sir David Ochterlony Bart. GCB The First Resident in Rajputana and Malwa who established his headquarters at Neemuch and occupied this house as his official residence from 1822 to 1825.”

The Cantonment was disbanded in 1936. In 1939, all the barracks and other buildings including Ochterlony House and Neemuch Fort were taken over by the Crown Representative’s Police which was raised at Neemuch on 27th July. Neemuch is the birthplace of the CRPF and one of its most important stations. Since 1961, officers’ basic training is also being conducted there.

Ferreting out facts

“During my basic training, I and other officers used to dine in Ochterlony House since it was the CRPF Officers’ Mess. Finding ourselves in a totally new environment, I dug out details of the history of Neemuch and Ochterlony House. I again visited Neemuch in 1981 and 1983 for some courses but the curiosity existed to know more about the place and Ochterlony’s exploits,” says Gill who was again posted there from 2003 to 2005.

Even after retirement his passion to know more about the life of the colourful soldier – statesman continues.
