Bizmen hold protest against PSPCL

Ludhiana: City businessmen led by the United Cycle and Parts Manufacturing Association (UCPMA) held a protest against the Punjab State Power Corporation Limited (PSPCL), on Wednesday.

The protest was organized by businessmen against the rising cost of power for industrialists in Punjab and erratic power supply.

They staged a dharna outside the office of the chief engineer of the PSPCL, located on the Ferozepur road.

Furious over non-fulfillment of their demands, the businessmen sat on the floor in the office of the chief engineer.

Inderjit Singh Navyug, president of UCPMA, said the industrialists marched towards the office of the chief engineer with black flags and raised slogans against the PSPCL and the state government.

The protest was called off after the chief engineer, D P S Grewal, called them in his office and took a memorandum of their demands. He also assured them of apprising his seniors about their demands.

Giving more information, Navyug said: “We are thankful to all the business associations for their support in this agitation and making it a success. We were forced to protest against the PSPCL as the power rates were increasing from the past two years, despite promises made by the Congress party in its poll manifesto that they would fix the rate at Rs 5 per unit for industries. The rate of power for small industries has presently climbed to more than Rs 10 per unit. In addition to this, frequent unscheduled power cuts and erratic power supply are the reasons because of which we were forced to protest today. I think our mission has been accomplished and our voice will be heard by the government as the chief engineer has assured us of putting forward our demands to the head office and the state government.”

Senior member of the UCPMA, Avtar Singh Bhogal, said: “Though governments have changed in the state and this government came into power on the promise of giving electricity at Rs 5 per unit to industries, but the promise had fallen flat. Industries are dying a slow death. From the present situation, it seems that the Punjab government does not want that any industry should flourish. The government only provides free power to the farming sector. The Punjab State Electricity Regulatory Commission hikes power rate for industries after every six months to cover the losses and increasing expenditure of the PSPCL, which is uncalled for. We strongly condemn this attitude of the government. We have called off our agitation only due to the promise made by the chief engineer, but if our demands are not met, we will hold state-wide protest.”

Businessmen Pradeep Wadhawan, Jaswinder Singh Thukral, Manjit Singh Matharoo, Amarjit Singh Swan, Rajinder Singh Sarhali, Achru Ram Gupta and Gurpargat Singh Kahlon were also present.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
