Farmers, residents protest sugar factory’s expansion of ethanol unit in Nanjangud

MYSURU: Highlighting the perils of expanding an ethanol unit in Nanjangud taluk, farmers ’ organisations and residents of Hathuru village staged a protest against Bannari Amman Sugar Factory on Wednesday.The protest was led by the Mysuru district president of the Karnataka Rajya Raitha Sangha (KRRS) TR Vidyasagar. “Started in 2004, the ethanol unit was permitted to operate at a capacity of 60 kilo litres per day (klpd), but it has recently been permitted to increase its operational capabilities to 150klpd. If the factory realises this plan, the natural resources in the 10 surrounding villages will suffer from pollution,” Vidyasagar said.He pointed to the fumes that would rise from the factory, and the waste expelled from the unit and its possible effects on the environment. “The effluence will seep beneath the surface, polluting underground water. Worse still, if it is allowed to flow to the waterbodies, our health, and the wellbeing of our livestock will be jeopardised. What is more, the contaminated water will have no utility for agriculture either,” Vidyasagar added.Another farmer leader Lakshminarayana Gowda asked the government to withdraw permission given to the factory to expand its capacity. “This will disrupt the lives of the villagers who have been living here for the past many years. We will continue our protest till the sugar factory drops its plans for expansion,” Gowda said.Protest by sugarcane farmers In a bid to voice their disgruntlement over the state government’s failure to address their many woes, members of the Akhila Karnataka Sugarcane Farmers’ Association have decided to stage a protest on July 2. Farmer leader Halemirle Sunaygowda said that the aggrieved farmers would take out a rally from the North Gate of the Mysore Palace to the deputy commissioner’s office.From the impact that frequent disruption in power supply had had on storage of sugarcane to the delay in fixing a minimum price for the crop, Sunaygowda listed the many problems that farmers were grappling with. “Before our crops are irreversibly destroyed, the sugar factories must be reopened. A sum of Rs 3,800 must be fixed as the minimum price for one tonne of sugarcane. The government must work towards re-opening Sri Rama Sugar Factory immediately. Compensation must be paid to farmers who have incurred losses owing to heavy rainfall,” he added.Suanygowda also urged the authorities concerned to release water from the Varuna Canal to Megalapura and Keelanapura villages. “The government must take steps to prevent nationalised banks from troubling farmers about outstanding loans,” he said.
