BEST Strike Day 7: Employees sleeping on footpaths, bathing in public bathrooms while staging silent protest

More than 32,000 workers are staging a silent protest outside each BEST depot asking the government to fulfill their demands. | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: As the strike of Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport (BEST) buses entered the seventh day, no resolution of the conflict between the management of the civic-run transport and the trade union organisations could be seen. The BEST employees are demanding a merger of the budgets of the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) and BEST and an extension of the wage agreement of 2016, meaning an increase in salaries among other issues.

More than 32,000 workers are staging a silent protest outside every BEST depot asking the government to fulfill their demands. "We have not gone to our homes since the strike began and have been sleeping on the footpaths and bathing in public bathrooms. We do not know if our families are safe at home," a BEST employee said.

#Mumbai Bus Strike enters day 7. Meeting between bus union & Maharashtra govt committee fails to end the deadlock.



MIRROR NOW's @nehakulkarni29 & Santia Gora get the latest. pic.twitter.com/YtdRkakl5G — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) January 14, 2019

Lakhs of commuters have been affected by the strike as the BEST transport is the second largest mass transport system in the city after local trains. The passengers have switched to autos and private cabs and buses. They have to wait for long hours, even after paying more.

On Monday, Bombay High Court observed that the BEST union was not negotiating properly and was also violating the court's orders. The union informed the court that they were compelled to be on strike as the management was not ready to accept their demands.

Mumbai: Seventh day of strike by Brihanmumbai Electricity Supply & Transport (BEST) bus employees over demands of implementation of the merger of the BEST budget with principal budget of the BMC, employee service residences etc; Visuals from Dharavi BEST depot. #Maharashtra pic.twitter.com/asVYl7q8mk — ANI (@ANI) January 14, 2019

After Bombay High Court pulled up the state government, BEST and BMC on Friday for not providing a substitute to the people for road travelling, about 1,000 buses each from the private bus association and school bus association were deployed.

Also Read: Safer railway stations: Mumbai locals to get blue indicators for passenger security

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
