After Marathas, Congress wants reservation for Dhangars and Muslims; say ‘it will lead to harmony in state'

Maharashtra Congress Chief Ashok Chavan | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: After the Bombay High Court upheld the reservation given to the Maratha community in educational institutions and government jobs, Maharashtra Congress Chief and former chief minister Ashok Chavan called for a reservation for Dhangar (shepherd) and Muslim communities saying it will lead to communal harmony in the state.

He also said that it was the former Congress government which proposed the reservation for Maratha community but due to some legal hurdles, the matter was not resolved.

Earlier today, a bench of Justices Ranjit More and Bharti Dangre ordered to cap the reservation at 12 per cent for admission to educational institutions and 13 per cent in the government jobs. The earlier quota of 16 per cent was not accepted.

The state government on November 30, in 2018, passed the Maratha Reservation Bill and extended 16 per cent reservation in educational institutions and government jobs to the Maratha community.

The Maratha community, which has been declared as a socially and educationally backward class (SEBC) by the state government, makes up a total of 33 per cent of the total population in the state, ANI reported.

Various Maratha organisations had launched widespread protests in Mumbai, Navi Mumbai and Thane during which multiple incidents of violence, arson and stone-pelting were reported.

Protesters had also blocked many arterial roads causing massive traffic jams. Apart from this, Mumbai-Pune Expressway was closed for more than five hours.

Reports of protests turning violent were also reported from other parts of Maharashtra and as per the media inputs people resorted to stone pelting and also torched state transport buses, police and private vehicles. Sit in protests were also organised outside government offices and homes of legislators.

Later, Sakal Maratha Samaj, the umbrella organization which had called for protests, called for the suspension of the bandh all over the state. However, many protesters ignored the order and continued their protest in Thane and Navi Mumbai.

Following this, Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis appealed for calm and declared that the state government was ready for talks with the Maratha community.
