Row over Jai Shri Ram slogan: Hooghly town tense after BJP claims its worker injured in police firing

BJP supporters gheraoed a police station and allegedly damaged police vehicles at Gurap in Rural Hooghly on Thursday, after they claimed that a party supporter was injured in police firing the night before. However, police denied the allegation, claiming it was a misfire.

To protest against the alleged police firing, a group of BJP leaders reached Gurap on Thursday. Police said the BJP workers burnt tyres, raised slogans and blocked roads for hours. They also gheraoed the police station and hurled stones.

“We had to open two rounds of fire after the mob kept pelting us with stones. They attacked the police and also damaged nearly five vehicles,” a senior police official told The Indian Express.

According to police, a clash broke out between TMC and BJP supporters over Jai Shree Ram slogan at Dhaniakhali in Hooghly on Wednesday. A team was dispatched after police received an information that a man had been brutally beaten up and was admitted to hospital with a head injury around 11 pm. However, a group of BJP supporters on bikes stopped the officials midway. The officials tried to disperse the bikers from the spot, following which a clash broke out and some officials were manhandled, police added.

BJP alleged that police opened fire on them, following which one of their supporters, Jay Chand Mali (40), received a bullet injury on his chest.

However, police claimed it to be a misfire. “Some people were trying to snatch a police revolver during the scuffle and a misfire took place. Investigation is on,” SP (Rural Hooghly) Sukhendu Heera told The Indian Express.

Sources said Mali was rushed to the hospital, where he is undergoing treatment. Police claimed nearly five people were injured in the clash on Wednesday.

A team of BJP supporters, under the leadership of general secretary Raju Bandopahyay, arrived at the spot. Bandopadhyay met Mali’s family members and extended all support.

Meanwhile, three cases have been filed in connection with the case – one for attacking the police and snatching revolver, another based on a complaint filed by Mali’s relative against police, and a third is a suo moto case by Gurap police against BJP supporters for attacking the police and damaging vehicles during Thursday’s protest.
