France DEFENDS India as Pakistan conflict escalates - ‘EXERCISE RESTRAINT!’

Pakistani protesters burn an Indian national flag during a protest in Peshawar yesterday

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

New Delhi says the strike targeted a jihadi camp inside Pakistan, killing some 300 militants, but officials in Islamabad firmly deny this claim, saying no casualties had been reported. A Foreign Ministry spokesman said: “France recognises India’s legitimacy in ensuring its security against cross-border terrorism and asks Pakistan to put an end to the activities of terrorist groups established within its territory. We solemnly call on India and Pakistan to exercise restraint in order to avert any risk of military escalation and to preserve strategic stability in the region.”

India Pakistan: We are on 'brink' of war says Pakistani politician

“The resumption of bilateral dialogue between Islamabad and New Delhi is necessary in order to launch efforts to achieve a peaceful resolution to the disputes.” The European Union’s diplomacy chief, Federica Mogherini, urged both sides to exercise “maximum restraint and avoid further escalation of tensions”. The air strike earlier on Tuesday near the town of Balakot, close to the border with Pakistan’s sector of Kashmir, was the deepest cross-border raid launched by India since the last of its three wars with Pakistan in 1971, but there were conflicting claims about the alleged damage caused. A senior Indian government source that 300 militants had been killed in the strikes and that the warplanes had ventured as far as 80km (50 miles) inside Pakistan. However, no evidence was provided to back up the alleged death toll.

Federica Mogherini urged both sides to “avoid further escalation of tensions"

Pakistani officials dismissed the Indian claims, saying the Indian jet had dropped their bombs in a wooded area, causing no damage or casualties. Indian officials said the “pre-emptive” strikes had targeted a training camp belonging to the outlawed Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) group. JeM is a primarily anti-India group with strong ties to al-Qaeda and which has been on a UN terror blacklist since 2001 Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said that the “existence of such training facilities, capable of training hundreds of jihadis, could not have functioned without the knowledge of Pakistani authorities”. Islamabad denies sheltering JeM.

Pakistan says no casualties had been reported

In December 2001, Jaish fighters, along with members of another Pakistan-based militant group, Lashkar-e-Taiba, attacked India’s parliament, which almost led to a fourth war. The government said the action was ordered as India said it had intelligence that JeM was planning more attacks. Tensions between New Delhi and Islamabad have been highly charged since a suicide car bombing by Jaish militants in Indian-controlled Kashmir killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police on February 14. Both countries claim the mountainous Himalayan region of Kashmir in full but rule in part.

India Pakistan: Pakistani Foreign Ministry issue statement

The French Foreign Ministry also reiterated its condemnation of the Kashmir attack. “France utterly condemns the appalling attack carried out on February 14 against the Indian security forces in Pulwama, for which the terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed has claimed responsibility. “France, which stands alongside India in the fight against terrorism in all its forms, is fully committed to mobilising the international community to punish the terrorists responsible for this attack and to block their channels of financing.” Pakistan, for its part, said later on Tuesday that it would respond in due time, with a military spokesperson referring to its nuclear arsenal.

A candle light rally to pay tribute to the martyred 45 CRPF soldier who lost their life in Pulwama

Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale
