India and Pakistan: The deadly history of the neighbours born from conflict

India and Pakistan: The deadly history of the neighbours born from conflict

India and Pakistan: The deadly history of the neighbours born from conflict

Russell Hope, news reporter

India and Pakistan have fought six wars since the countries were formed in 1947 after being granted independence from the British Empire.

At the heart of the conflicts has been the disputed mountainous territory of Kashmir, which borders both nations and is divided into an Indian and Pakistani section. Both believe the region should be theirs completely.

Pakistan's claim is based on the fact that the majority of the area's population is Muslim, while New Delhi claims ownership because, on partition, the region's then-ruler chose to join India.

1947-48

Great bloodshed followed the creation of the largely Muslim Pakistan and its much larger neighbour, the Hindu, secular, India.

Advertisement

Around half a million people died in communal violence after the countries were created and the same amount were left homeless.

Image: Europeans were evacuated from Kashmir by the British Army after the first post-partition conflict broke out in 1947

The first conflict began in October 1947, two months after the countries came into being, following Pakistan's support of a Muslim insurgency in Kashmir.

Kashmir's Maharaja appealed to India for help in return for it becoming an Indian territory. But the nature of that agreement has long been disputed. The war ended on 1 January 1949, with the establishment of a ceasefire line.

1965

Image: Tribesmen from Waziristan who fought Indian forces in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965

The second Indo-Pak war began in April 1965 with a border dispute which escalated into fighting before Pakistan claimed victory.

It flared up again when Pakistan launched a covert offensive across the ceasefire line into Indian-administered Kashmir in August.

Image: A Kashmiri village destroyed by Pakistani infiltrators during the second Indo-Pak war in 1965

India retaliated by crossing the international border at Lahore before both committed to a UN-sponsored ceasefire.

1971

Six years later, they raised arms again after East Pakistan, located on the other side of India, demanded independence from Islamabad.

Image: A bridge blown up in 1971 on the road between India and East Pakistan, which became Bangladesh at the end of the conflict

As the conflict escalated to full civil war, around 10 million people left for India, giving Delhi the excuse to intervene.

Image: An Indian tank in Matijheel, Dhaka, East Pakistan 1971

The Pakistani army surrendered at Dhaka and more than 90,000 soldiers became Indian prisoners of war.

Image: December 1971: Bangladesh soldiers celebrate winning independence from Pakistan after a nine-month war, helped by India

East Pakistan became the independent country of Bangladesh on 6 December 1971 and the new country was recognised by Pakistan three years later.

1989

Growing Muslim resentment against Indian rule and the arrival in Kashmir of Islamic Jihadi fighters after the Soviet Union pulled out of Afghanistan led to armed resistance breaking out in 1989.

Pakistan gave "moral and diplomatic" support to the movement, but India accused its neighbour of of training and supplying weapons to militant separatists.

During the following decade, anti-Indian sentiment in Kashmir changed from being nationalistic to being essentially Islamic in nature.

1999

Conflict again erupted after India launched air strikes against Pakistani-backed forces that had infiltrated Indian-administered Kashmir, north of Kargil in 1999.

Image: Indian soldiers fire heavy artillery shells towards Pakistan during fighting in 1999

Fighting built up towards a direct conflict between the two states and tens of thousands of people were reported to have fled their homes on both sides of the ceasefire line.

Image: Pakistani soldiers chant "Allah-o-Akbar" (God is great), at a border post after fighting broke out in 1999

Later that year, General Pervez Musharraf led a military coup in Pakistan.

2001

Thirty-eight people were killed after an attack on the Kashmiri assembly in Srinagar, in Indian-controlled Kashmir in October and a month later, 14 people were killed in an attack on the Indian parliament in Delhi.

Image: A Pakistani soldier prepares for battle at the Line of Control between India and Pakistan in 2002

Image: An Indian police vehicle is attacked during a protest against Indian rule in Srinagar in 2016

India again blamed Pakistani-backed Kashmiri militants and a dramatic build up of troops along the Indo-Pakistan border followed.

In January 2002, President Musharraf promised that Pakistan would not allow terrorists to operate from Pakistani soil and again called on Delhi to resolve the dispute over Kashmir through dialogue.

India said it would wait for action to back up his words.

Tensions have continued to simmer throughout this century, with the disputed ownership of Kashmir and Pakistan's alleged support of terror groups the most frequent causes.
