Cyberwar post-Pulwama: Pakistan tried to hack 90 Indian websites on February 14, failed miserably

Pakistani hackers attacked over 90 Indian websites | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: Just hours after the dastardly Pulwama attack on February 14, Pakistani hackers attacked over 90 Indian websites and tried to hack into Indian critical systems, say reports. Though the Pakistani attackers were not able to breach the firewalls and protective measures of the critical systems, the attack forced India to use offensive measures to protect its websites. Notably, the location of the attacks was traced to Bangladesh.

Reports suggest that after the failed hacking attempt, Pakistan resorted to stroke fake news, interfering in the information flow in order to create "chaos and confusion" such as the fake news of Indian Air Force Western Air Command Chief C Hari Kumar being sacked on the day of Pulwama attack, among others.

Days after the Pulwama attack, there were reports that more than 200 Pakistani websites were hacked by an Indian hacking group, named 'Team I Crew' to protest against the suicide attack by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM). A list of the Pakistani websites that were hacked was also circulated on social media with comments like "We will never forget #14/02/2019,” "Dedicated to the martyrs sacrificed their lives in #PulwamaTerrorAttack”.

It's not clear if there's a connection between the Indian offensive measures taken after the Pakistani cyber-attack and the 'Team I Crew' hacking of Pakistani websites. Though the two countries did fight a virtual battle on cyberspace in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack.

On February 14, Pakistan based terror group JeM carried out a suicide attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district in which at least 40 CRPF personnel lost their lives. The attack was one of the deadliest in the last decade. In response to the terrorist attack, India carried out air strikes on February 26 across the Line of Control (LoC) hitting JeM's training camps and launchpads
