Question Of Political Will

(MENAFN- Kashmir Observer) This refers to your thought-provoking article ' Dialogue, not war will resolve Kashmir Issue ' (KO- March 7). Terrorism and insurgency are the unending battles India has been fighting since Independence. It also indicates that considering from any angle, terrorism is an activity which calls for severe condemnation. The threat to peace-loving societies from the globalization of terror is an ugly reality of today's world. Terrorism has emerged as one of the gravest threats to peace and a democratic polity. No organization, irrespective of whether it claims to espouse the cause of the majority or the minority community, can be allowed to inflame passions, spread hatred and incite violence.

The overwhelming majority of Indian Muslims are loyal, law-abiding citizens. They have not allowed their anger against the Indian government or the Hindus for any reason to drive them into the arms of terrorist organisations. India is an urgent need for an integrated plan to launch a war against terrorism. The rapid increase in infiltration into India from neighbouring countries has further aggravated the crisis of internal security in the country. Proof enough that where there is a political will there is always a way. And that all this self-righteous talk of preserving human and/or democratic rights, etc. is humbug aimed at achieving set party political aims and shirking of responsibility.

No doubt, our security forces can seek out terrorists and put them behind bars or kill them in encounters, but that amounts to cutting off some branches of the terror tree & such actions cannot root out terrorism. Government should make immediate diplomatic efforts to pursue the international community to put the ISI on the International watch. Until the country learns the basic lessons of modern security, tragic deaths and destruction are bound to continue.

Most of us also agree that a stable global order has to rest on the four strong pillars of peace, security, sustainable development and democracy. International cooperation, exchange of information and a strong intelligence grid are necessary to fight the menace is the need of the hour. Proof enough that where there is a political will there is always a way. And that all this self-righteous talk of preserving human and/or democratic rights, etc. is humbug aimed at achieving set party political aims and shirking of responsibility. Vinod C. Dixit Ahmedabad – 380 015
