Rahul Gandhi will again fight from Amethi, will win by huge margin: Sachin Pilot

India Today TV interviewed deputy chief minister of Rajasthan Sachin Pilot.

The Congress leader talked about Sam Pitroda, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), dynasty politics, and victory under the leadership of Rahul Gandhi.

When Sachin Pilot was asked about Rahul Gandhi becoming the next prime minister if the Congress wins the upcoming elections, he said, "If the Congress comes to power, Rahul Gandhi can be the next prime minister of India. However, Rahul Gandhi becoming the next prime minister, if the Congress wins, also depends on what the alliance partners decide upon."

Recently, a close aide of Rahul Gandhi and Indian Overseas Congress chief, Sam Pitroda, questioned the death toll in the Balakot airstrike by the Indian Air Force (IAF) in response to the Pulwama terror attack and said it was wrong to attack Pakistan. "Don't know much about attacks. It happens all the time," Sam Pitroda said.

When asked about Sam Pitroda's statement, Sachin Pilot said, "What Sam Pitroda said on Pulwama is his personal opinion. The party does not agree with it."

Shedding light on Rahul Gandhi fighting from Amethi and the proposal to have Rahul Gandhi contest from another seat, Sachin Pilot told India Today TV, "Rahul Gandhi will again fight from Amethi and win by a huge margin. His opponent had earlier lost to him and will lose again. There is a proposal to have Rahul Gandhi contest from another seat. That does not show that he is a weak leader or is not confident of victory. Even Indira Gandhi had fought from two seats."

Commenting on dynasty politics, Sachin Pilot said, "Dynasty should not be a disqualifier for anyone wanting to contest elections. Ashok Gehlot's son has been working with me in the party."

Sachin Pilot, talking about winning the upcoming elections under the leadership of Rahul Gandhi, said, "I am very happy where I am right now. Our mission is to ensure victory in the Lok Sabha elections under Rahul Gandhi's leadership."

CONGRESS AND RAJASTHAN

Talking about the BJP vs Congress in the desert state, "We are almost ready with our list of candidates for Rajasthan. People are not very excited with the BJP's list of candidates announced so far."

"We are working as a team in Rajasthan. I have already announced that no one from my family will be trying for a ticket for the Lok Sabha elections," Sachin Pilot added.
