ND Tiwari’s son was choked to death by wife: Cops

NEW DELHI: Former UP and Uttarakhand chief minister N D Tiwari ’s son, Rohit Shekhar Tiwari , was murdered by his wife, Delhi Police claimed on Wednesday. The accused, Apoorva Shukla Tiwari, was arrested after she allegedly admitted to strangling her husband and smothering him to death with a pillow while he was sleeping on April 16.Rohit, 40, was found dead in his Defence Colony house in south Delhi on the evening of April 16, with heavy bleeding from his nose. He was initially believed to have died of cardiac arrest but police had kept the murder angle open right from the start.Police said there were three motives behind the murder: Apoorva’s troubled marriage, the fear of property seemingly slipping out of her hands and Rohit’s proximity to a woman relative.Police said, on the night of the crime, Apoorva had a brief spat with Rohit on his return from a trip to Kotdwar . Later, she went to his bedroom around 12.45am, allegedly sat on top of her sleeping husband and began strangling him with her hands. Rohit, who was heavily drunk, struggled to save himself and, in the process, his nose hit Apoorva’s head, which led to the nose-bleed.After Apoorva held him down for some time, Rohit stopped resisting but kept groaning. Apoorva then allegedly pressed a pillow against his face until he stopped breathing. Rohit was physically weak and died in a few minutes, according to the police.Apoorva then covered him with a sheet and went to sleep in her room. The next morning, she didn’t wake up till 10am and a servant went to wake her up only when Rohit’s mother, Ujjwala, came to their house briefly. She was told that Rohit was unwell and was sleeping in his room.Apoorva, 35, a practising lawyer, has been taken on two days of police custody for further interrogation.As per the crime branch, Rohit had gone to Kotdwar along with his mother, brother and the female relative on April 10. He had hastily returned on April 15, citing personal work. He travelled with the woman relative in one car, while the other members of the family came in another vehicle. On the way, he consumed a bottle of whisky along with the woman. After reaching home around 10.30pm, Rohit had a fight with his wife. Around 11pm, he had his dinner and went to his room on the first floor.In the morning after the murder, Apoorva asked a household help to wake up Rohit, police said. When the help reached the room, he found Rohit’s body was cold and there was blood around his nose and on the pillow and bed.Apoorva asked the help to clean the blood with a tissue paper and insisted on taking him to a hospital in her car, but the helps had called an ambulance by then.When Rohit reached the hospital, the doctors declared him dead. Cops reached Rohit’s house for an inquiry after this but Apoorva refused to allow them entry saying that the incident was a case of natural death due to excessive drinking.The twist in the case had emerged when the autopsy report mentioned the cause of death to be smothering and strangulation. The crime branch was roped in and a team led by DCP Joy Tirkey narrowed down on Apoorva’s role after a series of interrogation sessions involving all occupants of Tiwari’s house. “A joint team of ACPs Anil Dureja and Arvind Kumar confronted her with evidences for four days after which she admitted to have smothered and strangled her husband in a fit of rage,” said DCP Tirkey.Rohit was a heart patient and had undergone a bypass surgery in 2012. He was on medication and was unable to take stress. He had suffered his first heart attack at the age of 27 and also a brain haemorrhage, due to which his sleep cycles were erratic.Rohit also suffered from depression since his career in politics was not taking off, due to which he had started drinking heavily, police said. This had led to discord in his marital life.
