Nine MLAs, 10 MPs in the fray in Punjab

No less than nine leaders are eyeing to traverse the road from Punjab Vidhan Sabha to the Parliament during Lok Sabha elections.

Banking on their not only tried and tested, but also winning horses, the major political players in the State are banking on their elected representatives to romp home to victory in the May 19 elections.

While the ruling Congress and its arch rival Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) has decided to lay their bet on two sitting MLAs each, Bharatiya Janta Party has fielded a sitting legislator from one out of the total three seats it contests in alliance with the SAD.

Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), which has snatched the position of the main opposition party from SAD after 2017 state assembly polls by bagging 20 seats, has also decided to field its one MLA in the ensuing elections.

A total of three sitting MLAs would be representing the Punjab Democratic Alliance (PDA) — a conglomeration of six political outfits and newly-created splinter groups.

Maximum three legislators would be facing each other in the most watched-out electoral battle of Bathinda against the SAD’s sitting MP and the Union Minister Harsimat Kaur Badal. Congress’ MLA from Gidderbaha Raja Amarinder Singh Warring, AAP’s MLA from Talwandi Sabo Prof Baljinder Kaur, and AAP’s ‘rebel’ MLA from Bholath Sukhpal Singh Khaira would fight it out against each other in the known Badals’ bastion.

Khaira, who had rebelled against his party after he was unceremoniously removed from the post of the Leader of Opposition and left AAP, floated his own political outfit by the name of Punjab Ekta Party (PEP) and would be contesting his first Lok Sabha election from Bathinda as PDA’s joint candidate.

Another AAP’s ‘rebel’ MLA who left AAP to join Khaira’s PEP, Master Baldev Singh Jaiton, would also be testing himself in the Faridkot constituency. Elected legislator from Jaiton assembly segment, Master Baldev would also contest against Congress’ Mohd Sadique and SAD’s Gulzar Singh Ranike as joint candidate of the PDA.

Lok Insaaf Party, which contested 2017 polls in alliance with AAP but parted ways after Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal’s meek apology to SAD leader Bikram Majithia, is also the part of PDA. Its president and Atam Nagar MLA Simarjeet Singh Bains would contest from Ludhiana Lok Sabha seat.

In 2014, Bains had also contested from Ludhiana as an independent and managed to bag more than one lakh votes.

Congress has fielded its another MLA from Chabbewal, Dr Raj Kumar Chabbewal, from Hoshiarpur reserve constituency, while denying the ticket to its former MP and former Union Minister Santosh Chaudhary, who has been lobbying hard to get party nomination either for her or her daughter Namita Chaudhary.

Pushed back at the third spot in the state Assembly after staying in power for a decade, the Akali Dal has also decided to field its two MLAs, including party chief Sukhbir Badal and former finance minister Parminder Singh Dhindsa.

Sukhbir, who has been announced the party candidate from Ferozepur only a day before, would be returning to the national level politics after over two decades to revive the party’s dwindling fortunes in Punjab. He is currently representing Jalalabad assembly segment, a part of Ferozepur constituency.

Hit by rebellion by the traditional Akali leaders and facing allegations in sacrilege and related firing incidents, SAD is facing its worst ever political crisis forcing the party to field its stalwarts to ensure its victory in the crucial elections.

Earlier reluctant, sitting Lehra Gaga MLA Parminder Dhindsa is fighting SAD’s candidate from Sangrur notwithstanding his father and Akali stalwart Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa’s advice against contesting polls under Sukhbir’s leadership.

Sangrur’s former MP and former Union Minister, Dhindsa was the first one to raise the banner of revolt against SAD and resigning from all party posts citing health concerns. Sitting Rajya Sabha MP, Dhindsa was recently conferred with the Padma Bhushan award.

BJP, which has just three MLAs in the 117-member House in Punjab, has also declared its Phagwara MLA Som Parkash as its candidate from Hoshiarpur replacing the sitting MO and the Union Minister Vijay Sampla.

Besides the sitting MLAs, the parties have also reposed its faith on the former lawmakers or ministers.

Congress has fielded two former MPs and Union Ministers — Preneet Kaur from Patiala and Manish Tewari from Sri Anandpur Sahib. Aming the former MLAs are Jasbir Singh Dimpa from Khadoor Sahib, Mohd Sadique from Faridkot, and Kewal Singh Dhillon from Sangrur.

SAD too has decided to filed former MLAs — Bibi Jagir Kaur from Khadoor Sahib, Charanjit Singh Atwal from Jalandhar, Mahesh Inder Grewal from Ludhiana, Gulzar Singh Ranike from Faridkot, and Surjit Singh Rakhra from Patiala.

10 PARLIAMENTARIANS SEEKING RE-ELECTION

As many as 10 sitting MPs, out of total 13 in Punjab, would once again try their luck in May 19 elections. Besides, one Rajya Sabha MP is also in fray.

Congress, which has four sitting MPs, has decided to once again nominate them for Lok Sabha elections. Among them are Gurdaspur MP Sunil Jakhar, Amritsar MP Gurjit Singh Aujla, Jalandhar MP Chaudhary Santokh Singh, and Ludhiana MP Ravneet Singh Bittu.

Winning four seats in 2014 general elections, SAD went on to lose its two sitting MPs—Ranjit Singh Brahmpura from Khadoor Sahib and Sher Singh Ghubaya from Ferozepur—in these five-year time.

While senior leader Brahmpura decided to part ways and form an Akali faction — SAD Taksali, Ghubaya rebelled against the party and joined the Congress, and is now seeking re-election on Congress ticket. Brahmpura, on the other hand, decided against contesting the elections.

Left with two MPs, SAD has re-nominated both of them — Union Minister Harsimrat Badal from Bathinda, and Prem Singh Chandumjra from Sri Anandpur Sahib.

BJP, which has dropped its lone MP Vijay Sampla, has decided to field its Rajya Sabha MP from Uttar Pradesh Hardeep Puri from Amritsar.

AAP, which stunned the traditional political parties in Punjab by bagging four seats in 2014, had also faced rebellion within the party. Out of four, party’s two MPs revolted. It has now re-nominated Sangrur sitting MP Bhagwant Mann and Faridkot MP Prof Sadhu Singh from their respective constituencies.

AAP’s “suspended” MP from Patiala, Dr Dharamvir Gandhi, would again give a tough fight to Patiala Royal family, but this time as PDA’s joint candidate. Dr Gandhi has also floated his own outfit, Nawan Punjab Party.

Its another sitting MP from Fatehgarh Sahib Harjinder Singh, also suspended for anti-party activities in 2015, has joined the BJP, but not contesting the elections.
