In second term, Narendra Modi must make room for people’s inputs in national security

The 2019 Lok Sabha elections saw national security emerge as a major political plank. But the debate over national security has only been limited to dealing with specific security-related episodes such as terrorist attacks at Pathankot, Uri and Pulwama; the stand-off with Chinese forces on the India-Bhutan-China border; or the security operations in the disturbed state of Jammu and Kashmir.

But a long-term strategic planning discussion of India’s national security rarely takes place, even within the government. In the absence of an overall strategy, the state relies on ad hoc responses of questionable utility. Moreover, it possesses no mechanism to permit it to learn from its experience.

Also read: If India starts now, it can finally have a National Security Doctrine by 2022

Treat cause, not symptoms

The Indian state does not possess an overarching national security strategy (NSS), which comprehensively assesses the challenges to the country and spells out policies to deal with them effectively, bearing in mind that such a strategy must be executed within the parameters laid down by the Constitution and the country’s democratic political dispensation.

National security cannot be confined to the use of coercive power of the state to overcome domestic and external threats. For example, threats to domestic peace and stability may arise from economic and social grievances. A knee-jerk reaction may leave these grievances unaddressed while the use of the coercive power exacerbates rather than ameliorates the situation. For instance, Left Wing Extremism (LWE) in India is rooted in persistent exploitation of tribal populations.

Similarly, the vulnerability of our borders is linked to large-scale smuggling and contraband trade which permits channels through which terrorists and criminals find easy access. Such threats cannot be dealt with solely through enhanced military capabilities unless the drivers of illegal trade are addressed.

The line between what is domestic and what is external is becoming increasingly blurred. For example, terrorism is a threat to domestic security but may have external links. Issues related to water security may involve dealing with neighbouring countries with which India shares its major rivers. So, a combination of domestic and external interventions may be necessary.

Also read: For 5 years, Modi put national security reforms on hold. Now, he must act fast

National security in digital age

We live in a technology-driven world where tools like internet and digitisation enable states to enhance national security, but also create new and serious security risks. Cybersecurity has become a major concern and it is only through developing advanced technological capabilities that a state may be able to defend itself against cyber-attacks. In a democracy like India, the state’s use of advanced digital technologies for surveillance and intelligence gathering must not violate the citizens’ right to privacy and freedom of expression.

There is a trade-off between enhanced security and the citizens’ rights guaranteed by the Constitution, and this must be clearly spelt out for the people of the country. National security must not become a justification for a surveillance state. The danger of relying on ad hoc responses is that they may cumulatively lead to a predatory and authoritarian state, limiting the exercise of democratic rights. An NSS must deal with this dilemma up front.

Also read: Modi should know India’s status as a nuclear weapon state demands responsible leadership

A new nuclear order

Technological change and geopolitical shifts also have an impact on India’s nuclear security. India’s nuclear deterrent must deal with the challenge of two nuclear-armed neighbours – China and Pakistan. The nuclear domain is becoming closely inter-linked with cyber and space-related capabilities. The development of India’s nuclear deterrence must take into account the impacts of such technological change.

The overall nuclear security environment is being impacted by geopolitical shifts with the gap between the US and Russia, on the one hand, and China, on the other, being reduced significantly. The older nuclear order anchored in bilateral US-Russia arms control arrangements is now unravelling because China remains outside these arrangements. A new nuclear order is becoming necessary as we move into a world of multiple nuclear states. India will need to determine what role it should play in shaping this new nuclear order.

Effects of climate change

Ecological degradation and climate change have significant impacts on national security. There may be direct consequences of the melting of glaciers on the deployment of troops at high altitude locations on our mountainous borders. Sea-level rise as a result of global warming may inundate naval bases along our coasts. There may be large scale migration of populations from low-lying coastal plains towards higher ground and this may lead to social disruptions and economic distress, undermining domestic security. The NSS must consider this.

Also read: On nuclear policy, India can’t compromise on security to look good in international books

Open doors to feedback

Another oft-neglected dimension to India’s national security that must be integrated within the NSS is strategic communications. It relates to the indispensable need, particularly in a democracy, to shape public perceptions through constant and consistent outreach and provide a channel for feedback.

This has become a much more difficult and complex challenge due to the spread of social media, the phenomenon of fake news and the instant nature of news gathering and dissemination. Governments need to stay ahead of the news cycle, establish credibility as a source of authentic and reliable information and shape public opinion rather than be reactive all the time.

India’s national security strategy needs to take a comprehensive approach and formulate a coherent template for multi-disciplinary and multi-sectoral interventions. Such a template would serve as a guide for the government’s overall approach, ensuring that intervention in any one domain does not contradict or negate government’s policies in another domain. It is only by focusing on the big picture constantly that contradictory and wasteful policies can be avoided.

The new government under Prime Minister Narendra Modi must task national security strategy to a group of eminent persons from different disciplines. In a democracy, the NSS must be citizen-centric and must reflect the values and beliefs of the people but, at the same time, seek to raise public awareness of, and shape public perceptions about national security issues.

Also read: India must go beyond seeing climate change as a rich vs poor diplomacy battle

Pursuit of excellence

In every domain of national endeavour, there must be a pursuit of excellence and high standards. Islands of excellence cannot be sustained in an ocean of mediocrity and low quality. This need not conflict with properly designed affirmative action policies designed to reduce and eventually eliminate the consequences of longstanding social and economic disabilities suffered by sections of India’s citizens. There may be a need for new institutions to deal with newly emerging challenges. This, too, must be included in the NSS.

It is recommended that the NSS that the new government prepares should be a public document – open to public debate and review. A well-informed, vigilant and educated public opinion is the best assurance of national security.

The author is a former Foreign Secretary and is currently Senior Fellow, CPR.

This is the fourth in a series of articles titled “Policy Challenges 2019-2024” under ThePrint-Centre for Policy Research (CPR) collaboration. A longer version of this piece is available on the CPR website at https://www.cprindia.org/. The full policy document on a range of issues addressed in this series will be available on CPR’s website from 4 June.
