Northrop To Update TLMs | Qatar Beefs Up Defense Against Iran | Bulgaria To Buy New F-16s

Americas

QED Systems won a $17.6 million contract for the storage, overhaul, assessment, repair and industrial activity to make ready for issue critical steam plant valves to support Naval Surface Warfare Center Philadelphia Division engineering, technical, production and subsequent logistic support services. The services are required to develop and integrate technological improvements for Steam Safety and Reliability Program critical spares and 2SCOG program for steam valves installed onboard current LHD-1 Class and LCC-19 Class. The LHD-1or Wasp is an amphibious assault ship class. Its lead ship commissioned on July 29, 1989. The LCC-19 or Blue Ridge Class is a class of amphibious command ships. The lead ship, USS Blue Ridge was put “in commission special” on November 14, 1970. The contract also supports system life cycle requirements required by Naval Surface Warfare Center, Philadelphia Division, Code 412. Work will be performed in Virginia Beach, Virginia, and is expected to be complete by July 2024.

Northrop Grumman will upgrade Target Locator Modules (TLMs) under a $17.6 million award from the US Army announced in a press release on July 9. The TLMs will be retrofitted with high accuracy capability to modernize the Lightweight Laser Designator Rangefinder 2H (LLDR 2H) man-portable targeting system. The LLDR 2H hybrid sensor solution fuses data from a digital magnetic compass and celestial navigation sensors to provide fast and high accuracy target location and long-range imaging for high-value targets. According to Northrop Grumman, more than 2,700 LLDR systems have been delivered and fielded to date.

Middle East & Africa

Qatar is further building up its defense against Iranian missiles, Defense One reports. The country committed to acquiring Patriot interceptors and National Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile Systems (NASAMS). The NASAM is a medium-range, network-centric air defense system designed and developed jointly by Raytheon and Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace. The system can be deployed to identify, engage and destroy aircraft, helicopters, cruise missiles and drones. In November, the State Department approved a $215 million sale of NASAMS to Qatar. The patriot is a surface-to-air missile manufactured by Raytheon. Qatar already operates Patiots. In 2012, the US DoS approved a sale of the interceptors to the country.

Europe

Bulgaria’s government approved a deal on Wednesday with the United States to buy eight new Lockheed Martin F-16 fighters for its Air Force for $1.3 billion. The NATO member is looking to replace its aging Soviet-made MiG-29s and improve compliance with NATO standards. The decision needs parliament’s approval before it can be completed. It is expected that the deal would easily win parliament’s endorsement in a vote likely to take place next week. Defense Minister, Krasimir Karakachanov, who is also Deputy Prime Minister, said there was an option for the US Congress to reduce the price by $60 million due to the cost of adapting an Air Base in southern Bulgaria to the F-16’s requirements.

Asia-Pacific

The US State Department approved two contracts worth $2.2 billion for possible Foreign Military Sales to Taiwan for Abrams tanks and Stinger missiles. On Monday the DoS announced it approved a $2 billion sale to the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office (TECRO) in the United States for M1A2T Abrams Tanks and related equipment and support. TECRO had requested to buy 108 M1A2T Abrams Tanks. The M1 Abrams is a Main Battle Tank for modern armored ground warfare. Production of the new tanks will be at Anniston Army Depot, and the Joint Systems Manufacturing Center in Lima, Ohio. Also on Monday, the State Department approved a sale to TECRO for Stinger missiles and related equipment and support. The deal is valued at $223.6 million. The Stinger Missile is a Man-Portable Air-Defense System that operates as an infrared homing surface-to-air missile. Raytheon Missile Systems is the primary contractor for the 250 Block I-92F MANPAD Stinger missiles and four Block I-92F MANPAD Stinger Fly-to-Buy missiles, as well as a trainers, parts and other support.

The Australian government has issued a request for information (RfI) for a replacement of the Australian Army’s fleet of Airbus Helicopters ARH Tiger armed reconnaissance helicopters. The Australian Department of Defense’s Capability Acquisition and Sustainment Group is seeking information to acquire a total of 29 airframes under the Land 4503 program. Of these 29, 24 are to be based at a single location, with a further five to be used for training operations. The timelines for the program anticipate an initial operating capability (IOC) of a squadron of 12 aircraft by 2026, with full operational capability (FOC) from 2028.

India received two new heavy-lift Chinook helicopters. The Indian Air Force bought 15 Chinook and 22 AH-64E Apache helicopters from the US’s defense company Boeing. The IAF had placed the order in 2015. The first four helicopters arrived in February. The induction of the two new CH-47F (I) Chinook helicopters took place on Monday. The Chinook has unsurpassed ability to deliver heavy payloads to high altitudes, and is eminently suitable for operations in the high Himalayas. According to Boeing, the aircraft has been battle-tested in diverse, extreme conditions throughout the world, and has proven capability to operate in the wide range of conditions that typify the Indian subcontinent.

Today’s Video

Watch: Alert : Airbus, Boeing May Pull Out of Fighter Jet Race They Say is Rigged for F-35
