United oppn could trigger bedlam in RS over govt 'haste' in pushing bills

NEW DELHI: The opposition plans to take up a raft of issues which it argues projects the BJP-led government as eager to run Parliament by cornering rivals, a development which could trigger turbulence in Upper House during the remainder of the budget session A united opposition camp walked out of Rajya Sabha Tuesday and then held discussions airing their grievances and resolving to push the government. The opposition leaders said the government's desire to push through bills without adequate time for amendments and discussion has adverse implications for the functioning of Parliament.While the immediate provocation was the controversy over US President Donald Trump's remarks on Kashmir and the opposition's insistence that Prime Minister Narendra Modi personally clarify the issue, sources said the resentment in opposition runs on issues like the government refusing to refer key bills to parliamentary committees and the PM's junking the convention of briefing Parliament after international visits.Comprising Congress, RJD, DMK, AAP, Left parties, TMC and SP among others, the opposition seems angered by the government's aggression in Lok Sabha where it has a brute majority. The immediate trigger was passage of the RTI amendment bill in the Lower House where the demand was that it be referred to the standing committee for vetting.At its deliberations on Tuesday, the anti-BJP grouping resolved to resist the Centre in the Upper House where it has the numbers to make its arguments count. It has been decided that the opposition would insist on referral of key bills to parliamentary panels with Trinamool's Derek O'Brien pointing to a high number of bills being sent to committees in the past and the rising recourse to ordinances. A boycott of Parliament in both Houses is also being considered.On their part, ministers said bills were being discussed at length and Parliament had sat till late hours. They contended that in the past opposition had sought to use its numbers in Rajya Sabha to undercut the will of Lok Sabha where NDA had a big and clear majority. Bills were sent to committees, sometimes more than once, and stalled. With the government claiming that standing committees were still to be constituted, opposition members said the Centre can refer the bills to "select committees". The amendment bills on RTI and Motor Vehicles, passed by the Lower House, would face such demands from the opposition in Rajya Sabha.AAP appears agitated over the passage of Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Bill in the Upper House. A party leader argued that it has serious implications for Delhi state human rights body.Parties were also peeved that Rajya Sabha conducted business despite a walkout by the entire opposition on Tuesday. "Is this how the government wants to conduct the proceedings?" an MP asked, with members talking about the Upper House turning into a 'rubber stamp" . It is not clear if the Upper House would witness blockade as happened in the last government. However, the opposition MPs said if the government does not heed its demand on referring key legislations to select panels for vetting, they would be left with little option but protest . The opposition will meet again on Wednesday to chalk out its future strategy.
