Sanjay suits the role perfectly in KGF 2: Yash

The actor also promises exceptional action scenes featuring the two.

Kannada superstar Yash, who is busy shooting for the second chapter of the 2018 release KGF franchise, is happy to welcome Sanjay Dutt into the fold.

Talking about Sanjay’ s role in the film, Yash confirms, “Yes, he’s playing the archvillain named Adheera. The poster has evoked enormous interest. He will start shooting with us this month. We’re very happy to have him. He suits the role to perfection. But until all the formalities were completed, we didn’t want to make any announcements. Now Sanjay Dutt is definitely with us.”

The actor also promises exceptional action scenes featuring the two. “Since he is pitched against me in the script, there are going to be some major fight sequences between us. We’re working towards making the action sequences very special,” he reveals.

When asked if the actions scenes would allure the audience, the actor assures that it will be a great experience for the fans of both the actors. “It will be as special, as Mr Dutt’s fans and my fans would expect them to be when we come together. It is very important for us to assure that everything is larger, and more crowd-pleasing this time than the last time. And I promise, you won’t be disappointed,” he shares.

Yash also agrees that the Sanjay’s presence is very important in the sequel. “Having him in the film is very important. He propels the plot forward just as much as I do. The film can’t work without our characters. We’ve shot only 15-20 percent of the film so far. We were waiting for Mr Dutt to join us, which he will be doing very shortly,” exclaims the actor.

Making the sequel in full-fledged Hindi version, Yash informs that Dutt will be seen speaking Hindi lines. “This will be a complete Hindi film and Mr Dutt will speak his lines in Hindi. We’ve actors from Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Mumbai, and they will bring their own cultural flavour to the table. But I must say, KGF is not about the spoken language. The visuals and the emotions are the mainstay of the film. Everything that the audience will see and feel would add to the film’s strength as a path-breaking franchise,” says the actor.

Busy with the shooting, Yash doesn’t get enough time to be with his seven-month old daughter Ayra. “As soon as I pack up, I rush to be with my daughter. There’s no place on this earth I’d rather be at. Ayra has changed my life,” gushes the doting father. Meanwhile, Yash and his wife Radhika are also expecting their second child. Ask if he wishes for another child to complete the family, the actor responds, “Son or daughter we will welcome another baby with equal happiness. Having tasted the joy of parenthood, we can’t wait to go into it again.”
