CBI chargesheets 27 in murder case of Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh leader in Kerala

CBI chargesheets 27 in murder case of Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh leader in Kerala

According to the CBI, the charge sheet mentions about 130 witnesses, 112 documents and the weapons used in the assault.

news Crime

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Thursday filed a charge sheet against 27 people, including those associated with the Communist Party Of India-Marxist (CPI-M) in Kerala, in the 2012 murder case of a Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) leader, the labour wing of the Rashtriya Swayamsewak Sangh (RSS).

The CBI filed a charge sheet before the Chief Judicial Magistrate (CJM) court in the state against 27 accused, including members of the CPI-M, trade union, gang members from Payyoli Muchukunnu and Vatakara areas in Kerala, alleging conspiracy, house trespass, attacking with deadly weapons, murder under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure.

According to the CBI, the charge sheet mentions about 130 witnesses, 112 documents and the weapons used in the assault. It said that departmental action was also recommended against a then Inspector of Police and a then Deputy SP of Kerala Police.

The CBI registered the case on March 29, 2016 on the orders of the Kerala High Court.

It was alleged that Manoj CT, an auto driver, union leader of Koyilandi (Kozhikode district) and a member of the BMS, who contested the panchayat election in 2011, was allegedly attacked by CPI-M workers on the night of February 12, 2012, in retaliation to an attack on one of their members, which took place four days prior to the incident.

According to the CBI, CPI-M party worker Kuriyad Babu was attacked on February 9, 2012. In the attack, Manoj suffered severe injuries and died next morning in the hospital.

The police registered a case and filed a charge sheet against 15 accused in May 2012. The agency said that during investigation, it arrested 10 persons, including leaders of the CPI-M for their alleged involvement in the murder case.

The agency said that it has named Biju, Sajith.K.T, Nizam, Sanooj.V.P, Sanoop.P, Nidheesh, Priyesh.C.T, Sumesh.K.V, Suneesh.K, Akhilnath, Ramsheed, Akhil, Unnikrishnan, T Chandu, P V Ramchandran, P K Kumaran, N C Mustafa, K T Ligesh, C Suresh Babu, Anoop, Arunnath, K V Ratheesh, Preman K.K, P K Valsan, Gharesh A T, Sanuraj K K, and Vipin Das, all residents of Kozhikode district in the state, under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code.
