2-year-old thrown out of sixth floor by grandmother over conflicts with daughter-in-law, in Mumbai

Screams and cries lined an apartment building in Mumbai, India on early morning Saturday, September 28, when a two-year-old toddler’s lifeless body on the ground after it was deliberately thrown out from the sixth floor.

A 50-year-old woman was arrested by Mumbai Police on Sunday for killing her two-year-old granddaughter in Mumbai’s Malad suburb. The accused allegedly threw off her granddaughter while she was asleep, according to a report by news magazine India Today's website.

The accused has been identified as Ruksana Obedulla Ansari.

Residents of the area found the child’s body, who has been identified as Jiya Ansari, and informed her family staying on the sixth floor of the building.

According to reports, the parents ran downstairs and found their baby girl lying lifeless in a pool of blood with her head smashed to the ground.

At first, it was suspected that toddler might have fallen out of the window on her own while the family members were asleep but evidence from the scene of the crime suggested otherwise.

Police officials noticed that the window was shut while the baby had fallen. Officials also found that the main door of the house was shut in the morning, reported India Today.

Dilip Sawant, Additional Commissioner of Police for the north region of Mumbai, asked Kurar police station officials to conduct a detailed probe into the incident and question as many people possible including the family members.

"The initial questioning of the family members did not yield any results so some of them were questioned again and this time the victim's grandmother, who was her father's step-mother, changed her statement," a senior police official was quoted as saying.

Upon questioning the grandmother, who is now booked for murder, police grew suspicious because she kept changing her statements.

"Ruksana Obedulla Ansari was again grilled and she later revealed that she had thrown the kid as she had a fight with her daughter-in-law, the victim's mother," the police official added.

"Ruksana would regularly get into fights with her daughter-in-law and to teach her a lesson, she threw off her granddaughter while the victim's mother and other family members were asleep on Saturday morning and went back to sleep again," a police official said.

Police said the minor was asleep when she was thrown out of the window and she died of multiple head injuries due to impact.
