5 Civilians Injured In Grenade Attack In Srinagar's Hari Singh High Street Market

New Delhi:

At least five people were injured in a grenade attack in Hari Singh High street area of Srinagar on Saturday. The area has been cordoned off by the security forces following the attack and massive search operation to nab the attackers is underway. The militants hurled a grenade in Hari Singh High Street Market, which is a few hundred metres away from the city centre Lal Chowk, a police official said. All the injured were civilians. They were rushed to a nearby hospital where their condition is stated to be stable.

"Five civilians were injured, all are stated to be stable now. The area is under cordon. Search in the area is in progress," news agency ANI quoted Jammu and Kashmir police as saying. The incident took place in the afternoon when unidentified militants hurled a grenade in the High Street Market, few hundred metres away from the Lal Chowk.

The explosion also damaged the windows of a car. However, the damage could have been more but the market was shut and only a few vendors had set up their stalls in the area. The attack has come hours after Jammu and Kashmir Principal Secretary Rohit Kansal announced to lift the communication blockade in the Valley from Monday.

Also Read | Jammu And Kashmir: Postpaid Mobile Services To Be Restored From Monday

"Mobile phone connections, to be specific, all postpaid mobile phone connections, irrespective of service provider, will resume from Monday - October 14th at noon. This will happen across the state, in all 10 districts of Kashmir," Kansal had said earlier in the day.

Kashmir has been under total communication blockade since August 5 when the central government announced to revoke Article 370, a constitutional provision that had given the state a significant autonomy for decades. With the mounting international pressure, New Delhi decided to give partial relief to the people of the Valley after more than two months.

Search operation underway at Hari Singh High Street in Srinagar following a grenade attack earlier today. More details awaited, reports ANI. #JammuAndKashmir



ðŸ“¸: ANI



READ full story: https://t.co/7riNpFmbs1 pic.twitter.com/71RELOQm4O — News Nation (@NewsNationTV) October 12, 2019

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
