At 60% turnout, state fares worse than in 2014 polls

RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat

Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis

Union surface transport minister Nitin Gadkari

NCP president Sharad Pawar

Supriya Sule

Ajit Pawar

Mumbai Photos: From first-time voters to senior citizens and politicians, highlights of polling day 1 21 What's your excuse? Abdul Latif Choudhary from Dharavi casts his vote. Only 6.5 per cent voter turnout recorded till 10 am in Mumbai. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/ BCCL Responsibility first Aruna Rayar, a 70-year-old, Ghatkopar resident, was one of the first residents to step out on Monday morning to practice her right to vote. Senior citizens across the city have shown the importance of voting by coming out in huge numbers. No excuse Visually impaired Dr Pramod Trivedi, and his wife Anuradha Trivedi cast their votes at Shivaji Park polling booth. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/BCCL

Leprosy patients from Anandwan, Chandrapur exercise their rights Leprosy patients, who had been denied of their voting right for years, stepped out and celebrated the festival of democracy by voting. Out of 973 eligible voters in Anandwan, 535 voters voted within 5 hours. They also urged citizens to step out and vote. Beach Warrior Afroz Shah cast vote Afroz Shah, best known for beach-up initiative at Versova, shows his inked finger. Lawyer Shah's weekend clean-up drives made what was considered virtually impossible - possible. Versova beach saw a transformation after months of a sustained effort from volunteers across age groups. Mumbai policemen cast their vote On duty police officers from Samta Nagar police station at a polling station in Kandivali East show their inked fingers. Mumbai's auto to the rescue Mumbai's auto rickshaw driver come to the rescue of senior citizens in Borivali. Auto driver provided assistance to senior citizens and those unable to walk at Mary Immaculate School in Borivali, where voters have to climb a number of steps to the polling booth. He made 25 trips, so far, ferrying senior citizens to the polling station. Mumbai's former top cop votes Former Mumbai Police Commissioner Julio Ribeiro after casting his vote for the Worli Assembly constituency. Shiv Sena's Aaditya Thackeray and NCP's Suresh Mane are contesting in battle for Worli seat. Voters in Kurla Women voters in Kurla show their inked fingers after voting. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/ BCCL My Vote Matters Padma Shri awardee and sand artist from Odisha created a beautiful sand art to urge voters to step out and practice their right. Early birds Senior citizen Shobha Natre, Dahisar resident, 70, was among the first ones to step out and cast her vote at Shailendra High School despite having knee problems.

We have voted, Have you? Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray, Yuva Sena chief and Worli seat candidate along with many other leaders show their finger marked with indelible ink after casting voteshow their finger marked with indelible ink after casting vote. Taking to Twitter, Aaditya wrote, "We have voted. Have you? Do step out and vote today! This is the most powerful voice we have. This is that moment that defines governance and the future of the State." NCP turned Shiv Sena leader Sachin Ahir casts vote Shiv Sena leader Sachin Ahir and his family members show their finger marked with indelible ink after casting vote. Photo: PTI Cancer patient casts his vote Cancer patient Mangesh Mhatre casts his vote with wife Shubhangi. Photo by Shruti Ganpatye/ BCCL Senior Citizen voting in Thane Thane police help a senior citizen to the polling booth through uneven roads in Thane. Vinod Tawde votes with wife Varsha BJP leader Vinod Tawde cast his vote at a school in Vile Parle along with his wife, Varsha. Tawde, who is a cabinet minister, was not given a ticket by the BJP. He won his last election from Borivali in 2014 but was not re-nominated. Sunil Rane is the BJP's candidate from Borivali in the 2019 Maharashtra Assembly Elections. BJP's Prasda Lad votes with his family BJP leader Prasad Lad cast his vote along with his family members on Monday. Lad is also the Vice President for BJP Maharashtra state unit. He is a member of Maharashtra Legislative Council. Sakhi Matdan Kendra in Chembur Sakhi Matdan Kendras, the polling booths entirely managed by women, have been set up the authorities. These centres are exclusively taken care of by women, including police personnel, electoral officers and other employees. Scouts and guides help voters Young scouts and guides help voters at Hansraj Morarji School in Andheri. Family time BJP MLA Parag Alavani and his family cast their votes at M.L. Dahanukar College in Vile Parle East. The sitting MLA is seeking re-election and is pitted against Congress' Jayanti Siroya and MNS' Juilee Shende. Somaiya family cast their vote Kirit Somaiya and family cast their votes at Tarun Utkarsh School, Mulund. Somaiya's mother, Gunawanti Somaiya is an 87-year-old senior citizen.

Election Commission

Untitled Carousel Mumbai records turnout of 50.59 per cent; Bandra West and Colaba put up worst show Records turnout of 50.59%; Bandra West and Colaba put up worst show.

Photos: Pune steps out to vote; pictures from polling day in Pune, Baramati and other cities from Maharashtra 1 39 What's stopping you? Differently-abled Surekha Khude went on to cast her vote at the Parvati constituency. Photo by Archana More/BCCL Elders vote in Gadchiroli A number of elderly people came out to cast their votes in Gadhchiroli. They were extended a helping hand by locals, volunteers and even auto rickshaw and tempo drivers in reaching the booths. Photo courtesy: Twitter/ @PIBMumbai Students help senior citizens Students belonging to the NSS group helped senior citizens and the differently-abled outside the Paud Road polling station. Photo by Mahendra Kolhe/BCCL Makeshift bridge for voters Rain created a ruckus at Kambleswar polling station in Baramati as the area was layered with mud and sludge. However, people came up with a unique solution to cast their votes. They lined up trucks from the entrance to the booth and created a makeshift bridge for the ease of people. A muddy election Voters are forced to walk on a muddy road at the Gitabai bumb school polling station in Daund city. Photo by Nikhil Ghorpade/BCCL One chocolate per vote Children at Lohegaon went door-to-door giving chocolates to those who voted. They also motivated others who had not voted to step out and fulfil their duty. People in Wagholi appeal others to vote People in Wagholi cast their votes along with their friends and families. After that, they even appealed to the public to exercise their rights. They held up placards and banners urging people to vote. Selfie point outside Akola polling station Voters got their pictures clicked at the selfie points set up outside the Akola polling station. A couple can be seen clicking a picture of themselves after casting their votes. Photo courtesy: Twitter/@PIBMumbai Voters in Amravati People turned out in huge numbers at Amravati polling stations to cast their votes. Young and aged alike came together and exercised their right. Photo courtesy: Twitter/@PIBMumbai The family comes out to vote A family of father, mother and daughter happily posed for the cameras after casting their votes and exercising their democratic right at Kasba Peth polling booth in Pune. Photo courtesy: Twitter/@PIBMumbai Dabbu Aswani attacked outside his house Former deputy mayor and PCMC corporater Dabbu Aswani was attacked by unknown assailants near his house. The attackers came in four cars and fled leaving one behind. The car was loaded with weapons. The city police is looking into the matter. Aswani claimed that the attacks have been done to create chaos during the voting process. Sangli polling station decked up for elections The model polling station in Islampur, Sangli was decorated by voluteers for the voting day. The entrance and the corridors were adorned with balloons and rangoli designs. A first-timer casts her vote The young as well as the aged have come together to exercise their right to vote. A young girl, who is a first-time voter, cast her vote in Pune and was very happy about it. Photo courtesy: Twitter/@PIBMumbai One responsible citizen! A physically-challenged man named Mohanish Nikam cast his vote along with his wife at Albachat Bhawan in Pune. Photo courtesy: Twitter/@PIBMumbai Prithviraj Chavan votes with family Former Chief Minister MLA Prithviraj Chavan, a candidate for Congress-NCP alliance in the Karhad South assembly constituency casts his vote. Medha Kulkarni casts her vote BJP MLA from Kothrud Medha Kulkarni cast her vote along with her husband on Monday. Photo by Nikhil Ghorpade/BCCL Prakash Javadekar votes in Kothrud Union Information and Broadcasting minister Prakash Javadekar voted at Bal Shikshan Mandir Mayur Colony in Kothrud. BJP's Chandrakant Patil is pitted against MNS's Kishor Shinde from the Kothrud constituency. Crowd at Shivaji Nagar booth Voters are standing in a long queue at Vikhe Patil School, Shivaji Nagar, and waiting for their turn to cast votes. Photo by Rahul Deshmukh/BCCL Age no barrier An elderly woman from Gondia was assisted to the polling booth by her family and officials for casting her vote. She covered the distance from her house to the booth in a wheelchair. Photo courtesy: Twitter/ @PIBMumbai Devendra Fadnavis casts his vote Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis reached Nagpur with wife Amruta Fadnavis and mother Sarita Fadnavis to cast his vote. He also urged people to come out and vote and exercise their right to choose the right government. Sand art for voter awareness Renowned sand artist Sudarsan Pattnaik created a beautiful sand art in a bid to spread awareness about the importance of voting. It has "My vote matters" written on it. Photo courtesy: Twitter/@sudarsansandart Sanjay Bhegade votes in Maval Minister of State Sanjay Bhegade alias Bala Bhegade cast his vote in the morning in Maval. He was accompanied by his wife. Bhegade seeks his third term as Maval's MLA and is fielded against NCP's Sunil Shelke and BSP's Mandakini Bhosale. Photo by Nikhil Ghirpade/BCCL Balasaheb Thorat votes in Sangamner Maharashtra Congress state President Balasaheb Thorat cast his vote in Sangamner along with his family. He has also contested the polls from the Sangamner constituency and is pitted against Navale Sahebrao Ramachandra of Shiv Sena and Sharad Dyandev Gorde of MNS among others. He had won the constituency seat in the 2014 Assembly elections. Photo by Prachee Kulkarni/BCCL LIVE monitoring A webcasting has been arranged at the District Collector's office. Collector Naval Kishor Ram is personally monitoring the voting process. Photo by Nikhil Ghorpade/BCCL Traffic in Kondhwa There was heavy traffic and roads were jampacked as voters lined up near the polling booth in Kondhwa. As the rains have finally stopped and the sky has begun to clear up, voters rushed to their respective polling booths to cast their votes. Photo by Himanshu Nitnaware/BCCL Eknath Khadse casts his vote Six-time MLA Eknath Khadse came out and cast his vote on Monday along with his family. His daughter Rohini Khadse has made her poll debut this year and is fighting from the high-profile Muktainagar Assembly seat in Jalgaon district. Polling station decorated at Patrakar Nagar The polling station set up at Vikhe Patil Memorial School at Patrakar Nagar was decorated with balloons and flowers ahead of the Assembly elections. This is a model polling station. Selfie points outside polling booths To create awareness on the ban on single-use plastic, Pune Municipal Corporation officials have set up selfie points outside a number of polling booths. "I will not utilize single-use plastic from today" is written on the selfie frames. Photo by Prachee Kulkarni/BCCL Mehendi for voters Volunteers have set up stalls offering free mehendi to female voters outside Bajirao Road polling booth. Photo by Sukhada Khandge/BCCL Ajit Pawar casts his vote Senior Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leader Ajit Pawar cast his vote in the morning. He was accompanied by wife Sunetra Pawar and other family members. Pawar is also a candidate from the Baramati constituency. Senior citizens step out to vote 90-year-old Sumti Gangadhar Ashtikar cast her vote early in the morning on Monday. She also urged everyone to vote and fulfill their responsibility as a citizen. Photo by Nikhil Ghorpade/BCCL Supriya Sule casts her vote Supriya Sule cast her vote along with Pratibhatai Pawar, Ranjit Pawar, Shubhangi Pawar, Ira Pawar, Devyani Pawar and others in the polling booth at Remand Home in Baramati. Photo by Nikhil Ghorpade/BCCL Free food on showing your ink The New Poona Bakery in Pune has come up with a unique initiative for the day. Customers will be given one vegetarian pattice free for every two they buy after showing their inked finger. Photo by Nikhil Ghorpade/BCCL Police extend a helping hand Police stationed outside Mata Ramabai Ambedakar Primary School, Chikhaliwadi helped the senior citizen by assisting them to the polling booths. Photo by Gunwanti Paraste/BCCL Ashok Chavan casts his vote Former Chief Minister and Congress leader Ashok Chavan cast his vote in the morning along with wife Ameeta Chavan at the Municipal School polling station at Ambedkar Nagar in Nanded. Ashok Chavan, former CM of Maharashtra is the Congress candidate from Bhokar. Solapur: Polling station rained out Unseasonal rains have impacted polling at some places. At this polling booth in Solapur, rain water has entered the school that is the polling centre. Photo by Nikhil Ghorpade/BCCL Gopichand Padalkar votes in Sangli BJP candidate in Baramati assembly constituency, Gopichand Padalkar, voted at Padalkarwadi in Sangli. He is contesting against NCP's Ajit Pawar. Photo by Nikhil Ghorpade/BCCL Mahadev Jankar votes Mahadev Jankar, who is part of the outgoing Devendra Fadnavis government in Maharashtra casts his vote with his mother. 'Arati' before the vote Nagnath Kshirsagar, a candidate for the Mahayuti constituency in the Mohol Assembly constituency, voted at the polling station No. 113 in the city of Mohol. Women from the Kshirsagar family performed a traditional arati before voting. Photo by Nikhil Ghorpade/BCCL

Rural voters showed more eagerness than their counterparts in cities and towns.Barring stray incidents of violence, polling on Monday was largely peaceful with the state witnessing a voter turnout of 60.46 per cent that is less than the 63.38 per cent polling recorded in the last Assembly elections in 2014.However, the rural parts of Maharashtra showed more enthusiasm than the urban centres, evident from the difference in voting percentages. In the major urban centres of the state, including Pune, Nagpur, Nashik, Aurangabad, Kolhapur and Solapur among others, polling percentage remained in the mid-50s range.The political celebrities who cast their vote in Nagpur includeandNCP MP and daughter of, and her cousin and former deputy chief ministercast their votes in Baramati. However, Sharad Pawar himself cast his vote in Mumbai.A few inspiring instances made the tryst with democracy a memorable affair. In Pune, a 102-year-old man, suffering from a heart ailment, went straight to a polling booth after being discharged from a hospital. Ibrahim Alim Joad, who, according to his family, has never missed voting since Independence, consulted his doctors before going to vote. “Modi is doing good work and hence my vote goes to him,” he said.The state has a total 8,98,39,600 voters, including 1,06,76,013 in the age group of 18 to 25. Nearly 6.5 lakh polling personnel were deployed at 96,661 polling booths across the state.The opposition Congress said it filed over 250 complaints of poll procedure violations with the, including one for Ramtek segment where it said if the EVM button was pressed in favour of the Congress candidate, the vote was shown to be going to the BJP nominee.In Gadchiroli district, a 45-year-old teacher posted on election duty died in a hospital after fainting while walking towards the voting booth on Monday morning, an official said. Bapu Pandu Gavade, who was heading to the booth with a polling party from Dehari base camp, fainted mid-way near Pursalgondi village of Etapalli area.In Pune, a 62-year-old man fainted while standing in the queue outside a polling station in Bhosari constituency and later died of brain haemorrhage in the hospital, police said. Abdul Rahim Shaikh, a resident of Shantinagar, was suffering from cancer for the last one year, police added.The supporters of Shiv Sena candidate from Beed, Jaydutt Kshirsagar, who is the employment guarantee and horticulture minister, clashed with the followers of his nephew and NCP candidate from same constituency, Sandeep Kshirsagar, over alleged incidence of bogus voting.According to the complaint lodged with the local police by Sandeep Kshirsagar, around 10 to 12 persons working in a cooperative institution run by Jaydutt Kshirsagar tried to impersonate other people. However, the minister has refuted the charges.In Pimpri constituency, supporters of local NCP corporator Dabbu Aswani came to blows with the followers of Shiv Sena candidate Gautam Chabukswar who is defending his seat.The violence left five people injured with the condition of two persons stated to be critical. While Aswani alleged that Sena workers were trying to intimidate people and preventing them from casting vote, Chabukswar claimed that the NCP workers started the fight as they could see the writing on the wall that they would be comprehensively defeated.AIMIM MP Imtiaz Jaleel received minor injuries in a clash between workers of the NCP and his party in Aurangabad Central assembly constituency. The incident took place near a polling booth in Katkat Gate locality, a local police official said.Deputy Commissioner of Police Rahul Khade said it was a minor scuffle, and the situation was under control. Poll-related altercations were also reported in Lotakaranja, Harsul and Baijipura areas of the city.
