Decentralise & invent new growth model: Raghuram Rajan

LONDON: Former RBI governor Raghuram Rajan and Congress’s overseas unit chief Sam Pitroda have criticised the BJP government for proposing to make a nation based on a “single idea (of Hindutva)” and have also called for India to move away from authoritarianism and centralised control to strengthen its democracy.Rajan also called for India to invent a new model of growth that relies on the strengths of its democracy, even though he recognised authoritarianism had powered other Asian economies. He argued that the current government, which had centralised power, had not seen rewards in terms of economic growth.The duo was speaking at an event titled ‘Perspective: Gandhi at 150’, exploring the relevance of Gandhi in today’s times, at the National Indian Students and Alumni Union (NISAU) at King’s College London on Wednesday.“This government is much more centralised than UPA 1 and UPA 2, and possibly NDA 1. A lot of decisions are made by the prime minister and not ministers. You have to ask yourself is this right approach for India? In my opinion it doesn’t work that well —it may further the aims of the government but not economically, as decision-making has become paralysed despite the political power of this government. We need to encourage places like JNU that produced our Nobel prize winner.“On the economic front, India has slowed considerably in last three quarters. Some say it’s cyclical but I fear it is more. Investment has been slowing for a long time, more recently consumption joined in. We have not had a serious sustained reform especially focused on improving the use of land, labour, power and logistics. Sometimes political constraints or ideology held it back and has created tremendous problems in job growth. Joblessness is fact of life in many parts of India. At some point people are going to rise up and ask what is in it for us.”Rajan even compared the need for decentralisation in India to Brexit . “That cry ‘take back control’ is not just about Brussels to London but London to the localities,” he said. “The world has profited by global forces and now people want to take back power. It also reflects anger against the elite. Some decentralisation is not a bad thing.”The RBI ex-chief added that he “worried where India was going”. “India is too diverse to have one idea of what it is.”Rajan, who is now a professor of finance at Chicago Booth School of Business, also criticised demonetisation saying it was not tested properly before it was rolled out and said there was a shortage of bureaucrats in India. “Authoritarian decision-making is not a good idea. Demonetisation did economic damage to India. Whether it helped politically I don’t know. You can still get growth and development if people are free to talk.”Rajan said the new bankruptcy laws were not working as the cases were dragging on for years.“If we don’t have a serious debt recovery process, then debt becomes a joke in India,” Rajan said. “We need a limit on appeals and interventions. I don’t think we need more authoritarianism — rather more sensible planning.”Pitroda said: “Gandhi is relevant to improve our economy as we need to decentralise and free the systems. Don’t assume you can build a nation based on one simple idea. Building a nation is very complex. I was shaken up when I saw tweets saying Gandhi was son of India and Modi is father. We need to fight these lies. This is a diverse nation and you have to love everyone. All the stuff we worked for 50 years I see being challenged and going down the drain. I worry a lot about India. Only one voice is heard in the media.”
