Ace of Space 2 winner is Salman Zaidi from Hyderabad

Ace of Space 2 concluded on Sunday, November 3, with the announcement of its winner this season. Hyderabad's Salman Zaidi was adjudged the winner of the second season of Vikas Gupta's reality show, after battling it out against the shrinking walls and fearsome challenges, beating the five other finalists. Social media star Adnan Shaikh and Baseer Ali of Roadies fame were the first and second runner-up of Ace of Space 2 respectively.

Salman Ziadi braved 73 days inside Mastermind Vikas Gupta's house to emerge as the winner. The show had a mix of contestants ranging from a National Award winner to reality TV star to social media stars. The show welcomed people from all walks of life, with all ofthem together under the same roof.

The grand finale of MTV Ace of Space 2 had some amazing performances from the contestants. This finale saw popular names from Bollywood and TV such as Neil Nitin Mukesh, Adah Sharma, Vikrant Massey, Harleen Sethi, Amrita Rao, Tejasswi Prakash, Shantanu Maheshwari and Sidharth Nigam as guests.

MTV Ace of Space 2 winner Salman Zaidi is a boxer by profession. He went through many ups and downs inside the house and also grabbed eyeballs for his love story that blossomed inside the house with actress Krissann Barretto.

On winning the show, Salman Zaidi said, "The feeling of winning is amazing and beyond words. I'm thankful to my fans and family - inside and outside the house. This win wouldn't have been possible without them. This competition was theirs and this trophy is dedicated to them. I love each one of them and couldn't be happier winning for all my near and dear ones."

ALSO READ| Ace of Space 2: Baseer Ali is the first finalist of the show

ALSO READ| Erica Fernandes reveals unknown fact about her father on Ace of Space 2

ALSO READ| Ace of Space 2: Deepak Thakur gets into a big fight after his return on the show

ALSO READ| Ace of Space 2: Salman Zaidi calls housemate garbage, gets schooled by Vikas Gupta

ALSO READ| Ace of Space 2 contestant quits show after Jay Bhanushali's feedback

ALSO WATCH| Ace of Space's Divya Agarwal and Varun Sood to appear together in Ragini MMS 2
