5ft Narwhal horn wielded by brave chef who took down terrorist pictured hanging on wall at scene of attack

A BRAVE chef yesterday fought off a terrorist with a huge 5ft narwhal horn after the knifeman slashed 12 people in a rampage at London Bridge and killed two of them.

Along with several others, and armed with the historic artefact, the hero - thought to be a Polish chef by the name of Lukasz - helped to bring down convicted terrorist Usman Khan.

11 Luckasz accosted the terrorist with the priceless horn Credit: KNS News

11 A photo showing the two deadly tusks at Fishmonger's Hall Credit: @lostradical / Twitter

11 Another man grabbed the tusk after Lukasz accosted Usmun Khan Credit: The Sun

11 Forensics officers remove the tusk from the scene Credit: Getty Images - Getty

Now, pictures have emerged of two narwhal horns hanging on the wall at the historic Fishmongers' Hall where Khan began his attack in the middle of a prison rehabilitation event.

Narwhals are the only animals in the world with a straight tusk - a kind of tooth that can grow to several feet long and is covered with enamel.

The toughest part of a narwhal horn runs straight through the centre - making it an ideal weapon.

Documents from the Journal of the Royal United Service Institution show that one of the tusks once pierced through two-and-a-half inches of solid oak on a ship in the South Seas.

Yesterday, during a criminal justice conference held at the historic Fishmongers' Hall, convicted terrorist Khan brandished a large kitchen knife and began to attack anyone in his path.

The historic hall is home to The Worshipful Company of Fishmongers and packed full of artefacts collected since its opening, well over a century ago.

A picture has now circulated on social media of the majestic tusks adorning a large wooden doorway in Fishmonger's Hall.

11 The London Bridge attacker has been named as convicted terrorist Usman Khan, who heroes tackled on the bridge Credit: PA:Press Association

11 Thomas Gray (pictured) said that the attacker was wielding two knives had had another duct-taped to his hand

11 Tour guide Stevie Hurst, 32, helped pin down the terrorist before armed officers shot him dead Credit: Facebook

Do YOU know Lukasz or any of the other hero bystanders? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368. You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502.

Brave chef - Lukasz - is thought to have grabbed one of the mighty tusks before heading out with a group of men to accost Khan.

One person on social media claims Lukasz gave the terrorist "a beating" with the 5ft horn, suffering only a cut on his hand.

In the photo, the gleaming white horns, standing around 5ft tall are attached to wall with gold cladding, and reach well-above the ornate chandelier.

The tips of the tusks end in razor thin, super-strong peaks which cast ominous shadows against the cream walls.

As historian and journalist Guy Walters says: "You REALLY don't want to pick a fight with a man wielding a narwhal tusk."

Taking to Twitter, he revealed the tusks - once used as deadly weapons in Greenland called "nuguit" - are valued up to £2 million.

According to Walters, one such tusk sold for £36,0000 just a few years ago.

Queen Elizabeth I was so taken with her very own narwhal tusk, presented to her by privateer Martin Frobisher that she placed it in the Royal Wardrobe & Treasury for safekeeping.

Walker also revealed that when the tusks were fashioned into nuigit, they were thought so deadly that soldiers were banned from using them against people - instead using them to hunt birds.

Khan was shot dead by armed police after several brave bystanders - including the narwhal tusk armed chef - wrestled him to the ground.

Those who stepped in to tackle the terrorist include two hero tour guides, Stevie Hurst and Thomas Gray and one other unnamed man who successfully wrenched a large kitchen knife from Khan's hands.

Two other men also joined chef, Lukasz to bring down Khan, one spraying him with jets from a fire extinguisher and another wrestling the terrorist to the ground.

Speaking yesterday, Mayor of London Sadiq Khan sad: "Members of the public didn’t realise at the time that was a hoax device and they really are the best of us, another example of the bravery and heroism of ordinary Londoners running towards danger, risking their own personal safety to try and save others."

11 Narwhals are toothed-whales native to Arctic climes Credit: Alamy

11 The horns are deadly Credit: Getty Images - Getty

11 The creature's super-strong tusks used to be used to hunt birds Credit: .
