Attempt to murder case against Shiv Sena MP Om Rajenimbalkar

Omraje Nimbalkar faces attempt to murder case/ Facebook: Omraje Nimbalkar | Photo Credit: Facebook

Key Highlights In September, police had filed a case against the Shiv Sena MP for abetment of suicide of a local farmer His father, Pawan Rajenimbalkar was allegedly murdered in 2006 on Mumbai-Pune expressway

Usmanabad (Maharashtra): An attempt-to-murder charge has been registered against Shiv Sena MP Om Rajenimbalkar and 11 others. Akluj Police filed a case against the MP after an individual was beaten up by Rajenimbalkar and 11 of his aides, during the recently concluded local body elections. The MP and his aides are absconding, police sources told Times Now.

According to local media reports, a fight broke out over the decision to elect a functionary of the Panchayat Samiti in village Kalamb in Rajenimbalkar's constituency. According to a complaint registered at the local police station, the individual was followed for about a kilometre, brought to the residence of a party leader and thrashed.

This is not the first time Rajenimbalkar is at the centre of a controversy in Marathwada. In September, Usmanabad Police had registered a case against Rajenimbalkar and 52 others on charges of abetment of suicide and cheating. The charges were slapped against the Sena MP after a local farmer left a suicide note on April 12 this year. The police reportedly probed the case for nearly five months before registering a case against the MP.

Rajenimbalkar had, however, refuted the charges and called the allegations against him 'politically motivated' claims. He had, instead, blamed the cooperative bank which had extended a loan towards the farmer, for the incident.

#Breaking | @ShivSena MP Omraje Nimbalkar has been booked under ‘attempt to murder’ charge for allegedly thrashing a person.

Reportedly, Omraje Nimbalkar is currently absconding.



TIMES NOW’s Aruneel with details. pic.twitter.com/k6Hq7Q3Iz3 — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) December 31, 2019

In October, Rajenimbalkar was stabbed by an unidentified man during an election rally. The man reportedly approached the Lok Sabha MP at the pretext of shaking hands, however, stabbed him with a knife and fled away. According to local reports citing police, Nimbalkar suffered a limited injury due to his wristwatch.

His father Pawan Rajenimbalkar, who was a Congress leader, was shot dead on Mumbai-Pune Expressway on June 3, 2006. Padmasinh Patil, former Lok Sabha MP has been a key accused in that case.
