On Masood Azhar, China's Stand Unchanged Amid Global Outrage Over Pulwama

Despite the Pulwama attack being claimed by Jaish, China's stance on Masood Azhar unchanged

Highlights We are deeply shocked by this attack: China

Masood Azhar is the chief of Pak-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed

India urged UN Security Council to list Masood Azhar as global terrorist

Countries from across the globe condemned the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district with nations like the United States, UK, Russia and France asserting that they stand with India in combating the menace of terrorism. China however, kept its stand on Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar unchanged.

At least 40 Central Reserve Police Force or CRPF personnel were killed on Thursday in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir when a Jaish-e-Mohammed or JeM suicide bomber exploded a vehicle carrying 60 kg of explosives next to their bus in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district that also left many critically wounded.

Condemning the terror attack in Pulwama, Beijing said: "China has noted the reports of suicide terrorist attack. We are deeply shocked by this attack. We express deep condolences and sympathy to the injured and bereaved families."

But when asked about China's stand on the listing Masood Azhar as a global terrorist by the UN Security Council, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Geng Shuang told the media that "As for the issue of listing, I could tell you that the 1267 Committee of Security Council has a clear stipulation on the listing and procedure of the terrorist organisations".

"As to the listing of an individual, we have always upheld an earnest, responsible and professional manner," he said, adding, "JeM has been included in the UN Security Council terrorism sanctions list. China will continue to handle the relevant sanctions issue in a constructive and responsible manner." This is what China has been saying while repeatedly blocking efforts by India and other UN Security Council members to list Masood Azhar as a UN designated terrorist.

China's statement was in reference to External Affairs Ministry's latest appeal to all members of the UN Security Council to list Masood Azhar as a global terrorist.

GLOBAL CONDEMNATION ON PULWAMA TERROR ATTACK

The US condemned the terror attack and said it stands alongside India in defeating terrorism.

"The US Mission in India strongly condemns the terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims," US Ambassador to India Kenneth Juster said.

Russia, while condemning the terror attack, stressed the need to combat such "inhuman acts" with decisive and collective response without any double standards.

"We denounce terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and reiterate the need to combat these inhuman acts with decisive and collective response without any double standards," a Russian Embassy statement said.

French Ambassador to India Alexandre Ziegler said France most firmly condemns the heinous attack perpetrated in Jammu & Kashmir. "France has always been and always will be by India's side in the fight against terrorism in all its forms," he said.

Germany strongly condemned the heinous terrorist attack, saying stands by its strategic partner India.

Australia, Turkey and Czech Republic also condemned the horrific terror attack.

India's neighbours Nepal, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Sri Lanka and Maldives also expressed solidarity and vowed to combat the menace of terrorism jointly.

"I strongly condemn the deadly terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir today killing at least 40 people. We send our thoughts and prayers to those affected. The Maldives will continue to work with India and the international community to combat terrorism in our region and the world at large," Maldivian President Ibrahim Solih said.

Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, in a message through the country's High Commission, said her country remains steadfast in its commitment against terrorism of all forms and manifestations and maintains a zero tolerance policy against any kind of terrorist activities.

Bangladesh would continue to work and cooperate with international community including India to eradicate the menace of terrorism, she said.

"Deeply saddened by the news of the horrific terrorist attack in Kashmir. Bhutan strongly condemns terrorist attack of any nature. Our prayers are with the grieved family and we are following the situation closely," Bhutanese Prime Minister Lotay Tshering said.

Sri Lankan President Maithripala Sirisena expressed sadness over the dastardly terror attack, saying the world must condemn such brutal terrorist attacks and take effective action to prevent such incidents in future.

(Inputs from PTI)


