No tolerance for terror: More than 2 years after surgical strikes, PM Modi again takes the fight to the enemy

Prime Minister Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: India woke up on Tuesday morning to the news that Mirage fighter jets of the Indian Air Force (IAF) destroyed multiple terror camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) after crossing the LoC in a daring pre-dawn attack.

While the military and geopolitical consequences of the airstrikes will be debated for weeks and months, the punishing attacks once again show that Prime Minister Narendra Modi is more than willing to take the fight to the enemy territory when it comes to responding to terror strikes planned and plotted from across the border.

After the Pakistan attack on Uri that killed about 20 Indian soldiers in September 2016, Modi gave the go-ahead to carry out a strike to give a clear message to the Pakistani Deep State that terrorist attacks won’t go unpunished. Sure enough, on the intervening night of September 28 and 29, 2016, Indian army commandos crossed the LoC and carried out surgical strikes in PoK.

In the days before the strike, Modi and the other top political leaders who were in the know – and there were very few ministers who were aware about the precise plan – maintained a conspicuous silence and, in fact, gave the impression that New Delhi was not planning anything dramatic.

The brilliant deception worked, and Pakistan’s security establishment was caught completely off guard. Dozens of terrorists were killed in the surgical strikes.

Modi’s credentials as someone who has a no-nonsense approach to terrorism and national security got a boost.

This time around, there was little doubt that Modi would act against Pakistan’s latest provocation – the February 14 JeM terror attack in Pulwama that killed at least 37 CRPF men. The suicide bombing shocked the nation.

Keenly aware of the national mood, Modi declared that he felt the country’s anger. “The anger that is seething in the nation after the attack, the people's blood is boiling, I understand it,” the PM said. “Our security forces have been given full freedom (to avenge the attack).”

Remarkably, Pakistan knew a retaliation for the Pulwama atrocity was coming, at a time, place and manner of India’s choosing, and yet, when the air strikes actually occurred, Pakistan’s military has again been embarrassingly caught off guard.

More than two years after the surgical strikes, Modi has again proved that under his administration New Delhi's patience with Pakistan, which has bled India for more than three decades, has run out, and India will punish Pakistan whenever it carries out a major terrorist attack.

Indeed, it’s an entirely new anti-terrorist doctrine. The Pakistani Deep State that uses terrorism as an instrument of state policy has very difficult choices to make faced with the new ‘Modi’ doctrine.
