Protest demonstrations, wearing of black badges mark observance of 30th Holocaust Day by Pandits - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

KP bodies submit memorandum to Governor

Excelsior Correspondent

JAMMU, Jan 19: Holding of protest demonstrations, corner meetings, wearing black badges marked the observance of 30th Holocaust Day by displaced Kashmiri Pandits today in different parts of country.

In commemoration of Holocaust Day displaced KPs held a massive protest demonstration outside the Raj Bhawan here, today. A large number of community members attended the protest, which was organised under the aegis of All State Kashmiri Pandit Conference (ASKPC) along with other prominent socio-political organizations in front of Raj Bhawan here and protested in support of their demands.

Advocate Ravinder Raina, president, ASKPC in his address alleged that the exiled community has been cheated with a false and hollow promise of return and rehabilitation in their place of birth for the last 30 years by successive Governments and the annals of Indian history will record a gloomy and painful chapter for aborigines of Kashmir.

Raina demanded that the Government should immediately come out with a blueprint for the return of the community to Kashmir with honour and safety. Pending this, the community should be declared as “Internally displaced”, he added.

H.N.Jattu a senior KP leader and president All India Kashmiri Conference (AIKPC) reiterated the demand for an immediate blueprint for the rehabilitation of Kashmiri Pandit community in the Valley in a secure area, with an unhindered applicability of Indian Constitution.

Kiran Wattal, convener, Vishwa Kashmiri Pandit Samaj which along with other KP bodies participated in the joint protest to show solidarity with community cause termed the January 19 blackest day in the history of Kashmiri Pandits as on this day entire community which believed in peace, communal harmony, brotherhood and policy of live and let live was forced to flee the Valley.

He alleged that during last 30 years the successive Governments have failed to address the core issues and burning problems of the community by dogging the community. He reiterated the KPs demand of ordering a probe to identify and punish the forces which were responsible of genocide and ethnic cleansing of the community in the Valley and the killers of the Kashmiri Pandits who are roaming freely be punished under law of the land.

Wattal regretted that the GoI has launched the Ayushman Bharat and the KP community which is totally dependent on cash doles has been ignored in it too.

He highlighted the problems of PM package employees in Valley, traders and relief holders and strongly advocated for enhancement of cash relief, removal of encroachments from migrants land, property and their religious places besides protection of their religious places by constituting a temple and Shrine Board as demanded by the community.

Shiban Khaibri a free launce journalist while addressing the gathering demanded a probe into the genocide and ethnic cleansing of the community by a Supreme Court Judge and fixing the responsibility and punishment to the culprits, as has been done in case of 1984 carnage of Sikhs.

Dr T.K.Bhat general secretary, ASKPC castigated the Government for ignoring rehabilitation of over aged youth and demanded waiver of age bar for Government employment and implementation of Prime Minister’s package in letter and spirit by filling all the 6000 posts sanctioned under it. He also demanded additional posts in the Central Government departments and undertakings.

R.L.Pandita chairman, Prem Nath Bhat Memorial Trust demanded the Passage of Temples and Shrines Bill through an ordinance to protect the religious heritage of the community.

President, NC Minority Cell, M K Yogi accused the Government of denying basic rights to the displaced Pandits who are in wilderness for last 30 years now.

A joint memorandum was also submitted to the Governor highlighting the demands of the community giving thrust to its permanent rehabilitation in their homeland Kashmir by fulfilling the geo-political aspirations of the community.

Other prominent organisations were represented by R.L.Pandita, chairman, Prem Nath Bhat Memorial Trust, Sunderi Lal Koul, secretary PNBMT; M.K.Jalali, president Sharika Peeth; T.N.Koul, president TRT Muthi. Kuldeep Raina chairman, Samajik Vikas Sanstha; A.K.Sidha president, Mattan Trust, Kiran Wattal convener Vishwa Kashmiri Pandit Samaj, Vinod Pandit, chairman APMCC; King C Bharti national spokesperson APMCC; Shiban Khaibri veteran journalist, Ashok Kangan, JKVM, Vijay Bhat president, Panun Kashmir; T.K.Jigyasu social activist; T.N.Koul, Ashok Dhar, Daya Krishan presidents TRT Muthi I, II, Purkhoo; P.L.Badgami chairman KHC; Chand Ji Bhat, T.N.Bhat president and ex-president BJP Kashmir Mandal, Desh Rattan president, Rakesh Koul, councilor and president, Kashmiri Visthapit Sangthan, AMCCC;,Sunil Pandita social activist Jagti, Ashok Koul president, TRT Nagrota, and others.

Holocaust Day was also observed by BJP Kashmir Displaced District and BJYM displaced district at Balidan Stumb Bahufort road Jammu under the chairmanship of MLC Girdhari Lal Raina. Earlier the BJP KDD and BJYM KDD also held a demonstration at Kachi Chawni against the failure of dynastic parties to dispense justice to exiled Pandits in last 30 years.

Kashmiri Khatri Hindu Maha Sabha also observed Holocaust Day under the chairmanship of Ramesh Chander Mahajan in front of Raj Bhawan here. The members of the organization paid rich tributes to martyrs.

Kashmiri Pandit Conference (KHC) observed the Holocaust Day at New Delhi under the leadership of Kundan Kashmiri. The activists of the organization wore black badges as a mark of protest against the mass killings of the community members under the very nose of then State Government led by Dr Farooq Abdullah which gave a free hand to the ultras in regrouping till the situation went out of control.

Kashmiri regretted that successive governments in last 30 years including the present one at Centre failed to redress the rehabilitation issue of Pandits in a separate Kashyap State in Valley.
