Government will fight terrorism with all its might, says PM Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi sounded a poll bugle in Jammu & Kashmir on Sunday. Addressing a massive public rally in Samba district, Prime Minister Modi reached out to the people of Jammu and displaced Kashmiri Pandits. The Prime Minister assured the people that his government has been committed to the development of Jammu region which was neglected by the previous regimes.

Realising his government's failure to rehabilitate Kashmiri Pandits in the valley, PM Modi spoke on the issue of their displacement and termed their ethnic cleaning as one of the dark chapters in Indian history. I want to discuss a very serious topic today which is the issue of Kashmiri Pandits.

The government will dedicatedly work for their rights, honour and pride. The era of terrorism during which they had to flee their homes is a dark chapter in Indian history, said Prime Minister Modi during his address. Paying homage to those killed while fighting terrorists, including Nazir Ahmed Wani and Aurangzeb from Jammu and Kashmir, Modi said, Today the whole country is angry to see the killings of innocent and armless Kashmiri youths. (They are targeted) because these youths want to live and fulfil their dreams. But they are targeted by terrorism. This is the truth of terrorism here, he said.

The surgical strike has showed to the world India's new policy and tradition to check terror, and the government will fight terrorism with all its might, he added.

FARM LOAN WAIVER

But interestingly, it was the issue of farmers that dominated the speech. PM Modi accused the Congress of cheating the farmers in the name of farm loan waiver. The Congress fooled the farmers in the name of farm loan waiver. Their debts didn't go away. The schemes only benefitted the middlemen. The Congress cheated the farmers. In his desperate bid to woo the farmers, PM Modi said that only his government's schemes had benefitted them. When we decided to open Jan Dhan’ accounts, some people mocked us.

Now, they know how the Jan Dhan’ accounts are going to be used. In near future, money will be directly transferred to these accounts. `75,000 crore will be transferred to the farmers’ accounts. This will not involve any middlemen or broker. This will help many small farmers who have never received any help from the government, said PM Modi while talking about his ambitious PM-Kissan scheme that was announced in the budget speech.

KARTARPUR CORRIDOR

Prime Minister Modi also attacked the Congress on the issue of Kartarpur Sahib Corridor. Had the previous governments paid attention to sentiments of the people, the land of Guru Nanak Dev would have been a part of India, said PM Modi at the rally. Earlier, before addressing the rally, PM Modi laid the foundation stone of AIIMS at Vijaypur in Samba and other developmental projects.Also read: Modi doesn't know how to speak like a PM, his arrogance will end: Mamata on triple T remark

ALSO WATCH| Modi vs Mamata: Is BJP trying to make inroads in Bengal?
