UNSC needs to play its role for Kashmiri people: Firdous Ashiq Awan

Geo.tv/Files

ISLAMABAD: Prime Minister Imran Khan's special assistant on information and broadcasting, Dr Firdous Ashiq Awan, said Wednesday the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) needed to play its role for Kashmiri people just like it did in South Sudan and East Timor.



In posts on her Twitter account, Dr Awan said: "It was made clear to the world today that we are all one and ready to go to any lengths for Kashmir.

"We will not sit by calmly until this goal is achieved," she added.

The SAPM further noted: "The [United Nations] Security Council needs to play the same role for the Kashmiri people the way the United Nations played in South Sudan and East Timor.



"The world needs to stop India from murdering and engaging in ethnic cleansing of the Kashmiri people.



"The Security Council needs to play its role before India's illegal action impacts the world's capitals," she stated.

A day prior, Dr Awan had stressed that Pakistan would not abandon the Kashmiri people. “We want to convey to the innocent Kashmiris that we will not abandon you.



"Pakistan on every forum will stand with you [Kashmiris] for the protection of your just demands,” Awan had said while speaking to reporters outside the Parliament.



The special assistant had added that the entire nation was united on Kashmir and that the Parliament would adopt a unanimous resolution that would reflect the aspirations of over 220 million Pakistanis.

That unanimous resolution — to condemn India’s move to scrap the special status of Indian occupied Kashmir — was unanimously passed in a joint session of the Parliament earlier today (Wednesday).

The Parliament session had discussed the deteriorating situation in IoK after the Indian government on Monday had revoked Article 370 that granted special autonomy to the disputed Himalayan region.



Kashmir Committee Chairperson Syed Fakhar Imam had presented the resolution, condemning the unilateral move by India, which is against the UN resolutions.



The resolution said the move is aimed at changing the demography of the disputed area and ethnic cleansing of Kashmiris. The Kashmir issue should be resolved through the UN plebiscite, it added, noting that Pakistan would continue diplomatic, moral, and political support of Kashmiris.

On Monday, India, through a rushed presidential decree, had abolished Article 370 following days of uncertainty in occupied Kashmir. Article 370 of the Indian Constitution gave a special status to the region and limited the Indian parliament's powers to impose laws in the state, apart from matters of defence, foreign affairs, and communications.

Read more:




