Genocide of Kashmiris by India unfolding RSS ideology: PM Imran

ISLAMABAD (Web Desk) – Prime Minister Imran Khan on Sunday said that curfew, crackdown and impending genocide of Kashmiris in occupied Kashmir is unfolding exactly according to Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, (RSS) ideology inspired by Nazi ideology.



In a tweet, the premier said the attempt is to change demography of Kashmir through ethnic cleansing and question is: Will the world watch and appease as they did Hitler at Munich?

The curfew, crackdown & impending genocide of Kashmiris in IOK is unfolding exactly acc to RSS ideology inspired by Nazi ideology. Attempt is to change demography of Kashmir through ethnic cleansing. Question is: Will the world watch & appease as they did Hitler at Munich? — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 11, 2019

In another tweet, the PM expressed fear that this RSS ideology of Hindu Supremacy, like the Nazi Aryan Supremacy, will not stop in IOK; instead it will lead to suppression of Muslims in India and eventually lead to targeting of Pakistan.

I am afraid this RSS ideology of Hindu Supremacy, like the Nazi Aryan Supremacy, will not stop in IOK; instead it will lead to suppression of Muslims in India & eventually lead to targeting of Pakistan. The Hindu Supremacists version of Hitler s Lebensraum. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 11, 2019

He said the Hindu Supremacists is version of Hitler s Lebensraum.



The reaction came after Indian troops and police used brute force against thousands of protesters in Srinagar.

Defying stringent curfew, thousands of people including women, children and elderly persons gathered in Soura area of Srinagar and protested against New Delhi’s action of abrogating special status of the occupied territory.

The protesters raised high-pitched slogans like “We want freedom”, “Go India go back” and “Indian Constitution unacceptable”. Indian troops and police pushed back the demonstrators at Aiwa Bridge by firing bullets, pellets and teargas shells resulting in the injuring of many people.

India has been seeking to tighten its grip on the region with all public mobile, landline telephone and internet connections suspended from the last seven days in the Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir state.
