KNS

Srinagar, Jan 05 (KNS): Hurriyat Conference (M) chairman, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq while commenting on the completion of 70 years of January 5 United Nations Security Council resolutions on Kashmir, stated that it is an irony UN being the world’s highest forum has not fulfilled its promise of implementing its own resolutions to resolve the world’s one of the oldest disputes—Kashmir even after seven decades of long ongoing bloodbath in Kashmir.

In a statement issued to KNS, Mirwaiz said that the primary job of the UN was to address and resolve the issues pending resolution across the globe and that Kashmir should have been its top priority as the dispute continues to linger on since past over seven decades consuming precious lives and properties on daily basis.

“By not initiating a process viz-a-viz Kashmir issue, it seems the world’s largest body UN giving a deaf ear to the united demand from the Kashmir that it must fulfill its promise of implementing its own resolutions that guarantee the right to self-determination,” he said.

Mirwaiz said that people of Kashmir are engaged in a sacred struggle to get their legitimate right, the right to self-determination, in a peaceful way but GoI has left no stone unturned to crush the people’s struggle by using ultimate military might followed by repression.

“Until Kashmir issue is resolved in the backdrop of its historical background, peace would remain a dream in the entire region as political instability will continue to prevail,” he said, urging the United Nations and other international forums to play their role and use their good offices in resolving the Kashmir conflict in the larger interests of the peace in the south Asian region.

Mirwaiz said that bloodshed would only end with the vexed issue of Kashmir would be resolved as per the people’s aspirations and for that International Community must build pressure on the New Delhi to shun its stubborn approach.

He hailed the Turkish president Recap Tayab Erdogan’s stand on Kashmir issue stating that Turkey is the key member of OIC’s contact group on Kashmir and has always been supporting the Kashmir struggle besides expressing support to the oppressed nation.

While thanking the Turkish president for his unrelenting support, Mirwaiz hoped that Kashmir issue would get more world attention and world leaders should push for its final settlement.

Mirwaiz also paid tributes to the armed youth killed in Aripal, Tral encounter, stating GOI has pushed an entire generation of Kashmiri youth to the wall through its oppressive policies.

He said that youth are offering priceless sacrifices and it’s the duty of people and leadership to carry their mission.

Meanwhile, Mirwaiz paid tributes to martyrs of Sopore, the 53 unarmed civilians massacred by BSF men in indiscriminate firing on January 6, 1993, in broad daylight and stated that people of Kashmir can never forget those incidents where unarmed people were killed mercilessly by Indian armed forces.

Mirwaiz also expressed his grief over the death of five members of a family at Bemina due to asphyxiation and expressed solidarity with the family members of the deceased and prayed for their highest standards in janah. (KNS)
