Never talked about Kashmiris who were ethnically cleansed: Hasan Minhaj called out for selective rant on Kashmir

2/4

India's Permanent Representative to the United Nations Syed Akbaruddin on Friday said New Delhi was committed to the Simla agreement to resolve issues with Pakistan and it was for the neighbouring country to "stop terror to start talks".

Talking to reporters after closed-door meeting held at the United Nations Security Council on Kashmir developments, he targeted Pakistan and said "using terror to try and push your goal is not the way that normal states behave".



He said that India's position of addressing issues with Pakistan on a bilateral tract has very broad acceptance globally.

#WATCH: Syed Akbaruddin, India’s Ambassador to UN says,"so, let me start by coming across to you and shaking hands. All three of you," to a Pakistani journalist when asked,"when will you begin a dialogue with Pakistan?" pic.twitter.com/0s06XAaasl — ANI (@ANI) August 16, 2019

Also Read: 'The great Akbar of India': Twitter all praise for Syed Akbaruddin's UNSC remarks

Akbaruddin spoke to the media after the representatives of China and Pakistan had spoken and took questions unlike his counterparts. He took first three questions from Pakistani journalists and even went to them to shake hands in a gesture reflecting India's willingness to engage in a dialogue provided there was no push to terror.

Akbaruddin said that matters related to Article 370 of Indian Constitution "were entirely an internal matter of India".

Asked about India refusing dialogue with Pakistan, Akbaruddin said there are normal diplomatic ways of dealing with countries.

"But using terror to try and push your goal is not the way that normal states behave. No democracy will acknowledge or accept talks when terror thrives. Stop terror, start talks," he said.

Referring to the UN representatives of China and Pakistan, Akbaruddin said the national statements were sought to be passed off as the will of the international community.

"I do not need to tell you that SC is a very deliberative institution. It works in a very considered manner. Its outcomes are provided to all of us through the president. So if national statements try to masquerade as the will of the international community, I thought I will come across to you and explain our national position," he said.

Answering a query that Article 370 could be an internal matter of India and there were past UNSC resolutions, he said India and Pakistan had signed the Simla accord in 1972.

"We are committed to that and we hope Pakistan too will try to address these issues in the manner that they have signed on to in a legally binding agreement.

We stand ready to address them in that context. We can go back in history but every new agreement overtakes the past. We are committed to that agreement and we hope Pakistan too is because if that is so, its actions do not seem to be working out in what is in that agreement," he said.

Asked when the dialogue will start, he said "We have already extended our hand of friendship by saying that we are committed to Simla agreement".

Asked about Pakistan saying that the issue has been internationalised, he said that in close consultations, anyone, especially parties to the dispute, can try and throw in anything for consideration of members of the security council.

"However, you have seen what is the outcome of that meeting. We are ready to address these issues in a manner that states who have normal approaches to international ties should address them. In our case, we are committed to Simla agreement. It is now for Pakistan to make that commitment to stop terror to start talks," he said.

Asked about Russia saying that it favors a bilateral tract between India and Pakistan on Kashmir and it was also the view of many countries at the UN, Akbaruddin said he will not take on the responsibility of speaking for the council.

"The council has spoken. All of you are aware of what outcomes are. Let me tell you India's commitment to addressing these issues on bilateral tract has very broad acceptance globally", he said.

Answering a query about restrictions in Jammu and Kashmir, he said prevention is better than cure.
