If talks are held with Pakistan then it will now only be on PoK: Rajnath Singh

Rajnath Singh Twitter page

Kalka, Aug 18 (IBNS): Indian Defence Minister Rajnath Singh on Sunday sent out a strong message to Pakistan and said talks will only take place with the neighbouring nation when they stop aiding and abetting terrorism.

He said in case talks take place in future then it will only be on the issue of Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK).

"If talks take place (with Pakistan), it will be on PoK (Pakistan occupied Kashmir) and not on any other issue," Singh said while addressing a rally.

Relationship between India and Pakistan have touched new lows ever since the attack in Pulwama took place in February this year.

The PM Narendra Modi-led Indian government's recent move of scrapping Article 370, which gave a special status to Jammu and Kashmir, further worsened the ties as Pakistan snapped several diplomatic and trade ties following the development.

Jammu and Kashmir will complete two weeks on Monday since the Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led government made major announcements by abrogating Articles 370 and 35A that had granted special power to the former state.

The government bifurcated Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories, Jammu and Kashmir with an assembly and Ladakh without an assembly.

Article 35A of the Indian Constitution allowed the Jammu and Kashmir state's legislature to define “permanent residents” of the state and also provided special rights and privileges to those permanent residents.

Article 370 allowed Jammu and Kashmir to have its own constitution, flag and right to handle its own laws except on matters that impact national security.

Meanwhile, Pakistan PM Imran Khan on Sunday once again targeted the BJP government in India and described it with the Nazi regime of Germany.

"India has been captured, as Germany had been captured by Nazis, by a fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist ideology & leadership.This threatens 9m Kashmiris under siege in IOK for over 2 weeks which shd have sent alarm bells ringing across the world with UN Observers being sent there," he tweeted.

India has been captured, as Germany had been captured by Nazis, by a fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist ideology & leadership.This threatens 9m Kashmiris under siege in IOK for over 2 weeks which shd have sent alarm bells ringing across the world with UN Observers being sent there — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 18, 2019

"And the threat also extends to Pakistan, the minorities in India & in fact the very fabric of Nehru & Gandhi's India. One can simply Google to understand the link between the Nazi ideology & ethnic cleansing & genocide ideology of the RSS-BJP Founding Fathers," the Pakistan PM said.

And the threat also extends to Pakistan, the minorities in India & in fact the very fabric of Nehru & Gandhi's India. One can simply Google to understand the link between the Nazi ideology & ethnic cleansing & genocide ideology of the RSS-BJP Founding Fathers. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 18, 2019

He said: "Already 4m Indian Muslims face detention camps & cancellation of citizenship. World must take note as this genie is out of the bottle & the doctrine of hate & genocide, with RSS goons on the rampage, will spread unless the international community acts now to stop it."

Already 4m Indian Muslims face detention camps & cancellation of citizenship. World must take note as this genie is out of the bottle & the doctrine of hate & genocide, with RSS goons on the rampage, will spread unless the international community acts now to stop it. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 18, 2019

Imran Khan said the world must also seriously consider the safety & security of India's nuclear arsenal in the control of the fascist.

The World must also seriously consider the safety & security of India's nuclear arsenal in the control of the fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt. This is an issue that impacts not just the region but the world. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 18, 2019

He said: "The World must also seriously consider the safety & security of India's nuclear arsenal in the control of the fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt. This is an issue that impacts not just the region but the world."
