Opposition’s oblivious attitude

The situation inside occupied Kashmir is volatile. Pak-India tension on the line of control is extremely high and the Prime Minister Imran khan himself is leading multifaceted diplomatic battle to maintain peace in the region. Chairman All Parties Hurriate Conference Syed Ali Geelani has appealed to the people of Jammu and Kashmir to continue their resistance against the Indian brutalities. But the opposition political parties instead of giving unflinching support to the government are indulging in leg pulling exercise and points scoring on governments’ Kashmir policy which has succeeded in internationalizing this dispute. The core issue of Kashmir remained on the backburner during the previous two governments. The Kashmir Committee which was headed by Maulana Falu Rehman did merely lip service.

Talking to media after JUI (F) Shura meeting, Maulana Fazlu Rehman said that for the protection of Kashmir fall of the incumbent government is necessary. He has been assigned the task by opposition political parties for a protest plan against the government and to capitalize on it he has announced lockdown of the federal capital Islamabad in October. What massage the Central Amir of JUI (F) Maulana Fazlu Rehman is conveying to international community before the Prime Minister’s address to UN General Assembly in September in which he will focus on inevitability of resolution of Kashmir dispute, revocation of special constitutional status of the state of Jammu and Kashmir, human rights violations there, genocide and ethnic cleansing of Kashmir Muslims at the “Altar” of Hindutva and its sharp similarity with fascist philosophy of Hitlerite Nazism? The phraseology used by Amir Jamat Islami Sirajul Haq at a public meeting in Peshawar on Saturday to ridicule Kashmir diplomacy of the government will not serve any useful purpose except creating trouble for Pakistan while advocating the just cause of Kashmiri Muslims at the international forums and resolution of this dispute through proactive diplomacy. For effectively fighting the right of self-determination for Kashmiri Muslims, the present government needs active support from the opposition political parties in accordance with the aspirations of the people of Pakistan and not hurling the threats of protests and lockdowns.
