Imran Khan likens NRC to Kashmir, says 'annexation' of J&K part of Indian govt's policy to 'target Muslims'

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights Imran has suggested that NRC is part of Indian government's anti-Muslim policies Khan again raked up the issue of Kashmir, saying that the annexation of Valley by India is also part of the same anti-Muslim policy

Islamabad: Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Saturday referred to the Assam's National Register of Citizens (NRC) list, released earlier in the day, to target the Indian government, alleging that it was part of the Narendra Modi-led dispensation to "target Muslims". Imran liked the NRC with Kashmir, saying that the "illegal annexation" of the Valley was also part of the Indian government's anti-Muslim policies.

In a tweet, Khan said that the PM Narendra Modi government's "ethnic cleansing of Muslims should send alarm bells ringing across the world".

"Reports in Indian and international media on Modi government's ethnic cleansing of Muslims should send alarm bells ringing across the world that the illegal annexation of Kashmir is part of a wider policy to target Muslims," he said.

Khan's remarks have come only a day after he urged the international community to "think beyond trade and business advantages" and warned of a looming threat - direct military confrontation - between the nuclear powers due to "appeasement" of India.

"With the nuclear shadow hovering over South Asia, we realise that Pakistan and India have to move out of a zero-sum mindset to begin a dialogue on Kashmir, various strategic matters and trade," Khan said in an editorial piece published in New York Times.

Claiming that 'lasting and just peace in South Asia' has been his priority ever since he came to power a year ago, Khan alleged that his government's attempts to start a dialogue with India have been 'rebuffed' by New Delhi.

Imran alleged that his goodwill gesture to return Wing Commander Abhinandan was responded by New Delhi with a bid to get "Pakistan placed on the blacklist at the intergovernmental Financial Action Task Force".

Meanwhile, Imran has launched a massive campaign to express solidarity with the "people of Kashmir." On Friday, thousands gathered on Constitution Avenue in front of the government offices and Khan addressed the nation asserting that they will stand with Kashmiris until the disputed Himalayan territory was "liberated".
