Why is world silent: Imran Khan attacks India over Kashmir issue

In another tweet, Pakistan PM Imran Khan claimed that hospitals have run out of medical supplies and there were limited resources in the Kashmir Valley. (Photo: PTI)

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has attacked India again over the Kashmir issue and questioned why the world was silent despite the violation of humanitarian laws in the Valley.

In a series of tweets, PM Imran Khan highlighted the siege-like situation in Kashmir and questioned the humanity of the international community.

"Today is the 32nd day of the siege of IOJK by the Indian Occupation Forces of the Modi government. Under cover of this siege, Indian forces have killed, injured (with pellet guns), abused Kashmiri men, women and children. Men have been taken away and thrown into prisons across India," Imran Khan tweeted.

Today is the 32nd day of the siege of IOJK by the Indian Occupation Forces of the Modi Govt. Under cover of this siege, Indian forces have killed, injured (with pellet guns), abused Kashmiri men, women & children. Men have been taken away & thrown into prisons across India. Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) September 5, 2019

In another tweet, he claimed that hospitals have run out of medical supplies and there were limited resources in the Valley. He also highlighted the communication blackout in Kashmir.

"Hospitals have run out of medical supplies; basic necessities are in short supply but a communication blackout has deprived Kashmiris a voice to the outside world and their families. Despite this, tales of horror are finding their way into the international media," Imran Khan said.

Hospitals have run out of medical supplies; basic necessities are in short supply but a communication blackout has deprived Kashmiris a voice to the outside world & their families. Despite this, tales of horror are finding their way into the international media. Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) September 5, 2019

Imran Khan attacked India in another tweet, saying, "India's violation of all international laws including humanitarian laws is there for the world to see. So why is the world silent? Is the international community's humanity dead when Muslims are being persecuted? What message is being sent to the 1.3 billion Muslims across the world?"

India's violation of all international laws including humanitarian laws is there for the world to see. So why is the world silent? Is the international community's humanity dead when Muslims are being persecuted? What message is being sent to the 1.3 bn Muslims across the world? Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) September 5, 2019

Imran Khan attacked the Modi government and said that the "ethnic cleansing" in Assam and Jammu and Kashmir was out there for the world to see.

"The world cannot feign ignorance as it did at Munich in 1938. The fascist, Hindu-Supremacist design of the Modi government with its ethnic cleansing and genocide of Muslims' agenda in IOJK, in India itself (Assam) and beyond into AJK is now overt for all the world to see," Imran Khan tweeted.

The world cannot feign ignorance as it did at Munich in 1938. The fascist, Hindu-Supremacist design of the Modi Govt with its ethnic cleansing & genocide of Muslims' agenda in IOJK, in India itself (Assam) & beyond into AJK is now overt for all the world to see. Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) September 5, 2019

PM Imran Khan, in his recent op-ed in the New York Times (NYT), wrote that if the world fails to do nothing to stop India’s decision in J&K then the nuclear-armed countries will get ever closer to a "direct military confrontation."

On August 5, the Centre scrapped Article 370 from Jammu and Kashmir and bifurcated the state into two Union territories.

Tensions between India and Pakistan has spiked after New Delhi withdrew Jammu and Kashmir's special status and bifurcated it into two union territories.

Imran Khan on Wednesday discussed the situation in Kashmir with visiting foreign ministers of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, amid tensions with India after New Delhi abrogated Article 370.
