Kashmir after Abrogation of Special Status – I

By Dr. Jaipal Singh

It has been a month, since the Government of India revoked the special status of the state of Jammu and Kashmir through a Presidential order on 5 August 2019 under the Article 370, prevailing upon the Presidential Order of 1954 and nullifying all the provisions of autonomy granted to the state. Almost simultaneously, the resolution seeking the revocation of the special status through abrogation of relevant provisions under Article 370 and the bill for the state’s reorganization was debated and passed by the Rajya Sabha (Upper House of Parliament) on 5 August with 125 (67%) votes in support and 61 (33%) against it. The following day i.e. on 6 August 2019, the resolution on abrogation of the special status was passed in Lok Sabha (Lower House) too by division of votes among the members present and voted with 351 (83%) members in support and 72 (17%) opposing it, and the Reorganisation Bill passed with 370 (86%) members in favour and 70 (14%) against it. The voting pattern cutting across the party lines suggested an overwhelming support of the members in favour of the abolition of the aforesaid discriminatory and controversial provision.

Position Following Abrogation of Special Status

Much to the chagrin of the Indian National Congress, some other opposition parties, self-proclaimed left leaning intellectuals and liberals and a section of Indian and International media, the Central Government had taken drastic and extraordinary measures by mobilizing adequate security forces even before moving the resolution and bill in the Parliament to ensure that there was no trouble or violence in the Kashmir Valley and other parts of the state. These measures inter alia included almost a virtual communications blockage of internet and mobile services, closure of offices, markets and schools and restrictions on assembly and movements of people. People were, however, allowed to move in the event of urgent needs including medical treatment and emergencies. Besides, key political leaders and separatist leaders of the Kashmir Valley were also either arrested or put under the house arrest.

Ever since, the conditions are fast returning to normal and most of the restrictions have already been lifted from Jammu, Ladakh and parts of the Kashmir Valley. Barring few exceptions, most of the educational institutions have been opened, government offices and markets have resumed routine business but considerable restrictions on internet and mobiles still exist in some parts. These precautions and tightened security measures have ensured that a single casualty and loss of human life has not occurred that could be attributed to the security forces. During this period, only two untoward and unfortunate incidents have been reported: in the first case suspected terrorists abducted two members of the nomadic Gujjar community from a forested area in Pulwama district and later shot them dead; in another case in Srinagar outskirts, unknown gunmen shot dead a shopkeeper who had apparently dared to open his shop against the dictum of terrorists. Such isolated occurrences are not surprising in the light of fact that the state has already remained disturbed for the last many years with unabated terrorist incidents. The government is also hopeful to lift remaining restriction in next few weeks to bring normalcy and business as usual.

The Central Government has also planned the roadmap for the development of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh union territories. This includes massive investment, employment opportunities including a recruitment drive of local youth in Army, opening of more industrial units, educational institutions and hospitals, building and strengthening infrastructure and tourism, reduction in power tariff and a host of other developmental activities. Reportedly, ten Union ministries have already joined hands to speed up development work in both union territories. The Government has also planned extensive benefits to the police personnel, similar benefits to the civilian government employees and the 7th Pay Commission allowance to employees of newly created union territories. With these measures, the Government maintains that the constitutional change made in tandem with proposed investment and developmental activities will usher in an era of prosperity and progress for the people in the region. A month long campaign has also been launched to educate people about the benefits of the legislation.

On the other hand, the disruptive forces present in Kashmir too are at large in their endeavor to disrupt peace process. As the region is fast returning to the normal, reportedly mischievous posters have appeared on streets in different parts of Kashmir, particularly in downtown Srinagar, Anantnag and Shopian districts, warning people not to cooperate with the government. The posters contain threat to the government employees, shopkeepers, daily wagers, transporters and street vendors of dire consequences if they are seen cooperating with the government and security forces. These posters in Urdu claim that those who cooperate with the government are traitors. Even at national level, some leaders of the Congress, intellectuals and liberals and a section of national and international media are engaged in a tirade to condemn government action and measures taken in Kashmir. The untiring efforts of these individuals and organizations include over a dozen suits filed in the Supreme Court against the legislation and allegations against the Centre with the charges of human rights violations, curtailment of freedom and oppression of Kashmiri people.

Age Old Multi-ethnic Character of Kashmir

I first visited Kashmir in April 1984 as part of the training curriculum of the civil service that mandated exposure with the Indian Army formations in the forward areas for two weeks. That was the time when we had liberty to freely move in various regions of the state including Valley without any fear and risk. We were indeed fascinated with the lush green Valley rich in Chinar trees, magnificent mountains with dense deodar, fir and pine forests, and majestic Himalayan rivers that have fascinated elites, philosophers, poets, young couples and commoners alike for centuries. The valley was still a preferred destination for the tourists and many honeymooners for its natural beauty, tranquility and quaint lifestyle. The average Kashmiri did not appear rich yet lively and cheerful enough true to poet Amir-e-Khusru’s following couplet:

“Gar firdaus bar-rue zaminast,

hamiasto, haminasto, haminast.”

(If there is a paradise on earth, it is here, it is here, it is here.)

But things changed in the state for the worse after March 1987 state assembly elections which are widely perceived as a watershed in the politics of the Jammu and Kashmir. Many independent analysts believe that the elections were rigged at mass scale in favour of Farukh Abdullah at the behest of the Centre (Congress Government). Following 1987 elections, the disillusioned and combined opposition Muslim United Front leaders like Abdul Ghani Lone and Syed Ali Shah Geelani became separatist leaders and many young Kashmiris, out of sheer frustration with the democratic process, opted for an armed struggle that gave rise to terrorism actively exploited and supported by Pakistan. The cry of fanaticism and jihad against minority Hindus and Sikhs climaxed towards the end of 1989 to such an extent that hundreds of them were killed among the slogan of “Ralive, Tsaliv ya Galive” (Convert to Islam, leave the land, or perish) culminating into mass exodus of lakhs of Kashmiri Pandits in 1990 onwards.

Under the influence of fanatics and jihadis, the majority Muslims in Valley actively or passively accepted cleansing of minority ethnic groups in the quest of purity of religion. With this ethnic cleansing, the Valley achieved over 97% of Muslim population. On the contrary, perusal of the history of Kashmir gives altogether a different picture. A 12th Century Kashmiri author and historian, Kalhana’s Rajatarangini is regarded as the most authenticated account of the history of Kashmir till his time. The book documents pedigree details since the legendary reign of Gonarda in Mahabharata times but more illustrious and authentic history is recorded from the time of emperor Ashoka of Maurya dynasty who is known as the founder the city of Srinagar. During the first millennium, both Hinduism and Buddhism prospered in the valley and later during the ninth century Hindu Shaivism also took deeper roots in the Valley region. The fact is Hindus are aborigines of the Kashmir Valley since ancient times. All along the first millennium, Kashmir had been a major hub of Hindu culture producing some of the greatest sages, Sanskrit scholars and treaties of all times.

In fourteenth century, Muslim rule was established in the valley during the weak and unpopular Lohara dynasty. One of the Muslim rulers, Sikandar Butshikan (1389-1413), often referred to as an iconoclast, reportedly took a drive for systematic destruction of Hindu Shrines and forced the population to convert to Islam or kill or migrate from valley to other parts of India. This application of force, intimidation and violence against Hindus was repeated by many other tyrants like Ali Shah, Samsuddin Iraqi and so on leading to constant shrinking of Hindu population. The continuous persecution led to gradual shift in the ethnic population of the Kashmir valley that became predominantly a Muslim region with time. The Muslim rule lasted for about 500 years including that of intervening more moderate Mughal period, and it ended in 1819 with the annexation of Kashmir to the Sikh kingdom of Punjab. Later, the Hindu Dogra kingdom was established in 1846 at the end of First Sikh War and Dogra kings ruled the state till independence. Thus Kashmir prospered with cultural and ethnic diversity and was famous as a land of knowledge and learning for centuries before the excesses of successive Islamic rulers converted it predominantly a land of Muslims. The Kashmir carries a legacy of diverse culture and multi-ethnic society contrary to the claims of some radicalized locals and Pakistan that it belongs only to Muslims alone. (Courtsy: Boloji.com)

(to be continues…)
