SUPREME COURT – Wake up before it is too late – KashmirWatch

By- Safura Amin

Independence of the judiciary, the supremacy of the constitution and rule of law are the features of the basic structure of the constitution. The submission of an independent judiciary to the absolutist government is virtually the last step in the destruction of a democratic society.

The Supreme Court of India is the highest judicial court. It safeguards the fundamental rights of citizens. The main purpose of the Supreme Court is to decide constitutional issues. In fact, there are many laws that are enacted by the Parliament without following the stipulated procedure in the constitution and they are detrimental to the basic foundation of the constitution. The fair trial to examine the validity of these Laws was never conducted on utmost priority. There is always a delay in disposal of the various petitions filed by the people of Kashmir which is also a violation of their basic rights enshrined in the constitution.

For over the years, the Supreme Court hasn’t delivered justices in the cases relating to Kashmir, there are a number of cases which are pending in the Supreme Court out of which few are discussed in detail hereunder:-

The Jammu & Kashmir Resettlement Act, 1982:

Introduced on March 8, 1980, the J&K Resettlement bill became a law in April 1982 when both houses of the state legislative assembly passed it. Then governor B K Nehru returned the bill on September 18, 1982, seeking “reconsideration” but the houses passed it again without any change on October 4, 1982. Though governor gave his mandatory ascent to the bill on October 6, 1982, the piece of legislation had already been sent on September 30, 1982 for a Presidential Reference to the Supreme Court under the provisions of Article 142 (1) of the constitution by the then President Giani Zail Singh seeking opinion “as to whether the bill or any of the provision thereof, if enacted, would be constitutionally invalid”.

After 19 years, a 5-member constitutional bench observed that “it appears to us inexpedient to answer the question posed to us in the reference”. Even if we were to answer the question in the affirmative, we would be unable to strike down the Act in this proceeding. We think, therefore, that the reference must be, respectfully, returned un-answered,” As the state government was in the process of setting up an authority for the implementation of the law, another PIL was filed before the Supreme Court on which a stay was issued. It is still disputed in the court of law.

Maqbool Bhat Case:

In 1978 the Indian Supreme Court restored death sentence on Maqbool Bhat and he was transferred to Delhi’s Tihar Prison. After eight long years in prison, he was hanged on February 11, 1984, in haste to avenge the killing of an Indian diplomat in Birmingham by then a group ‘Kashmir Liberation Army’. The way he was hanged and his burial was a total abortion of Gandhiji’s India’s democratic values, human rights, and civil liberties. In 1977, he had filed a mercy petition, which was rejected by the Supreme Court of India

Maqbool’s elder brother, along with his sister was leaving to see him. But both of them were detained at the Srinagar airport while catching a flight to Delhi. Maqbool’s lawyer too was not allowed to meet him ahead of the hanging

Afzal Guru Case:

The government of India secretly hanged Afzal Guru, prime accused in the attack on parliament in December 2001, and interred his body in Delhi’s Tihar jail where he had been in solitary confinement for 12 years. Guru’s wife and son were not informed. “The authorities intimated the family through speed post which they never received.

The Supreme Court judgment acknowledged the evidence was circumstantial: “As is the case with most conspiracies, But then, shockingly it went on to say: “The incident, which resulted in heavy casualties, had shaken the entire nation, and the collective conscience of society will only be satisfied if capital punishment is awarded to the offender.”

Afzal Guru, locked in a high-security solitary cell, had no lawyer. The court-appointed junior lawyer, who did not visit his client even once in jail, he did not summon any witnesses in Guru’s defence, and he did not cross-examine the prosecution witnesses. The judge expressed his inability to do anything about the situation.

Chitti Singhpora massacre:

On March 20, 2000, armed renegades cold-blooded murder of 35 Sikh men in Chitti Singhpora village in South Kashmir on the eve of US President Bill Clinton’s visit to India. A “micro-minority” in Kashmir, the violence was a first for the Sikh community, who have lived for generations alongside their Muslim counterparts in harmony in the Valley. Although the reasons behind the violence and the identity of the perpetrators remain shrouded in mystery, Kashmiris — both Muslim and Sikh — believe that its intent was to create communal fault lines and drive out the Sikh community. Even after 19 years they still wait for justice.

Pathribal Fake Encounter:

After five days of Chitti Singpora massacre, Zahoor was picked up by the police on the evening of March 24, 2000, outside his house; four more people were picked from different areas of Kashmir. The sudden disappearance of five civilians during the same time had led to the suspicion that the militants killed were actually the innocent persons who had gone missing. In its charge sheet filed on May 9, 2006, the CBI held the Indian Army’s 7 Rashtriya Rifles responsible for the killings of “cold-blooded murder “and also said, “There was tremendous psychological pressure on the army to show results after the massacre of 35 Sikhs,”

The victims’ families, however, got a glimmer of hope when the army moved to the Supreme Court on May 1, 2012. The Supreme Court refused to take over the case and initiate court-martial proceedings against them and after some period the army men were set free by the Court Martial. The Pathribal fake encounter was the first case among several cases of human rights abuses including Machil fake encounter, Brackpora killings, Kunan Poshpora rape case, wherein the premier investigation agency had clearly established the civilians were killed in a staged encounter.

Supreme Court Stand on Article 370:

Advocate M L Sharma became the first petitioner in the case when he filed a petition in the Supreme Court on August 6, 2019, challenging the Presidential order on Article 370. Later; several political Parties have filed pleas in this regard in the Supreme Court. They have sought directions declaring the presidential orders of August 5 “unconstitutional, void and inoperative”.

The Article 370 issue involves the determination of limits of Executive functioning. It also involves the question of the constitutional federalism and the survival of India’s democracy as envisaged by our founding fathers. Understandably, nothing could be more important from among the pending cases than securing the identity of our Constitution. However, while hearing the matter on September 30, the Supreme Court delayed the hearing of the matter, noting:

“We do not have time to hear so many matters. We have a Constitution Bench case (Ayodhya dispute) to hear.”

When the matter was placed before a Constitution Bench on October 1, the Court again failed to adequately fulfill its role as the protector of liberty by further delaying the hearing.

Finally, the Ayodhya verdict came, which is not related to Kashmir but it is a historical judgment in India .where Supreme Court has weighed religious belief of a particular section over the rule of law. The court allotted five acres of land to the Muslim parties, which is almost double the size of the original disputed land. The Supreme Court gave importance to belief over other concerns. The court gave the disputed land for the construction of a Hindu temple this means that belief of a section of people was given prominence over the rule of law. There are two ways to look at the judgement- Religious dispute and Property dispute. The judgment is fair in terms of religious freedom but in terms of a property dispute, the court is not fair.

Conclusion: The Indian Supreme Court’s core constitutional role is to protect the fundamental rights of the citizens. The efficacious hearing and adjudication of the petitions against civil rights restrictions, house arrests, communications blackout as well as the constitutionality of the Parliament’s legislation are critical in current times. Just recently, the Kerala High Court held that access to the internet is a fundamental right. The imposition of blanket restrictions on the entire Kashmir population’s access to essential and basic communication facilities should certainly merit the considerate attention of the watchdogs of the Constitution. At the same time, curbing politically opposite views by isolating the leaders away from the public and press is a direct strike on the virtues of democratic deliberations.

(The author is a practicing advocate at J&K High Court, Srinagar and can be reached at safurabhat15@gmail.com )
