CAB aimed at 'ethnic cleansing' of NE, says Rahul Gandhi; calls it 'criminal attack on idea of India'

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi

Key Highlights Rahul Gandhi has called the Bill an attack on the Constitution and people of Northeast The Congress has urged its party leaders and workers to hold protests across the country on Wednesday over the Bill The Bill will be debated upon in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday.

New Delhi: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi has called Citizenship Amendment Bill an attempt by Modi-Shah government to ethnically cleanse northeast. Calling it a criminal attack on the region, their way of life and the idea of India he said that he stands in solidarity with the people and that he is at their service.

On Tuesday, Gandhi termed the Bill that will provide refuge to Hindus, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Parsis and Jains fleeing religious persecution from the Pakistan and Afghanistan and Muslim-majority Bangladesh - an attack on the Constitution. He also said that people who support the Bill are trying to destroy the foundation of India.

The CAB is a attempt by Modi-Shah Govt to ethnically cleanse the North East. It is a criminal attack on the North East, their way of life and the idea of India.



I stand in solidarity with the people of the North East and am at their service.https://t.co/XLDNAOzRuZ — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) December 11, 2019

The Bill which was tabled for discussion in the Lok Sabha on Monday by Union Home Minister Amit Shah was passed late on Monday night.

While the opposition parties questioned the nature of the CAB describing it "against Muslim community", the Centre rejected the claim saying it does not affect the community residing in the country.

The Bill will be debated upon in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday.

Meanwhile, the Congress has urged its party leaders and workers to hold protests across the country on Wednesday over the Bill.

"You are aware that our party is opposing the CAB which is likely to be taken up in Rajya Sabha tomorrow (Wednesday). We need to enlighten the public at large on our stand and mobilize support in favour of our decision," wrote Congress General Secretary (Organisation) KC Venugopal in a letter to all the state party chiefs.

I request you to undertake dharna pradarshan (protest) tomorrow (Wednesday) against the Bill in state headquarters by involving the senior leaders and frontal organisations, he said.

All the major opposition parties, including the Congress, the TMC, Revolutionary Socialist Party, Dravida Munnetra Kazhgam (DMK), All India Majlis-e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen (AIMIM), Indian Union Muslim League (IUML), AIUDF, BSP, Samajwadi Party, Aam Aadmi Party and YSR Congress have opposed the Bill by referring to various articles of the Constitution.
