Maharashtra woman approaches police, accuses in-laws of harassment; commits suicide a day later

When the woman tried to resolve her issues with the in-laws, they did not respond to her (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The deceased was identified as Jayashree Gajanan Gaware The incident took place in Washim, Maharashtra

Mumbai: A woman allegedly committed suicide in Maharashtra's Washim district on Thursday, July 18, and murdered her two children. Identified as Jayashree Gajanan Gaware, the woman allegedly hanged her two minor sons at her father's residence in Tondagaon village before ending her own life, said the police.

The deceased was living at her parents' residence. Allegedly, she had approached the police on Wednesday, alleging harassment by her in-laws.

According to the police, when the woman tried to resolve the issues with her in-laws, they did not respond to her. Inspector of Washim police station Yogita Bhardwaj said that a case of murder and suicide has been registered in relation to the incident. Further investigation is underway.

Rajasthan woman found hanging inside well, kin allege torture by husband for dowry

A woman from Rajasthan allegedly committed suicide in July after being constantly harassed by her husband for dowry. The deceased's husband, Nanuram Tanwar was accused of torturing his wife for dowry. The deceased and Tanwar had been married for two years.

Identified as Kallibali Tanwar, the woman allegedly hanged herself inside a well in Rajasthan's Durjanpura village. Ghatoli police station in-charge Nainuram Meena said prima facie, it appeared that the woman had committed suicide.

The woman's father claimed that Tanwar had strangled her to death and hanged her. He said that the accused had murdered the woman as they (the woman's family) were unable to fulfil his demands for dowry. The police booked the accused under Section 304 B of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) following the incident.

Uttar Pradesh: Woman sets herself on fire, two children ablaze

A woman allegedly immolated herself and her children in Ghaziabad's Preet Vihar in the month of July. The woman and her daughter died on the spot and her son survived. Identified as Deepa, the woman allegedly set herself ablaze when her husband and in-laws were not at home.

According to Neeraj Kumar Jadaun, Superintendent of Police, a domestic dispute was to be blamed for the incident. The police said that the deceased's husband had allegedly slapped her after their argument escalated. After her husband left, Deepa allegedly locked herself and her children in a room, poured kerosene and set them ablaze.

Deepa's five-year-old son, however, managed to open the door of the locked room and went out for help. Though the neighbours tried to help the three, Deepa and her two-year-old daughter died on the spot.
