Payal Tadvi suicide: Chargesheet shows accused doctor denied her mandatory medical leave

Payal Tadvi, the junior doctor who committed suicide following caste-based harassment, was denied mandatory medical leave, according to the chargesheet filed by police in the case.

The Mumbai city crime branch has now cited a medicolegal incident in the chargesheet, pointing out how Tadvi, 26, had suffered mental torture and harassment at the hands of three senior doctors. A medicolegal incident is something that involves both legal and medical aspects.

She committed suicide on May 22 in her hostel room at BYL Nair hospital.

One of the accused senior doctors in the case did not allow Tadvi to avail mandatory medical leave when she was undergoing almost a month-long anti-HIV course after getting injured while operating an HIV-positive woman, reported The Times of India.

The report added that the doctor ignored Tadvi's complaints and was made to work all despite the repeated pleas. Tadvi even stopped the treatment before the stipulated period as she got frustrated.

Tadvi and one of her colleagues had carried out the delivery of an HIV-positive woman at Nair Hospital on April 24. During the operation, Payal suffered from a minor needle injury while carrying out the stitching process.

An official told the publication that the health department has set strict guidelines in such cases, where it is mandatory for the concerned doctor to undergo 28-day post-exposure profile prophylaxis or preventive drug course.

The official added that the doctor is entitled to mandatory leave as the anti-HIV drugs are potent in nature and known to cause a number of side-effects including diarrhoea, vomiting, and fatigue.

Despite the terms, accused doctor Bhakti Mehare refused leave to Tadvi and taunted her for trying to avoid duty.

In her suicide note recovered from Tadvi's phone, she has blamed her seniors Hema Ahuja, Bhakti Mahare and Ankita Khandelwal.

Tadvi's colleague, who underwent the same anti-HIV course, testified that the anti-viral medicines caused several problems including headache, but added that they had to cut short the course to just seven days.

The report also mentioned that there were many witnesses who saw Tadvi in depressed state hours before her suicide. One doctor said Tadvi looked "very hurt" while another junior doctor admitted that she saw one of the accused doctors yelling at Tadvi.

She was found hanging from the ceiling fan of her hostel room at around 7.10 pm.

In the suicide letter, Tadvi wrote: "Initially me and Snehal [Payal Tadvi's friend who gave her statement to crime branch] didn't come forward or said anything to anyone. The torture continued to the level that I could not bear. I complained against them [the accused doctors] but it had no result. I have lost my professional life, personal life, everything because it has been declared by them that they will not let me learn anything until they are in the hospital. I am prohibited from handling the labour room from last three weeks because they don't find me efficient. I have been asked to stay out of the labour room during OPD hours."

In the letter, she also mentioned how she was not allowed to check patients and only allotted clerical work.

The suicide note read: "Despite putting all efforts, the condition is still not improving, I am becoming mentally disturbed. The environment is not healthy to work and I have lost hope for anything to change because I know it won't."

Payal Tadvi wrote, "I hold Hema Ahuja, Bhakti Mehra and Ankita Khandelwal responsible for conditions of me and SnehalI have tried a lot, came forward many times, spoke with madam about this, but nothing has been done. I literally do not see any way, I can only see THE END."
