3-Year-Old Girl Kidnapped, Raped, And Beheaded By Child Killer After Getting Released From Jail In India

A 3-Year-Old girl was kidnapped, allegedly raped, and beheaded by a police officer’s son in Jamshedpur, her body has been found by the police. The accused has been arrested and officials said that this is not the first time the man has committed the crime.

Officials say that the three-year-old girl went missing last week.

The torso of the girl has been sent for an autopsy, the police suspect that the girl was raped before being killed.

Officials said that the girl has injury marks on her private parts.

The head of the three-year-old girl is still missing.

Rinku, the son of the police officer (havildar), has committed a similar crime with this before.

The police said that Rinku has been arrested and convicted for killing and kidnapping children in Telco and Sakchi before.

He is a son of a havildar that is working in the Giridih Police.

DSP Noor Mustafa Ansari said, “Rinku was earlier convicted and sentenced to a two-year jail term for abducting with the intention to kill a seven-year-old child from Jemco-Azadbasti locality on April 9, 2015. He was sentenced to a two-year jail term in March 2018. He came out of jail a few weeks ago.”

During a press release, the police said that the girl was kidnapped on Thursday last week when she was sleeping with her mother at a railway station in the area.

The CCTV footage caught Rinku passing by with the kid in her arms, he was then arrested from Kailash on Monday.

The beheaded body of the three-year-old girl was discovered from a bushy area near Dhobi Ghat in Ramadhin Bagan.

DSP Ansari said, “We recovered the headless body of the girl from the bushes in Ramadhin Bagan Tuesday night after Rinku revealed that he had dumped her body and told us the location.”

DSP Ansari added, “We took him along with us and found the headless body though he has been insisting that he didn’t behead the victim but admitted to killing her. She had injury marks on her private parts, indicating rape but we are awaiting post mortem report.”

Rinku, the accused, said that he gave the girl to a child trafficking gang.

The police are also questioning Md Sheik, better known as Monu Mandal. Mandal brought the mother of the 3-year-old girl to Tatanagar from Purulia.
