Is KPCC chief Dinesh Gundurao BJP’s next target?

Bengaluru: Is the stage set for the BJP to launch a mission to finish Congress strongman Dinesh Gundurao? Dinesh, who is KPCC President and the undisputed leader of Gandhinagar constituency, has come under the radar of the BJP, it is learnt.

The BJP party sources give a thumping yes. It is said that, the complaint submitted by BJP leader N R Ramesh in the murder case of BBMP member S Nataraj, will prove to be a nemesis for Dinesh Gundu Rao, who ruled Gandhinagar constituency for over half a decade.

Ramesh had submitted the report to the Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa last Saturday and briefed him about the case. It is said that, Nataraj, a Congress councilor who was murdered was a right hand man of Dinesh Gundu Rao. However, the stage is all set to beat him down legally in this case.

Ramesh has explained how the nine accused persons arrested in Nataraj murder case have sent letters to central home ministry, state home ministry, DG & IGP office and Commissioner of Police, Bengaluru office regarding what really happened in the Nataraj murder case.

Nataraj was murdered immediately after he raised issue of the Rs 150-crore Gupta Market located in the heart of the city, Ramesh alleges.

“The names of the key persons who have given supari to kill Nataraj have been left out. I can only say that their godfather is Dinesh Gundu Rao,” explains N R Ramesh.

Ramesh has provided documents and evidences in this regard to CM Yediyurappa. It is said that BJP is giving a serious thought of handing over the case to Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).

It is said that Nataraj was murdered at the behest of the strong politician to protect his interests. Investigating agencies of the state have shown least interest in the case. The charge sheet filed in the case excludes the names of those who gave supari to kill him even as the arrested persons readily gave their names.

On Oct. 1, 2011, councillor Nataraj was hacked to death by a gang of miscreants near Malleshwaram. The arrested Murugan and Mani in their written statements spilled out the name of Ashok B Dani, a two-time BBMP member from Gandhinagar ward implicating him in the conspiracy.

Ramesh also explained the role of Chandrappa alias Petticoat Chandrappa who is said to be a business partner of Dinesh Gundu Rao. In 1997, Chandrappa sold Petticoats on the footpaths of K G Road in front of Gupta Market. He became a BDA and a BBMP contractor and purchased the Gupta Market. He took Sangam Complex premises on lease. The total market value of these places is Rs 1,050 crore and this is a big game alleges N R Ramesh.

Both Chandrappa and Ashok B Dani influenced the police, he adds.

Ramesh further alleges that, the accused Murugan and Mani had surrendered nine accused persons in the case assuring them Rs 20 lakh for each and one commercial shop in Gupta Market. The accused have turned hostile as none of their promises is fulfilled, Ramesh alleges. It is to be seen which curious twist this case takes in the coming days.
