‘10-yr jail’ for assault on docs

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Aditi Tandon

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, September 2

The government today finalised a Bill proposing up to 10-year jail term and up to Rs 10 lakh fine for people who assault medical professionals.

The Healthcare Service Personnel and Clinical Establishments (Prohibition of Violence and Damage to Property) Bill, 2019, aims at prohibiting and punishing acts of violence against doctors and offences under the Bill will be cognisable and non-bailable.

The draft legislation bars violence against doctors and damage to medical facilities. “Whoever commits violence or abets or incites commission of violence against healthcare service personnel or abets or incites or causes damage or loss to property of a clinical establishment, shall, upon conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to five years, and with fine, which shall not be less than Rs 50,000 but which may extend to Rs 5 lakh,” says the Bill.

It provides a separate clause that deals with grievous hurt (Section 320 of IPC) of any healthcare service personnel. “Anyone who causes grievous hurt to any healthcare professional, shall, upon conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to 10 years, and with fine, which shall not be less than Rs 2 lakh but which may extend to Rs 10 lakh,” according to the Bill.

The draft law provides for all acts of violence against doctors to be investigated by a police officer not below the rank of DSP.

Besides, it provides for compensation in cases of violence against doctors.

“In addition to the punishment provided for the offence under Section 5, the convicted person shall be liable to pay, by way of compensation an amount, twice the amount of fair market value of the damaged property or the loss caused, as may be determined by the court; Rs 1 lakh for causing hurt to healthcare service personnel and Rs 5 lakh for causing grievous hurt to healthcare service personnel,” the Bill says.

It adds if a convicted person does not pay the compensation granted, the said sum will be recovered as an arrear of land revenue under the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890.

The Health Ministry opened the Bill for public consultations today.

The Bill comes close on the heels of assault on doctors of a hospital in Bengal, which had triggered a nationwide strike by medical professionals who demanded protection of the law.
