Chandigarh: Ten year jail sentence awarded to man for sodomising 7-year-old boy

After analysing the medical reports of the survivor and taking his statement, the police launched an investigation into the case (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The Additional District and Sessions Court in Chandigarh sent a man to jail for sodomising a minor The incident had taken place in October last year The accused allegedly lured the minor on pretext of giving him fruits and flowers and sodomised him

Chandigarh: A 24-year-old man was awarded a ten-year jail sentence in Chandigarh for sexually abusing a minor boy in 2018. The Additional District and Sessions Court of Chandigarh sent the man to jail for sodomising a 7-year-old boy on Friday. The convict has been identified as Mukesh.

The decision was taken by the Court of ADJ Poonam R Joshi. Mukesh has been convicted under Section 377 (unnatural offences) and Section 506 (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) along with Section 4 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. He has been directed to pay a fine worth Rs 1.62 lakh.

On August 25, 2018, the minor's mother approached the police and told them that her son was missing. A florist, the woman told the police that her son was playing outside her shop before he went missing. When the woman started looking for her son, she found him crying nearby.

Reportedly, Mukesh had offered to give fruits and flowers to the boy. He allegedly took the minor to a jungle where he assaulted him and sodomised him. The police sent the child to the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH), Sector 32 and the doctors confirmed that he had been sexually assaulted.

After analysing the medical reports of the survivor and taking his statement, the police launched an investigation into the case. It was during the investigation that the police checked the CCTV footage of the area. In the footage, Mukesh was seen taking the child with him. The following day, the police nabbed Mukesh and registered an FIR against him. The FIR was registered at the Sector 31 police station.

The defence counsel claimed that Mukesh was being framed. He said that the swabs of the 7-year-old boy did not match with Mukesh's semen. Contrary to the defence counsel's claims, the court held the 24-year-old guilty.

Minor Delhi boy sexually assaulted in boarding school

A similar incident came to light from a boarding school in Dehradun in August this year where an 11-year-old boy was allegedly sodomised by his senior. A native of Delhi, the boy had been staying at a residential school in Dehradun.

A student of class 10, the boy said that his senior had taken him to a room in the school. He allegedly sexually abused him and beat him up. The accused senior was expelled from the school after the management learned about the incident. A case was also registered against him under Section 377 (unnatural sex) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
