India news: protests after vet gang raped and killed

Hundreds of people have gathered in New Delhi, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and other Indian cities to demand justice after a veterinarian was gang-raped and killed last week.

The protesters demanded a fast-tracked investigation of the case and stringent laws for the safety of women in India after a burned body identified as Priyanka Reddy was found under a bridge on Thursday.

"We are not safe anymore in India. We are scared to move out of our homes," Sejal Kumar, a college student from New Delhi, said on Monday.

The body of Priyanka Reddy was found under a bridge after she was gang-raped, murdered and set alight. (Change.org)

Hundreds of people have taken to the streets around India to protest the violent rape and murder of a 27-year-old vet. (AP/AAP)

The burned body was found by a passer-by in an underpass in the southern city of Hyderabad after she went missing the previous night.

Police said four suspects have been taken into custody.

R. Venkatesh, Police Inspector from Shamshabad Police Station in Hyderabad told CNN the men had confessed to sexual assault.

"Due to the sexual assault and the force (used), she became semiconscious," he said.

Activists shout slogans demanding justice in the case of a veterinarian who was gang-raped and killed last week during a protest in Mumbai, India, Monday, Dec. 2, 2019. (AP/AAP)

"They put her body in a lorry and took her to a different location where they put her body under the bridge and poured diesel fuel and petrol on her body and burnt her."

A medical examination could not conclude that the woman had been raped due to the extensive burns to the remains.

India's fight to end violence against women

Violent crimes against women have been in the spotlight in India since 2012, when the fatal gang rape of a young woman aboard a moving bus in New Delhi prompted hundreds of thousands to take to the streets to demand stricter laws against rape.

The attack spurred quick action on legislation that doubled prison terms for rapists to 20 years and criminalised voyeurism, stalking and the trafficking of women.

Indian politicians also voted to lower the age at which a person can be tried as an adult for heinous crimes from 18 to 16.

Similar protests occurred in 2018 to end rampant sexual violence against women in India. (AP/AAP)

According to the most recent available official crime records, police registered 33,658 cases of rape in India in 2017, an average of more than 90 every day.

But the real figure is believed to be far higher, as many women in India do not report cases to police due to fear.

The data also show that more than 90 percent of cases of crimes against women are pending in city courts.

Last week's incident was also discussed in parliament.

Activists in India say the government has failed to address the rising issue of violence again women. (AP/AAP)

India's defence minister Rajnath Singh said the attack had "brought shame to the entire country".

"It has hurt everyone," he said.

"The accused must be given the most stringent punishment for their crime."

Activists in India said the government has failed to control rising crimes against women.

Jyoti Badekar, a women's rights activist from Mumbai, said an inadequate number of female police staff is one of the factors contributing to the problem.
