Bihar: Woman burnt after failed rape bid, admitted to hospital with 90% burns

After the rape and murder incidents in Unnao and Hyderabad, several other cases of victim being set on fire by rapists have come in light. (Image for representation: PTI)

A woman was admitted to a hospital in Muzaffarpur on Sunday after she was allegedly set ablaze by a man who had attempted to rape her but failed. The victim suffered 90 per cent burns when she was admitted to Shri Krishna Medical College and Hospital in Muzaffarpur. The victim is battling for her life at the hospital.

According to the victim's family, the incident took place on Saturday afternoon when the victim was alone in her house in the Nazirpur locality under Ahaiyapur police station. Upon finding the victim alone in the house, Raja Rai, the accused tried to rape her and when he failed, he set her on fire.

The victim's mother claimed that Raja Rai was harassing her daughter for the last three years. She disclosed having approached the Ahaiyapur police five times with her complaint which fell on deaf ears.

"The accused was continuously torturing my daughter for the last three years because of which I discontinued my daughter's education after her 12th class. I also tried to complain regarding the accused to the police several times but to no avail. On Saturday when my daughter resisted him, he set her on fire", she said.

The police have lodged an FIR in this case against Raja Rai and charged him under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code.

"We have arrested the accused and are questioning him. We have also spoken to the victim and her family. However, there is no evidence with the family to prove that they had complaint to the police earlier regarding the accused", said Ganesh Kumar, IG Muzaffarpur range.

After the rape and murder incidents in Unnao and Hyderabad that sparked anger across the nation, several other cases of victim being set on fire by rapists have come in light.

In Hyderabad, a 26-year-old veterinary doctor was smothered, raped and then burnt by four men late at night on November 27 and her charred body was found the next day under a culvert on the Hyderabad-Bengaluru national highway. The four accused in the case were killed on early Friday by the Telangana police in a 'retaliatory' firing when they were taken to the crime spot for recreation.

Soon after, the Unnao rape victim was was also set on fire by five men, including the two accused of raping her in December last year. The woman had sustained 90 per cent burn and lost her life in hospital on Friday.

Four days back, a 35-year-old woman alleged that four men namely Aarif, Shahnawaz, Sharif and one more person entered her home in Shahpur village in Kaserawa, Uttar Pradesh and threw acid on her. The victim was rushed to the hospital where she was admitted for medical assistance and was discharged on the same day. On Sunday she threatened to end her life if justice is not served, news agency ANI reported.

The rising in such incidents of rape and murder has triggered nationwide protests where activists and students have come out in large numbers demanding justice for the victims and trial in a fast-track court.
