Pulwama attack: As it happened| Modi, Rahul pay tributes to slain jawans at Delhi’s Palam Air Force Station

The death toll of CRPF jawans in the February 14 terror attack in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir has crossed 40.

After a meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Security chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the withdrawal of the Most Favoured Nation status granted to Pakistan was announced. The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) summoned Pakistan High Commissioner Sohail Mahmood and issued a "strong démarche" in connection with the attack.

Also Read Pulwama attack: World nations condemn act of terror

Several nations, including the United States, and the United Nations have strongly condemned the attack.

Here are the updates:

9.40 pm

Enough is enough, says Rajinikanth

Celebrities like Amitabh Bachchan, Rajinikanth and other leading celebrations across India have condemned the terror attack on the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) troopers in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district.

Rajinikanth expressed his anger over the attack, in which 49 troopers were killed, saying enough is enough.

"I strongly condemn the unpardonable violence of the terrorists at Pulwama in Kashmir enough is enough! Time has come to put an end to all these barbaric acts.

"My heart goes out to the families of the jawans who lost their lives and are injured. To those brave hearts departed... May their souls rest in peace," he said in a statement.

Here's what others have tweeted:

Amitabh Bachchan: Distressed... Disturbed.

Lata Mangeshkar: I condemn the terrorist attack in Jammu-Kashmir's Pulwama district. I would like to pay a tribute to the martyrs. I am with the families of these soldiers in this moment of grief.

Shah Rukh Khan: Heartfelt condolences to the families of our valiant jawans. May the souls of our countrymen who laid their lives down for us rest in peace.

Salman Khan: My heart goes out for the jawans of our beloved country and their families who lost their lives as martyrs to save our families... You stand for India.

Aamir Khan: I am heartbroken to read about the terrorist attack on our CRPF jawans in Pulwama. It's so tragic. My heartfelt condolences to the families of the jawans who have lost their lives.

Ranveer Singh: Disgusted at the cowardly terror attack on the CRPF soldiers in Pulwama — my sincere condolences to the families of our brave jawans. Saddened. Angry.

Hrithik Roshan: Deeply grieved on hearing about the Pulwama attack. My heartfelt condolences to the families of the jawans martyred.

9:20 pm

J&K Police detain seven youths

Jammu and Kashmir Police have detained seven persons from Pulwama district of South Kashmir in connection with the terror attack, officials say.

The youths were detained from Pulwama and Awantipora during the night on suspicion of links with the planning of the suicide attack.

The overall planning is believed to be done by a Pakistani national, one Kamran of Jaish-e-Mohammed, who has been operating and moving in areas — Pulwama, Awantipora and Tral areas of South Kashmir.

The fidayeen (suicide attacker) was identified as Adil Ahmad from Kakapora in Pulwama. He had joined the JeM in 2018.

According to initial investigations, the planning for the terror strike was done at Midoora area of Tral in South Kashmir.

Police are also looking for another local JeM overground worker who was instrumental in arranging the explosive material. - PTI

9:10 pm

NIA team collects material for forensic evaluation

“An NIA team, along with the explosives and forensic experts, has collected material required for forensic evaluation from the scene of crime at Pulwama. Considering the status of the scene of crime, the team would continue with sifting of the material on February 15 as well. The outcome would be made known after the analysis is over,” says NIA official.

9 pm

Portraits of CRPF Jawans killed in the Pulwama attack

Portraits of CRPF Jawans killed in Pulwama attack. | Photo Credit: PTI

Portraits of CRPF Jawans killed in Pulwama attack. | Photo Credit: PTI

8:50 pm

Modi, Rahul pay tributes to jawans

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Congress president Rahul Gandhi have paid their tributes to the slain CRPF jawans at the Palam airport in Delhi.

Both leaders paid their homage to the slain security personnel by laying a wreath where the caskets carrying the mortal remains of the soldiers were kept at the Palam technical area.

The Congress chief paid his tributes after the three armed forces chiefs’ homage to them.

National Security Advisor Ajit Doval, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and senior Cabinet Ministers including Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, also paid their homage.

Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman pays her tributes to the slain CRPF jawans at the Palam Air Force Station in New Delhi on February 15, 2019. | Photo Credit: PTI

7:45 pm

Modi likely to pay last repects to slain CRPF jawans

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is likely to pay his last respects to the slain CRPF personnel at the Palam technical area, sources say. The bodies of the troopers reached Delhi’s Palam air force area a few minutes ago. Mr. Modi is likely to reach the technical area shortly, add the sources.

7:40 pm

Bodies of slain jawans arrive at Palam airport

The mortal remains of the slain CRPF jawans arrive at the Palam airport, ANI reports.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi will also pay tributes to the slain CRPF jawans at the Palam airport.

7:10 pm

Time to strike inside Pak.: Uddhav Thackeray

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray says the terror attack had shown that it is now time to “strike inside Pakistan“.

“If an intelligence failure led to the terrorist attack on the CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir, those who were in charge should be removed,” he said.

After the surgical strikes of 2016, it is now time to “strike inside Pakistan”, he tells reporters in Mumbai. “The issues of alliances, elections will be there. But Pakistan must not be allowed to go scot-free. It should be taught a befitting lesson,” he says.

“You [the Union government] conducted a surgical strike in Pakistan occupied Kashmir. Now the time has come to strike inside Pakistan. The entire country supports the government on this issue,” he says.

“This is not just a terror attack. It has blown the country’s intelligence system into smithereens,” he notes and demands action against those who failed to take necessary steps to prevent such incidents in spite of being in charge.

“Instead of making tall claims, Pakistan needs to be taught a lesson once and for all. If intelligence inputs were not available, one wonders what do the people who are holding the reins were doing. They should be removed,” the Sena chief says.

7 pm

J&K Congress calls for ‘appropriate and effective response’

The Jammu and Kashmir unit of the Congress, in a resolution, calls for “an appropriate and effective response” to avenge the killings of the CRPF personnel.

In the resolution made at a meeting in Jammu, the Jammu and Kashmir Pradesh Congress Committee says “the party solidly stands in solidarity with the nation and calls for an appropriate and effective response to avenge the killings“.

The meeting was chaired by the party’s State president G.A. Mir.

The party shares the grief, anguish and anger of the nation over the dastardly and barbaric terror attack over a CRPF convoy in Awantipora in Pulwama, the resolution reads.

The party appeals to the people to express their anger and anguish unitedly in a peaceful and non-violent manner and maintain communal harmony at all costs to defeat “nefarious designs of the enemy“.

As a mark of respect to the slain jawans, the meeting decides to defer all scheduled programmes of the party for a week.

6:50 pm

MEA officials meet representatives of diplomatic missions

Representatives of different diplomatic missions arrive at the MEA to attend a meeting called by senior officials to apprise them of the involvement of Pakistan-backed terror groups in the Pulwama attack, ANI reports. Representatives from Germany, Hungary, Italy, European Union, Canada, Britain, Russia, Israel, Australia, South Korea, Sweden, Slovakia, France, Spain and Bhutan are attending the meeting, which began at 6 pm. Representatives from Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan and Nepal are also present.

6:40 pm

Pranab, Venkaiah Naidu condemn attack

Former President Pranab Mukherjee says he is “pained by the inhuman act perpetrated by terrorists“.

“We must stand together as a nation in this hour of grief,” he says at an event to release a compilation of speeches of Vice President M. Venkaiah Naidu in New Delhi.

Mr. Mukherjee says the response of international community in condemning the terror attack in one voice will strengthen the resolve to fight terrorism.

Neighbour aiding terror groups: Vice-President

Mr. Naidu says “our neighbour” has been “aiding, abetting, funding, training terror groups for long“. Such an attempt to “destabilise and impede” the country’s progress will no longer be tolerated.

Terror reared its ugly head on Thursday and Indians must stand together with a resolve to make every inch of “our motherland safer,” he says.

6:30 pm

AMU student booked for tweet on Pulwama attack

A student of the Aligarh Muslim University was on Friday booked for allegedly posting an objectionable tweet on the soldiers who died in the Pulwama suicide attack.

Basim Hilal, a mathematics student at the university, allegedly posted on Twitter, "How's the Jaish? Great Sir," in apparent taunt of a dialogue from Bollywood film Uri, which is based on the surgical strikes conducted by the army in 2016.

A case was registered against the student, who hails from Jammu and Kashmir, at Civil Lines police station in Aligarh.—Omar Rashid

Read more

6 pm

Amit Shah’s party programme cancelled

BJP president Amit Shah's programme at Godda in Jharkhand has been cancelled following the Pulwama terror strike, party sources say. Fresh date of the party function would be announced later, BJP State unit spokesman Pratul Shahdeo tells reporters in Jharkhand’s Pakur.

Following the terror attack, all party programmes scheduled for February 15 and 16 have been cancelled. As such party national president’s programme in Godda stands cancelled, he says.

5:40 pm

‘Civilian traffic to be restricted during movement of troops in J&K’

“Civilian traffic movement will be restricted for some time during movement of army and security forces convoys. This may cause inconvenience and I apologise for this but this is necessary for safety of jawans,” Home Minister Rajnath Singh announces in Srinagar after a high-level security review meeting.

Mr. Singh also says security given to people getting funds from Pakistan and its snooping agency, ISI, should be reviewed.

“Some elements in Jammu and Kashmir have links with the ISI and terrorist organisation. We will win decisive war against terrorism,” he says.

He says he has instructed the State government to ensure communal harmony.

Earlier in the day, Mr. Singh, accompanied by a high-level team comprising officials from the CRPF, NIA and Home Ministry, arrived in Srinagar and drove straight to the adjacent CRPF campus where a wreath laying ceremony was held for the slain jawans.

As the bugler played the ‘last post’ and guard called for ‘shok salami shastra’ (reversing of arms in honour of fallen soldiers), a two-minute silence was observed after which the Union Home Minister gave a shoulder to the coffin of a jawan.

Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh is among the pallbearers of a slain CRPF jawan on February 15, 2019. Photo: Twitter/@rajnathsingh

The Home Minister, Governor Satya Pal Malik, Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba, CRPF Director General R.R. Bhatnagar, Jammu and Kashmir DGP Dilbagh Singh besides others attended the wreath laying ceremony.

“The nation will not forget the supreme sacrifice of our brave CRPF jawans. I have paid my last respects to the martyrs of Pulwama. The sacrifice will not go in vain,” Mr. Singh said.

5:25 pm

Death toll rises to 40

The CRPF has confirmed that the number of jawans died in the Pulwama attack has risen to 40.

5 pm

Indian envoy to Pakistan called back for consultations

Ajai Bisaria, Indian High Commissioner to Pakistan, has been called back to New Delhi for consultations, sources in the Ministry of External Affairs told The Hindu.

4:50 pm

Need to halt cultural exchange with Pakistan: Shabana Azmi

Actor Shabana Azmi has called for snapping cultural ties with Pakistan in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack. “I am filled with pain and grief and all else by the dastardly Pulwama attack. For the first time in all these years, I feel weakened in my belief that people to people contact can force the establishment to do the right thing. We will need to call halt to cultural exchange,” she has tweeted.

“There is no way we can carry on with cultural exchanges between India and Pakistan even as our martyrs are laying down their lives for us. I stand in solidarity with the grieving families,” she added. “But lets not lose sight of the fact that there is a difference between the Pakistani Establishment and the people of Pakistan and vice versa. On both sides of the border stand sisters and brothers divided by circumstances with which they had nothing to do.”

In an earlier tweet she said she and her husband, lyricist-writer Javed Akhtar have decided not to attend Kaifi Azmi’s birth centenary celebrations in Karachi in the wake of Pulwama terror attack. “@Javedakhtarjadu and I were invited for a 2 day event celebrating Kaifi’s Centenary and were truly looking forward to it. I appreciate that our hosts the Karachi Arts Council mutually agreed to cancel the event at the nth hour in the wake of Pulwama attack,” she said.

Mr. Akhtar said in a tweet: “Kranchi art council had invited. Shabana and me for a two day lit conference about Kaifi Azmi and his poetry . We have cancelled that . In 1965 during the indo Pak war Kaifi saheb had written a poem. AUR PHIR KRISHAN NE ARJUN SE KAHA”.

4:10 pm

Karnataka government offers job to slain jawan's wife

Karnataka Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy said the government would offer a job to the wife of CRPF soldier H. Guru, who died in the Pulwama terror attack on Thursday. He spoke to mediapersons at Channarayapatna near Hassan on Friday.

"It was a heinous act by terrorists, should not have happened. I pray the god to bestow the families of the soldiers with the strength to bear the loss. This is the time when all of us have to join hands to fight terrorism”, Mr. Kumaraswamy said.

Answering a question, the Chief Minister said he had asked the minister in-charge of Mandya district to collect information about educational qualification of Mr. Guru’s wife. “We will take a decision on offering her a job after collecting the required data”, he said.

3:40 pm

Putin condemns attack

Condemning the Pulwama attack, Russian President Vladimir Putin Friday said perpetrators and sponsors of the attack should be brought to book and reiterated his country’s support for further strengthening counterterrorist cooperation with India.

In a message to President Ram Nath Kovind and Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Putin said, “Please accept the most sincere condolences in connection with the loss of Indian law enforcement officers in the terrorist act in the state of Jammu and Kashmir. We strongly condemn this brutal crime. The perpetrators and sponsors of this attack, undoubtedly, should be duly punished.

“I would like to reiterate the readiness for further strengthening counterterrorist cooperation with Indian partners. In Russia, we share the grief of friendly people of India and hope for speedy recovery of the injured.”

3.25 pm

Tempers run high in slain CRPF soldier’s village in UP’s Deoria

As tempers run high in neighbouring Deoria’s Jaidev Chapia, the native village of 30-year-old CRPF jawan Vijay Kumar Maurya who was killed in the Pulwama terror attack, the proud father of the soldier seeks a befitting reply to Pakistan.

Vijay Maurya joined the paramilitary force nine years ago and got married in 2014. He is survived by wife and a one-and-a-half-year-old daughter. He was home on February 2 on vacation and left for Jammu only on February 9.

“I am proud that my son gave up his life for the nation but Government should give a befitting reply to Pakistan as soon as possible. The action should be so strong that Pakistan dare not enter our territory and kill our soldiers ever again, Vijay’s father Ramayan Maurya said.

Vijay Maurya’s inconsolable wife said, “I lost my husband and my daughter lost her father. Whenever such incidents take place a lot of people express their emotions but after 4-5 days everything becomes normal and Government never does anything.

The family came to know of the attack from Vijay’s cousin Rajesh Maurya, who is posted as DSP, CRPF in Jammu and Kashmir, Ramayan Maurya said.

The entire village is angry over the terror attack and is raising slogans against Pakistan. Hundreds of people are gathered outside the martyr’s house since early Friday morning.

A huge number of youth of the village with tricolour in hand also demanded that Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath visit the village and family.

“We will continue demonstration until CM comes here,” villager Arun Dubey told newspersons.

SDM Vineet Singh and BSP state president R.S. Kushwaha rushed to the village on Friday morning to meet the family.

3.15 pm

Nitish condemns Pulwama attack

Strongly condemning the “cowardly terrorist attack” in Pulwama, Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar on Friday expressed hope that a “befitting reply” will be given to the perpetrators.

The martyrdom of the CRPF men “will not go in vain”, he told reporters outside the premises of the Assembly in Patna, where proceedings were adjourned till 2 pm after the members observed a two-minute silence in memory of the deceased jawans at 11 am.

“I strongly condemn the cowardly terrorist attack on the CRPF convoy in Pulwama. The nation stands united against the terrorists and I am confident that a befitting reply will be given. My condolence to the bereaved family members. The martyrdom of the slain soldiers will not go in vain,” Mr. Kumar said.

3:00 pm

Movement of convoy of forces in Kashmir Valley suspended

The movement of convoy of security forces in Kashmir Valley was suspended on Friday apprehending law and order situation.

Movement of isolated vehicle is strictly prohibited while movement of Army and CRPF vehicles in the interior, inter-district and intra-district in the valley is also banned on Friday, a Home Ministry official said.

2:40 pm

Pakistan envoy summoned

Pakistan High Commissioner Sohail Mahmood was summoned to the External Affairs Ministry and issued with a "strong demarche" by Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale on Friday in connection with the Pulwama car bomb strike by a Pakistan-based terrorist group.

Mr. Gokhale demanded that Pakistan should take immediate and verifiable action against the JeM and stop individuals associated with JeM from operating in Pakistani territory.

2:30 pm

The CRPF has released the details of 36 personnel killed in Pulwama attack. One person is yet to be identified.

"In memory of the Martyrs of Pulwama terrorist attack, all formations of CRPF observed 2 minutes silence. The CRPF flag will fly half mast today," the official account of CRPF has tweeted.

Name of the jawan State Rathod Nitin Shivaji Maharashtra Virendra Singh Uttarakhand Awadhesh Kumar Yadav Uttar Pradesh Ratan Kumar Thakur Bihar Pankaj Kumar Tripathi Uttar Pradesh Jeet Ram Rajasthan Amit Kumar Uttar Pradesh Vijay Kumar Mourya Uttar Pradesh Kulwinder Singh Punjab Maneswar Basumatari Assam Mohan Lal Uttarakhand Sanjay Kumar Sinha Bihar Ram Vakeel Uttar Pradesh Naseer Ahmad Jammu and Kashmir Jaimal Singh Punjab Sukhjinder Singh Punjab Tilak Raj Himachal Pradesh Rohitash Lamba Rajasthan Vasantha Kumar V.V. Kerala Vijay Soreng Jharkhand Subramanian G. Tamil Nadu Guru H. Karnataka Manoj Kumar Behra Odisha Narayan Lal Gurjar Rajasthan Pradeep Kumar Uttar Pradesh Hemraj Meena Rajasthan Ramesh Yadav Uttar Pradesh Sanjay Rajput Maharashtra Koushal Kumar Rawat Uttar Pradesh Pradeep Singh Uttar Pradesh Shyam Babu Uttar Pradesh Ajit Kumar Azad Uttar Pradesh Maninder Singh Attri Punjab Ashvni Kumar Kaochi Madhya Pradesh Sudip Biswaws West Bengal Sivachandran C Tamil Nadu

WE WILL NOT FORGET, WE WILL NOT FORGIVE:We salute our martyrs of Pulwama attack and stand with the families of our martyr brothers. This heinous attack will be avenged. pic.twitter.com/jRqKCcW7u8 — CRPF (@crpfindia) February 15, 2019

2.15 p.m.

Kashmir regrets every killing, resolve real issue: Hurriyat

Separatist amalgam, Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL), comprising Syed Ali Geelani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Mohammad Yasin Malik, on Friday said that "people and leadership of Kashmir regret every killing that happens on its soil".

Referring to the Pulwama incident, the trio said, "The delay in the resolution of the Kashmir dispute, the denial to engage with the sentiments and aspirations of the people of J&K and instead the use of a muscular military approach to counter an essentially political and human problem, is wrecking havoc in Kashmir especially on our next generation and consuming them, while those who are here to execute this policy are also under stress and paying a price with their lives."

The JRL said if this dance of death has to stop. "If hatred and revenge has to stop, if killing and counter-killings has to stop and if we really want peace in the region, we have to put an end to hostilities," they said.

"And the most effective and civilized manner to do so, is to reach out and engage and listen to the concerns of all three stakeholders and address them in the spirit of humanity and justice. Resolve the Kashmir dispute for all times," they added.

2.10 p.m.

Advisory issued to all private channels

In light of the recent attack, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has issued an advisory to all private channels, advising them to be cautious in telecasting content that is likely to "encourage or incite violence or contains anything against the maintenance of law and order or which promotes anti-national attitudes, and/or contains anything affecting the integrity of the nation."

2.00 p.m.

Curfew in Jammu city

Curfew was imposed in Jammu city on Friday as a precautionary measure following massive protests over the terror attack in Pulwama in the Kashmir Valley.

The Army has been requested to help the administration in maintaining law and order and conduct flag marches, officials said.

Curfew was clamped as authorities feared a communal backlash, officials said. Protesters, particularly in the old city, refused to disperse even after loudspeakers announced that curfew was imposed.

1.30 p.m.

Rajnath Singh leaves for J&K

Home Minister Rajnath Singh left for Jammu and Kashmir on Friday to take stock of the situation in the State. He is accompanied by top home ministry officials.

During the visit, the home minister will take part in a high-level meeting in Srinagar to be attended by Governor Satya Pal Malik and top civil, police and other security officials.

The home minister will take stock of the security situation in the state in view of the terror attack on Thursday, a home ministry official said.

Singh will also pay his last respects to the CRPF jawans who were killed in Pulwama.

1.10 p.m.

China condemns attack

China on Friday condemned the Pulwama terror attack carried out by a Jaish suicide bomber but once again declined to back India’s appeal to list the Pakistan-based terror group’s chief Masood Azhar as a global terrorist by the UN.

“China has noted the reports of suicide terrorist attack. We are deeply shocked by this attack. We express deep condolences and sympathy to the injured and bereaved families,” spokesman of the Chinese Foreign Ministry Geng Shuang told a media briefing in Beijing.

When asked about China’s stand on the listing of Azhar as a global terrorist by the UN Security Council, he said: “As for the issue of listing, I could tell you that the 1267 Committee of Security Council has a clear stipulation on the listing and procedure of the terrorist organisations“.

“JeM has been included in the Security Council terrorism sanctions list. China will continue to handle the relevant sanctions issue in a constructive and responsible manner,” he said.

1.00 p.m.

UP govt announces Rs 25 lakh ex-gratia to families of 12 jawans

The Uttar Pradesh government announced an ex-gratia of Rs. 25 lakhs each to the families of the 12 CRPF jawans of the State killed in the terror attack in Pulwama.

The government has also announced job to one member of each soldier’s family besides naming the link road in their native village after the martyrs, a State government official said.

Directives have also been issued to ensure that the last rites of the jawans are performed with full state honours in which one minister of the state government besides DM and SSP remain present as representatives of the government, the official said.

12.30 p.m.

Perpetrators will not go unpunished, says Ravi Shankar Prasad

The perpetrators of the suicide attack in Pulwama, Jammu and Kashmir, that killed at least 37 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel will not go unpunished, said Union Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad.

Talking to the media at Madurai airport on Friday, Mr. Prasad said that the sacrifice of the CRPF jawans will not go in vain.

"There will be an appropriate and suitable response as may be strategically decided," he said. Stating that the entire world has condemned the dastardly attack, Mr. Prasad said that Pakistan now stood isolated.

12.00 p.m.

This is an attack on India's soul: Rahul Gandhi

Congress President Rahul Gandhi, former PM Manmohan Singh, Former Defence Minister A.K. Antony address a press conference in New Delhi on Friday. | Photo Credit: R.V. Moorthy

Addressing a press conference in New Delhi, Congress president Rahul Gandhi, flanked by former PM Manmohan Singh, Former Defence Minister A.K. Antony and Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad, said that the Opposition stands by the government at this time. "This is an attack on India's soul. No force can divide our country," said Mr. Gandhi. "No amount of hatred can do anything to the love and affection that our country is built on," he added.

As Congress president put it, today is a day of mourning, said Mr. Singh. "Our country has lost forty jawans. Our foremost duty is to convey to families that we are with them. In condemning the act of terror, I also want to say that we will never compromise with terrorism," added Mr. Singh.

"We will do all that is necessary to keep the country united," said the former PM.

11.50 a.m.

Punjab Assembly condemns terror attack in Pulwama, House adjourned for the day

The Punjab Assembly on Friday strongly condemned the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama, and passed a resolution for adjournment of the proceedings of the House for the day.

Members of the House, cutting across party lines, paid tributes to the CRPF personnel killed in a one of deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir, and observed two-minutes silence in their memory.

11.45 a.m.

Raza Academy, Shiv Sena protest against the attacks

Members of Raza academy protest against Pulwama terror attack on CRPF | Photo Credit: Vivek Bendre

Shivsena workers burn Pakistan flags and posters of Imran khan as a protest against the attacks of Pulwama | Photo Credit: Emmanual Yogini

11.35 a.m.

Perpetrators will be punished: Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi assured people that the perpetrators of the terror strike would be punished. He said it was important that the country spoke in one voice after the terror strike.

India would give a befitting response to the terror attack, Mr. Modi said, calling on the international community to stand together to defeat terrorism.

The high-profile CCS meet on Friday morning was chaired by the Prime Minister. Union Ministers Rajnath Singh, Arun Jaitley, Sushma Swaraj and Nirmala Sitharaman were also present at the meeting.

Top security officials are learnt to have made a presentation on the incident and the overall security situation in the State.

11.30 a.m.

Mortal remains of CRPF men to be flown to their homes today

The mortal remains of the CRPF personnel killed will be sent to their homes across the country this afternoon, officials said on Friday. While a majority of the 37 bodies have been identified, some of them have been mangled beyond recognition.

A home ministry official said arrangements have been made to hand over the bodies to the families.

Home Minister Rajnath Singh, who is visiting Jammu and Kashmir to take stock of the situation in the wake of the terror attack, Governor Satya Pal Malik, DG of CRPF R.R. Bhatnagar will pay their last respect to the departed souls in Srinagar before the bodies are flown out of the State.

11.20 a.m.

Dominican Republic extends "deepest sympathy"

Ambassador of Dominican Republic Hans Dannenberg Castenllanos extended "deepest sympathy" and said that the country firmly supports India in the fight against terrorism.

"On behalf of the Diplomatic Corps, we would like to express our deepest sympathy to the Government and to the people of India, as well as families of the victims of this horrendous act. We firmly support the Government of India in their fight against terrorism," the country said in a statement.

11.15 a.m.

J&K Guv failed in his primary responsibility, says Omar Abdullah

Former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah in a scathing attack on Governor Satya Pal Malik, accused him of “failing” to carry out his “primary responsibility” and asked him to visit those injured in the Pulwama terror attack and take stock of the situation.

Mr. Abdullah, the National Conference vice-president, tweeted, “The Governor of J&K has failed in his primary responsibility. He compounds things by preferring to appear on every single news channel he can find rather than rush to the valley to meet the injured and yet somehow Mehbooba & I are to blame for everything (sic).”

“It’s mind boggling that the biggest ever terrorist attack in J&K takes place & yet for some channels/talking heads the only people NOT accountable are the central government & the governor’s administration," he wrote.

“Dear Governor Malik, some unsolicited advice from a person who has governed J&K for 6 years. Pls stop giving interviews, let your advisors do it. You will only make things worse by trying to talk your way out of this situation (sic)”, he said in a series of tweets.

Accusing Malik of “playing politics” over the issue and trying to “pass the buck”, Mr. Abdullah urged him to be a “statesman for once".

“This should have been done yesterday but yesterday you were too busy passing the buck...You are a politician & obviously your first instinct will be to play politics but this is neither the time nor the occasion. Please suppress your desire to politicise everything & instead be a statesman for once. The nation will appreciate that more even if your party might not,” he said. - PTI

11.10 a.m.

Suicide bomber used slip road to join CRPF convoy

Preliminary investigations in Pulwama attack in Kashmir has revealed that the suicide car bomber used a slip road to come on the highway where the CRPF convoy was passing by. The explosives-laden car, being driven by a local Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terrorist Adil Ahmed Dar, was driving beside the convoy. After moving ahead of it, the car had suddenly turned back and rammed into one of the buses.

The bus was hit on the left side and both the vehicles were blown to pieces. There were 39 occupants in the bus, the third in the 78-vehicle convoy to have entered the highway. CRPF said 37 personnels were killed and five others were seriously injured.

11.00 a.m.

Pakistan rejects India’s charge on Pulwama terrorist attack

Pakistan has condemned the terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district and said it is a matter of grave concern even as it rejected India pointing out Islamabad’s link to the incident without investigations.

Pakistan’s Foreign Office, after keeping quiet for hours, issued a statement after midnight.

The attack in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir “is a matter of grave concern,” it said. “We have always condemned heightened acts of violence in the Valley,” the FO said.

Pakistan also rejected that it was in any way involved in the attack.

“We strongly reject any insinuation by elements in the Indian government and media circles that seek to link the attack to the State of Pakistan without investigations,” the FO added.

10.50 a.m.

Most favoured nation status of Pakistan withdrawn: Jaitley

Union Minister Arun Jaitley, who resumed charge as the Finance Minister on Friday, said that a detailed assessment of the terror strike was made at the CCS meeting.

"MEA will initiate all diplomatic steps to ensure the complete isolation of Pakistan from the international community. Most favoured nation status of Pakistan stands withdrawn," he added.

Mr. Jaitley said that Pakistan has direct hand in suicide attack and that the Home Minister will call an all party meeting after his return from Kashmir on Saturday.

What is Most-Favoured Nation status?

According to the MFN principle of the WTO’s General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) — to which India is a signatory/contracting party — each of the WTO member countries should “treat all the other members equally as ‘most-favoured’ trading partners.”

The WTO says, "Grant someone a special favour (such as a lower customs duty rate) and you have to do the same for all other WTO members." Hence, though MFN sounds like special treatment, in effect it means non-discrimination.

Read more here.

10.40 a.m.

BJP leaders cancel all political programmes

All political programmes of BJP leaders, including Prime Minister Narendra Modi and party President Amit Shah, scheduled for Friday have been cancelled following the attack.

PM Modi was scheduled to address a rally in Itarsi in Madhya Pradesh and Mr. Shah was slated to attend different political events in Odisha and Chhattisgarh on Friday. These programmes have now been cancelled, party sources said.

Top BJP leaders have been holding rallies and other political programmes in the run up to the Lok Sabha polls.
