Two soldiers killed during bridging exercise in Pune

The tower support collapsed, injuring several jawans

Two Army jawans were killed and five others injured during a bridging exercise on the premises of the College of Military Engineering (CME) in the city’s Dapodi area on Thursday.

Sources said that a unit was training on a mobile bridge used in surmounting obstacles in rough terrain when the mishap occurred, resulting in serious injuries to seven jawans, two of whom died later. The deceased were identified as Lance Havildar Sanjivan P.K. and Naik Waghmode B.K.

“ During the training of bridge construction, the tower support collapsed and six-seven troops were injured. They were immediately shifted to Military Hospital in Kirkee and the Command Hospital. A Court of Inquiry has been ordered for investigating the incident and the Next of Kin (NOK) of the deceased soldiers have been informed,” said an official statement issued later in the day.

The CME is a technical and tactical training institution of the Engineer Corps of the Indian Army.

Two Army personnel were killed at the College of Military Engineering (CME), Pune during a bridging exercise, while nine other personnel were injured in the incident, said Army sources.

The CME is a premier technical and tactical training institution of the Engineer Corps of the Indian Army.

“The incident occurred at around 11:50 a.m. when two personnel, one an officer and another a Junior Commissioned Officers (JCO) and Other Ranks, were launching a bailey suspension bridge. Construction of a tower was in progress on one side and the third row was under construction, when the tower tilted and collapsed,” Army sources said.

The deceased were identified as Naik B.K. Waghmode and Lance Havildar P.K. Sanjivan. One Officer, one JCO and Other injured soldiers were rushed to a hospital. While the officer and JCO are out of danger, seven soldiers are currently undergoing treatment — three at Command Hospital and four at Military Hospital.

A Court of Inquiry has been ordered for investigating the incident and the Next of Kin (NOK) of the deceased soldiers have been informed, the statement said.
