Odisha: Teacher sexually harasses student; arrested and suspended

The Collector suspended the accused after the inquiry report was submitted to her (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Bhubaneswar: In a shocking incident reported, a teacher was arrested for behaving inappropriately with his student. The accused allegedly touched the victim inappropriately. The accused is employed at a government-run residential school. The man was arrested three days after the incident.

The accused allegedly harassed the victim at the accommodation given to him by the school. The quarter of the accused is located near the school. The area comes under the jurisdiction of the Phulbani Sadar police station in the Kandhamal district.

Also Read: Hyderabad: Student jumps from hostel building after being sexually assaulted

While talking to the Times of India, the Sub-inspector in-charge of the Phulbani police station, RK Sahu said that the accused was arrested on the basis of the complaint filed against him by the victim's father. The accused is employed as the headmaster-cum-superintendent of the hostel.

The District Welfare Officer (DWO) said that the administration suspended the accused and stripped his of his authority after the complaint was filed. The DWO also inquired into the matter and a report on the same was also submitted to the Collector. The Collector suspended the accused after the inquiry report was submitted to her.

The victim narrated her ordeal and said that she had gone to the teacher's quarters to call her parents when the latter allegedly touched her inappropriately. The incident allegedly took place on Thursday. The victim came out of the house crying and shared her plight with the people around. The matron of the hostel was guilty since he allowed the victim to go outside.

In a similar incident, a student resorted to committing suicide after her schoolmates allegedly assaulted her sexually. The two accused were booked under POCSO Act and the school authorities were taken into custody.
