Bengaluru police rescue eight minors from illegal ashram run by magician accused of sexual abuse

The accused has been arrested and booked under POCSO Act (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Bengaluru: Police in the state capital of Karnataka rescued eight minors from an illegal-ashram in Bengaluru's Kengeri area following complaints of sexual assault against the owner of the ashram, a magician. A case has been lodged against the accused of sexual harassment under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act based on a complaint by a 17-year-old girl.

The matter came to light when the complainant who escaped the ashram, was rescued by Child Welfare Committee's (CWC) Chamaraj Nagar unit from the Chamaraj Nagar railway station. Following her rescue, CWC members alerted city police who brought the girl back to Bengaluru and lodged a case against the ashram owner based on her complaint.

An official investigating the matter told New Indian Express that a preliminary inquiry revealed that the minor girl was sexually abused by the ashram owner. Other children staying at the ashram have not complained of sexual harassment yet, added the officer. Deputy commissioner of police (DCP), Ravi D Channavar said that the case has been assigned to ACP Kengeri Gate sub-division. The investigation is still in progress and we have arrested the ashram owner on the basis of the girl's complaint, added the DCP.

Going by reports, the ashram owner is an engineering graduate who has been running the ashram since 2015. A popular magician in his area, the accused completed his engineering from a private college in Mandya. Records have asserted that he did not have the required permission to run the ashram. He is believed to have sheltered several children even before he started the ashram. He gathered a few such children, most of whom are orphans and moved them to the ashram in Kengeri. The investigation into the matter is still underway and more details in this regard are awaited.
