News India Kashmir: Outrage over alleged rape of girl, three

Thousands of people have taken to the streets in Indian-controlled Kashmir to protest the alleged rape of a 3-year-old girl by a neighbour who lured her to a school bathroom, escalating into intense clashes between protesters and government forces.

Top local administrator Baseer Khan said yesterday that police arrested the suspect in a village in Sumbal town and a fast-track inquiry is underway.

Police said the girl was hospitalised in critical condition on May 8 but her condition has stabilised.

The assault is the latest incident of violence against women in India. (PA/AAP)

Protests erupted over the weekend and spread to new areas yesterday after the suspect's family produced a school-issued birth certificate giving his age as 13.

The protesters claimed it was a fake birth certificate produced by the family to show him as a juvenile and save him from a maximum sentence of life imprisonment.

The protesters said the suspect is at least 20 and worked in a motor repair workshop.

The area is 30 kilometers north of Srinagar, the main city in the Indian-controlled portion of Kashmir.

Massive protests were held in many parts of Kashmir valley following the alleged rape of a three year old girl. (PA/AAP)

Police said they were questioning the school principal who issued the birth certificate.

Protesters blocked highways and fought pitched battles with government forces at several areas in the region.

During the clashes, police and paramilitary soldiers fired shotgun pellets and tear gas and also fired into the air to stop stone-throwing protesters from marching on highways.

About 100 civilians and government personnel were injured in the clashes, police and medics said. One young man was said to be in critical condition.

Women have called for better protections against violence. (PA/AAP)

Hundreds of students also joined protest marches demanding justice for the victim.

Khan, the administrator, appealed for calm.

"Justice will be done and the culprit will be given fair punishment as per the law," he said.

India has been shaken by a series of sexual assaults in recent years, including the gang rape and murder of a student on a moving New Delhi bus in 2012.

Kashmiri women take to the streets following the alleged rape of the girl earlier this month. (PA/AAP)

That attack galvanised a country where widespread violence against women had long been quietly accepted.
