Delta Twp. man arraigned in killings of women in Holt, Meridian Twp.

MASON - A parolee who served prison time for choking and cutting an ex-girlfriend made his first court appearance Tuesday in murder cases involving two other women.

Kiernan Brown, 27, of Delta Township, was arraigned in 55th District Court over a video link to the Eaton County Jail on two counts each of murder and armed robbery.

Brown is accused of bludgeoning 26-year-old Kaylee Brock at her Delhi Township home on Thursday and 32-year-old Julie Ann Mooney, of Williamston, at a Meridian Township motel on Friday.

Police said he also was intending to kill two other women when he was stopped by Eaton County Sheriff's deputies on Interstate 69 north of Charlotte early Friday.

"There's no doubt he was on a killing spree," Ingham County Sheriff Scott Wriggelsworth said last week.

Brown often bowed his head to the camera during Tuesday's hearing and quietly answered questions from Magistrate Mark Blumer. Not guilty pleas were entered on his behalf, and Blumer ordered that he be held without bond.

Eaton County Sheriff's deputies went looking for Brown after a former girlfriend said he had gone to her apartment and sent her text messages saying he "spared" her because he loved her, "and she would know what that meant soon," Wriggelsworth said.

Under a personal protection order, Brown was barred from going to the woman's home on Mall Drive West in Delta Township.

After deputies stopped him on I-69 near Otto Road, he used his cell phone to show them photos of the bodies of the two women he had murdered, police said.

Brown was initially arrested on charges of assault with intent to do great bodily harm, domestic violence and animal cruelty. Those charges are unrelated to the murder cases.

Police have not said how Brown knew Brock and Mooney. Both women died from blunt force trauma, Wriggelsworth said.

Brown was accompanied at Tuesday's hearing by attorney Keith Watson, a public defender. A hearing to determine if he should stand trial on the charges is set for May 30.

Brown is charged as a fourth-time habitual offender. He served 3½ years in prison after pleading guilty to assault by strangulation and domestic violence in 2014. He was paroled in early 2018 and is now listed as a parole absconder.

RELATED:

Lansing Community College student charged with 2 counts of murder in killings of 2 women

'There's no doubt he was on a killing spree': Police arrest man in killings of 2 women

Prosecutor issues 7 arrest warrants in MSU Healing Assistance Fund fraud investigation

Contact Ken Palmer at (517) 377-1032 or kpalmer@lsj.com. Follow him on Twitter @KBPalm_lsj.
