#MenToo: If FIR is found false, it may have bearing on Karan Oberoi rape case too

MUMBAI: Will lawyer’s Ali Kaashif Khan’s allegations that the 34-year-old woman orchestrated the early-morning attack on herself have a bearing on her rape case against actor Karan Oberoi Legal experts said the case of a “staged FIR” – her complaint about the assault – needs to be thoroughly investigated. “If there is any truth of the falsity of the second FIR by the woman, it is time stern action is initiated,” said leading criminal law counsel Amit Desai. He added, “If it is found allegations of assault are false, it will have a bearing on the credibility of the allegations made earlier by the woman against the actor.”In the light of the lawyer’s allegations, police will now be required to investigate the veracity of the charges. Only if police find the lawyer’s version to be credible are they entitled to initiate proceedings against the woman for filing a false police complaint. They can then even arrest her and take action against her under Section 182 of the Indian Penal Code for giving a false complaint.Actor Karan Oberoi’s lawyer Dinesh Tiwari said, “His (Khan’s) arrest will undoubtedly help in bail proceedings filed by Karan in Bombay high court after the sessions court rejected his plea last month.” He added, “We would mention in court that if a person is capable of cooking up such a plot as alleged, her first initial accusations against the actor can also be the product of such fertile imagination.”“This will also go a long way in helping to prove that the rape case she filed was concocted and utterly false, as had been submitted at great length before sessions court,” Tiwari added.Police need to conduct a fresh probe into her rape allegations too, stated advocate Hitesh Jain. “A person’s arrest is something that cannot be undone. Police also routinely appear to arrest and seek custody mechanically at times,” he noted.The sessions court, a court subordinate to the HC, had while rejecting Oberoi’s bail plea “at this stage” however prima facie disbelieved the woman’s contention that the first time she was “raped” in January 2017 at the actor’s house was after he allegedly intoxicated her with coconut water. The sessions judge had also found it hard to believe her other allegation that the actor made a videotape which he wanted to use for extortion.The actor in his bail plea, which HC is to yet hear, contended that the second FIR which the woman filed was only to ensure he doesn’t bail from a higher court. He had said in the plea that the attack on her appeared staged. At that time, the four youth were not arrested, nor had her lawyer been named.
