Young Pakistani Sister raped by Brother and Brother-in-law

it confirmed that she had been sexually assaulted.

In a case in Badami Bagh, Lahore, it’s been reported that a young Pakistani was raped by her brother and brother-in-law on Saturday, June 8, 2019.

It is another horrific case of sexual violence against minors as the victim was under 18.

The victim had been at home alone with the two suspects as the rest of her family were out visiting relatives.

The two men, identified as Ali Hassan and Pervaiz, allegedly gave the victim sleeping pills which caused her to fall unconscious. Hassan and Pervaiz then sexually assaulted her.

The young Pakistani victim was taken to the hospital where she told doctors what had happened to her, they then informed the police.

Badami Bagh SHO Sohail Raza Kazmi stated that they had conducted a medico-legal examination of the victim and it confirmed that she had been sexually assaulted.

Police officers went to the victim’s home and collected evidence from the crime scene.

SHO Kazmi confirmed that the victim’s brother and brother-in-law were arrested and that a case had been registered against them.

Police officers are currently investigating the matter further.

In another incident, a father from Thokar Niaz Baig, Lahore, was arrested for raping and sexually abusing his daughters, aged nine and five for many years.

He was arrested after the victims’ mother secretly recorded her husband sexually assaulting their young daughters in order to gather evidence.

The man denied the accusations and instead blamed his wife for trying to frame him.

However, he later admitted to the charges of raping his daughters.

Sexual violence against children is a huge problem in South Asian countries like India and Pakistan.

The Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) Sahil is the only organisation in Pakistan that works specifically on the issue of child sexual abuse and exploitation.

They released a report which shows that a total of 3,832 cases of child abuse were reported in the country throughout 2018.

This was an 11% increase in the number of cases reported in 2017, which was 3,445.

Out of the total number of cases that were reported, 63% were from Punjab, 27% were from Sindh, four per cent were from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, three per cent were from Islamabad and two per cent were from Balochistan.

In addition, 34 cases were reported in Azad Jammu and Kashmir while six cases were reported from Gilgit-Baltistan.

The report by Sahil also revealed that at least 10 children were abused every day in 2018.

The figures highlight that out of the total cases reported, 55% of the victims were girls while the other 45% were boys.
