Massacre victims’ kin disheartened as UK hesitant to apologise

editorial@tribune.com

GS Paul

Tribune News Service

Amritsar, April 11

As India prepares to commemorate the centenary of Jallianwala Bagh massacre, descendants of martyrs are discouraged by the attitude of the Britain government yet again. British Prime Minister Theresa May though expressed regret for the massacre by British troops in 1919, but fell short of a formal apology in the British Parliament.

Identical was the scenario in February 2013, when Britain’s serving Prime Minister David Cameroon and his delegation paid tribute to the martyrs at the Jallianwala Bagh, but didn’t submit official apology.

In 1997, Queen Elizabeth II and her husband Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, visited the massacre site and laid wreaths at the Flame of Liberty memorial, but they too remained silent.

Mahesh Behl, whose grandfather Lala Hari Ram (then 36), an advocate, was killed in the massacre, said English came to India for trading, but ended up committing atrocities on Indians by making them their slaves. “Ironically, the British admit it to be a ‘shameful act, but their egoistic attitude refrain them from apologising. Earlier, Queen Elizabeth came to pay tributes to martyrs at Jallianwala Bagh but couldn’t write even a single word of apology while jotting down her remarks on visitor’s book. This was followed by another meaningless visit of former PM David Camroon who also didn’t submit atonement for the most barbaric incident of the colonial oppression. Now, May too adopted the same practice, which was disheartening”, he added.

Surinder Singh, grandson of famous fresco painter Gian Singh, who lost his 17-year-old talented son Sunder Singh, said General Dyre was a butcher who ruined families. “Had the British PM tendered apology in Parliament, it could have brought some solace to the aggrieved families of the martyrs, but the British government remained thick skinned and didn’t shun its insensitive attitude,” he said.

Sunil Kapoor, great grandson of Lala Wasoo Mal (in his 40s then) who died six days after receiving bullet injuries, said the tragedy changed the fortune of the victims’ families. “As this massacre entered 100th anniversary, we expected at least the admission of guilt officially by the Britain government, but it was again not to be”, he said.

Kapoor showed his resentment towards the Indian government too. “What to talk of British government, our own country too is hesitant to award martyr status to those who were killed on that fateful day. We were struggling to get the Centre and the state government convince for the past so many decades, but remained unsuccessful,” he added.
