Nation pays tribute to martyrs on 100 years of Jallianwala Bagh massacre

Follow us on Image Source : PTI India marks 100 years of Jallianwala Bagh massacre today

India marks 100 years of the Jallianwala Bagh massacre on Saturday, which recalls the killing over 1000 peaceful protestors, including unarmed men, women and children after Brigadier General Reginald Dyer had opened fire on them on 13th April 1919. The massacre was one of the worst atrocities of British colonial rule for which London is yet to apologise.

On the occasion, Prime Minister Narendra Modi early Saturday took to Twitter and said the valour and sacrifice of the Jallianwala Bagh martyrs will never be forgotten.

"Today, when we observe 100 years of the horrific Jallianwala Bagh massacre, India pays tributes to all those martyred on that fateful day. Their valour and sacrifice will never be forgotten. Their memory inspires us to work even harder to build an India they would be proud of," Modi said through Twitter.

President Ram Nath Kovind also took to Twitter on the occasion and wrote, ""A 100 years ago today, our beloved freedom fighters were martyred at Jallianwala Bagh. A horrific massacre, a stain on civilisation, that day of sacrifice can never be forgotten by India."

Paying his tributes to the martyrs, Congress President Rahul Gandhi layed wreath at the Jallianwala Bagh memorial early on Saturday, in the presence of Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh and state minister Navjot Singh Sidhu.

Image Source : ANI Rahul Gandhi pays tribute to martyrs of Jallianwala Bagh massacre

Gandhi, Singh, Punjab minister Navjot Singh Sidhu, accompanied by some other Congress leaders, paid floral tributes at the memorial and also observed two-minute silence to remember those who were massacred in the tragic incident on April 13, 1919.

Gandhi arrived at Amritsar late on Friday. Upon his arrival, the Congress chief, accompanied by Singh, went straight to the Golden Temple and paid obeisance.

Other leaders, including Vice President Venkaiah Naidu are expected to visit the memorial in Amritsar today. Other than political bigwigs, hundreds of people are also expected to gather at the memorial in the memory of the martyrs.

Earlier, the annual event, which was organised to mark the event was cancelled by the Election Commission in the wake of polling for the 2019 general elections. A candlelight vigil was hence, organised in Chandigarh on Friday.

Amarinder Singh and Punjab Governor VP Singh Badnore had also taken part in a candlelight march on the eve of the centenary of the Jallianwala Bagh massacre on Friday evening as part of the various events organised by the Punjab government to mark the historic occasion.

Singh had termed the tragic event as a heart-wrenching moment in India's history.

At the British Parliament on Wednesday, UK Prime Minister Theresa May expressed "deep regret" for the Jallianwala Bagh massacre led by British troops in India, back in 1919.

May, however, did not tender an apology for the incident.

"We deeply regret what happened and the suffering caused," May told the British parliament.

Watch TV Coverage

Latest India News
