Officers involved in Kupwara massacre given rewards, impunity by Delhi: Rasheed

Srinagar

Speaking during a seminar organized by Awami Itihaad Party at Kupwara on Sunday in solidarity with the “martyrs” of January 27, 1990, Er Rasheed said that sacrifices are our assets and no one will be allowed to disrespect them.

Er Rasheed while addressing a huge gathering at Kupwara said that “Let Delhi answer if those including senior Congress leader Sachin Kumar could be punished by courts for their role in anti-Sikh riots, what stops the same judiciary when it comes to Kashmir.”

“Delhi by denying justice to Kashmiris has yet again proved that J&K is not its integral part. The doors of justice are closed for Kashmiris everywhere. While two innocent youth from Handwara namely Nazir Ahmad Pir and Zahoor Ahmad Pir are lodged in Tihar jail for none of their faults since last two years, the irony is that court is denying bail to Zahoor despite his father Habibullah Pir, a renowned teacher of village Muqam Yehama, suffered a stroke and unfortunately passed away at SMHS this afternoon,” the spokesman quoted Er Rasheed as having said.

“Delaying his bail by NIA court is not justified. One has a right to ask if film actor Sanjay Dutt and Lalu Yadav can be released on pay role despite being convicted why cannot Zahoor Ahmad Pir be released,” he said.

Er Rasheed further added that Delhi is giving impunity to everyone in uniform who has carried murders and those officers involved in Kupwara massacre were rewarded with promotions without feeling any shame in doing so.

The spokesman said that Er Rasheed later attended the funeral of late Habibullah Pir and expressed solidarity with the bereaved family.

He said on the occasion Er Rasheed sought unconditional release of Zahoor Ahmad Pir and his cousin Nazir Ahmad Pir on humanitarian grounds and said that neither NIA nor court has found anything against them.

The spokesman said that renowned writer, poet and educationist Ghulam Rasool Dardpori presided over the function and people in large numbers from Kupwara and adjoining areas participated in the programme.

“Those who spoke on the occasion included Dr Nazir Ahmad Mir, Ashraf Charag, Firdous Baba, Molvi Shabir, Advocate Noor-ul-Shahbaz and Mir. Gh. Rasool Dardpori. Speakers in one voice reiterated that people of Kupwara have offered huge sacrifices and cannot forget them,” said spokesman in a statement.
