Shah Bano, Muslims in gutter & Zakaria’s secularism

Readers need to be assured the below sentences of wisdom is not the fiction of some Hindutva mind, but the actual printed thoughts of a man who was a PhD from London University

There is a great deal of anxiety among Indian Muslims who believed there is little they can do to save themselves, Dr Zakaria recommended the following

Referring to the Congress party’s continued opposition to the Triple Talaq Bill, our Prime Minister reminded that party of how it had similarly shielded the mindset of the minority community during the Shah Bano controversy by arousing the sentiment that “Upliftment of the Muslims is not the responsibility of the Congress; if they want to lie in the gutter, let them”.

The facts of the Shah Bano case are in nub are as follows:

The mature and nationalistic view is to bring the Muslims together and build a really great Indian nation.

In 1975, Ahmad Khan (an advocate) threw out Shah Bano from her matrimonial home. She was then aged 62 years and was the mother of three children. Because of a court petition, she was granted monthly maintenance of Rs. 200. A few legal interventions later, the Supreme Court, on April 23, 1985, upheld a High Court judgment and granted her monthly maintenance of Rs. 179. But this verdict of Rs. 200 per month created a lot of heat and dust among the Muslim community because, under Islamic law, divorce maintenance is to be paid only during the period of iddat, or till 90 days after the divorce. The state was set for the “secular” Congress party to enter. Despite the protest of several of its leaders, and the resignation of Union Minister Arif Mohammad Khan, Rajiv Gandhi enacted the “The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act 1986” which nullified the Supreme Court judgments and restricted the maintenance amount as per the Islamic law.

The entire situation may well have caused uncertainty among the Muslim community itself. And these Hindu extremists don’t reduce the general uneasiness among the Muslims.

So, what should Muslims in India do?

You’ll get angry replies to that question from Abu Azmi or Asauddin Owaisi or Abdul Razaq Khan and others. And the loony Hindus will want the Muslims to vanish to Pakistan.

The mature and nationalistic view is to bring the Muslims together and build a really great Indian nation.

And some of the suggestions towards that aim have come from the late Dr Rafiq Zakaria, a prominent Minister in the Maharashtra government of the Congress during the seventies.

His answers to the questioning Muslims are in his 219-page book “Communal Rage In Secular India” (Popular Prakashan, September 2002) in which, notably, the first Chapter is on the Godhra massacre of 2002 in Gujarat.

The book’s entire last chapter of 31 pages is devoted to “What Should Muslims Do?“, and accepting that there is a great deal of anxiety among Indian Muslims who believed there is little they can do to save themselves, he recommended the following:

Dr.Zakaria was a Congressman who was deputy leader of the party in Parliament after he had spent 15 years as a cabinet minister in the Maharashtra government.

Confrontation has done no good to the Muslims. The only alternative for them is to change their outlook … Muslims must try and become an integral part of the mainstream. They must wholeheartedly collaborate in enriching composite nationalism . For this, they must get out of their ghetto mentality break the barriers of alienation and generate a harmonious environment.

… Muslims must try and become an integral part of the mainstream. They must wholeheartedly collaborate in enriching . For this, they must get out of their ghetto mentality break the barriers of alienation and generate a harmonious environment. They must discard their worn-out prejudices and outmoded habits and adjust themselves to the requirements of the changing times. Muslims must stop asking for doles which will only cripple them, and instead learn to stand on their own feet because the fact is that they have no true friends; many who show them sympathy are not sincere and do so only for electoral gain. Even Muslims from other countries have never come to their rescue. This has been proved time and again, and the wise must now take the hint and correct themselves .

their worn-out prejudices and outmoded habits and adjust themselves to the requirements of the changing times. Muslims must asking for doles which will only cripple them, and instead learn to because the fact is that they have no true friends; many who show them sympathy are not sincere and do so only for electoral gain. Even Muslims from other countries have come to their rescue. This has been proved time and again, and the wise must now take the hint and correct themselves Muslims continue to live in a make-believe world of their own. Their leaders waste their energies in whipping up emotions and bringing more trouble to ordinary Muslims. There are also the other warriors such as priests, academicians, journalists, who add fuel to the fire by taking up cudgels on behalf of the community. Indian Muslims have to come out of this quagmire; they must show such self-appointed champions of their cause in their place; they must do their best to change the hostile attitude of the Hindus against them and take their proper share in the nation’s development .

to change the hostile attitude of the Hindus against them and take their in the nation’s development Indian Muslims must join hands with liberal Hindus to work zealously for harmony between the two communities . To succeed in this task, they must change their own behavior— indeed their entire perception.

. To succeed in this task, they must change their own behavior— indeed their entire perception. Indian Muslims must boldly come forward to undergo an all-around transformation in their style of functioning. The younger generation, in particular, will have to arm themselves both educationally and socially . They will succeed if parents shed their old habits, give up their outdated notions, and help encourage and help their sons and daughters to get the best education. Merit alone gives them a reward; they must never seek patronage .

and . They will succeed if parents shed their old habits, give up their outdated notions, and help encourage and help their sons and daughters to get the best education. alone gives them a reward; they must never seek . Indian Muslims must disarm the jihadis and disown the bigotry which has made Muslims pariahs everywhere . They must give assurance to the non-Muslims that their religion stands for “live and let live”. This reformation will rejuvenate Islam itself.

and disown the bigotry which made Muslims pariahs everywhere They must give assurance to the non-Muslims that their religion stands for “live and let live”. This reformation will rejuvenate Islam itself. Without compromising the Quranic injunctions Indian Muslims must agree to the introduction of certain much-needed, essential changes in the Personal law, particularly the enactment of monogamy. There is, in fact, enough scope under the Shariah to amend the laws relating to marriage, divorce, dower, and even maintenance.

compromising the Quranic injunctions Indian Muslims must agree to the introduction of certain much-needed, essential changes in the Personal law, particularly the enactment of monogamy. There is, in fact, enough scope under the to amend the laws relating to marriage, divorce, dower, and even maintenance. The controversy on the singing of Vande Mataram is meaningless. It was sung by all Muslim leaders of the Congress during the freedom struggle . Those Muslims who do not want to sing it may not, but they must stand up when it is sung as a mark of respect to an anthem which has a hoary past and is declared as a national song. Why add hurt to an already worsening communal relationship?

is meaningless. It was sung by Muslim leaders of the Congress during the . Those Muslims who do not want to sing it may not, but they must stand up when it is sung as a to an anthem which has a hoary past and is declared as a national song. Why add hurt to an already worsening communal relationship? There is the question of family planning on which much of our country’s progress depends. It cannot be denied that Muslims have not taken to it as seriously as Hindus. This has to be corrected. There must be a vigorous campaign for its implementation among Muslims and their leaders in every sector must engage themselves to persuade them to adopt it so that they do not lag behind Hindus in fulfilling this most urgent task, without which India cannot succeed in eradicating poverty.

on which much of our country’s progress depends. It cannot be denied that Muslims have not taken to it as seriously as Hindus. This has to be corrected. There must be a for its implementation among Muslims and their leaders in every sector must engage themselves to persuade them to adopt it so that they do not lag behind Hindus in fulfilling this most urgent task, without which India cannot succeed in eradicating poverty. Muslims must make a sustained effort to convince Hindus that they should have no fear of them and assure them that they harbor no enmity towards them, nor are in a secret conspiracy with Muslims elsewhere to harm them. They must give assurance that Muslims are as much the sons of the soil as Hindus and as committed to the country’s glory and prosperity as Hindus are.

the as Hindus and as committed to the country’s glory and prosperity as Hindus are. Finally, the punch line: “What Indian Muslims have to understand is that eventually it is not their leaders but they themselves who will have to make their destiny.”

Readers need to be assured that the above 11 sentences of wisdom are not the fiction of some Hindutva mind, but the actual printed thoughts of a man who was a PhD from London University who was called to the Bar from Lincoln’s Inn, and was active in India’s freedom struggle. He had a distinguished career in law, education, journalism, and politics, and was a scholar of international repute.

Even more significant to note for the likes of Rahul Gandhi and Mani Shankar Aiyer, Dr.Zakaria was a Congressman, first and last. Yes, a Congressman who was deputy leader of the party in Parliament after he had spent 15 years as a cabinet minister in the Maharashtra government.

The above manifesto is what one can call as Zakaria’s Secularism which, alas, is totally absent in the minds of most Congressmen — from Jawaharlal Nehru down to the Abu Azmis, Azam Khans and Sonia Gandhis of our political world, on all the pseudo-secularists from Teesta Setalvad and Arundhati Roy to Amartya Sen, and, of course, on all our journalists bearing the Lutyens stamp.

Note:

1. The views expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily represent or reflect the views of PGurus.
