Ethnic cleansing of Kashmiries

In a Save Our Soul (SOS) like tweet, Chairman All Parties Hurriate Conference Syed Ali Geelani has jolted the collective conscience of rulers of 50 plus members of Organisation of Islamic Countries (OIC) against the policy of “Ethnic Cleansing” by the BJP government of Nrendra Modi in the Indian held state of Jammu and Kashmir. He has painfully said that if all Kashmiries die because of the mass genocidal policy of the incumbent government in New Delhi and Muslims all over the world keep quiet then they will be answerable to Allah, the Magnificent on the day of resurrection. The Kashmiri Hurriate Conference leader has forewarned about the launching of the biggest genocide of Kashmiries, which according to him, would have no parallel in the history of mankind.

Promptly responding to the call of Syed Ali Geelani, Pakistan on its part has decided to take the issue of ethnic cleansing and brutalities perpetrated on Kashmiries to the OIC forum. Foreign Minister Shah Nehmood Querishi is approaching OIC Secretary General on the prevailing situation in the Indian held Kashmir. If collective efforts do materialise, the issue can be taken to the forum of UN Security Council, although it will require hectic and proactive diplomacy by our diplomats who have been posted in the important world capital. The disclosure of the US President Donald Trump about Narendra Modies desire for mediation in Kashmir dispute and the follow up statement the American President in this regard provide sound foundation to our diplomats to highlight the unresolved Kashmir dispute for mounting international pressure on the Indian government. No doubt it is a herculean task as the diplomatic inactivity of previous PPP government, remote controlled by former President Asif Zardari, and second fiddle role of former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif versus India have given credence to the Indian narrative that Pakistan is involved in cross border terrorism. It gave a level playing field to India’s diplomacy of painting the situation in Kashmir as cross-border terrorism. The International Community, by and large, accepted the Indian narrative. The PTI government will have to make extraordinary efforts to clear the diplomatic debris that PPP and PML-N governments allowed to pile up against Pakistan in the international arena because of their willful and deliberate diplomatic inactivity and has to convince the world about the homegrown struggle of Kashmiries.

In addition to the large scale genocide of Kashmiries, the Indian government is planning to abrogate Article 35-A as enshrined in the Constitution of India to pave the way for the mass settlement of Hindus in Jammu and Kashmir to convert it into a Hindu majority state. The intended change of its special status is not only the violation of Indian Constitution but of international law as well.

India has also escalated tension along the line of control in the past few days. The Indian army is using cluster monition on the civilian population in Azad Jammu and Kashmir. The use of cluster bombs on civilians in the Neelum Valley has resulted in the death injuries of a number of people, including minor children. Prime Minister Imran Khan has called on the United Nation Security Council to immediately take note of the use of cluster monition, which is tantamount to international threat to peace. The Prime Minister will be presiding over the meeting of National Security Committee to deliberate over this issue and formulate a befitting response. Hopefully, proactive and sustained diplomatic efforts will continue to compel India to resume the process of composite dialogue for resolving the outstanding disputes between the two countries including the core issue of Kashmir.
