Maharaja Ranjit Singh’s Statue Vandalized by Two Jihadi Youths in Pakistan.

Maharaja Ranjit Singh’s Statue Vandalized by Two Jihadi Youths in Pakistan.

Why the pet dogs of Pakistan like Babbar Khalsa and Khalistani Tiger Force are not protesting against the desecration of Maharaja Ranjit Singh’s statue in Lahore fort?

Statue of Sher-e-Punjab Maharaja Ranjit Singh Vandalized in Lahore by Two Fanatic Muslim Youths of Tehreek-Labbaik Pakistan.

Ravikiran Singh | HENB | Chandigarh | Aug 11, 2019:: In an very unfortunate situation, on August 10, two fanatic Muslim youths belonging to Tehreek-Labbaik Pakistan of Maulana Khaim Rizvi reportedly vandalized the recently installed statue of Sikh ruler Sher-e-Punjab Maharaja Ranjit Singh outside the Sikh gallery in Lahore fort. Notably, this life size (9-feet) statue of Maharaja Ranjit Singh was unveiled at the Lahore Fort on June 27 this year. The statue was gifted to the people of Punjab from the UK-based S.K. Foundation.

Taking an immediate action against the Jihadi culprits namely Adnan Mughal and Asad, the Police is learnt to have arrested duo of them by after registering an FIR under charges of blasphemy. Wielding clubs and bricks, the Muslim culprits entered Mai Jinda’s Haveli where the statue was installed and damaged a part of it.

It is learnt that the duo youths were upset over revocation of the special status of J&K with scrapping of Article 370 by the BJP led saffron Indian government.

Shocked over the move, the Walled City of Lahore Authority has said that this is an unfortunate incident. “We will enhance security at the Lahore Fort so that no such incident should take place in the future,” said Tania Qureshi, the spokesperson of Walled City of Lahore Authority while vowing to repair the statue soon after Eid.

But, the pet dogs of Pakistan like Babbar Khalsa and Khalistani Tiger Force are not protesting against the desecration of Maharaja Ranjit Singh’s statue in Lahore fort. These separatist pro-Khalistani groups who generally take the help of Pakistan to disintegrate India did not show any concern for the desecration of Majaraja Ranjit Singh’s statue in Lahore Fort.

Eminent Hindu interlocutor and Hindu Existence Web Editor, Upananda Brahmachari vehemently condemned the vandalism on Maharaja Ranjit Singh statue in Lahore Fort and tweeted+, “A wave of Hinduphobia is perpetuating in Pakistan. It is not due to Kashmir tension or removal of Art 370. Pak has generic enmity c’ India. So, it’s a new scope to run d last lap of ethnic cleansing of Hindus and Sikh in Pak. Attack on Maharaj Ranjit Singh’s statue is symbolical.“

“Purification and Regimentation of Sikhs are deep rooted in Hinduism and never in Islam. The Guru Parampara and historic struggle in Sikh tradition to protect Dharma and Rashtra legacy put most of the Gurus under the perpetual persecution and brutal killings of them one by one by Mughal rulers. Sikhs Gurus and warriors have the history to fight against fanatic Islam. But, these dogs of Pakistan like Babbar Khalsa and Khalistani Tiger Force are making friendship with anti-Sikh, anti-Hindu Pakistani people. Consequently, fanatic Muslims are attacking Sikh and Hindu people in Pakistan. The Jihadi elements in Pak are desecrating the Maharaja Ranjit Singh’s statue in Lahore. These must be stopped anyway, Minority Hindus, Sikhs, Christians and Ahamedians in Pakistan always under dangerous Jihadi threat. The minority people in Pakistan must be protected by India and International Rights lobbies,” Brahmachari told HENB.

…

__inputs from PTI.
