RSS: We Wanted World To See Us & India As One, Imran Khan Did It

The RSS (Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh) on Saturday hit out at Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan a day after his remarks at the UNGA on Friday. On being questioned about Imran Khan's statements against RSS in UNGA speech, the Sangh leader Dr Krishna Gopal Sharma said that Pakistan's anger against RSS equates to it being furious against India. He went on to thank Pakistan for making the world aware that RSS and India and synonymous entity. The RSS leader maintained that the organisation wants the world to see RSS and India as one identity, adding that Imran Khan did it beautifully.

"The RSS is only in India and for India. It has no branch anywhere else in the world. Why is Pakistan angry with us? It means if it is angry with Sangh, then it is angry with India. The RSS and India have now become synonymous. We also wanted that the world should see India and the RSS as one and the same, and not two separate entitles. Imran Khan has done the job very well and we congratulate him for that. He is spreading our name," Dr Krishna Gopal Sharma said.

READ | Here's how India exposed Pakistan's 'no terrorists' lie at UNGA

Imran Khan's UNGA speech

In his 50-minute rant against India at the UNGA on Friday, Imran Khan made repeated attacks at the RSS, focusing on the abrogation of Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir. Imran Khan had also quoted Congress to advocate his anti-India ideology. He further took the UNGA gathering to the World War era, once again fearmongering about RSS, ascribing the organisation with having a belief of racial superiority.

"RSS believes in the ethnic cleansing of Muslims. RSS goons butchered hundreds of Muslims. This is arrogance. This makes people do cruel things. The previous Congress Home Minister gave a statement that in RSS camps, terrorists are being trained," Khan said.

READ | 5 Imran Khan statements at UNGA that reflected a 'medieval mindset'

India's befitting reply to Pakistan

India sent out a strong message to Pakistan after its PM Khan's 50-minute anti-India rant at the UNGA on Friday. First Secretary MEA Vidisha Maitra reiterated India's position on Jammu and Kashmir, asserting that its citizens do not need anyone else to speak on their behalf. India asserted that Imran Khan's address appeared like a 'hate speech' at the UNGA. Vidisha Maitra further said the world will hold Imran Khan to the promise, after he invited UN observers to inspect the presence of terrorist organisations on Pakistan's soil. The First Secretary MEA also posed a set of questions to Imran Khan asking if the Pakistan PM would deny to the city of New York that he was an open defender of Osama bin Laden?

READ | UNGA speech response: Vidisha Maitra hits back at PM Imran Khan

READ | Anand Mahindra's one-word praise for India's fitting reply to Pakistan

(With agency inputs)
