Cong to review AFSPA, DAA in J&K; promises unconditional dialogue - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

‘Will reduce presence of Army, CAPFs in Kashmir’

No muscular militarism, Cong for federal solution

Sanjeev Pargal

JAMMU, Apr 2: The Congress manifesto released today by top brass of the party in New Delhi including AICC (I) president, Rahul Gandhi, has promised to reduce presence of Army and Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) in Kashmir, review Armed Forces Special Power Act and Disturbed Areas Act in the State and hold unconditional dialogue with the people.

Congress had dedicated one full chapter to Jammu and Kashmir in its 54-page election manifesto titled `Hum Nibhayenge’ (We will deliver) in which there has been no mention of anything specific about Jammu and Ladakh and all announcements were virtually Kashmir-centric.

“Congress promises to review the deployment of armed forces, move more troops to the border to stop infiltration completely, reduce presence of Army and CAPFs in the Kashmir valley and entrust more responsibility to Jammu and Kashmir Police for maintaining law and order,” the Congress manifesto said.

Assuring review of Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) and Disturbed Areas Act (DAA) in Jammu and Kashmir, it said suitable changes will be made in the text of laws to balance requirements of security and protection of human rights.

“Jammu and Kashmir and its problems deserve a large-hearted approach that will eschew muscular militarism and legalist formulations and look for an innovative federal solution,” the Congress documents said and promised to find such a solution (to Kashmir problem) through patient dialogue and talks with all stakeholders in the State.

The talks, it said, will be without pre-conditions. It added that the Congress will appoint 3 Interlocutors drawn from Civil Society to facilitate such talks.

It may be mentioned here that during UPA-II, the Congress had appointed three Interlocutors-Dileep Padgaonkar, Prof Radha Kumar and MM Ansari, who had submitted their comprehensive report that was never implemented.

“Congress has long held the view that dialogue is the only way to understand aspiration of the people of 3 regions of Jammu and Kashmir and find an honourable solution to their issues. We will take that path,” the party manifesto said.

It added that the Congress will adopt a two-pronged approach: firstly, uncompromising firmness on the border and ending infiltration; and secondly, absolute fairness in dealing with demand of the people and winning their hearts and minds.

Noting that Congress has stood witness to developments in Jammu and Kashmir since the Instrument of Accession was signed on October 26, 1947, the Congress manifesto affirmed that whole of Jammu and Kashmir is part of India.

“We also acknowledge the unique history of the State and the unique circumstances under which the State acceded to India that led to inclusion of Article 370 in the Constitution of India,” it said and declared that nothing will be done or allowed to change the Constitutional position.

The Congress promised free and fair elections to the Legislative Assembly immediately.

The Assembly elections due for May this year have been deferred by the Election Commission of India due to security considerations.

Referring to cases of harassment of Kashmiri traders and students in different parts of the country in the aftermath of Pulwama terror attack on February 14, the Congress manifesto said the party was deeply concerned about the cases of discrimination and harassment of students, traders and others belonging to Jammu and Kashmir in the rest of India and it will ensure their safety and right to study or do business.

It also assured to renew the initiatives taken by the UPA Government such UDAAN, HIMAYAT and UMEED to impart training in skills and create economic opportunities for the youth of Jammu and Kashmir.

On National Security, the Congress promised to take strategic and hard measures to defend territorial integrity of India and ensure safety of the people.

“The Congress will provide statutory basis to the National Security Council (NSC) and the office of National Security Advisor (NSA). Their powers and functions will be defined under the law and both authorities, and the agencies under them, will be accountable to Parliament,” the manifesto said.

It assured to rapidly expand domestic capacity to manufacture defence and security equipment and create manufacturing capacity in the public sector and in pre-qualified, security-cleared private sector companies.

On Internal Security, the Congress said most serious threats to internal security emanate from terrorism, infiltration of militants, Maoism or Naxalism and caste or communal violence. It promised separate and distinct response to each of these threats.

The Congress promised an uncompromising approach and hard measures to put an end to terrorism and infiltration of the militants.

“The Congress will hold the district administration responsible for riots, caste or communal violence, large scale crimes against women, and for the widespread breakdown of law and order,” it added.

Noting that key to internal security is intelligence, analysis and quick response, the manifesto said: “The Congress had put in place the Multi Agency Centre and the NSG Regional hubs. Congress had also proposed to establish the National Counter-Terrorism Centre and NATGRID. The BJP Government dismantled the preparatory work and wasted 5 years. NCTC was put in the cold storage and NATGRID is yet to be made operational. We promise that NCTC will be set up within 3 months and NATGRID will be made operational by December 2019.

Separatists, terrorists will cheer Cong manifesto: Jaitley

Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley today took said the Congress manifesto will bring smile on the faces of separatists and terrorists and described the Congress party as “principal creator” of J&K problem.

In a blog written soon after release of the Congress manifesto, Jaitley said the manifesto seeks to dilute the provisions of the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA).

“After having been spurned on various occasions to have a dialogue with the separatists, who want to settle for nothing other than cessation from India, it (the Congress manifesto) promised to have a continuous dialogue with them. It promises to dilute the presence of the Armed Forces in the Valley,” Jaitley pointed out and described the Congress as the “principal creator” of the Jammu and Kashmir problem.

He said the Congress created a special status. It unconstitutionally brought in Article 35A. It rigged the 1957, 1962, 1967 as also the 1987 Assembly elections. This eroded the confidence of the people of Jammu and Kashmir and now its manifesto only brings smiles on the faces of the separatists and the terrorists.

“A reference to “Kashmiri Pandits’ and their ethnic cleansing from the Valley is conspicuously absent in the manifesto,” the Finance Minister said.

He added that the Congress has always been soft on terror.

“Late Rajiv Gandhi introduced TADA. Later the Congress revoked it. It revoked POTA. Now it wants to go further soft on separatism and terrorism,” Jaitley said.

He said there is only a lip sympathy in the assault required on Maoists violence, which Dr. Manmohan Singh had described as the greatest threat to India. “In the recent elections, as also in the case of JNU and urban Maoists, Congress and Congressmen have always flirted with the Maoists as fellow travelers”.
