Mumbai animal cruelty: Woman beats dog to death with washing bat for vomiting on her door

Jadhav found the stray animal crying later after which it began to vomit blood (Representative image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: In an appalling incident reported from Vakola, a stray dog named Macho was bludgeoned with a washing bat after it had vomited outside the door of a homemaker. The dog succumbed to its injuries on January 16. The police has registered a case against the accused woman.

The incident happened in D'Mello Compound near Vakola Bridge, Santacruz (east). While speaking to The Times of India, a resident of the chawl in Vakola, Vandana Jadhav said that everybody in the neighbourhood took care of the dog even though it was a stray. Jadhav saw Macho roaming in the locality at midnight on the fateful day when she was sitting outside her room with a friend.

Also Read: 102 one-horned rhinoceros poached since 2008, 209 poachers arrested: reveals RTI

After some time, she saw her neighbour Vidya Lodh running after Macho with a washing bat. Lodh was hitting the animal brutally. When Jadhav tried to prevent Macho from getting beaten up, Lodh asked her if the dog was her husband. Justifying her action, she said that the stray dog had vomited outside her door.

Jadhav found the stray animal crying later after which it began to vomit blood. The kind woman applied antiseptic on the injured animal's body and took it to a veterinary hospital in Parel next morning. The veterinarian who examined Macho told her that the dog had suffered internal injuries and its chances of survival were very little. The dog succumbed to its injuries on January 16. The police has registered a case against Vidya Lodh under section 489 for mischief by killing an animal of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
