West Bengal: 65-year-old man lures minor girl with chocolates, rapes her; arrested

At around 11 AM, victim's father went to buy some groceries nearby when the shop owner reportedly called the minor inside the shop. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights When victim's father went to buy some groceries, the accused called the minor inside the shop. The minor came out of the store and parts of her dress were soaked in blood. The accused has been booked under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

Kolkata: In a disturbing case reported from the City of Joy, a 65-year-old stationery shop owner was arrested for allegedly sexually assaulting a minor girl inside his shop. The incident happened in the CD Block of Salt Lake, West Bengal on Saturday morning.

The minor was a 7-year-old girl, whose father works as a caretaker at one of the houses in the block. At around 11 am, he went to buy some groceries nearby when the shop owner reportedly called the minor inside the shop.

According to a report in The Times of India (TOI), the accused lured the girl with some chocolates and then allegedly sexually abused her. Meanwhile, when the minor did not come for a long time, her mother went searching for her in the vicinity. Reportedly, when the accused saw the woman coming, he fled from the spot. When the minor came out of the store, parts of her dress were soaked in blood. The minor victim narrated the ordeal to her mother after which she was immediately rushed to a local hospital.

Eventually, the police were informed about the incident who then surrounded the store and arrested the shop owner after he returned. The action was taken based on a written statement by the minor's parents claiming that the store owner has sexually assaulted their minor daughter. However, the accused has been booked under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

In another case reported on July 5, a minor girl consumed poison after she was allegedly raped by a man in the Gagaha area of Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh. The girl was hospitalised and her condition was said to be stable. She told her family that she was kidnapped by their neighbour Modassir Ansari from Gajpur Bazar on the pretext of marrying her. But later, he allegedly raped the girl along with his friends Akhtar and Atiullah.

Meanwhile, later she tried to end her life by consuming poison, the police told news agency PTI. However, a case under sections 363 (kidnapping), 366 (Kidnapping, abducting or inducing the woman to compel her marriage) and 376 (rape) of the Indian Penal Code and under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act was registered against Ansari at Gagaha police station.
