JNU student sexually assaulted by cab driver; accused on the run

The passerby later called the Police Control Room and the woman was taken to a hospital. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights JNU student hired the cab from Mandir Marg area Victim was found unconscious in a park near IIT-Delhi Woman was returning to her hostel when the incident happened

New Delhi: A 21-year-old Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) student was allegedly sexually assaulted by a cab driver on Friday night. The victim was allegedly drugged before she was raped by the cab driver. According to police, the student had gone to attend a party with his friends near Panchkuian metro station.

The incident happened at around midnight when the student booked a cab to return to JNU hostel after the party. The woman was found unconscious in a park near IIT Delhi on Saturday morning. The woman alleged that the driver offered her something after which she fell unconscious.

The passerby later called the Police Control Room and the woman was taken to a hospital, where a medical examination confirmed sexual assault.

Doctors who attended to the student later found out that she was a JNU student and informed university authorities. JNU administration later called the local police who then informed the New Delhi district police.

Police haven't yet revealed whether the victim hired an app-based cab or any other taxi service. Police have registered a case on the complaint of the woman.

The police are now going scanning the CCTV footage of Mandir Marg area from where the woman booked the cab.

The driver of the cab is also absconding. According to the victim, the cab driver drove her in the car for around three hours after sexually assaulting her. The victim is pursuing a course in foreign language in JNU and hails from Western Uttar Pradesh.

In February this year, a driver with private cab aggregator Uber was arrested along with his accomplice for allegedly raping a 26-year-old employee of a private company. The complainant had boarded an Uber cab from her friend's house in Greater Noida to her residence in the same area. The driver of the cab was identified as one Aarav Yadav, a resident of Nuh in Haryana. Yadav was driving the cab using the credentials of one Joginder who is a resident of Mahendargarh in Haryana.

Later, the accused driver drove the car behind a row of bushes, got down from the car and forced himself on her. The complainant also alleged that the accused dropped her home only after she agreed to pay him Rs 1,000. She said she kept the incident to herself and decided to report it only after a friend advised her to do so.
