Chinmayanand Case: Police Continue Search for Missing Woman; SC Takes Cognisance

New Delhi: The mystery surrounding the sudden disappearance of a post-graduate student, who levelled harassment charges against BJP leader Swami Chinmayanand, continued on the sixth day as her family awaited any concrete information about her.

The woman, a student at a college run by Chinmayanand’s trust, has been missing since August 24, a day after she posted a video on social media alleging that the former Union minister was harassing and threatening to kill her.

She had not named Chinmayanand in the video but said “a senior leader of the sant community”. The politician, who faced similar accusations in 2011 and was booked for raping a woman who stayed at his ashram, has disputed the charge.

The UP police claimed the student was spotted at a Delhi hotel on Wednesday but had left the place before officials reached there. A search is underway to trace her.

On Thursday, Kotwali police station in-charge Pravesh Singh said the woman’s hostel room in Shahjahanpur was sealed last evening to avoid trespassing and evidence tampering. Her mother had visited the hostel on August 24 after the news the student had been missing spread but she found her room locked.

Uttar Pradesh Women Commission chairperson Vimla Batham talked to family members and assured them justice would be served through an unbiased probe. Batham also talked to the Shahjahanpur SP and the Bareilly Zone ADG and inquired about the case, a day after the commission sought a report from the district administration.

The student’s college’s principal told PTI that though classes began on August 5, the woman has not attended any. He said she had begun working at a library after college hours in July 2018.

In the video she posted online, the student alleged she has “evidence” that the 72-year-old three-time Lok Sabha member, who was a minister of state in the Atal Bihari Vajpayee government, had harassed and threatened to kill her.

Her father later filed a written complaint, accusing Chinmayanand of sexually harassing his daughter. But the politician’s lawyer Om Singh claimed his client was being blackmailed and had received a message on WhatsApp on August 23, the day the video surfaced, demanding Rs 5 crore ransom.

Shahjahanpur police said Chinmayanand has been booked on charges related to abduction for murder and criminal intimidation.

SC takes cognisance

The Supreme Court on Thursday took cognisance on its own over reports of the woman student going missing. The issue, which was mentioned before the apex court on Wednesday by a group of lawyers urging it to take cognisance in the matter, would come up for hearing on Friday before a bench of Justices R. Banumathi and A.S. Bopanna.

The group of lawyers, in a letter, addressed to Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi, had requested him to take suo motu action based on media reports that the student has gone missing for the past three days.

“Your lordships, we the undersigned members of the legal fraternity and practising lawyers of this court are extremely disturbed and concerned about the wellbeing of the girl concerned. We as a society cannot allow another ‘Unnao case’ to happen. This court has been interfering in letter petitions when it comes to protection of human rights,” the letter said.

It urged the court to take cognisance in the matter and issue notices to the chief secretary and director general of police of Uttar Pradesh as also the principal of the college, where the woman is studying so that immediate action can be taken to trace her and give protection to the woman and her family.

It also referred to the reports about the video clip in which the woman is speaking about the threat to her and her family’s life.

In the Unnao case of Uttar Pradesh, a 19-year-old woman has levelled rape allegations against MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, who was expelled from the BJP after the incident came to light.

The rape survivor in the Unnao case and her lawyer had suffered critical injuries in a road accident in Raebareli district in Uttar Pradesh on July 28.

Her two aunts died in the incident and her family alleged that the accident was an attempt to eliminate her.

(With PTI inputs)
