Kolkata: Denied entry into in-laws' house, man stabs estranged wife to death

For the last two years, Madhumita had been living with her parents in South 24 Pargana (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights An electrician from Kolkata stabbed his wife on their son's birthday Allegedly, the accused was not allowed to enter his in-laws' house He went to the police but was sent back by the cops After returning, he called his wife to another room and stabbed her to death

Kolkata: A man allegedly stabbed his wife to death in Maheshtala in South 24 Parganas in Kolkata on Saturday night. The accused has been identified as Shibu Karmakar. The incident took place when Shibu was at his in-laws' house for the celebration of his son's birthday. The deceased has been identified as Madhumita.

Madhumita and Shibu had been married for the last 17 years but they did not stay together. They have a son named Iman. Allegedly, Shibu suspected his wife of having an affair. Shibu used to work as an electrician.

For the last two years, Madhumita had been living with her parents in South 24 Pargana. Shibu had gone to his in-laws' house for his son's birthday. He went there with chocolates and gifts but he was denied entry into the house.

After he was denied entry, Shibu went to a shop near the house and kept the gifts there. According to a report, he went to a police station to lodge a complaint in relation to the incident. The police asked Shibu to go back to the house to meet his son.

Following the advice given by the police, the electrician went to the house and asked his wife to excuse herself. He asked her to come to another room and told her that he wanted to talk to her. When his wife came, Shibu locked the door and stabbed her multiple times. Madhumita died due to severe blood loss. Locals caught hold of Shibu and handed him over to the police.

Rajasthan man stabs wife multiple times after heated argument

This is not the first such instance, a similar incident came to light from the Bundi district of Rajasthan in September this year where a man allegedly stabbed his wife to death after they had a heated argument. The accused was identified as Asmuddin. Asmuddin was employed as a railway gangman at Keshoraipatan railway station. Tabassum and Asmuddin did not have any children.

Asmuddin's wife was identified as Tabbasum. Tabassum was a forest guard. The couple had been married for around two years. After the couple started having arguments on a regular basis, Tabassum took the decision of shifting with her parents. After being counselled by both the families, Tabbasum shifted back to Asmuddin's house. On the day of the incident, the couple had an argument, following which, Asmuddin stabbed Tabbasum.
