Child molester sentenced to 7-years’ imprisonment

Pune sessions court on Friday sentenced a 32-year-old man to seven years of rigorous imprisonment along with a fine for abducting, wrongfully confining and sexually assaulting a 13-year-old school student in November 2014. S



pecial judge under Prevention of Children from Sexual Offenses (POCSO) Act, AN Sirsikar found Bunty alias Rajesh Narayan Prabhu (in pic), a resident of Indiranagar, guilty under sections 377 (unnatural offense), 342 (punishment for wrongfully confined), 363 (kidnapping), 367 (kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to grievous hurt, slavery) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and relevant sections of the POCSO Act.



The accused had committed the crime against the minor on November 14 in 2014, which is incidentally also celebrated as Children’s Day in the country. The victim, then a Class VII student, was residing in Shirur with his parents, and had come to the city for Diwali vacations to stay with his uncle in Budhwar Peth.



The victim knew the accused as his father’s friend. On the day of the incident, the child was playing near a temple in the area where the accused met him. The child requested the accused to call his father, as he wanted to go back home. Rajesh took the child to his house, which was only a few metres away, on the pretext of placing the call.



Rajesh took the victim to a small room on the terrace of an old building where he used to live and sexually assaulted the child. He also threatened to kill the minor if he disclosed the incident to anybody in the house. The child then came out of the building and directly went to the Faraskhana police station where he narrated the entire incident to the police officer and showed the house of the accused, after which he was arrested.



Additional public prosecutor Ujjwala Raskar examined five witnesses during the trial of the case. APP Raskar told Mirror, “The statement of the child and medical report played an important role in the case. He narrated the entire incident during his cross examination which was considered as important evidence in the case. The accused is a close friend of his father and had abducted the child, confined him and later assaulted him sexually.”
