Delhi Crime TV series: Not just a tale of the Delhi gang rape, but of several regular women across the country

Netflix's Delhi Crime is based on the 2012 Delhi Gang Rape case that shook the country to its core. Directed by Richie Mehta, this seven part series depicts the timeline of the crime till the arrest of six rapists from the perspective of Delhi Police. On the night of 16th December, 2012, a 23-year-old girl was gang raped, tortured and beaten up by six men in a moving bus in South Delhi. Her male friend was also beaten up and both of them were thrown on the streets naked. The gravity of the crime was so severe that there were nationwide protests to bring justice which was followed by stringent laws enacted for women safety and fast track courts were set up for hearing of such crimes.

Shefali Shah plays the role of DCP Vartika Chaturvedi who along with her team cracks the case in five days and brings all the six criminals behind the bars. Her character is inspired by Chhaya Sharma who is former Deputy Commissioner of Delhi Police. There are several spine chilling scenes throughout the series which makes us question humanity in the first place. The scenes of 'Nirbhaya' (fearless as she was referred to) worked a clear mirror to the audiences in making them know of what hundreds of rape victims go through every single second of their life after the crime takes place. But that is not all the series tells us. It shows how women are treated at every level in the society. The stories maybe different, but the narrative is the same and so is the intent. In spite of that, these women emerge above all, like a phoenix from the ashes.

In a blink and miss scene, DCP Vartika Chaturvedi climbs the podium to address the media on the case. We see a male police officer offering his hand to her, she does not take his help and steps on the podium. This small nuances of her character depict her strong persona throughout the series. Rasika Dugal who plays the role of IPS Officer Neeti Singh makes us realize that a woman with a soft heart is not always weak and sometimes it can be the biggest strength one can have. The series gives us glimpses of women who face the fire daily, at their own terms and immerse victorious despite of that. In such scene when the Magistrate is taking the statement of Nirbhaya, there are several moments when she is stunned at the victim's words but irrespective of that, continues to do her job.
