Poll official killed on way to election duty in eastern India - Xinhua

Source: Xinhua| 2019-04-18 16:23:20|Editor: Xiaoxia

Video Player Close

NEW DELHI, April 18 (Xinhua) -- A female election officer was killed by Naxals in the eastern Indian state of Odisha, officials said Thursday.

The election officer was killed at village Balandapada-Gochhapad in Kandhamal district, about 253 km west of Bhubaneswar, capital city of Odisha.

"A polling supervisor Sanjukta Digal was killed after Naxals yesterday fired upon her at Balandapada in Gochhapad tehsil here," a police official said in Kandhamal.

"She along with her staff was on their way to attend the election duty. The incident occurred when Digal's staff was retreating following a landmine blast. She was standing on road after parking the vehicle when she was hit by a bullet in head," the police said.

According to the police, the staff accompanying her escaped unhurt.

Earlier, Naxals set ablaze a vehicle which was ferrying polling officials to Mungunipadar booth under Phiringia police limits in the district.

Officials said Digal along with her staff were on their way to reach the polling station, where elections were held on Thursday.

"Deeply anguished by the sad demise of polling supervisor Sanjukta Digal in Naxal attack in Kandhamal district of Odisha on her way to polling booth. Heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and prayer for the departed soul," Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik said in a statement.

The second phase of the seven-phase Indian general elections began Thursday morning. The first phase was held last week.

In the ongoing elections, the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party is seeking to regain power under leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. He is facing tough competition from Rahul Gandhi, the fourth generation scion of India's powerful Nehru-Gandhi family and regional parties that have forged coalition in several states.

The last phase of the elections will be held on May 19 and counting of votes is scheduled on May 23.
