#MeToo against Hirani, Richa unsure of real facts

Mumbai: The Hindi film industry has largely been silent about the sexual assault allegation against filmmaker Rajkumar Hirani and actor Richa Chadha said that is because they are not aware of the facts of the case.

Hirani is the latest name to be called out for sexual harassment with a woman ‘assistant’ alleging in an article in ‘HuffPost India’ that he sexually abused her more than once between March and September 2018 while working on ‘Sanju’.

When asked if the industry was quiet about Hirani as he is a powerful director, Richa told reporters, Thursday evening, “It isn’t power structure. I think everyone is tentative because they don’t know the facts of the case. Legally, a publication is allowed to run a story because they vet it with their legal team.

“But it’s an anonymous allegation. I’m not defending him (Hirani) or the girl either. I’ve learnt it the hard way. A friend of mine was falsely accused. This is the only reason why I feel people are tentative.”

The actor said her upcoming film ‘Section 375’ debates about consent and said if survivors come out and share their stories, they must be supported.

“If there’s a survivor willing to come forward and say ‘this happened to me’ and confide in people, we must support her, which is why I vocally supported Vinta Nanda,” pointed out Richa.

“He (Hirani) is one of the directors with the cleanest image, you must not forget that. There have been others who were accused but nobody said anything,” she added.

Richa said she has understood that the best thing to do in #MeToo movement is to take the legal route. “A bad date, a relationship gone sour or vendetta is not #MeToo,” Richa asserted.

While most in Mumbai have refused to speak on the issue, Hirani’s previous collaborators Arshad Warsi, Dia Mirza and Sharman Joshi have batted for the filmmaker.

The director also found support in veteran screenwriter Javed Akhtar, who called him the ‘most decent’ person in the industry.

PTI
