Mumbai businessman duped of Rs 3.3 cr using forged SIM card

The accused allegedly obtained a SIM card using forged means. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Accused duped businessman using new SIM card obtained through forged means Businessman was duped of Rs 3.3 crores

Mumbai: In yet another case of cyber forgery, a businessman in Mumbai was duped of over Rs 3 crore with help of a fraudulently obtained SIM card. The city police have arrested the accused after following the digital trail of the transactions.

The accused allegedly obtained a SIM card using forged means and gained the One Time Password (OTP) through which he made the transactions. The businessman, who has a book publishing firm, filed a police complaint after he came to know that he was duped in crores. The accused has been identified as 33-year-old Amanatullah Sheikh.

According to a report, the accused already had access to specific details of the businessman, including his cell phone number. Police said that the accused pretended as a businessman and approached the mobile service provider's outlet claiming that he had lost his phone and requested that his (businessman's) number be blocked immediately.

"The accused Amanatullah later produced fake documents proving the identity of the businessman and purchased a new SIM card. He started using the new SIM and made several transactions from the account using OTP's sent through the new SIM card," the report quoted an investigating officer as saying.

Police officials say they are trying to ascertain as to how Sheikh got the identity documents of the businessman, which also included an Aadhar card. However, police did not reveal how the accused managed to gain access to businessman's internet banking details, including the password and bank account number.

According to police, the case appears to involve a crime syndicate and they suspect many people are involved in this fraud. Police say it's not easy to gain access to bank account details and identity documents. Police have also approached the mobile service provider for CCTV footage of the outlet.

From the stolen Rs 3.3 cr, Sheikh transferred around Rs 25 lakh in his own account, bought gold worth Rs 1.5 lakh and spent Rs 4 lakh on other things. Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) (Cyber cell), Vishal Thakur, said they have written to the bank to seize Sheikh's bank account. The accused, who works as a small-time contractor in the construction sector, resides in Baiganwada area of Govandi.

In May this year, a man has been arrested by the cyber cell of the Pune police for allegedly duping 35 people of over Rs 30 lakh. The accused was identified as 32-year-old Vikram Attar Singh, a resident of Hadapsar in Pune. The modus operandi of Attar Singh included seeking large sums of money in advance on the pretext of providing house help.
