Government employees, teachers begin indefinite strike

Plan to stage district-level protest on January 25

Employees of various State Government departments and teachers of Government-run schools in Coimbatore began their indefinite strike on Tuesday by staging a protest at the Coimbatore Collectorate.

Employees and teachers also held protests in Coimbatore North and South, Mettupalayam, Kinathukadavu, Pollachi, Sulur, Perur and Annur taluks, bringing work to a halt, said U.M. Selvaraj, State president, Tamil Nadu Government Employees’ Union and State Coordinator of JACTO-GEO, the union that is spearheading the protest.

He said that though the JACTO-GEO representatives had met State ministers, the Chief Minister and top officials and their demands were agreed to in principle, the Government was yet to implement their nine demands that included reverting to the old pension scheme, removing anomalies in the last two pay commissions and releasing salary arrears.

V. Senthilkumar, district president, JACTO-GEO, said the protesting employees would not be cowed down by the Government’s threat to invoke disciplinary proceedings against them for boycotting work. He said the Government that claimed to be following the footsteps for former Chief Minister Jayalalithaa should revert to the old pension scheme, as promised by her.

Mr. Selvaraj said the protesting employees would stage a dharna at taluk-level followed by a district-level protest on January 25. If the Government still failed to heed to their request, the employees would decide on their next course of action after a meeting in Chennai. Around 500 employees and teachers participated in the protest at the Coimbatore Collectorate. Across the district, hundreds of employees joined the indefinite strike, said City and Rural Police sources.

In the Nilgiris, around 70 percent of all government employees and teachers boycotted work as part of the protests announced by JACTO-GEO. Protests were held across the district, including Udhagamandalam, Coonoor, and Gudalur.
