Deliver and State will get more aid: World Bank

Agreement for $250 million for the Resilient Kerala Programme

More financial assistance to Kerala from the World Bank (WB) for the ‘Resilient Kerala Programme’ to enhance the State’s resilience against the impacts of natural disasters and climate change will be based on the delivery, Junaid Ahmad, Country Director, World Bank, India, has said.

“It is for the State to approach the WB through the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) of the Union Government for further assistance and it will based on the delivery,” Mr. Ahmad, who was here to attend the Development Partners Conclave organised by the government for the Rebuild Kerala Development Programme (RKDP), told mediapersons here on Monday.

Agreement signed

The WB has signed a Development Policy Loan (DPL) agreement of $250 million for the ‘Resilient Kerala Programme’ with the State and work to provide the second tranche of $ 250 million is on, he said.

The programme, which represents the maiden ‘State partnership’ of the WB in India, is the first of two development policy operations aiming to mainstream disaster and climate resilience into critical infrastructure and services.

“The future of India is in the States and hence we decided to invest in State schemes besides concentrating on citizen-centric programmes,” he said.

Tripartite negotiations

Pointing out that the financial aid is not on ad hoc basis, the Mr. Ahmad said the Board of Governors of the WB had the other day approved DPL to enable the release of the funds through the DEA. The terms and repayment conditions were worked out at the tripartite negotiations in Delhi.

The aid has been made available to the exchequer as budgetary support through the DEA and the State will have the ‘flexibility’ on disbursing the funds for achieving targets set under Rebuild Kerala Initiative.

The Mr. Ahmad said the bank would be providing technical assistance to the State for executing the identified programmes. “We have an urban service project. The new programmes in the pipeline would look into sanitation and solid waste management and talks are on,” he said.
