Authorities aren’t serious about prevention measures, says district disaster mgmt cell

Claims PMC, PCMC, PMRDA and ZP ignored MoS orders to immediately supply list of vulnerable spots weeks ago; latter say efforts ongoing



Two consecutive tragedies in the city a fortnight ago raised numerous questions about the preparedness of authorities when it comes to major calamities, after the back-to-back wall collapses at Kondhwa and Ambegaon claimed 21 lives and exposed the casual approach of the powers-that-be in such situations.



And now, it has revealed that despite orders from minister of state (MoS) for labour, environment, relief and rehabilitation Sanjay Bhegde on July 3, asking Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC), Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC), Pune Metropolitan Region Development Authority (PMRDA) and Pune Zilla Parishad (ZP) to conduct surveys of dangerous sites under their jurisdiction and submit details, none of these authorities followed the diktat.



Interestingly, the minister had set a deadline of just two days for the same, so that the disaster management cell of Pune district could start planning restorative efforts right away. As a result, weeks down the line, the same cell has raised a red flag and issued notices to the local authorities concerned.



Sources said there are over 3,000 disaster-prone spots in the district. Many are highly vulnerable and may invite major tragedies during this monsoon itself. Most of these places are in remote hilly spots of the Mulshi, Maval and Ambegaon talukas. Several old buildings, dams, walls and structures also fall under this vulnerable category.



District disaster management officer Vitthal Banote confirmed the development and said, “Following the July 3 meeting with MoS Bhegde, no authorities took efforts to inform us about the status of disaster-prone areas. We were also expecting a plan of action from their end to prevent possible calamities. This casual approach has hurt the district administration as we are unable to plan any restorative efforts. Now, we have issued notices so that information can be gathered on a war-footing.”



Echoing this, additional district collector Ramesh Kale said, “No information has been received from any of the authorities from the district. This will create hurdles in planning.”



Asked about this gaffe, PMC executive engineer Yuvraj Deshmukh refuted, “We have conducted a survey and started issuing notices to parties concerned and developers of societies in tumbledown shape. There must have been some miscommunication — we have already started acting against offenders. However, as per the requirement, we will send details to the district administration for further action.”



Similarly questioned, PMRDA metropolitan commissioner Vikram Kumar insisted, “We are going to submit this report within a couple of days. We have already formed seven squads equipped with executive engineers and assistant town planners to locate such vulnerable places. Our focus is on dangerous construction sites. There are many illegal structures in the urban parts as well as villages recently merged within PMC. These are built without proper construction design and permissions, leading to a weak structure. We will initiate action against their owners.”



Echoed an officer attached with the Pune ZP, “We have instructed all gram panchayats and municipal councils to submit details of disaster-prone spots. Since this jurisdiction is huge, we require more time, which has been conveyed ahead. Remote villages in Velhe, Bhor, Purandar are most vulnerable.”


