Except South, Monsoon Likely to Take a Week Off Across India

Silhouette of a man cycling through the banks of Sangam in the backdrop of cloudy skies, in Allahabad on July 2, 2018. (IANS)

After starting of July on a high note with widespread rainfall across India, the monsoon is likely to enter a 'break' phase for a week till next Wednesday. From July 16 to 22, very little rain is forecast across India except for the southern states and isolated parts of Uttar Pradesh.

The first 15 days of June witnessed above normal rains across India bringing down the overall monsoon rainfall deficit from 33% during the end of June to 13% on July 15. The northeast, Bihar. Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh witnessed the maximum rains this week.

The Weather Channel’s met team forecasts suggest very low rainfall across central and northern India this week. Despite the reports of the 'break' in monsoon, the IMD has not officially confirmed the slow down so far. The government of Maharastra has, however, issued an advisory to farmers warning no good rainfall across central India and a likely rise in temperature across Vidarbha, Marathwada and Madhya Maharashtra. Central India is already reeling under substantial rainfall deficit with Marathwada and Vidarbha witnessing 33% and 32% below-normal monsoon rains so far.

Southern India, however, is expected to experience a much wetter week as the off-shore trough along the west coast has induced instability, drawing moist onshore winds into the region. The interaction of these winds with the cyclonic circulation over the Bay of Bengal will cause widespread heavy rains across the southern states. India Meteorological Department (IMD) also forecasts vigorous monsoon conditions with extremely heavy rainfall at some places over Kerala, adjoining ghat districts of Tamilnadu and Karnataka mainly from July 18 to 20.

Why the 'break'?

Advertisement The sustained active rainfall during the monsoon is primarily driven by two extended low-pressure areas (troughs): one offshore trough along the west coast and another diagonal trough along the Indo-Gangetic Plains. The trough over the Indo-Gangetic Plains has moved northwards over the past one week and now runs across Haryana, South Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Gangetic West Bengal. It was the reason for the widespread flooding across Bihar, Nepal, and northeast India.

As the trough over north India approaches the foothills of the Himalayas, a ‘break’ in monsoon occurs as rains drastically decrease across the country. In 2016, the break phase developed during the third week of July while in 2017 and 2018, it prevailed during the first week of August. This year, as the arrival of monsoon rains was delayed by 7-10 days across the country, many experts earlier expected the break phase to happen only by first week August. However, many forecasters now expect the break to develop this week, and this may widen the existing deficiency further.

A fresh low-pressure area is expected to develop over the Bay of Bengal by Thursday, July 18. The formation of this low-pressure is expected to bring widespread rainfall in the south this week. As the low-pressure approaches Odisha next week, widespread rains are expected across eastern, central and northern states. The approach of this low-pressure around July 23 is likely to mark the end of the monsoon’s break phase by bringing back the trough to the northern plains.

**

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel App (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
