Pandit enclaves to test govt’s resolve

editorial@tribune.com

Sumit Hakhoo

Tribune News Service

Jammu, July 16

Resettlement of displaced Pandits in Kashmir, which is back on the agenda of the BJP, is likely to test the resolve and sincerity of Narendra Modi-led NDA government.

With reports of the Central government reconsidering revival of the plan to set up camp townships in the Valley to resettle 3.50 lakh minority Hindus, the step would be the biggest confidence-building measure in decades. A project under which 6,000 housing units were to be constructed for employees engaged under the Prime Minister’s Employment Package was “abandoned” by the NDA government during its first term (2014-2019).

Governor Satya Pal Malik and BJP general secretary Ram Madhav recently hinted about the need for separate enclaves in the Valley for secure living of Pandits who fled Kashmir in 1989-90.

“The implementation of the ambitious plan has to cross several hurdles, including land acquisition process and sanctioning of funds. Most important are steps to build bridges between the minority Hindus and Muslim-majority Valley,” said a senior officer in the relief and rehabilitation department.

All such attempts have failed earlier, especially when it comes to the implementation of the PM package.

The project also faces opposition from separatists and mainstream political parties. Between the year 2013-2015, there was a backlash from fundamentalist groups who opposed any such move, claiming a conspiracy to create Israel-type settlements in the Valley.

In 2015, Pakistan-based United Jehad Council had also warned against it.

“The community wants a secure place to stay in the Valley, but the Modi government could not translate its promises into action during its first term. It has to be seen how the government and administration proceed now,” said TK Bhat, general secretary, All State Kashmiri Pandit Conference.

Separate townships

Separate township or composite settlements on the pattern of the Jagti camp in Jammu were first mooted in 2008-09 during the tenure of the Congress-led UPA government. Land identification process was started in 2012-13 when the Congress-National Conference coalition government was in power in the state. However, the change of guard in New Delhi and Srinagar slowed down the process.

After the BJP came to power in 2014, the government had claimed that 723 kanals had been identified at various places in the Valley, but no headway was made.

“Separate enclaves could help us to slowly integrate with the local community. Entire social milieu has changed. We cannot go to our original place of residence because the houses have been either burnt, sold in distress or are occupied,” said Sunil Kumar, a social worker who lives in the Jagti camp.

Flip-flop continues

2004: Construction of transit camps starts at different places in the Valley during the tenure of the PDP-Congress government headed by late Mufti Mohammad Sayeed

2008: Prime Minister Manmohan Singh-led UPA government announces Rs 1,610-crore rehab package

2010-2013: Nearly 2,000 Pandit youth engaged under the PM package. They settle in transit camps

2014: Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led BJP government allocates Rs 500 crore for the rehab process

2015: The Centre announces Rs 2,000-crore package. Specific allocation for 6,000 housing units across Valley

2019: Modi lays the stone of the transit accommodation for Pandits at Ganderbal and Bandipora. No progress has been made on the project so far
