How safe is your city? Patrolling bike stolen from Chickpet station

Chickpet traffic police station

beat patrol

Bengaluru

We are now relying on the CCTV camera installed at a nearby church to track the vehicle. But so far, the footage is not clear as some tree branches are blocking the view to the street –A police official from VV Puram police station

VV Puram police station

.

By Amit KumarIs this an act of daredevilry? Or just plain stupidity? What would you call stealing an Assistant Sub-Inspector’s bike, that has been parked between theand VV Puram Law and order station?This cheeky crime is not a figment of our imagination but what actually happened in the early hours of January 19. Assistant Sub-Inspector Thammana Gowda of Chickpet traffic police had finished hisand returned to the police station where he had parked his bike and locked it for good measure.But he was in for a rude shock when he found a couple of hours later that his black Bajaj Pulsar bike that belongs to theCity Police department, had been stolen. A policeman’s bike that’s a police department issue, stolen from right under the shadow of not one, but two police stations.We can’t even!“The bike had ‘Police’ written clearly on it. Whoever stole it must not have noticed it or he may have been under the influence of alcohol. There is a possibility that the thief could leave the bike somewhere when he realises that he has stolen a police bike,” said Thammana Gowda.The sub-inspector says he returned to the Chickpet police station around 2:15 am on January 19 and parked his bike with Reg No KA02G1185 right outside the police station, after completing his night rounds. When he came out of the police station at 6 am, he found the bike missing. He immediately informed his seniors and was told to register a formal complaint with the VV Puram law and order police station.According to the National Vehicle Registry records, the 2010 model bike has been registered to the Deputy Commissioner of Police with a fitness certificate valid up to June 18, 2025 and an insurance certificate that had expired on June 7, 2011. According to the details given to VV Puram police, the bike was the only two-wheeler that was parked at the spot and it was locked. The vehicle lifters managed to break open the lock, hotwire it and speed away from the spot.Despite claims by the police of using technology in their functions, this parking space, bang outside the station where during the day at least 40 to 50 bikes are parked, was not under CCTV surveillance. This proved to be an advantage for the vehicle lifters as the cops are yet to get any clue about their identity. “We are now relying on the CCTV camera installed at a nearby church to track the vehicle. But so far, the footage is not clear as some tree branches are blocking the view to the street,” said a police official fromPolice suspect that there may be two or three persons involved in the crime.Another official at the station said that in his entire career, he had not come across any two-wheeler thief targeting police patrol bikes. As per statistics, on an average 14 bike thefts have been reported per day across the city. In 2018, there were over 5020 cases of bike thefts reported in the city till December as compared to as many as 6157 and 5842 two-wheeler thefts reported in 2017 and 2016 respectively. The city police in 2018 have claimed to have busted organised rackets of bike lifters including those who operated from other states like Tamil Nadu.“This unfortunate incident happened to me but usually miscreants don’t have the courage to touch police vehicles. I urge the public not to judge the capability and efficiency of police on the basis of such isolated incidents,” Thammana Gowda added.Deputy Commissioner of Police (Bengaluru city South) K Annamalai said that tackling two-wheeler thefts is top priority and a review of these cases was being done once in a fortnight. He also added that they were carrying out awareness drives for the public to ensure that precautions are being taken to prevent such crimes.“It is very surprising that they have targeted a police vehicle. We are investigating the matter and will book them soon,” the DCP added.
