Bhilwara: Minor girl accuses alcoholic father of raping, threatening her with sword

Bhilwara is about 250 kilometres from state capital Jaipur (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Bhilwara Police are on the lookout for the accused A case has been registered against the father under relevant sections of POCSO Act The accused is an alcoholic who even threatened his daughter's life

Jaipur: Police officials in Bhilwara district of Rajasthan are on the lookout for a man accused of raping his own daughter several times over a period of about three months. A first information report (FIR) has been lodged in this regard and further investigation into the matter is underway.

Meanwhile, police have rescued the seven-year-old girl. She was handed over to the Child Welfare Committee. The matter was brought to the attention of the CWC on Monday night. Acting on the complaint, members of the committee met the girl and took her for a medical examination on the same night. A case has been registered against the accused at the Pratapnagar police station. He has been booked under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

Rajasthan: A man had been allegedly raping his 7-yr-old daughter over the course of last 3 months, in Bhilwara. She was rescued&brought to police by Child Welfare Committee. Police say "FIR lodged. Man is absconding, he'll be caught&strict action will be taken against him."(16.7) pic.twitter.com/hxHu1KQAXs — ANI (@ANI) July 16, 2019

Accompanied by relatives, the minor approached the committee earlier this week and narrated her ordeal. In her statement, the child claimed that her mother decided to leave home along with her about nine months ago owing to her father's alcoholism. The accused managed to bring her back and the girl moved in with her father and grandmother. She went further to claim that she slept in the same room as her father who sexually assaulted her on more than one occasion. This is when she told her grandmother about the assault and approached the commission accompanied by relatives.

The girl also told CWC that her father had brought her back while her mother was working in the field and she was alone at home. However, the mother did not return for the child and instead chose not to establish any contact with her. The child has also claimed that her father threatened to kill her with a sword while under the influence of alcohol. Police officials probing the matter said that the man is on the run. He will be caught and strict action will be taken against him, said an officer.

A similar case had come to light from Telangana in June of this year when a man was arrested in Kushaiguda division of the state allegedly for raping his own daughter. Police officials told mediapersons that a case was registered against the accused under Section 376 of the IPC and Section 5 r/w6 of the POCSO Act in Neredmet police station on the basis of a complaint from the child's mother. The victim and her mother were provided medical assistance and counselling by local police.
