Stroller: One more for vinegar: Tonic ‘does wonders’

TODAY’S WORD is crapulous. Example: “Beat That! Crapulous Rats From UP And Bihar Have Drunk 9,01,000 Litres Of Liquor In A Year” (Source: It is the headline of a Dec. 28 article in India Times.)

TUESDAY’S WORD was denizen. It means an inhabitant or occupant of a particular place. Example: “This clot,” boomed the Headmistress, pointing the riding-crop at him like a rapier, ‘this black-head, this foul carbuncle, this poisonous pustule that you see before you is none other than a disgusting criminal, a denizen of the underworld, a member of the Mafia!”

L.I.F.E. Series event postponed

Since ice was forecast for Wednesday morning, the New College Institute L.I.F.E. series program, “Shootout on Fayette Street,” has been postponed to noon Jan. 31. Tom Perry will talk about the 1886 feud between two families that became known as one of the largest gun fights on the East Coast. To attend the free lecture, RSVP to Ruby Jones at 403-5605 or rjones@newcollegeinstitute.org.

Brunswick stew

The Martinsville Elks Lodge will sell Brunswick stew (made with all fresh ingredients) on Saturday at $8 per quart. It can be picked up between noon and 2 p.m. To pre-order, call the Lodge at 638-1060 after 4 p.m. through Friday.

We left out a biggie …

Marian Myers of Martinsville called the Stroller to say that she has enjoyed seeing the Stroller’s list of uses for vinegar, “but you-all have missed the most important vinegar of all.

“For years and years I have been taking a tonic of vinegar and honey, and it makes all the difference,” she said.

This is apple cider vinegar to which she is referring, and not the white vinegar the Stroller has been writing about, she conceded.

Every day, she mixes a couple of teaspoons of apple cider vinegar and a couple of teaspoons of honey into hot water and drinks it. She used to have troubles with arthritis until she started this remedy many years ago.

Though any apple cider vinegar might do, she said, it’s best to get the kind that says “the mother” on the label, or Bragg’s brand.

“I’ve told many people in my aerobics class, and they’ve just started it and it does wonders,” she said.

Some people balk at the idea of the taste, but it’s just a sweet and sour combination like sweet and sour pork or pickles, she said.

“I don’t have an ache or pain at 87, and I’ve been taking it for years,” she concluded.

TODAY’S TRIVIA QUESTION: What currency is used in the United Kingdom?

TUESDAY’S TRIVIA ANSWER: Michael Jackson, who died in 2009, still is known as The King of Pop.
