Jadhav verdict: 'Sarabjit's fate would’ve been different had then govt acted effectively', says sister

Dalbir Kaur, Sarabjit Singh's sister | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights ICJ on Wednesday stayed the execution of Indian national Kulbhushan Jadhav in Pakistan The court also said that Pakistan should grant India consular access to Jadhav Sarabjit Singh, an Indian national, died in a Lahore jail in 2013

New Delhi: As the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on Wednesday ruled in favour of India in the Kulbhushan Jadhav case and asked Pakistan to maintain a stay on his execution, Dalbir Kaur, sister of Sarabjit Singh – the Indian national who died in Pakistani jail - hailed the verdict and called it a “big success for the Indian government.”

On Wednesday, in a major diplomatic win for India, the ICJ stayed Jadhav’s execution, as he had been sentenced to death by a military court in Pakistan on charges of espionage in 2017. The court also said that Pakistan had violated Vienna convention by not allowing India to have consular access to Jadhav.

Welcoming the verdict, Dalbir Kaur gave the credit of India’s win at the ICJ in The Netherlands to the Narendra Modi government.

"This is a big win for India. I congratulate Prime Minister Modi led government for reaching the ICJ and putting forth facts effectively. They also managed to get a stay on his punishment. The most important thing is that Jadhav will get a lawyer to fight his case now," she told reporters.

Speaking on this issue, Kaur added that when her brother was incarcerated in jail, the then government failed to act in an effective manner that could have prevented Sarabjit’s death in Lahore jail.

“I had approached the then government and told them to approach the ICJ as there were many mistakes in the case against Sarabjit. The then government acted but in an ineffective manner in Sarabjit's case,” Kaur said.

Sarabjit was tried and sentenced by Pakistan's Supreme Court for allegedly being involved in blasts in Lahore and Faisalabad in 1990 and spent the better part of his life in a Pakistani jail. He died on May 2, 2013, after he was reportedly attacked by his fellow inmates in the Central Jail, Lahore.

However, his family has maintained that Sarabjit had crossed the India-Pakistan border by mistake and that his alleged involvement in a string of bombings in Pakistan was a case of mistaken identity.

Meanwhile, in a setback to Pakistan, the ICJ today asked Islamabad to review the death sentence awarded to Kulbhushan Jadhav, a retired Navy officer, by the country's military court.

"Court finds that Pakistan deprived India of the right to communicate with and have access to Kulbhushan Jadhav, to visit him in detention and to arrange for his legal representation, and thereby breached obligations incumbent upon it under Vienna Convention on Consular Relations," the court said.

The decision was welcomed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh and former External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj.

"We welcome today’s verdict in the ICJ. Truth and justice have prevailed. Congratulations to ICJ for a verdict based on extensive study of facts. I'm sure Jadhav will get justice. Our government will always work for the safety and welfare of every Indian," PM Modi said.
