New Vodafone Rs 229 plan brings surprising benefits but you should know everything else it offers

Vodafone has been quite competitive these days to fend off threats from its biggest rivals in the Indian telecom space. Post its merger with Idea, Vodafone is now the largest telecom operator in India but it has been losing its subscriber base at a rapid pace. To tackle the threat, it is coming up with aggressively priced plans that offer larger benefits in an attempt to woo more customers. Its latest attempt is aimed at pleasing subscriber in the affordable segment.

Vodafone has introduced a new plan for its prepaid subscribers who don't want to spend upwards of Rs 250 for a monthly recharge. This plan costs Rs 229 and it comes with a lot of benefits with regards to call and data. However, the new Vodafone plan is primarily focused on the data-hungry subscribers who want more data benefits over calls and other stuff.

With the Rs 229 plan, subscribers will be getting a data allotment of 2GB per day for an entire period of 28 days. This is applicable for its subscribers on 3G and 4G networks. Along with data, the Rs 229 plan also bundles unlimited local, STD and roaming calls. Subscribers also get up to 100 SMSes per day. However, the validity of this plan is limited to 28 days.

To complement the higher data allotment, Vodafone is also clubbing a free subscription to its Vodafone Play app that gives access to Live TV, movies, web series and more. Subscribers don't get access to any third party streaming subscriptions.

If you are interested in this plan, you should know a couple of things. The Rs 229 plan doesn't offer any talk time and subscribers will have to ensure a minimum balance amount in order to make commercial calls, despite having unlimited calling. The plan was first spotted by Telecom Talk.

However, Vodafone isn't the only one with this plan. Airtel also has a similar prepaid plan for its subscribers, offering 2GB data per day for a period of 28 days. Airtel also offers unlimited calls and 100 free SMSes per day. In terms of benefits, subscribers will get access to Airtel TV Premium, 1-year Norton Mobile security, Wynk Music subscription and a few other devices.

On the other hand, Reliance Jio also has a similar plan but at a much cheaper price of Rs 198. With Jio, you will also get 2GB data per day along with unlimited calling, 100 free SMSes per day and complimentary subscription to Jio Apps.
