Arson attack kills dozens in popular Kyoto anime studio

A MAN screaming “you die!” has burst into an animation production studio in Japan and set it on fire, killing 33 people.

The attack left 36 people injured, some of them critically in a blaze that sent people scrambling up the stairs toward the roof in a desperate attempt to escape.

Most of the victims were workers at Kyoto Animation, known for mega-hit stories featuring high school girls.

The fire started in the three-storey building in Japan’s ancient capital after the suspect sprayed an unidentified liquid accelerant.

Japanese media reported the fire might have been set near the front door, forcing people to find other exits and possibly delaying their escape.

Firefighters are still searching inside the building.

The suspect was injured and taken to a hospital.

MEANWHILE, India’s space agency has said it will launch a spacecraft to the south pole of the moon on Monday after an aborted effort this week.

The Indian Space Research Organisation said the Chandrayaan-2 launch is now rescheduled for 2.43pm on Monday 22.

It added that an expert committee had identified the root cause of the previous technical snag and all corrective actions have been implemented.

The mission was called off less than an hour before lift-off of the 640-ton, 14-storey rocket launcher on Monday 15.

The new launch schedule on Sriharikota, an island off India’s coast, is sooner than expected.

ELSEWHERE, The US Air Force has warned people against participating in an internet joke suggesting a large crowd of people “storm Area 51”, the top-secret Cold War test site in the Nevada desert.

The prank event on Facebook has attracted more than 1.2 million interested people after suggesting a mass of people attempt to run into the mysterious site at 3am on September 20.

The site is part of the vast Nevada Test and Training Range and has become the centre of UFO conspiracy theories.

The Facebook call says “They can’t stop all of us” and “Let’s see them aliens”.

Nellis Air Force Base said in a statement that officials are aware of the Facebook posting and “any attempt to illegally access the area is highly discouraged”.

FINALLY, Pope Francis has named British-born Matteo Bruni as his new Vatican spokesman.

Mr Bruni takes over from Alessandro Gisotti, who became interim spokesman following the sudden departure on December 31 of Greg Burke.

He will now join the communications ministry as a deputy editorial director.

Mr Bruni’s appointment marks the latest change in the Holy See’s communications operations.
