MAH CET MBA Entrance EXAM PATTERN 2019 – PaGaLGuY

The Maharashtra Common Entrance is the only access to JBIMS, SIMSREE, K J Somaiya, PUMBA and more than 300 MBA colleges in Maharashtra. This year the MAH CET is scheduled to be held on Saturday, March 9 and Sunday, March 10, 2019. The exam is conducted every year by the Directorate of Technical Education (DTE), Maharashtra. For the smooth conduction of this prestigious exam year after year without any technical glitches in about 40 cities all across India, a special State CET Cell has been created by the Government of Maharashtra

The DTE of Maharashtra is expected to release the MAH CET 2019 exam notifications in the latter half of the month of January 2019.

The exam is taken by a lot of students and every year the number keeps on increasing. Hence, the difficulty of the exam has also been increasing. Students are finding it hard to manage their studies and the subject matter for this entrance exam. This article covers all the information regarding the MAH CET Exam Pattern for the year of 2019.

The Entrance Exam Pattern

The MAH CET Exam tries to test the analytic and aptitude capabilities of the students appearing for the exam.

This year the paper is set to have 4 sections- Logical Reasoning, Quantitative Aptitude, Reading Comprehension and Abstract Reasoning.

The test will be conducted on an online platform and every applicant will be provided with a separate system at their respective centers.

There will be 200 questions and every question will have 5 alternatives.

Only the mouse is required to answer the questions and no keyboard keys are to be used.

Once the applicant has selected any one alternative, they have to click on the “Save and Next” option provided on the same page.

Exam Highlights

Mode of examination Online Medium of CET English Types of questions MCQ type Test duration 150 minutes Sections of exam Logical Reasoning, Abstract Reasoning, Quantitative Aptitude, Verbal Ability/Reading Comprehension Total Marks 200 Total Number of questions 200

Marking Scheme for MAH CET 2019

For the perfect preparation of the MAH CET 2019, the applicants need to make sure that they have all the information they need. The marking scheme is one such important piece of information that all applicants must be aware of.

There is no provision of negative marking. 1 mark is added for every correct answer. Candidates have to answer 200 questions in a time frame of 150 minutes.

Section Name Number of Questions Marks per Question Maximum Marks Logical Reasoning 75 1 75 Abstract Reasoning 25 1 25 Quantitative Aptitude 50 1 50 Reading Comprehension/Verbal Ability 50 1 50 Total Marks 200 – 200

Guidelines for Applicants

The syllabus for this exam is vast. There are more than 100 topics that any applicant needs to cover before the exam. Most of these topics are actually based on the Intelligence Quotient of the students appearing in the exam. This exam is also a means of analysis of the alertness and of the applicants and their ability to perform under stress.

When preparing for the exam, the applicants must make it a point to understand what they are doing and why are they doing so. Every topic is different, and requires a different strategy to be studied and understood properly.

The DTE Maharashtra has recommended that the probability of an event of some kind of problem in the administration of the examination and during the exam cannot be ruled out completely. This may impact the test delivery and the performance of the candidates. There might also be a problem during the generation and final display of the result. In that event, every possible action will be taken to repair the problem. This rectification might also involve the shifting of the test center at the last moment or a delay in the test. The conduction of a re-exam is completely in the hands of the DTE Maharashtra. Candidates cannot claim for a re-test at any condition. Candidates not willing to participate in the delayed process of test delivery or not willing to move shall be instantaneously rejected from the entire process.

Usually the State CET Cell analyses the responses of individual candidates with those of the other candidates to spot patterns of resemblance of right and wrong answers. If by the analytical technique implemented by the State CET Cell in this regard, it is concluded that the responses have been shared and the scores obtained by both candidates are not genuine, the State CET Cell has the right to disqualify the candidature of the concerned candidates and the result of such candidates is declared null & void.

If the examination is held in more than one session due to some convenience emergencies, the scores across various sessions will be equated accordingly to adjust for the slight differences in difficulty level of different test batteries used across the various sessions. More than one session are required if the nodes capacity is less or some technical disturbance takes place at any center or for any particular candidate.

If there are cases where incorrect information has been provided or there has been a violation of any kind of process at any stage of the admission process, there might be a case of disqualification from both the admission and the test process.

After the complete study of the pattern and guidelines, we hope that the candidates will do a great job in their respective response sheets.

Read More
