DDA to undertake mapping of unauthorised colonies in Delhi to enable residents' claim to ownership rights

Delhi currently houses over 1,700 unauthorised colonies (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Centre grants one-time exception to residents of unauthorised colonies in Delhi Delhi HC has set a deadline of September 30, 2019, for the mapping of such colonies Delhi Development Authority has been tasked with the mapping

New Delhi: Almost four years after the Delhi Cabinet sent a proposal to the Centre concerning the regularisation of unauthorised colonies in the national capital, the central government has given its consent to a one-time amnesty to the residents of these settlements. Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Thursday told mediapersons that the people of the national capital have received a "positive response" from the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government at the Centre.

Records maintained by the Supreme Court monitoring committee show that Delhi houses between 1,797 to 2,041 unauthorised colonies which are home to an estimated population of about 40 lakh residents. In its Cabinet note sent to the Delhi government on July 11, the Centre proposed a one-time exception which would allow these inhabitants to transfer property rights of these properties without having to go through established norms to produce documents to establish their claims to the property. The power to extend the one-time exemptions for registration of sale deeds will rest with district commissioners.

This is not the first time an effort has been initiated to empower residents of unauthorised colonies on Delhi. In 1993, 567 of 607 such colonies were regularised. This time around, the Delhi government has decided on a "cut-off date". As per the draft proposal, only properties which have come up before this date (January 1, 2015) will be considered regularised. The Centre reportedly set up a panel in March of this year under the chairmanship of Lt-Governor Anil Baijal to chalk out ways to grant ownership rights to residents of unauthorised colonies. This panel submitted its report on June 10. With respect to the regularisation, the Delhi High Court had also extended its deadline of September 30, 2018, by one whole year.

Meanwhile, the Delhi Development Authority has been tasked with mapping unauthorised colonies. The primary land-owning agency in the capital, DDA has been entrusted with a task which remains undone following five unsuccessful attempts by the Delhi government's Urban Development Department. For this purpose, the DDA will undertake mapping surveys with assistance from the Urban Development Department. Earlier this year, Delhi Urban Development Minister Satyendar Jain had approved a proposal to use drones to map these unauthorised colonies. These drones will be used to do geo-spatial mapping of the concerned areas.

The issue of regularisation of unauthorised colonies has been raised by several political parties in the past, including BJP, Congress and the AAP. Most recently, Arvind Kejriwal and his party had proposed a resolution to people living in such colonies during his 2015 campaign. When asked whether the central government's approval to the proposal has anything to do with the upcoming Delhi Assembly elections, the Chief Minister said that there is no point in pointing fingers but a time to celebrate this initiative.
