Pradeep Sharma, 'encounter specialist' of Mumbai Police, resigns; may contest Assembly polls from Andheri

File picture: Pradeep Sharma | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Pradeep Sharma is one of the famous `encounter specialists' of Mumbai Police Pradeep Sharma, the head of Anti Extortion Cell of Thane Police Crime Branch, was scheduled to retire in May 2020 No word as to Pradeep Sharma will fight on which party ticket

Thane: Senior police inspector Pradeep Sharma has resigned and is expected to join politics, sources said on Thursday evening. Pradeep Sharma is one of the famous 'encounter specialists' of the Mumbai Police.

Sharma was leading the Anti Extortion Cell of Thane Police Crime Branch when he resigned from the service.

As per reports, Sharma, who was scheduled to retire in May 2020, had tendered his resignation to the Director-General of Police, Maharashtra, on July 4. It has now been accepted.

Sharma too has confirmed that he has resigned and cited 'personal reasons'.

Pradeep Sharma has purportedly killed more than 100 criminals in 'encounters' during his 35-year service.

A news report has suggested that Sharma is planning to contest the upcoming Maharashtra Assembly Elections from Andheri constituency. There is no word as to he will fight on which party ticket.

The report also claimed that Sharma wanted to contest polls in 2014 but could not get a party ticket.

Sharma, who was featured in a Time magazine interview, was sacked by the Maharashtra government in 2008 for his alleged involvement in the fake encounter of alleged gangster Lakhan Bhaiya.

On November 11, 2006, Lakhan Bhaiya was picked up by a Mumbai police team from Vashi in Navi Mumbai on the suspicion that he was an alleged aide of Chhota Rajan.

However, Lakhan Bhaiya was later found killed on the same day near Nana-Nani Park in Mumbai's Versova area.

A magisterial inquiry into the death concluded that Lakhan Bhaiya was hit from point-blank range. A Special Investigation Team (SIT) later arrested 22 people, including Pradeep Sharma, in the case.

Sharma was later acquitted in the case by a Mumbai court in July 2013.

Following his reinstatement and appointment as head of the Anti Extortion Cell of Thane Police Crime Branch in 2017, Sharma made two significant arrests - Dawood Ibrahim's brother Iqbal Kaskar on extortion charges, and Sonu Yogendra Jalan, a bookie.
