Will spill Kamal Nath's blood: Ex-BJP MLA arrested for threatening MP CM

The Madhya Pradesh Police has arrested former Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MLA Surendra Nath Singh for a controversial remark about Chief Minister Kamal Nath. Surendra Nath Singh had allegedly threatened bloodshed.

"Blood will flow on the streets and that blood will be of Kamal Nath," Surendra Nath Singh reportedly said.

News agency ANI reported his arrest.

Bhopal: Former BJP MLA Surendra Nath Singh has been arrested by police over his reported statement 'Blood will flow on the streets, and that blood will be of Kamal Nath (Madhya Pradesh CM).' ANI (@ANI) July 19, 2019

Earlier in the day there was ruckus in the Madhya Pradesh assembly as Congress MLAs raised the issue and demanded action against Surendra Nath Singh.

Speaker NP Prajapati had to adjourn the House twice. As soon as the question hour began, members from the treasury benches started raising slogans alleging that during a protest on Thursday, former BJP MLA Surendra Nath Singh had threatened that the blood of Chief Minister Kamal Nath would be spilled on the streets.

The Congress MLAs then trooped into the well of the House, ignoring the Speaker's appeal to maintain calm.

The BJP MLAs meanwhile said they were ready for a discussion on the matter.

Leader of Opposition Gopal Bhargava said the BJP is ready to give an answer provided the Congress members share the reason of their protest.

The Speaker said the statement made by former BJP legislator Surendra Nath Singh or other leaders of any party was deplorable and such language should not be used.

In his reply, Bhargava said that it was published across the media platforms that Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in a speech, has clearly given a message about leading ideal public life.

The BJP leader added that his party has not been in favour of this kind of behaviour, a veiled reference to Surendra Nath Singh.

Meanwhile, Bhopal police have registered a case against Surendra Nath Singh for holding a protest in Roshanpura area of the city "in violation of prohibition orders".

"We registered a case on Thursday night against Singh under IPC section 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) and 143 (unlawful assembly) for violating the prohibitory orders under section 144 of the CrPC imposed in the area," City Superintendent of Police (CSP) Umesh Tiwari told PTI.

When asked about his statement, Surendra Nath Singh told PTI that he was leading a protest against the action being taken against poor vendors and inflated power bills being recieved by slum dwellers.

"The local administration has been removing the vendors from the city without their proper rehabilitation. Where do these poor will go? The slum dwellers are being served inflated power bills ranging from Rs 10,000 to Rs 20,000 per month," Nath said.

Asked about the use of threatening language against Kamal Nath, the BJP leader said, "The protesters were raising slogans during the protest - 'Hamari mange poori nahi hui toh khoon bahega sadko par' (if our demands are not met, blood will flow on the streets). And when someone from the crowd asked me 'Whose blood?', I inadvertently mentioned the name of Kamal Nath."

ALSO READ | Kutte jaisi mentality: Congress minister slams BJP

ALSO READ | Kamal Nath govt would even transfer land & sky: BJP on transfer of police dogs, handlers in MP

ALSO READ | Curious case of power cuts in Madhya Pradesh that has left Kamal Nath edgy
