Governor summons KU Vice Chancellor

At Raj Bhavan meet, VC explains university’s probe into answer sheet scam

The scandal surrounding the alleged use of stolen answer sheets by leaders of the Students Federation of India (SFI) to cheat in Kerala University examinations assumed a consequential dimension on Friday.

Governor P. Sathasivam summoned Vice Chancellor of Kerala University V.P. Mahadevan Pillai to Raj Bhavan.

Officials said the Governor, who is the Chancellor, reportedly sought an explanation from Mr. Pillai in person about the scam. Officials said the meeting was one-to-one and closed door.

Accountability factor

Mr. Pillai purportedly briefed the Governor about the progress of the varsity’s probe to trace the provenance of the answer sheets. He also reportedly explained the steps taken to fix accountability and elaborated on the measures considered by the university to prevent such anomalies in future.

An official said the Governor had made a rare break with university customs by summoning Mr. Pillai directly.

He said Mr. Sathasivam appeared acutely mindful of the uncertainty the allegations had stirred in the minds of students and parents and also the blot it had created on the integrity of the university’s examination process. The police had chanced upon the stolen answer books during their raid on the house of SFI leader Sivarenjith last week.

He is the main accused in a case relating to the near-fatal knife attack on University College student Akhil Chandran on July 12.

Later, University College authorities discovered more answer sheet bundles stacked inside a covered stage the SFI had used as its unit office on the campus.

Question of exams

The discoveries had cast the Kerala University in poor light and also raised serious questions about the trustworthiness of examinations conducted on SFI-dominated college campuses.

The issue had devolved into a major crisis that found the State government and the Higher Education Department on the back foot. It also gave grist for the Opposition to launch a street agitation for a judicial inquiry into the alleged fraud.

Mr. Pillai’s visit to Raj Bhavan comes on the heels of Higher Education Minister K.T. Jaleel’s call on Thursday to explain the problem to Mr. Sathasivam.

KSU activists attempted to block Mr. Pillai as his car came out of Raj Bhavan. However, the police cleared his way.
