CM: redevelopment of cessed structures to be mandatory

But officials say policy likely to hit constitutional hurdle

Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis on Friday said the cluster redevelopment of dilapidated cessed buildings would be made mandatory if tenants refuse to vacate.

Earlier this week, following the building collapse in Dongri, the Chief Minister had said the government was considering an ordinance for cluster redevelopment of cessed structures. Elaborating on the policy on Friday during the ‘Navsankalp Samaroh’ of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Mr. Fadnavis said the State has no option but to implement the policy in a compulsory manner since the previous government did not take the tough call. He also set a target of winning 36 Assembly seats in Mumbai for the party workers.

However, senior government officials told The Hindu that such a policy is likely to hit a constitutional hurdle as it will require suspension of the Right to Property (Article 32). “We are considering all legal options, but at this point we are seeking to suspend the Right to Property under exceptional circumstances where larger public good is involved. The idea of giving an incentive to owners and tenants has not worked. We have had enough of using a soft hand trying to ask people to vacate dangerous buildings,” a senior bureaucrat said.

‘Target 36 seats’

Earlier, speaking at the function to formally induct Mangal Prabhat Lodha as the new BJP Mumbai chief, Mr. Fadnavis set a deadline for Mumbai’s transformation over the next 15 years, by which time, he said, at least 30 big ticket projects will be completed. “The previous government only saw Mumbai as the goose that laid the golden eggs. They said they would convert Mumbai to Shanghai. We have changed the slogan. We will make Mumbai a one-of-its-kind model for the rest of the world to follow. For that, the BJP will have to win all seats in Mumbai,” he said.

Mr. Fadnavis requested Mumbaikars to put up with the project-related inconvenience for a little longer. The government has undertaken 30 major projects across Mumbai and the Mumbai Metropolitan Region, which has increased the traffic congestion, he said.

“I am aware of the pain commuters have to go through, but I have so far not got a single complaint in this regard. That is because people are aware once these projects are complete, the next generation will live in comfort,” Mr. Fadnavis said.

Mr. Lodha, meanwhile, said the party must make the most of the golden phase in its expansion and eliminate the Congress from Mumbai and the State.
