Heavy Rains Kill 2 in Kerala, 7 Fishermen Missing

Waterlogging on the roads of Kozhikode city on Friday (Photo: BCCL Kozhikode)

Even as the monsoon officially covered all of India on Friday, the state that serves as the monsoon's entry point into the country, was being pounded by heavy rain. According to news reports, the rains in Kerala have claimed two lives, while 7 fishermen are missing at sea.

The rising currents of the Manimala river in Tiruvalla washed away a 54-year old man, Koshy Varghese. Authorities later found his body. Meanwhile, a 55-year man, Dileep Kumar, was killed in Kollam when a coconut tree fell on him. Seven fishermen are reported missing from the coastal areas of Vizhinjam in Thiruvananthapuram and Neendakara in Kollam. The administration said that they ventured into the water despite warnings of rough sea conditions.

According to the IMD's Saturday bulletin, the heaviest rainfall was recorded yesterday at Kannur (218.6 mm), Kozhikode (105.4 mm), Kottayam (100.2 mm, Alappuzha (54.2 mm), Punalur (66.4 mm) and Kochi airport (45.6 mm). The capital Thiruvananthapuram received 20.9 mm.

Advertisement The gates of three dams--Pambla, Malankara and Bhoothankettu--were opened after reservoirs filled up to full capacity. Landslides were reported in Idukki and Kottayam districts, while houses have been damaged in Alappuzha district due to heavy sea erosion.

On Friday morning, the heaviest 24-hour rain was reported in parts of Kozhikode, Idukki, Malappuram, Ernakulam, Kottayam and Thrissur.

The IMD has extended its red and orange alerts to several districts till Monday. In its Saturday bulletin, it has warned of 'heavy to very heavy' rainfall at a few places with extremely heavy falls at isolated places over Kerala, Mahe and South Interior Karnataka on Saturday. Parts of Coastal Karnataka may also see very heavy rains, it added. Rough to very rough sea conditions (with wind speed reaching 40-50 kmph) are likely to prevail over southwest and central Arabian Sea, along and off the Maldives area, Comorin area, Lakshadweep, Gulf of Mannar, Gujarat coast and Kerala coast, it adds in the bulletin.
