It's the punishment Muslims are getting after 1947, says SP leader Azam Khan on mob lynching incidents

SP leader Azam Khan

Key Highlights Yesterday, another case of mob lynching was reported from Bihar were three men were allegedly thrashed to death by villagers over suspicion of cattle theft After UP, MP and Rajasthan now opposition leaders in Bihar have demanded that the CM Nitish Kumar-led government enact a law to curb mob lynching

Rampur: Samajwadi Party MP Azam Khan has termed mob lynching as a punishment Muslims are getting after 1947. He further said that the reason why their ancestors didn’t go to Pakistan was that Maulana Azad, Jawaharlal Nehru, Sardar Patel and Mahatma Gandhi had made promises to the Muslims.

With the sudden increase in mob lynching related incidents in the country Muslims, Dalits and tribals will now start applying for arms licenses for self-defence.

The country-wide movement will commence from Lucknow on July 26. The announcement was made by Shia cleric and General Secretary of Majlis-e-Ulama-e-Hind, Maulana Kalbe Jawwad.

According to the cleric, these camps would be organised in at least 12 cities, including six in Uttar Pradesh, where these communities are under threat and require legal help.

After Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan now opposition leaders in Bihar have demanded that the Chief Minister Nitish Kumar-led government enact a law to curb mob lynching.

Raising the issue of mob lynching in the state the opposition members said they would protest if the government ignores their demand.

Meanwhile, the Uttar Pradesh Law Commission has already submitted a 128-page draft Bill to CM Yogi Adityanath recommending up to life imprisonment for mob lynching crimes.

The report cites multiple cases of lynching in the state saying that the existing laws are not sufficient to combat lynching and separate law is the need of the hour to tackle them.

Yesterday, another case of mob lynching was reported from a village in Bihar where three men were allegedly thrashed to death while one was critically injured by villagers over suspicion of cattle theft.

The deceased were identified as Naushad Quraishi, Raju Nut and Videsh Nut. The incident took place in Pithori Nandlal village under Baniyapur police station in Saran district.

The growing numbers of such cases have also been condemned by the civil society members. Recently, acclaimed Kannada theatre artiste and poet S. Raghunandana refused to accept the Sangeet Natak Akademi award conferred on him citing "mob lynching and violence in the name of God and religion".

Since 2015 writers and artists have protested against the culture of intolerance and hatred promoted by the BJP regime. However, right-wing influencers labelled the civil society members and intellectuals as award wapsi gang, a term which became popular on Twitter.

Last year, former Sahitya Akademi president Vishwanath Prasad Tiwari made a stunning claim saying that he had evidence to prove that the award wapsi movement was a publically motivated campaign organised by Communist writers and Hindi poet Ashok Vajpeyi to defame the Narendra Modi-led BJP government.
