Sanjeev K Singla appointed Israel envoy

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

New Delhi: Senior diplomat Sanjeev Kumar Singla has been appointed the Indian Ambassador to Israel, the Ministry of External Affairs said on Friday. Singla, a 1997-batch Indian Foreign Service (IFS) officer, was serving as Private Secretary to Prime Minister Narendra Modi. In other appointments, Vivek Kumar, a 2004-batch IFS officer, was appointed Private Secretary to the PM and Upender Singh Rawat was named as envoy to the Republic of Panama. agencies

‘Emergency ration’ packets for disaster-hit

New Delhi: The students of IIT-Madras and IIT-Guwahati —Shikhar Prakash and Megha Agrawal, have come up with “emergency ration” packets to be distributed during disaster relief operations and can also be consumed immediately or be left for microgreens to grow for the later usage. The “emergency ration” packets called “Green Aid”, priced at about Rs 25 each, contains a mix of dried porridge, seeds, yogurt culture, and a packet of clean water. PTI

Pilot who wrongly sent ‘hijack code’ suspended

New Delhi: Aviation regulator DGCA on Friday suspended an AirAsia India pilot for three months for erroneously transmitting ‘hijack code’ to the Air Traffic Services during a Delhi-Srinagar flight on June 9. “As one of the engines had stalled at this I5-715 flight of AirAsia India, first officer (pilot) Capt Ravi Raj was supposed to transmit the emergency code 7700 to ATS authorities. Instead, he erroneously ‘squawked’ the hijack code 7500,” sources said. The three-month period of suspension would be counted from the date of the incident. PTI

Vulture population down to 19K in 30 yrs

New Delhi: The population of vultures has sharply declined from 40 million to 19,000 in over three decades, Parliament was told on Friday. Environment Minister Prakash Javadekar said there were three species of critically endangered resident gyps vultures — white-backed vulture, long-billed vulture and slender-billed vulture — whose population as per the latest figures is 6,000, 12,000 and 1,000, respectively. “The crash in population was first noticed in the mid-90s and by 2007, there was a 99 per cent decline in the population of the three resident gyps species of vultures,” he said. PTI
