Jet Airways RP invites expressions of interest by August 3 - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

MUMBAI, July 20: The resolution professional (RP)

of Jet Airways Saturday called for expressions of interest

(EoIs) to sell the grounded airline’s meager assets by August

3.

In an advertisement posted on the airline’s website

and in newspapers, the RP, Ashish Chhawchharia, appointed by

Jet Airways’ lenders, has set a deadline of August 3 for

receipt of EoIs, August 6 as the date of issue of provisional

list of prospective resolution applicants, and August 11 as

the last date of submission of objections.

The advertisement stated that on August 14, final list

of prospective resolution applicants will be issued.

The final date for submission of resolution plans of

these applicants will be September 5, it added.

The estimated date for the submission of resolution

plan by the RP to the National Company Law Tribunal for

approval is September 20.

The airline’s assets include 14 aircraft including 10

Boeing planes — down from 124 before the grounding — and 49

per cent stake in Jet Privilege and a few buildings.

Its liabilities are over Rs 36,000 crore, including

more than Rs 10,000 crore of vendor dues, Rs 8,500 crore along

with interest owed to the lenders, over Rs 3,000 crore in

salary dues and more than Rs 13,500 crore in accumulated

losses of the past three years.

The lenders also list spares, slots and routes as the

assets of the Naresh Goyal-promoted airline which operated its

last flight on April 17.

The next hearing on the insolvency case and RP’s

progress report is on July 23.

The airline was sent to the NCLT on June 17, to

recover loans of Rs 8,500 crore.

On June 20, NCLT admitted the insolvency petition

filed by the lenders’ consortium led by State Bank against Jet

Airways.

Before it was sent to the NCLT, the banks, which own

half of the shares in the airline, had sought expressions of

interest from both strategic and financial investors to sell

between 31.2 and 75 percent stake.

The bankers received four non-binding EoIs in April,

while Etihad Airways, which owns 24 percent in the carrier,

had submitted a conditional bid. But none of the bidders moved

forward. (PTI)
