Amid growing fears of Kodagu residents, cloud seeding to begin on Wednesday

Mysuru: Notwithstanding the apprehensions expressed by the people of Kodagu , who fear that the state government’s cloud seeding operation may further disrupt the already erratic weather patterns that the district has witnessed in the recent past, officials of the department of rural development and panchayat raj (RDPR) are in the final stages of planning the exercise. The operation, which is expected to start from Mysuru, will be carried out across all districts in the Old Mysore Region – Hassan, Ramanagara, Mandya and Bengaluru. The exercise is expected to begin on Wednesday.RDPR department chief engineer Prakash Kumar said that they would be using two aircraft. “We will inspect the flights on Monday, and the cloud-seeding exercise will start from Wednesday. We will station the aircraft at the Mysuru airport till Friday. “On Friday, we will fly the second aircraft to Hubballi, which will be our base for the cloud seeding operation in North Karnataka,” said Kumar.Reacting to the fears expressed by the residents of Kodagu, Kumar said that they had been forced to resort to cloud seeding in the hilly district since the rainfall recorded was extremely poor compared to the normal quota that it is expected to receive. “We will conduct the operation in all those regions reeling under drought,” he added.‘Not the solution’President of the Coorg Wildlife Society CP Muthanna, expressing the opinion prevailing among a majority of Kodagu residents, said that taking up cloud seeding to artificially precipitate rain in the parched districts was not an ideal solution. “Such operations must not be initiated on whims. They must be conducted only after the experts have been thoroughly consulted,” said Muthanna.Such ad hoc measures, he declared, could not address the meteorological variations in Kodagu, he said.However, the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has stepped up its rain warning level for Kodagu, from ‘Orange’ to ‘Red’. IMD officials have forecast 205.5mm rain in the hilly district from Saturday to Tuesday.
