‘Judiciary should spread awareness about the Constitution’s principles’

Mysuru: Chief Justice of Karnataka Justice Abhay Shreeniwas Oka on Saturday felt the judicial system should take the initiative in telling the common man about the ideals of the Constitution After inaugurating the new four-storey court complex at Malalavadi here, he reiterated the objective of the Constitution and thoughts of its framers led by BR Ambedkar. He said the framers had envisioned one nation and one religion, the religion of human beings. “The citizens of India must forget differences on the basis of caste and religion and come together to build a modern India. We, the judges, and members of the Bar are part of this noble institution ( judiciary ) and we must keep in mind the principles of the framers,” he said.Justice Oka urged judicial officers, members of the Bar and court staff to safeguard the image of the judiciary and asked them not to give anyone the opportunity to speak adversely about the judicial system. “It’s been seven decades since India got independence, but people are questioning our credibility,” he said.He felt that it’s not enough to have good court infrastructure. “We have to take a pledge to work collectively to provide better quality of justice and to improve ourselves and perform better than yesterday,” he said.He said people have high hopes of the judiciary. “They’re knocking on the doors of the court because they feel they didn’t get justice from the executive. Every member of the judicial system, including judicial officers, must bear in mind that people come to us because they don’t have any other option to seek justice,” he said, adding, “I believe in collective effort and we, as judges, have to work to improve the quality of justice.”Deadline to dispose of old casesLauding the Justice Oka’s initiative to interact with every judicial officer in the district, high court judge Justice SN Satyanarayana said the CJ has set a September 30 deadline to dispose of at least 25 of the oldest cases. There are several litigations pending for 30 years in Mysuru district, said Satyanarayana, who is also administrative judge of Mysuru. Mysuru principal district and sessions court judge SK Vontigodi was also present.
