Woman molested on train tweets about how to file complaint, follow up in court

MUMBAI: A young woman from Delhi who was molested on a long-distance train last year has taken to Twitter to make survivors aware of how to go about registering a police complaint and follow up on the case in court. In an exhaustive thread, which has been retweeted more than 3,700 times since, she writes that the common perception that women have to visit a court repeatedly for hearings is just not true. She had to go for one court proceeding. She mentions that law enforcement officers might encourage a woman to withdraw her case.“I’m still awaiting court’s order in the case I filed. But I thought writing it all down might be able to help people who are too scared to go through the entire process,” she told TOI.The 26-year-old woman was travelling out of Delhi in December 2018 when the incident took place. “My co-passenger in a drunken stupor molested me in a full train. First thing you do, scream and alert people around you because they are potential witnesses. Even if they don’t help out, they are aware something like this has happened. I informed the pantry person to call the police or the ticket checker. The RPF came... and escorted the person outside the cabin,” she wrote in her post.“I got down at the next station with the officials. I know this can be a harrowing experience but you need to clear your mind and write down everything on a piece of paper... Every railway station has a police station. Go to one and state clearly that you want to file an FIR... Do not leave the station before filing an FIR. I stayed for three hours at the police station because they were taking time. But do not give up. If the police refuse to lodge an FIR, call up the control room. Take copies of your statement... ask the police to put their sign and seal saying they have received your complaint.”The woman added she was called to the police station the next day and asked to drop charges. She wrote that she was asked to think about the molester’s cihldren and family. “Don’t give in. On the third day, I was taken to court. The judge warned about the consequences of a false case. You will have to repeat your statement before the judge and name witnesses... Ensure you tell your family or friends after the incident, so they may also be your witness.” She said one did not need advocates as the state prosecutor would fight the case. “You have to go for just one court proceeding... it will probably take the whole day in court. Carry your summons as it will mention in whose courtroom your case would be heard.”
