Another University College

There could be several protagonists in this story that keeps repeating itself. Ever since the University College montages have taken the media by storm, Salwa Abdulkhader goes about her life with an unsettling sense of deja vu. Her peers at Government College, Madapally, an SFI stronghold in north Kerala, find the similarities to be uncanny.

Branded as ‘Muslim terrorist’ who didn’t flinch from barging into the gents’ toilet to save her comrades, Salwa has become an icon of resistance against the ‘SFI monopoly’ at Madapally. The former unit secretary of Fraternity Movement, the student wing of Welfare Party of India, is quick to find parallels. “In Madappally too we have an idi muri (room for bullying and beating) where conspiracies to unleash violence are hatched. The office room of the SFI unit was almost like the one you saw in University College. Whenever we saw local CPM workers in the room, we were sure that violence would occur at the college,” says Salwa.

Issues with SFI began with the establishment of ‘Inquilab’, a platform for non-SFI organisations, and later the formation of Fraternity’s unit on the campus. Things reached a flashpoint last year when some new-comers decided to pursue their own politics. “An MSF worker was beaten up inside the gents’ toilet and our male activists couldn’t do anything as they were prevented from going there. I entered the bathroom and forcibly released him,” Salwa recalls.

What ensued was full-scale violence. Adil Ali, another Fraternity worker, was assaulted outside the campus. “I was also beaten up when I tried to intervene. Some local people also got injured in the melee. The district collector promised to take action but nothing has happened till now,” she says.

Salwa alleges that besides physical attacks, SFI also tried character assassination to weaken the resistance against it. “The worst part was labelling us ‘terrorists’ and agents of proselytization. I used to wear purdah at that time and one of our workers was wearing a Muslim skull cap. That was enough for SFI to unleash a vicious campaign against us,” she says. Adil Ali, who was the Salwa’s classmate, provides more details. “A Hindu girl who was moving around with us was warned by SFI leaders that she needs to be careful as we would tempt her to convert to Islam. We were isolated and marginalised. Some students who used to share meals with us started looking at us with suspicion. SFI workers told them that the democratic face of the Fraternity was only a façade and we are terrorists like the Jamaát-e-Islami in Bangladesh ,” says Adil.

Salwa is pained most by the behaviour of teachers who are members of the CPM-affiliated union. “You may not believe it, but we have seen a lady teacher briefing an SFI leader how to file a complaint with the police. These teachers are appointed in key posts in disciplinary and anti-ragging committees. They would cold-shoulder any complaint against the SFI,” she reveals.

The victory of Fuad, a Fraternity candidate, as the zoology association secretary last year, was a slap in SFI’s face. SFI leaders had threatened students against voting for him. They even forced the teachers to recount the ballots six times and locked the counting room from outside and shouted slogans, but some teachers insisted on declaring the results.

Salwa was in Madappally college on Thursday to get her transfer certificate. “The college has changed at least outwardly. Painting and cleaning have been done ahead of the visit of the NAAC accreditation committee. I hope this change is reflected in activities on the campus too. Students now wish for a change and a different kind of politics and the transformation is increasingly becoming visible,” says Salwa, who is preparing to get admitted for a PG course.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
