Is India ready to face Water crisis

Is India ready to face Water crisis

Water, water everywhere, not a drop to drink-- a grave and unsettling situation India is saddled with. The monsoon this year came a week late and brought with it the usual woes-- floods in several parts of the country. But at the same time it bluntly exposed the biggest challenge of the 21st century-- water crisis.

We are faced with two extreme situations simultaneously-- floods, water logging, submerged villages, houses and roads and people dying in one part; and parched land, dry reservoirs and taps, water tankers, long queues and fights in the other.

NITI Aayog, India's policy think tank, has warned that 21 cities, including Delhi, Chennai, Bengaluru, and Hyderabad, will run out of groundwater by 2020, and that 40 per cent of India's population will have no access to drinking water by 2030. One doesn't need to wait that long-- the crisis has already hit us.

Chennai became the first major city in the country to face a severe water shortage the likes of which has never even seen before. Four major reservoirs that provide water to Chennai's 10 million population have become almost dry as dust. Hundreds of thousands of residents wait in line each day for water tankers, many ending in fights. Nursing homes, hospitals and other critical services are grappling with water scarcity. Local businesses are struggling to keep afloat with many asking their employees to work from home because of lack of running water in office bathrooms.

Several hotels and restaurants face the risk of shutting down due to water shortage. In some parts of the city, residents are digging wells as deep as 1,000 feet unmindful that much of this groundwater is too dirty to drink. Another major city that is running out of water is Hyderabad. Reports suggest that the capital of Telangana could lose all its drinking water by the end of August if rains don't fill up the near empty reservoirs by then.

Water levels at the city's two primary sources-- the Nagarjuna Sagar reservoir (River Krishna) and the Yellampalli reservoir (River Godavari-- are abysmally low. The city's 6.8 million residents are at the brink of water crisis. Along with Hyderabad, Secunderabad and adjacent areas of Greater Hyderabad could face severe water crisis from September.

Bengaluru, the capital of Karnataka, is another major city were the water situation is quite alarming. The KRS (Krishna Raja Sagara) reservoir, from which Bengaluru city gets 70 per cent of its daily water supply, has received little or no rainfall in the catchment areas. The water level in KRS reservoir is just 80 feet and if there is no adequate rainfall by July end, then it will be difficult to meet Bengaluru's water demand, says Deputy Chief Minister G Parameshwara. The Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) is monitoring the situation closely.

''If the water level in KRS reservoir does not improve, the BWSSB will have no choice but to start rationing water supply, " according to its chairman Tushar Girinath.

As monsoon plays truants in major parts of India, the brunt of the water crisis is being borne by the agriculture sector which accounts for more than 75 per cent of the water consumption in India. The sowing of seeds for the Kharif season, which starts with rains in June, is already delayed by a month. This means, sowing and as well as transplanting will have to take place in July, making the dependence on July rain much more desperate. And if the rainfall is erratic, crops will be damaged before they mature.

At present, almost all crops have reported a drop in area under sowing.

Data released by the agriculture ministry shows that as on July 5, the area covered by all Kharif crops was 27 per cent below normal.

The sowing shortfall was the worst in pulses at 71 per cent below the normal sown area.

The shortfall was the most severe in the major pulse-producing States of Madhya Pradesh (shortfall of 88 per cent over the normal sown area), Karnataka (82 per cent), Maharashtra (93 per cent) and Rajasthan (52 per cent). These four States account for about 69 per cent of India's area under cultivation in pulses and the cultivation is largely rain-fed.

But how well prepared or ill prepared our cities and governments are to deal with the water crisis? To incentivise sowing and mitigate the sufferings of farmers, the Centre has approved an increase of 1 to 9 per cent in the minimum support price of Kharif crops. But this will mean little unless the rains pick up. The BJP-led government has also set up a water ministry, called the Jal Shakti Mantralaya, to oversee water resource management.

The government has also launched a water conservation drive that will last the entire period of monsoon, targeting 250 of India's most water-stressed districts, covering roughly a fourth of the country's landmass. Delhi is also taking steps to conserve water. Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal says rainwater harvesting will be mandatory for all government offices in Delhi. The head of departments have been directed to install systems in buildings which don't have it and clean up existing systems. His government is also testing natural water storage in the Yamuna river floodplains.

But are these steps enough?

How fast are we heading towards Day Zero, when the taps run dry?

And when drinking water runs out, people will have no choice but to rely on unsafe water. And we will then be faced with another major crisis.

India has to act now if it wants to limit the damage of an inescapable crisis.

—[IFS]
