I'm not clinging to power, only wish to expose BJP: HD Kumaraswamy's statement

I'm not clinging to power, only wish to expose BJP: HD Kumaraswamy's statement

He also made an appeal to all the MLAs who have left Karnataka and taken refuge in hotels in Mumbai to attend the legislature session.

news Politics

A day before the state is poised to witness a trust vote in the Legislative Assembly, Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy has called the BJP's efforts to destabilise his government as 'a new benchmark in the country for immoral politics'. The Chief Minister has accused the BJP of making Governor Vaju Bhai Vala set deadlines for the confidence motion. The Governor had set two deadlines for the confidence motion, both of which were disregarded by the Speaker and the Congress- JD(S) coalition.

"It is a matter of immense pain and disgust that the BJP has not only taken Karnataka's political scenario to a new low, but also set a new benchmark in the country for immoral politics. The BJP has made a mockery of democracy by taking away several MLAs from ruling coalition forcefully. The TV footages have clearly shown BJP leaders and functionaries accompanying our MLAs to Mumbai in special aircrafts," he said.

Kumaraswamy went on to state that he was not trying to cling onto power, but his intention was to expose the BJP to the country.

"The BJP has been demanding that I must resign immediately and has even got the Raj Bhavan to set deadlines for putting the confidence motion into vote. I want to make it amply clear that I am not trying to cling onto power. My only intention of seeking time for debate on trust vote is to let the entire country know how the BJP, which talks of morality, is trying to subvert the very principles of democracy as well as Constitution," he said in the statement.

He also made an appeal to all the MLAs who have left Karnataka and taken refuge in hotels in Mumbai to attend the legislature session and "narrate how the BJP took them away forcefully".

"I request them to explain on the floor of the House how the BJP sabotaged democratic edifice and destroyed its sanctity. I also want to tell such MLAs that let there be no hesitation. Let us save this democratically elected government from the evil forces which are trying to shake the very foundation of democracy by misusing their political influence," he said.

As of Sunday, the coalition does not have the numbers to prove its majority in the assembly. Moreoever, the lone BSP MLA has said that he would be abstaining from the trust vote. This was a vote that the coalition had almost counted in its favour.
