Ahead of Karnataka trust vote, BJP locked in a war of words with HD Kumaraswamy

Karnataka Assembly: Trust vote on HD Kumaraswamy govt likely on July 22 | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights HD Kumaraswamy-led Karnataka government likely to take floor test on July 22 BJP accused CM Kumarawamy of delaying the floor test Kumaraswamy accuses BJP of engaging in immoral politics Two independent MLAs move SC

Bengaluru: Ahead of the crucial floor test in Karnataka Assembly in which the odds are stacked against Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy-led Congress-Janata Dal (Secular) coalition government, the Karnataka CM and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) got engaged in a verbal duel.

On Sunday, BJP spokesperson GVL Narasimha Rao hit out at Kumaraswamy government over the delay in holding the floor test. “HD Kumaraswamy was given a lot of time to prove majority in the House. The process of a confidence motion against the government is progressing like a test match. It looks like that they want to spend five years in proving the confidence motion," he told news agency ANI.

"Either Kumaraswamy should resign or prove his majority. The governor cannot give him time forever to prove the majority," Rao added.

Rao’s comments come amid Karnataka government’s last-ditch attempts to lure the unrelenting rebels back to its camp amid accusations by the BJP of delaying the process.

Kumaraswamy and Congress moved the Supreme Court on July 19 seeking clarification on its July 15 ruling allowing rebels to stay away from the proceedings of the Karnataka Assembly, which they said is an impediment in the parties’ right to issue whip. In their plea, they also accused Governor Vala of interfering with proceedings when a debate on trust vote was underway.

Reacting to BJP spokesperson Rao’s statement, Kumarawasmy issued a statement accusing the BJP of taking Karnataka’s politics “underground” and writing a new commentary on “immoral politics” in the country.

"The BJP has become a mockery of democracy by forcibly calling on legislators from ruling allies. It is clear from the media that the BJP leaders and activists have moved with our MLAs on special flights."

"Amidst all these developments, the BJP is desperate to come to power through immoral and illegal means."

“I want to make it clear again that I do not intend to cling to power. My intention behind the time for an elaborate debate on the vote of confidence is the same - the whole country must realise that while the BJP is talking about morality, democracy, the very essence of the Constitution is going to be shaken,” the Karnataka CM said.

“In this case, I urge the legislators who have gone away from us to come back, attend the session and reveal how the BJP has taken them. I urge the House to explain how the BJP has undermined the sanctity of democracy,” he added.

As many as 15 lawmakers, 12 from the Congress and three from the JD(S), resigned and are currently holed up in a Mumbai hotel. Independent MLAs R Shankar and H Nagesh have also withdrawn support to Karnataka's coalition government.

The ruling combine’s strength in the Karnataka Assembly stands at 117 – Congress (77), JD(S) (37), BSP (1), and 1 nominated, besides the Speaker. After the resignation of 15 MLAs or if they stay away from the trust vote, the coalition’s strength will be reduced to 101. BJP’s current strength stands at 107 in the 225-member Karnataka Assembly after two Independents accorded their support to the saffron party.

In a last-ditch effort, Kumaraswamy reached out to rebels on Sunday urging them to come back to the table. “I would like to inform the MLAs. Come without any hesitation; Let us sit down and discuss all the issues, including your problems, freely. The government must be rescued from the forces of evil that are trying to overthrow a democratically elected government, shaking the foundations of democracy through the abuse of political influence."

The trust vote is set to take place in the Karnataka Assembly on July 22 after the HDK government defied two deadlines set by Governor Vajubhai Vala on July 19. The Karnataka government was hit by a raft of resignations by rebel MLAs from both the Congress and the JD(S).
