Ahmedabad: Man, hospital lock horns over bills

A 50-year-old grain broker from Vastrapur has accused a prominent city hospital of providing him with a few 'kachi' or invalid bills following his wife's treatment at the medical facility and causing him financial loss.

Arvind Maheshwari has filed a police complaint against Sterling Hospitals alleging that a part of his mediclaim was rejected as the bills were not in order. He said the hospital refused to stamp the bills, thus making them useless for insurance purposes. The hospital has rubbished the charges and has filed a cross-complaint against Maheshwari for harassing its staff.

According to his police complaint, Maheshwari got his wife Sangeeta admitted to Sterling Hospitals on July 12 for a kidney stone surgery and was given an estimate of Rs 1.53 lakh.

The broker told DNA that the hospital forcefully discharged Sangeeta around 11.30 am the next day despite her being in pain. He said the final bill came to be Rs 1.66 lakh. "I had no issues till then, but my insurance company passed only Rs1.23lakh. I learnt that some of the bills didn't have the hospital's stamp due to which they got rejected. Maheshwari said the hospital showed him the door after he demanded a bill with a rubber stamp. Maheshwari said he wrote to the collector's office as well as the hospital over the "unfair billing". On July 19, he said, the hospital sent him a mail threatening to file a police complaint if he didn't take back the complaint.

Namisha Gandhi, vice president of Sterling Hospitals, said Maheshwari has cooked up a story to target them. "We have been running a hospital for the past 19 years. We follow all act and rules as per the government. Otherwise, such an issue would be happening with every patient here."

The senior official said it was Maheshwari who requested the hospital to modify the bill as per his format after the final settlement was done. "We refused to accede to his request as it is against the rules."

Enraged at the refusal, Gandhi said, Maheshwari started harassing the hospital staff by calling them up to 50 times a day, demanding a revised bill. "We even replied to every mail of his, but he also started threatening our staff," she said.

Gandhi said they had called Maheshwari to the hospital on July 20 to explain him their position, but he started misbehaving with the staff. "We called the cops, but he managed to flee from the spot. We then filed a complaint with the Vastrapur police." That same night, Maheshwari filed his complaint.

MM Jadeja, an inspector at Vastrapur police station, said they have received both complaints and begun an investigation.
