As Pakistan rakes up Kashmir at NAM, India hits back, says ‘terrorists operating with greater inhumanity’

India's permanent representative to the United Nations, Syed Akbaruddin

Key Highlights India slams Pakistan at NAM Ministerial Meeting India accuses Pakistan of using NAM for 'self-serving narrative' Pakistan had earlier raked up the issue of alleged human rights violations in Kashmir

United Nations: India has slammed Pakistan’s move to rake up Kashmir at a meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) in Venezuela. India's permanent representative to the United Nations, Syed Akbaruddin told the NAM Ministerial Meeting in Caracas, Venezuela on Sunday that the global forum should not be allowed to become a platform for “self-serving narrative” that is aimed at undermining the territorial integrity of one country by another.

Without naming Pakistan but making obvious references to it, Akbaruddin cautioned that NAM should not become a platform for raising bilateral matters. Issues, which are not on the agenda, should not become a part of the discussions of “the outcome document in any manner, find no resonance in the wider membership and those that contravene NAM traditions.”

"Regrettably, one delegation attempted this yesterday. That no other member is responsive to such a self-serving narrative is a telling rejoinder that NAM never was and never can be a platform for pursuits aimed at undermining the territorial integrity of a state by another state," the Indian Ambassador to the UN said.

Earlier, addressing the NAM meeting, Pakistan's Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs Andleeb Abbas had spoken about Kashmir and also referred to the recent UN Human Rights report on Jammu and Kashmir.

India has already refuted the claims made in the UN report and described it as a continuing "false and motivated" narrative.

Lashing out at the neighbouring country, Akbaruddin said terrorists are continuing to "operate with great impunity and greater inhumanity". He also criticised the global community's failure to take strong action against the menace.

"Terrorism not only kills our citizens but also seeks to disrupt societies by undermining our ability to attain our development goals. Unfortunately, all our talk about combating the scourge of terrorism has not been matched by actions," he said.

Stating borders have no meaning for terrorists, the Indian envoy said, "We, as NAM countries, need to take the lead as it is our citizens that stand to lose the most from the lack of coordinated and coherent responses.”

"Climate Change has become a pressing emergency; environmental challenges are an urgent reality; pandemics threaten the accrued gains of global health; terrorism has expanded alarmingly; humanitarian nightmares are playing out repetitively," he said.

"We live in times when more, and not less, collaborative and cooperative efforts are needed for managing the opportunities and challenges that we face. Common answers to each of these global issues require effective multilateralism. No amount of coercion or unilateral measures can resolve our primary concerns," he added.
