Without Congress, SP-BSP will bring BJP+ down to 18 seats in Uttar Pradesh: Mood of the Nation poll

In the 2014 Lok Sabha election, the BJP had nearly swept Uttar Pradesh, winning 71 seats. (Getty photo)

The Bharatiya Janata Party is staring at abysmal loses in Uttar Pradesh in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections, a poll conducted by India Today-Karvy Insights suggests.

If general elections were to be held today, the BJP and its ally Apna Dal would win only 18 seats in the politically important state of Uttar Pradesh. That is a drop of a staggering 53 Lok Sabha seats compared to the BJP's 2014 tally.

In 2014, the BJP had nearly swept Uttar Pradesh, winning 71 seats and relegating other parties to single digits. Apna Dal had won two, taking the BJP-AD alliance's share to 73.

In 2019, the table may turn on the saffron party, India Today-Karvy Insights' Mood of the Nation poll suggests. The party and its ally would win 18 seats, while the alliance between Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party would come out on top with 58 seats. The Rashtriya Lok Dal is also part from the SP-BSP alliance.

The Congress party, which has been left out of the SP-BSP alliance, would win four seats, two more than its 2014 tally.

These numbers are based on the current, on ground scenario in Uttar Pradesh -- the seat-share projections are for a situation where the BJP is up against a SP-BSP alliance and where the Congress is fighting solo.

That is exactly what may happen later this year when the Lok Sabha polls are conducted. SP's Akhilesh Yadav and BSP's Mayawati have said that they will fight the Lok Sabha elections together.

The two have kept the Congress out of their alliance. The Congress has said it will contest on all Lok Sabha seats in Uttar Pradesh on its own.

Interestingly, the Mood of the Nation poll, which surveyed a sample of more than 2,400 people in Uttar Pradesh, has found that if the Congress was part of the BSP-SP alliance, the loses for the BJP would be even more staggering.

According to this hypothetical scenario, a Congress-SP-BSP alliance would win 75 seats while the BJP would be reduced to a miserable five.

Now, let's come back to the actual scenario where the SP-BSP are contesting together and the Congress is fighting solo.

The India Today-Karvy Insights Mood of the Nation predicts that apart from losing seats, the Bharatiya Janata Party would also see a significant drop in its vote share.

If elections were held today, the BJP and its ally Apna Dal would get 36 per cent of votes (they had gotten 43 per cent in 2014). The SP-BSP-RLD alliance would get a combined vote share of 46 per cent while the Congress would get 12.

In 2014, these parties had contested separately. The SP had won 22.2 per cent vote share, the BSP 19.6 per cent, the Congress 7.5 per cent and the RLD 1 per cent.
