Karnataka government formation highlights: Same kind of political developments may take place in future, HD Kumaraswamy tells officials

Karnataka Government Latest News highlights: Both Devegowda and Kumaraswamy say the coalition will stay and there are no differences between JDS and Congress.

Karnataka news today highlights: Former Prime Minister and JD(S) chief Deve Gowda said that he has never seen in his political career the way things have unfolded in Karnataka. On the other hand, Bharatiya Janata Party’s state unit president and three-time Karnataka CM BS Yeddyurappa on Wednesday said that he was waiting for instructions from the central leadership before taking any step with regard to formation of the government. Yeddyurappa visited the RSS office in Chamrajpet to seek the blessings of senior RSS leaders before beginning his new innings. He said, “I came here to seek blessings of senior leaders of the Sangh Parivar. I am waiting for instructions from Delhi, at any point of time we will call for Legislature Party and then head to the Raj Bhavan.” It is likely that Yeddyurappa will stake claim to form the next government in the state once he gets a nod from Delhi. Last night, after HD Kumaraswamy failed to prove majority on the floor of the Vidhan Soudha, Yeddyurappa said that he will meet the Governor after consulting Prime Minister Narendra Modi and party president Amit Shah. If Yeddyurappa takes oath as the CM, this will be his fourth stint as the CM of Karnataka in the last 12 years, the most recent being 14 months ago.

The 14-month-old Congress-JD(S) government in Karnataka collapsed on Tuesday night as Kumaraswamy lost the trust vote held after days of political drama. A total of 99 MLAs voted in favour of the motion while 105 voted against it. A total of 20 MLAs were absent from the House at the time of division, reducing the strength to 205. The halfway mark was 103. Those who were missing from the House included 15 rebel MLAs (12 of the Congress and 3 of the JD-S), two Congress MLAs who got themselves admitted to hospitals in Mumbai and Bengaluru, two independents and the lone BSP MLA who was later expelled from the party for defying Mayawati’s diktat.
