Former FM Jaitley-inducted panel suggests to ban cryptocurrencies: All you need to know

Government panel suggests to ban cryptocurrencies. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Government-constituted panel recommends to ban all the private cryptocurrencies in India. According to the report, all of the cryptocurrencies which have surfaced so far don’t have underlying intrinsic value, attributes of a currency, fixed nominal value, also, there is no definitive medium of exchange.

New Delhi: People engaged in cryptocurrency trading and the exchanges facilitating the buying and selling in cryptocurrencies, and other related crypto-assets have faced a number of stern warnings from the Indian government, as well as, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Now, it seems that the cryptocurrency players may get another blow as the government is considering to put a ban on all cryptocurrencies.

Despite RBI's order in which the central bank directed that all the scheduled commercial banks should refrain the banking facilities to all people and entities involved in trading of bitcoin and other crypto-assets, several local crypto exchanges and a number a people are still involved in buying and selling of cryptocurrencies.

Cryptocurrencies ban recommendation

“As for private cryptocurrencies, given the risks associated with them and volatility in their prices, the group has recommended banning of the cryptocurrencies in India and imposing fines and penalties for carrying on of any activities connected with cryptocurrencies in India,” a government-instituted panel said in a report.

The suggestion to put a ban on all private cryptocurrencies comes at a time when global technology giant Facebook is planning to launch its own cryptocurrency libra. There have been several serious concern regarding the invariably growing usage and acceptance of non-sovereign cryptocurrencies by a number of people in India which are issued abroad.

Why the panel proposed to ban cryptocurrencies

According to the report, all of the cryptocurrencies which have surfaced so far don’t have underlying intrinsic value, attributes of a currency, fixed nominal value, also, there is no definitive medium of exchange.

“Since their inceptions, cryptocurrencies have demonstrated extreme fluctuations in their prices. Therefore, the committee is of clear view that the private cryptocurrencies should not be allowed. These cryptocurrencies cannot serve the purpose of a currency. The private cryptocurrencies are inconsistent with the essential functions of money/currency, hence private cryptocurrencies cannot replace fiat currencies,” the report noted.

The private cryptocurrencies in circulation have not been recognised as a legal tender in any jurisdiction, the committee hereby, recommends that all private cryptocurrencies, except any cryptocurrency issued by the government, should be banned in India, the report stated.

Fine and punishment

According to the conclusive recommendations by the committee, whoever involved, directly or indirectly, in mining, generating, holding, selling, dealing, transferring, disposing of or issuing cryptocurrency or any combination thereof with an intent to use it shall be punishable with fine or imprisonment or both. The committee has proposed to the imprisonment of up to 10 years and a monetary fine of up to Rs 25 crore on such cases.

Applaud for RBI’s move

The committee has endorsed the stand taken by the RBI to eliminate the interface of all the scheduled commercial banks and other institutions regulated by the RBI from cryptocurrencies. All exchanges, people, traders and other financial system participants should be prohibited from dealing with cryptocurrencies.

Other proposals & findings

“It may be possible to visualise some models of future official digital currencies but as of the date it is unclear whether there is a clear advantage in the context of India to come up with an official digital currency. Hence, the committee recommends that, if required, a group may be constituted by the Department of Economic Affairs, with the participation of the representatives of the RBI, MeitY and DFS for examination and development of an appropriate model of digital currency in India,” the report added.

In 2017, the government of China banned trading between local currency renminbi (RMB) and cryptocurrencies and also banned Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs). Before the ban, RMB made up 90 per cent of bitcoin trades worldwide following which, in under a year, the trades between RMB and bitcoin slipped to under 1 per cent of the world total, the report noted further.

The panel

Way back in 2017, Former Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley constituted a committee to study the issues related to virtual currencies and purpose of specific action to be taken in this matter. The committee of experts is headed by the Chairman Subhash Chandra Garg, Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), including other members Ajay Prakash Sawhney, Secretary, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), Ajay Tyagi, Chairman, Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and B.P. Kanungo, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India.
