What's next in Karnataka now that Congress-JD(S) government has fallen?

Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Congress-JD(S) lost the motion of confidence in a 99-105 vote Governor Vajubhai Valla accepted HD Kumaraswamy's resignation BJP, which is the single largest party, is poised to form the government

Bengaluru: The 14-month-old Congress-JD(S) coalition government collapsed after Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy-led government lost the trust vote in Karnataka Assembly on Tuesday. Kumaraswamy lost the motion of confidence in the Assembly after 99 MLAs voted in favour of his government while 105 voted against it.

Kumaraswamy tendered the resignation to Governor Vajubhai Valla and the same was accepted today. The Governor will now invite the leader of the single largest party - BJP's BS Yeddyurappa - to form the government.

The trust vote was necessitated after 16 rebel MLAs from Congress and JD(S) resigned and two independents withdrew support from the HDK government. An embattled coalition's generals fought hard to win back the rebels in a three-week-long ordeal but eventually failed to shore up numbers ahead of the impending trust vote.

On the day of the trust vote, Congress rebels defied a whip issued to them for attending and voting in favour of the government on Tuesday. However, ahead of the trust vote, the rebel MLAs were protected by an interim SC order, issued on July 17, which said they cannot be urged to attend the proceedings of the House. They now stand to face disqualification under the Anti-Defection Law, if Speaker KR Ramesh chooses to evoke the same. If the Speaker disqualifies the rebels, fresh by elections will be held on the constituencies held by them.

“15-16 of our MLAs violated the whip by abstaining from the house during the trust vote, thereby, it is a clear violation of Schedule 10 (of the Constitution) and attracts disqualification,” Congress' Siddaramaiah said.

A total of 21 MLAs - Congress-JDS (17), BSP (1), Independents (2) skipped the proceedings of the Assembly on Tuesday, reducing the effective strength of the House to 204. The BJP has 105 MLAs while Congress and JD(S) had 78 and 37 respectively in the 225-seater Vidhana Soudha before the resignations. However, after the resignations, BJP has emerged as the single largest party in Kartanaka.

“Their (rebel MLAs) resignations have not yet been accepted by the Speaker, after acceptance of resignations they have to decide whether to join BJP or not. In the present scenario, we have 105 MLAs, it is a majority for BJP, we will form a stable government,” BJP’s Jagadish Shettar said.

The leader of the single-largest party BJP (BS Yeddyurappa) will now be called by Governor Valla to form the government.Yeddyurappa will take an oath as the next chief minister of Karnataka after which he will be asked to prove his majority on the floor of the House.

However, the instability in Karnataka’s politics is far from over as both Siddharamiah and Kumaraswamy have warned that BJP could meet the same fate as that of the Congress-JD(S) coalition.
