Karnataka: Did Rahul Gandhi target Siddaramaiah for loss of power?

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi has taken a dig at leaders with "vested interests" within the party while targeting the BJP over loss of trust vote in Karnataka. Senior Congress leader Siddaramaiah is seen with Rahul Gandhi in this file photo.

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi has expressed his exasperation with his own party leaders after loss of power in Karnataka. Writing on Twitter soon after Karnataka HD Kumaraswamy government lost trust vote on Tuesday, Rahul Gandhi chose his words carefully: "vested interest" and "within" to identify the reasons for loss in Karnataka.

He wrote, "From its first day, the Congress-JDS alliance in Karnataka was a target for vested interests, both within & outside, who saw the alliance as a threat and an obstacle in their path to power. Their greed won today. Democracy, honesty and the people of Karnataka lost."

This is in sync with what Rahul Gandhi said in his resignation letter after the Lok Sabha election defeat. "It is a habit in India that the powerful cling to power, No one sacrifices power. But we will not defeat our opponents without sacrificing the desire for power and fighting a deeper ideological battle," said Rahul Gandhi.

Now consider what happened in Karnataka and the role of Siddaramaiah in the events leading to loss of power for the Congress in one more state.

Incompatible marriage

Deve Gowda, the Janata Dal (Secular) patron, and his son HD Kumaraswamy accused Siddaramaiah of trying to de-stabilise the coalition government. Congress leader DK Sivakumar, who emerged as the troubleshooter for the party, too blamed Siddaramaiah for the political crisis that ended in the fall of Kumaraswamy government.

Dissension was in the Congress, as Rahul Gandhi admitted in his tweet, from the first day of Congress-JDS alliance. The Congress was split in factions with Siddaramaiah leading the dominant group. This faction complained that alliance with JDS would finish the party in the old Mysore region, a stronghold of Siddaramaiah.

On the other hand, DK Sivakumar and central leadership loyalists worked hard to keep the alliance alive though acknowledging in the internal party meetings that the core vote banks of the Congress and the JDS are not compatible. The support base on the ground cannot work together, the faction conceded.

Lok Sabha rout and 2 meetings with Rahul Gandhi

In this backdrop came the Lok Sabha election rout. The Congress and the JDS got one seat each. The two factions blamed one another for the loss. Roshan Baig, the senior Congress leader in Karnataka, publicly blamed Siddaramaiah for the election loss. He was suspended. Dissension grew further.

Two meetings took place in Delhi after the Lok Sabha election loss - with Rahul Gandhi in June. First, Deve Gowda complained about the manner in which Siddaramaiah was trying to dictate terms to the government. Besides being the Congress legislative party leader in the house, Siddaramaiah was the chairman of the co-ordination committee of the Congress-JDS alliance.

Deve Gowda told Rahul Gandhi that Siddaramaiah and his supporters in the Congress were creating hurdles for HD Kumaraswamy in running the government. The JDS veteran warned Rahul Gandhi that unless the Congress controls its rebel leaders and reined in Siddaramaiah, it would be difficult to run the coalition government.

The second meeting was between Siddaramaiah and Rahul Gandhi. What transpired between the two leaders is not fully known. But the fact that Rahul Gandhi kept Siddaramaiah waiting for two days was enough to indicate that he was unhappy with him. Within hours of the meeting, Karnataka Congress committee was dissolved.

In two weeks' time, resignations of the rebel MLAs had started coming. Two MLAs put in their papers on July 1. By July 6, the consolidated number was 13 - 10 from the Congress and three JDS. They all submitted their resignation letters to Speaker Ramesh Kumar's office. Kumaraswamy government's countdown had begun.

The third meeting

Meanwhile, another meeting took place. This was in Bengaluru - between Deve Gowda and DK Sivakumar, who reportedly told the JDS leader that Siddaramaiah was behind the rebellion.

"I know Siddaramaiah is behind the political turmoil in the state. Those who had resigned are his supporters," Deve Gowda announced on July 7.

Sivakumar is believed to have told Deve Gowda that the only way to save the Congress-JDS coalition and government was to make Siddaramaiah Karnataka chief minister. Deve Gowda reportedly did not agree to the suggestion. Kumaraswamy government's downfall was not certain.

The final number of rebel MLAs went up to 18 and the Kumaraswamy government lost trust vote on Tuesday.

A dashed hope

Siddaramaiah went into the 2018 Karnataka Assembly election believing he would be the first Congress chief minister in 35 years to return to power in the state. Results placed the Congress at second position after the BJP, which had failed to secure majority. Siddaramaiah, insiders said, sensed a chance to become chief minister.

Deve Gowda, the Janata Dal (Secular) patron, and his son HD Kumaraswamy had repeatedly said they would not ally with the BJP. Kumaraswamy had done that in 2006 and was publicly reprimanded by Gowda senior for that. They were not yet cozying up to the Congress for a power-sharing formula but Siddaramaiah believed they would sooner than later.

The central leadership of the Congress, then under Rahul Gandhi, suspecting that the BJP under Amit Shah and BS Yeddyurappa in Karnataka might engineer defection in its ranks, announced unilateral support to a JDS government. The JDS had got less than half seats as Congress - 37 to 78.

Siddaramaiah's hopes were dashed - for the second time almost for the same reasons - coalition and HD Kumaraswamy.

And a tense past

In 2004, the Congress and JDS had joined hands to keep the BJP - then also the single largest party - to out of power.

Siddaramaiah was then with the JDS and expected Deve Gowda to propose his name as the chief ministerial candidate. Instead, he agreed to a formula that had N Dharam Singh as the chief minister and Siddaramaiah as the deputy chief minister.

The coalition broke away in 2006, when the JDS joined hands with the BJP. Siddaramaiah had long been the second-most powerful leader in the JDS. But Deve Gowda pampered Kumaraswamy so much that he dictated terms and became the chief minister.

Siddaramaiah had sensed that he would not become the chief minister if he stayed with the JDS. He quit, floated a new party and merged it with the Congress in 2006. He became the chief minister in 2013 when the Congress was voted to power.
