Maha Congress chief Balasaheb Thorat compares BJP to demon 'Bakasur', calls party power-hungry

BJP flag

Key Highlights Maharashtra Congress President Balasaheb Thorat accused the BJP of trying to destabilise the Congress governments in other states He called the BJP a power-hungry party adding that he was unable to understand whether it was a party or Bakasur Congress' Digvijaya Singh also accused the BJP of buying MLAs claiming that the party had made a lot of money during demonetisation

Bhopal: Maharashtra Congress president Balasaheb Thorat on Wednesday compared BJP with 'Bakasur', a mythological demon in Mahabharata known for his appetite. Thorat accused the BJP of trying to destabilise the Congress governments in other states.

Talking to ANI, Thorat called the BJP a power-hungry party adding that he was unable to understand whether it is a party or Bakasur.

Thorat’s statement comes after the Congress-JD(S) coalition government in Karnataka lost the trust vote leading to the collapse of the one-year-old coalition government. The coalition got only 99 votes compared to the BJP’s 105 votes.

Earlier, Gopal Bhargava, Madhya Pradesh Leader of Opposition and BJP leader said in the state Assembly that the Kamal Nath government would fall in 24 hours if he gets a signal from the "number 1 and number 2" of the saffron party.

Bhargava’s statement came after the coalition government in Karnataka was toppled by the BJP.

Reacting to Bhargava’s statement, Kamal Nath said that the Congress MLAs in the state were not for sale adding that he was ready for a floor test whenever the BJP asks for it.

Another senior Congress leader, Digvijaya Singh also accused the BJP of buying MLAs claiming that the party had made a lot of money during demonetisation.

In Madhya Pradesh, the Congress-led coalition has 121 seats out of a total 230 with support from Bahujan Samaj Party, Samajwadi Party and four independent candidates. While the halfway mark is 115, the Congress tally is set to increase as two BJP MLAs, Narayan Tripathi and Sharad Kol, decided to join the grand old party.

The duo had voted in favour of the Congress government during voting on the criminal law amendment bill.

However, the two MLAs have not resigned from the saffron party yet.

After the downfall of the Karnataka government, opposition parties and leaders came down heavily on the BJP accusing the ruling party at the Centre of indulging in "brazen horse-trading" and "misusing power".

While BSP supremo Mayawati said the day will go down in the history of democracy as a "black chapter", former prime minister HD Deve Gowda said that in his entire political career he had never seen anything like this.

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi said that the Congress-JDS alliance in Karnataka was a target for vested interests, both within and outside, adding that “their greed won today”.

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra said that a time will come when the BJP will discover that everything cannot be bought, everyone cannot be bullied and every lie is eventually exposed.
