Boris Johnson cabinet: No love for India, but space for Indians

Indians will rejoice at the ethnicity of some of the ministers Boris Johnson has appointed in his cabinet. Priti Patel, Alok Sharma and Rishi Sunak -- all Indian origin -- are part of the new team Johnson has put in place after becoming the prime minister of United Kingdom.

And in the spirit of neighbourly love if we spread our arms wide, we can also welcome Sajid Javid, of Pakistani origin.

Incidentally Theresa May had four Indian-origin lawmakers in her team -- Alok Sharma, Rishi Sunak, Suella Braverman (nee Fernandes) and Shailesh Vara.

Considering his staunch anti-European Union stance and hard Conservative politics it is surprising that he has such a multi-ethnic cabinet. In the new cabinet -- 32 members, including the prime minister, four are from an ethnic minority background.

Could his genes be a reason that Boris Johnson has co-opted ethnic minorities in his team? His paternal great-grandfather was a Muslim of Circassian-Turkish descent; his maternal great-grandfather was a Russian Jew, who had an Orthodox rabbi as a forefather.

Johnson has famously called himself a one-man melting plot.

Then there is the Indian connection, though not directly. Johnson’s second wife Marina Wheeler’s mother Dip Singh was a Sikh. Dip Singh, by the way was earlier married to Khushwant Singh’s brother. Johnson and Wheeler had made a number of trips to India, nurturing her Indian origins.

Reward for cronies

Newly appointed Britain's Home Secretary Priti Patel is seen outside Downing Street in London | Photo from REUTERS

True to his reputation, Boris Johnson has sprung a few surprises. The biggest perhaps is the appointment of Priti Patel as home secretary. Patel is virtually the No. 3 in the cabinet after Johnson and Sajid Javid, who has been appointed as the chancellor of exchequer.

As home secretary Priti Patel’s responsibilities include national security, fighting terrorism and tackling immigration among others.

I will do everything in my power to keep our country safe, our people secure and also to fight the scourge of crime that we see on our streets. I look forward to the challenges that now lie ahead, the 47-year-old said.

Patel’s appointment to such a plum job is seen as a remarkable comeback from the political exile she was packed off to just two years ago. In November 2017, she was forced to resign after it emerged that she met Israeli politicians without the knowledge of the government.

As International Development Secretary Alok Sharma, a chartered accountant by training, will hopefully not cut UK’s aid budget. Born in Agra, Sharma’s parents moved to England in the early 1970s.

Sharma is new to the development world. Earlier he was housing and employment minister.

Rishi Sunak is married to Infosys co-founder NRNarayana Murthy daughter Akshata. With a background in finance, he joined the Theresa May cabinet as an under-secretary of state in the housing ministry. Now as chief secretary to the treasury he will be able to attend cabinet meetings.

Brexit the Boris way

So has there been any dilution of Boris Johnson’s Weltanschauung? Though Indians would love to believe that the new UK premier’s heart overflows with love for India and it was this emotion that made him choose Indian-origin cabinet mates, that sadly is not true.

A pro-Brexit demonstator is seen outside Houses of Parliament in London | File photo from REUTERS

It is cold political calculations that decided who joined Johnson’s cabinet and who were culled. The three Indian-origin ministers in Boris Johnson’s cabinet -- Priti Patel, Alok Sharma and Rishi Sunak -- have always been pro-Brexit. In the tussle for Conservative Party leadership, all three backed Johnson against Jeremy Hunt.

(Minorities as right wingers is not a new phenomenon. Think of Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice in the US. Or our very own Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi and Shahnawaz Hussain.)

Take Priti Patel for instance: A Conservative ultra, she’s for a Brexit at all costs, backs tax cuts and till a couple of years back supported the death penalty.

When it comes to Brexit, she together with Dominic Raab, the new foreign secretary and de facto deputy prime minister, will watch Johnson’s back.

Johnson’s appointment of new ministers is seen in British political circles as the biggest ever purge of a cabinet. Seventeen of the 30 incumbents in Theresa May’s cabinet were either dropped or resigned.

Behind the clownish facade is a sharp mind. Johnson has packed his cabinet with colleagues who would push his no deal Brexit. Not just push but torpedo it if necessary.
