HC orders inspection of buildings in Kodaikanal

Directs officials to examine fresh representations individually and pass orders

MADURAI

The Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court on Thursday ordered status quo in a batch of cases pertaining to building violations in Kodaikanal. With the revised Master Plan for Kodaikanal municipality having been approved, the court directed the State to carry out inspections to ascertain if buildings were in consonance with the new plan.

Following a crackdown on buildings without plan approval in the hill station, the High Court Bench had earlier directed a ‘lock and seal’ procedure be followed by Kodaikanal municipality. A total of 304 buildings, which were in violation of plan approval, were locked and sealed by the municipality. The petitioners had sought a relief from the exercise.

Delivering the verdict in a batch of cases, a Division Bench of Justices N. Kirubakaran and G. R. Swaminathan directed the parties involved to make fresh representations to the Housing and Urban Development department for consideration, which should be examined individually by the department. The court warned the authorities against passing a stereotypical order.

Each representation should be considered and separate orders should be passed. It should be ascertained if the buildings were in accordance with the revised Master Plan and in conformity with planning norms. Spot and periodical inspections had to be carried out in this regard, the court said.

The court added that if the officials failed to ascertain whether the buildings were in conformity with the plan, they would have to face disciplinary action. The court fixed a separate outer time limit in each of the cases to carry out the exercise. If there were violations, the buildings could not be demanded to be kept intact, the court said.

Advocate T.S. Mohamed Mohideen, standing counsel for Kodaikanal municipality, had submitted that violations pertained to unauthorised construction, non-compliance of earlier Master Plan norms and use of residential buildings for commercial purposes.

Earlier, the court in an interim relief exempted educational institutions, residential buildings, government buildings, hospitals, banks, small shops like bakeries, groceries and small eateries from the lock and seal procedure. However, with respect to other buildings, including religious establishments, the procedure had to be followed, the court said.
