Here’s How Monsoon Fury Swamped Mumbai Fourteen Years Ago

Rescue operations after the heavy rains in Mumbai on July 26, 2005. (Deepak Salvi / Mumbai Mirror / BCCL)

The long term average monsoon rainfall across India from June 1 to September 30 is 887.5 mm. On July 26, 2005, Mumbai received 944 mm rainfall in a single day! The intensity of rain was so high that the financial capital of India received more rains on a single day than what many parts of the country receive in an entire year. The floods killed over 1000 people, and the whole city came to a standstill.

Fourteen years on, and similar extremes threaten many parts of India. Understanding the vagaries of weather and responding well in time remains a formidable challenge.

Experts say the processes that led to the torrential downpour on July 26, 2005, are fairly common during every monsoon season.

“A low-pressure area located over the north Bay of Bengal below Bangladesh coast can always pose a danger. Depending on the strength, it pulls all the winds from the Arabian sea towards the Bay of Bengal. The resultant westerly winds activate an off-shore trough along the west coast which creates an upper-level cyclonic circulation. The moisture incursion is enhanced due to the upper-level cyclonic circulation leading to the formation of rain-bearing clouds. This is the same dynamics behind most of the heavy rain spell over Mumbai,” explains Prof. Sridhar Balasubramanian, Associate Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Bombay.

LBS Marg, Kurla after heavy rains in Mumbai on July 26, 2005. (Pal Pillai/ MM, BCCL, MUMBAI)

Mumbai does witness a few spells of extremely heavy rainfall every year. Heavy rain of over 200 mm once or twice a year is fairly common for Mumbaikars. However, what transpired in 2005 was an unfortunate blend of unfavourable weather systems within a short time.

So, what happened on 26/7 of 2005?

Advertisement “Just before July 26, 2005, the low-pressure intensified into a well-marked low and strengthened the westerly winds which brought in a lot of moisture from the Arabian sea. Meanwhile, a strong upper-level circulation formed near Mumbai and led to the convergence of moisture and formation of thick clouds”, says Prof. Sridhar.

Therefore, while the strong upper-level circulation ensured that maximum cloud concentrate over Mumbai, the strong westerly winds kept feeding more moisture from the Arabian sea. The system was active for almost 6-8 hours, causing intense rainfall for a sustained period. Santacruz recorded over 600 mm of rainfall between 8 am and 8 pm on that fateful day.

Can’t we predict such episodes in advance?

People stranded after heavy rains in Mumbai on July 26, 2005. (Palashranjan Bhaumik / TOI, BCCL, MUMBAI)

The weather forecasting has improved significantly since 2005. However, even today, we cannot predict such heavy rainfall episodes over small locality in time. Most models, across the globe, forecast at spatial resolutions of around 10-20 km. Therefore, it is tough to predict whether a small locality like Santacruz or BKC will receive hefty rains.

“We are yet to achieve accurate predictions of the exact location of moisture convergence. The dynamics governing such small scale weather patterns are yet to be deciphered. And therefore, at this point, our scientific and computational abilities fall short”, clarifies Prof. Sridhar.

With the rapidly changing climate, studies have shown that the probability of such extreme events will increase in the future. So, the scientific community warns that it is not a matter of ‘if’ it happens in the future, but just a matter of ‘when’. If there is one thing to be learnt from the 2005 floods, it is that the most resilient city is the one that is ready to face the worst possible hazard.
