Mumbai: NCP's Sachin Ahir clears Worli for Aaditya Thackeray

Clearing the decks for Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Thackeray to contest the state polls from Worli, the man who would have been his main challenger in the constituency, NCP's Sachin Ahir, joined the Shiv Sena on Thursday.

If he contests the elections later this year, Aaditya, the elder son of Shiv Sena president Uddhav Thackeray, who is being pitched as his party's chief ministerial face, will be the first from the Thackeray clan to seek public office.

Ahir, until recently the Nationalist Congress Party's Mumbai chief, will fight the upcoming assembly elections from Byculla constituency.

The nephew of gangster-turned-politician Arun Gawli aka 'Daddy,' Ahir, a three-term MLA and a former minister of state, controlled the Rashtriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh – the only recognised union of workers from now-defunct textile mills.

Shiv Sena sources said Aaditya, 29, who has launched a state-wide 'Jan Ashirwad Yatra' in his soft launch as the Sena's chief ministerial nominee, was eyeing the Worli, Mahim and Sewri seats for the assembly contest.

A Sena leader said Ahir's entry into the party indicated that Aaditya would fight from Worli, which has a strong Marathi working class population and which Ahir once represented.

In 2014, Sena's Sunil Shinde defeated Ahir by over 23,000 votes. Before Ahir switched camps, Shinde claimed he was unaware of the development and said he (Shinde) was sure to remain the legislator from Worli.

Speaking to the media during Ahir's formal entry into the Sena, Aaditya said they had been discussing this for days. "We may have been in different parties, but shared the same dreams for Maharashtra," he added.

‘Have To Win By Big Margin’ Our opponents have joined us after being convinced about the efficacy of our leadership. There is no hindrance for our party now. If Aaditya Thackeray contests from the seat [Worli], our responsibility will increase. We will have to ensure a thumping victory with a massive margin. There is a demand from all constituencies across Maharashtra for him to contest the state polls, and if he fights from Worli, we will have to ensure a record margin of victory. –Arvind Bhosale, Shiv Sena spokesperson, Worli resident

Ahir said he was joining the Sena to "fulfil the dreams of (late Shiv Sena chief) Balasaheb (Thackeray)," and added that he would "work not to break the NCP but expand the presence of the Shiv Sena." He said it was "a moment of joy and also sorrow" to join the Sena after quitting the NCP.

"A decision on who will contest will be taken by Uddhavji," said Ahir, when asked whether he would contest from Byculla.

On questions about Aaditya contesting from Worli, Uddhav said "there was some time for the polls. The code of conduct is yet to be declared."

However, NCP spokesperson and former minister Nawab Malik, who was seen as Ahir's rival in the city unit of NCP, said Ahir had jumped ship as "he did not have faith in his ability to get elected" and called this "breach of faith."

Ahir, who is known for his dahi handi celebrations at Worli, was elected to the state assembly from Sewri in 1999, becoming the only NCP legislator from Mumbai, and was returned to the assembly in 2004 from the same seat, and later from Worli in 2009.

He was a bodyguard of textile magnate Sunit Khatau, who was killed in 1994, allegedly by members of the Amar Naik gang.

In 2004, Ahir, then with the NCP, contested from the Mumbai South Central Lok Sabha constituency against then Shiv Sena MP Mohan Rawle, but lost narrowly after his uncle Arun Gawli, fought as a nominee of his Akhil Bharatiya Sena.

Ahir will be fielded from Byculla, which is represented by Waris Pathan of the All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM). In 2014, Gawli's daughter, Geeta, had contested as a ABS candidate with the Shiv Sena's support.
