State sorry over IG’s shifting row, EC not impressed

editorial@tribune.com

Jupinderjit Singh

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, July 25

The Election Commission of India (ECI) has in a communication to the Punjab Government expressed displeasure at its “deliberate obfuscation” on shifting of IG Kunwar Vijay Pratap Singh from a Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the Behbal Kalan and Kotkapura firing incidents.

Senior Deputy Election Commissioner Dr Sandeep Saxena has, in a letter to the Punjab Chief Secretary Karan Avtar Singh, said the Election Commission accepted the apology of the state on the fiasco regarding implementing the commission’s orders during the run up to the Lok Sabha elections, but it wanted to put on record its displeasure at the whole issue.

The letter said the commission had asked the state government to shift the IG from the said SIT and not give him any election-related duty. The commission ordered this after a delegation of the Shiromani Akali Dal led by MP Naresh Gujral. However, the state government posted him out of the Organised Crime Control Unit, the IG kept working with the SIT.

Dr Saxena said though the Punjab Government had apologised for the issue, the commission would like to say that the whole issue was handled in a casual and irresponsible manner. The commission also warned the government through the Chief Secretary that no such lapse should happen in future.

Earlier on April 8, the IG was reportedly shifted out of the SIT following EC orders. The orders were issued after Akali Dal Rajya Sabha MP Naresh Gujral filed a complaint against the IPS officer on March 22.

The officer had allegedly given a “politically motivated” statement to a television channel on March 18 and 19, regarding the investigation in the police firing incidents being probed by the SIT. “The officer gave a politically motivated interview…It has been observed that the contents of the interview have political connotations and have the potential to show certain political leaders in poor light,” says the letter sent by Secretary, ECI, to Punjab Chief Secretary.

‘Issue handled in casual manner’
