Prabhadevi man who ordered liquor online cheated by fraudsters

engines

Mumbai

The fake number posted by fraudsters (top); the wine shop’s warning

Cyber fraudsters have struck wine shops and their buyers in the city again.Last December, Mirror had reported that fraudsters were replacing the contact details of wine shops in online search, and asking tipplers, who called these numbers for home deliveries, to transfer money directly to them via e-wallets.A Prabhadevi-based man was similarly cheated on Monday night when he ordered a bottle of liquor online. But wine-shop owners have begun to fight back, and are now posting cautionary messages on web search engines, alerting customers to the fraud.Narrating how he was cheated on Monday, the latest victim, who did not wish to be named, told Mirror, "It was the first time I had ordered liquor online. I searched for a liquor shop close to my residence on a search engine, and found the shop closest to my home, Wimpy Wines. A picture mentioning a mobile number was also beside the address. I called the number and the person who answered asked me to place an order and told me to pay through an e-wallet first, after which he said the delivery would be made. I made a payment of Rs 600 and waited for a while, but no delivery was made to my residence. I the same number again to check, and the person asked me to deposit more money. But when I refused to pay, he disconnected the call."Suspicious, I did a search, this time for "Wimpy Wines", and browsed the images tab. That's when I saw a notice that cautioned customers not to call that number for home deliveries. I made a complaint to thepolice on Tuesday through a tweet to inform them about the fraud."A senior police officer said, "The complainant has been advised to file an official complaint at the nearest police station."When Mirror contacted Wimpy Wines, manager Surya Jaiswal, said, "Several wine shops in the city are being targeted. Fraudsters have posted pictures on search engines mentioning their numbers, and when a customer carries out a search on the web, the contact numbers posted by these shows, which the customers call, and fall prey to the cheats. Fifteen days ago, I received a similar complaint from a customer. We do not make home deliveries, or accept advance payments."Deepak Jani, a committee member of the Wine Dealers' Association, said, "I have a shop in Mumbai Central, and on at least three separate occasions, fraudsters have attempted to target my business too. I advise that as a precautionary measure, liquor consumers must avoid making advance payment over the phone; all payments must be done on delivery. Also, since wine shop owners do not make home deliveries, one should not fall prey to fraudsters offering liquor at home."
