Congress ready for UP battle, Rahul signals to SP-BSP

NEW DELHI/AMETHI: In fielding older sister Priyanka Gandhi Vadra as party general secretary in charge of eastern UP, Congress president Rahul Gandhi sent out a strong signal to SP-BSP that while he remains open to talks, Congress is throwing its weight into fighting the UP battle.Elbowed out of an alliance between SP and BSP, in which BSP chief Mayawati and SP chief Akhilesh Yadav said they will concede only two “family” seats to Congress, Rahul seemed to hit back, even as he couched his comments by saying he has no malice for the two parties, saying the party intends to play on the front foot in UP.In his parliamentary constituency Amethi, where he is on a two-day tour, Rahul said, “Listen to me carefully, and understand this well that I have made Priyanka general secretary of UP. Now, Congress will work to have its own CM. With a government at Centre soon, we will fight with all our strength in UP.”The comments were significant as he made it clear that he was “invested” in the decision to pitch Priyanka into national politics at a time when a resurgent Congress, fresh from victories in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh, does not want to be out of the picture in UP. Seeking to reassure voters that Priyanka will not be a passing fad and Congress has stakes in UP, he said her appointment and that of Lok Sabha MP Jyotiraditya Scindia, was not a temporary measure.“I am not sending Priyanka for just two months. She and Jytotiraditya are being sent for a big mission. They will take Uttar Pradesh forward following the Congress’ ideology,” Rahul said.While skirting questions whether Priyanka will contest the Lok Sabha polls just yet and clarifying the decision would be hers to make, Rahul emphasised his happiness over his sister formally becoming a political colleague. He referred to Priyanka as “capable and ‘karmath’ (dedicated and hardworking), and said,“Meri behen, jo bahut capable aur karmath hai, woh ab mere saath kaam karegi. Mujhe personally bahut khushi ho rahi hai yeh batate hue. (My sister, who is so hardworking and capable, will work with me now. It’s a matter of great happiness that I am sharing this).”
