Love Island’s Danny Williams calls police after racist death threats from sick trolls

LOVE Island’s Danny Williams has had to call police after sick trolls made racist death threats.

He says the abuse has been the “worst you can imagine” and was forced to get cops involved when they sent messages saying they were going to kill him.

5 Love Island’s Danny Williams has had to call police after sick trolls made racist death threats Credit: Rex Features

Danny said: “I’ve had death threats, racism, people threatening to come round to my house and hurt my family.

“As worse as you can imagine, I’ve had it all. And it’s still happening today. Daily.

“When it’s racist and it’s threats and you have to get the police involved that’s next level. And it got to that extent.

“I'm going to bed at night I go on my phone like everybody else does, and you see some of the people saying they're going to come and kill me or, 'You're a horrible sick f' and whatever.”

5 Danny and scientist Yewande were coupled up before he dumped her for Arabella Credit: Rex Features

He added: “Everyone’s entitled to their opinions, but there’s never an excuse for that kind of stuff. It’s horrible.”

Danny sparked controversy when he dumped Yewande Biala for Arabella Chi.

He reckons he gets the abuse because he promised the Irish scientist his “head wouldn’t be turned”.

Danny told Fubar Radio: “I know that in myself I didn’t do anything particularly bad when I was on the show so I’m not going to sit there and feel guilty.

“The thing that annoys me is that my family gets upset. Especially when I was in the villa, they had a tough time dealing with all the abuse.

5 Danny sparked controversy when he dumped Yewande Biala for Arabella Chi Credit: Rex Features

5 Danny says he is now looking for properties with girlfriend Jourdan Riane who he left the ITV2 show with Credit: Rex Features

“People I think people think I’m a robot but I read these messages my family read these messages. But before I go to bed at night I read these messages.

“When I’m in public there’s never any hate – people ask for pictures, they’re please but behind a keyboard and Instagram.”

Danny says he is now looking for properties with girlfriend Jourdan Riane who he left the ITV2 show with.

We've a special code for Sun readers to use to get 10% off everything in the official Love Island shop - from personalised water bottles, suitcases and wash-bags to Love Burst make-up. Visit loveislandshop.co.uk and use code SUN10 at checkout. It's valid until midnight on Mon 5 August, excludes postage charges and can't be used along with any other offers.

5
