Konkan, Mumbai put on alert as many places get over 100mm rain

Read also:

The city is expecting intermittent heavy showers all through the night. We request commuters to not venture in water logged areas and also request you all to maintain distance from the sea. Please tweet to us or call on 100 in any emergency/need of help. Take care #MonsoonSafety — Mumbai Police (@MumbaiPolice) July 26, 2019

PUNE/MUMBAI: Rains made a big comeback in the state, with more than eight locations outside Mumbai recording a triple-digit millimetre count. India Meteorological Department IMD ) officials said the Konkan region was likely to be one of the wettest regions in the country during the next 24 hours as rainfall activity has increased significantly.Highways adjoining cities like Mumbai, Dahanu, Alibaug and Ratnagiri have been put on a heavy rain alert Mumbai, Airoli and Navi Mumbai witnessed a sustained downpour on Friday, with quite a few places recording over 100mm rainfall between 8am and 8pm. Mumbai police tweeted to caution citizens against venturing into water-logged areas or places near the sea. Roads were flooded in Bandra, Andheri, Vidyavihar, Chembur, Airoli, and Nerul. As many as 17 flights were diverted at the domestic airport till 10pm. Modak Sagar became the third lake, after Powai and Tansa, to overflow. According to IMD 's Regional Meteorological Centre, Mumbai, routes closer to Mumbai and adjoining locations like Pune and Nashik could experience heavy rains till Saturday, especially on the highways that are closer to Mumbai, Alibaug, Ratnagiri and Vengurla."The rainfall intensity may reduce as one moves away from the highways near the coast and towards the inland highways," an official said. Anupam Kashyapi, head of weather, IMD Pune, told TOI that fairly widespread to widespread rainfall with isolated heavy to very heavy falls are likely over Vidarbha, the ghat areas of Madhya Maharashtra and Konkan in the next three days. He said by Saturday morning, parts of Maharashtra, especially Konkan, could be among the wettest spots in the country.
