Airtel vs Vodafone vs Reliance Jio vs BSNL: Top one-year mobile phone prepaid recharge plans compared for you

Airtel, Jio, Vodafone, BSNL top yearly plans compared

The telecom sector has seen a massive boost to tariffs and plans since Reliance Jio came into play a few years back. With a number of plans and offers, telecom majors like Bharti Airtel, Vodafone, BSNL, and Reliance Jio have been tearing up the telecom bandwidth with their unlimited plans, zero FUP regulations, and unlimited data for their subscriber base. Recently, in a bid to strengthen the telecom tariff market once more, Bharti Airtel had come out with a new 365-day validity plan which was priced at Rs. 1,699. The latest Airtel recharge plan arrived in the market with benefits like unlimited calls with zero FUP, daily data, and SMS benefits for one year. Before that, Vodafone had also announced that they will be not charging any SMS charges for special days like Diwali, Holi, New Year and such in a bid to make their offers more attractive to their existing and potential subscriber base.

The latest 365-day plan is slated to make the fight tougher between telecom majors Vodafone, Airtel, BSNL, and Reliance Jio. So, to make it easier for you, we bring you all the 365-day long term plans from the telecom operators.

Airtel vs Vodafone vs Reliance Jio vs BSNL: Top 365-day plans compared

BSNL One Year plan

The BSNL's one-year validity plan has been priced at Rs. 1,312 plan with unlimited local, roaming, and STD calls (except Mumbai and Delhi). The plan also comes with 5GB of data and 1,000 SMS messages. There is no daily data in this plan.

There are other BSNL yearly plans which include Rs. 1,699 and Rs. 2,099 recharge plans and comes with a validity of 365 days. The Rs. 1,699 plan from BSNL provides data benefits of 2GB of daily data with FUP, after which speed will be reduced to 80kbps.

The BSNL's Rs. 2,099 one year plan provides benefits of 4GB of daily data with FUP, after which speed will be reduced to 80kbps. Both of these long-term plans provide unlimited voice calling to any network in India, and 100 SMS messages per day and free personalised ringtone for 365 days.

Vodafone One-Year plan

Vodafone's one-year plan has been priced at Rs. 1,499 plan with unlimited local, roaming, and STD calls (no FUP). Also comes with 1GB of daily data and 100 SMS messages daily.

Bharti Airtel One-Year plan

The recently launched plan has been priced at Rs. 1,699. The plan benefits include unlimited calling facility which includes roaming, local, and STD calls. Airtel has not imposed any FUP regulations on calls. Other benefits include 1GB of daily data and 100 SMS messages daily, which total up to 36,500 free messages in a year.

Other extended benefits include access to Airtel TV premium content which includes Prime subscription and Netflix subscription on their devices.

Reliance Jio One-Year plan

The 365-day validity plan from Reliance Jio is also priced at Rs. 1,699, similar to Bharti Airtel's one year offer. Other benefits include 1.5GB of daily data and 100 SMS messages daily.

Other extended benefits include a complimentary subscription to Jio apps.
