Mumbai Rains Update: Heavy Mumbai rains of 219 mm submerge city, more showers coming up

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

Updated on July 28 2019, 11:08 AM: Mumbaikars to see marginal relief from heavy Mumbai Rains in next 24 hours

Mumbai rains have reduced in the last 24 hours and Santa Cruz Observatory has recorded only 28 mm of rains. Meanwhile, 44.2 mm of rains have been recorded in Colaba.

Now, the Monsoon surge has reduced slightly, but on and off rain and thundershower activities would continue, mainly in the suburbs of Mumbai for the next 24 hours. Moreover, rains may not be a continuous affair and short breaks are expected in between.

By tomorrow, the Monsoon rains will pick up the pace once again and heavy showers may return, thus leading to water-logging in many low-lying areas. However, the intensity may not be as severe as it was the day before yesterday.

Updated on July 27 2019, 9:55 AM: Hefty Mumbai rains of 219 mm submerge city, more showers coming up

The city of Mumbai has had it all in the last 15-18 hours. There have been flight diversions, waterlogging in many parts of the city, delayed and suspended local trains in areas and massive traffic jams.

Moreover, rainfall activity over Mumbai had been apocalyptic during the night with very hefty showers. Thunderstorm and lightning also accompanied these very intense rains.

Talking about rainfall figures, Santa Cruz observatory in a span of 24 hours between 8.30 am yesterday and 8.30 am today, recorded 219 mm of rains. Moreover, rains in 12 hours have been very intense with the city recording 169 mm of rainfall.

The morning has also begun on a rainy note for the city of Mumbai and with short breaks in between, rainfall has been heavy. Moreover, talking about today's rainfall status, you can expect some rains of varied intensity in the city of Mumbai.

Moreover, the possibility of heavy Mumbai Rains in many areas cannot be ruled out as well. The intensity may not be as high as yesterday but rains will still remain heavy.

Mumbai rains may not be a continuous affair and there are expected to be short breaks in between. Waterlogging will persist today due to rains likely in many areas.
