Teachers’ groups buckle up, start campaigning for DUTA elections

Polling, counting of votes to be held on August 29

Various teachers’ groups have started campaigning for elections to the Delhi University Teachers’ Association (DUTA), which will be held in late August.

Candidates will be fighting for various posts of the DUTA executive panel, including president and members, which places teachers’ issues in front of the administration and the government.

Among the groups that have thrown their hat in the ring are the Democratic Teachers’ Front (DTF), which is currently in power; the National Democratic Teachers’ Front (NDTF) and the Academics for Action and Development (AAD).

The DTF, which has won the last four elections consecutively has fielded current president Rajib Ray for the post again. DTF said it has tirelessly organised protests, petitions and fought for the rights of teachers. In a statement, it highlighted its efforts to resist government moves to “nudge universities and colleges towards the market” such as a proposal to “generate 30% of expenditure through commercial activities”, and the autonomous college scheme which would turn colleges into “commercial entities”. It also highlighted campaigns to restore the 200-point reservation roster, and taking up of pension-related issues of teachers and employees.

The DTF’s primary contender, the NDTF, has fielded former executive and academic council member A.K. Bhagi, from the Chemistry Department at Dayal Singh College. In a statement, the group highlighted its efforts to fight for teachers’ rights by negotiating with the administration and agitating when required. Given that the present government at the Centre has a favourable attitude towards teachers’ issues, , it is critical to give rest to Left-affiliated groups that have taken recourse in protests, going to court and other routes that have kept teachers from working over the last several years, it said.

The AAD has fielded Anju Jain from the Department of Commerce at Shyam Prasad Mukherji College. She called for an “overhaul” of the educational landscape to motivate teachers to work.

The election will take place on August 29, with votes being counted on the same day.
