Article 35A: Everything you need to know about the much-debated provision for J&K

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The BJP has promised to do away with Article 35A Mehbooba Mufti said that tinkering with Article 35A is like playing with explosives Article 35A was added to the Constitution by a President order in 1954

The Union Government on Monday revoked Article 370 of the Indian Constitution that granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir, by way of a presidential order. The government also introduced the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill in the Rajya Sabha which proposes to divide the state into two Union Territories: Ladakh without a legislature and Jammu-Kashmir with a legislature.

The development came amid a fierce debate on the Article 35A of the Indian Constitution. The provision empowers the Jammu and Kashmir state’s legislature to define “permanent resident” of the state. Ever since the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led government came to power at the Centre, it has been calling for the abrogation of the provision.

What is Article 35A and how did it come about?

The much-debated Article 35A provides the Jammu and Kashmir Legislature the power to define and decide who qualifies as the permanent residents of the state and to confer upon them special rights and privileges in regard to employment, purchasing immovable property in the state, scholarships and other forms of aid and welfare that the state government provides.

Article 35A was included in the Constitution by a presidential order without following the procedure prescribed for amendment of the Constitution of India under Article 368.

Back in 1954, then President Rajendra Prasad introduced the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 under Article 370 on the recommendation of the Jawaharlal Nehru-led government. It was enacted following the 1952 Delhi Agreement, reached between Nehru and then Prime Minister of Jammu and Kashmir Sheikh Abdullah, which extended Indian citizenship to the ‘state subjects’ of Jammu and Kashmir.

As the Article 35A was added to the Indian Constitution by the executive head without any discussion in the Parliament, there have been objections over the manner of its enactment.

Centre, Opposition at locked horns over Article 35A

The BJP, in its 2019 Lok Sabha election manifesto ‘Sankalp Patra’, had promised to do away with Article 35A saying that the provision is “discriminatory against non-permanent residents and women of Jammu and Kashmir.”

The BJP's poll manifesto for the General Elections 2019 promised to work towards the annulment Article 35A, citing that it was “an obstacle in the development of the state.”

It also promised to make efforts to ensure the safe return of the ethnic Kashmiri Pandits (who had earlier been forced to leave the state by the jihadists and terrorists) and swore allegiance to the cause of the resettlement of refugees from West Pakistan, Pakistan occupied Jammu & Kashmir and Chhamb with the provision of financial assistance to them.

While the BJP government has repeatedly promised to annul the provision, several Opposition leaders, especially those from Jammu and Kashmir have warned the Centre against the move.

Recently, former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister and PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti said that tinkering with Article 35A is like playing with explosives.

“(Article) 35A ke saath chhedd chhadd karna baarood ko haath lagaane ke baraabar hoga. Jo haath (Article) 35A ke saath chhedd chaadd karne ke liye uthenge wo haath hi nahi wo saara jism jal ke raakh ho jaega. (Tinkering with Article 35A will be akin to setting a powder keg on fire. Whoever tries to meddle with Article 35A will be burnt to ashes),” she said at a public gathering in Srinagar on Saturday.

Former J&K CM and PDP leader, Mehbooba Mufti, in Srinagar: 35A ke saath chhedd chhadd karna baarood ko haath lagaane ke baraabar hoga. Jo haath 35A ke saath chhedd chaadd karne ke liye uthenge wo haath hi nahi wo saara jism jal ke raakh ho jaega. #JammuAndKashmir pic.twitter.com/mKIU9Vmexw — ANI (@ANI) July 28, 2019

Besides Mufti, National Conference leader and former Jammu and Kashmir CM Omar Abdullah said that the Centre was trying to create fear psychosis among the people of the state with the intimidatory threats on scrapping the Article 35A.

A debate over continuity of Article 35A

A debate over Article 35A has gained momentum in the recent past after several petitions were filed in the Supreme Court challenging the constitutional validity of the provision.

In 2014, a Delhi-based NGO filed a petition in the SC challenging Article 35A, arguing that the provision was included to the Constitution without being presented before Parliament and without an amendment under Article 368.

A two-judge bench of the top court referred the matter to a three-judge bench after the Attorney General said that it raised constitutional issues.

Currently, the NGO’s petition along with several other similar petitions is pending before the Supreme Court.
