Suspected serial killer arrested by Cuttack Police; targeted homeless people

The suspect has been identified as Narayana Sahu (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Three murders were reported in Cuttack last week withing 24 hours Police arrested the suspect, Naryana Sahu from his home near OPM square A forensic examination of the weapon used for the crimes is yet to be conducted

Cuttack: Days after three homeless people were murdered in cold blood in Odisha, Cuttack Police on Monday claimed to have nabbed a suspect behind the gruesome killings. The man is a 35-year-old who was arrested from a hut along the road stretching from OPM square to Cuttack Railway Station. He has been identified as one Narayana Sahu, a native of the state's Ganjam district.

This detention comes less than a week after the murders of three homeless people rocked the city of Cuttack. The bodies of the victims were found with deep cuts on their necks. A similar modus operandi of the killings prompted locals and police officials to suspect this to be the work of a serial killer. Deputy Commissioner of Police Akhileshwar Singh had even issued a warning to locals, asking them not to sleep in isolated places.

Following Sahu's arrest, Cuttack deputy commissioner of Police Akhileshwar Singh said that the suspect does not appear to be "mentally-challenged." Singh added that Sahu had been living in the shanty he was arrested from for the past 3-4 months, said a report. The suspect had been missing since Wednesday, the same day three homeless people were murdered within 24 hours in the city which is less than 30 kilometres from the state capital of Bhubaneshwar.

An investigation into the murders led police officials to examine CCTV footage retrieved from the scenes of the crime. This, in turn, assisted them in establishing a timeline of the suspect's movements. Special teams of police personnel were formed to nab Sahu. Based on circumstantial CCTV evidence, investigators managed to trace the suspect back to his shanty near OPM square. The fact that no such crime was reported from Calcutta after Narayan's departure from the city further emboldened the police's suspicion.

Going by the latest inputs, Sahu has been arrested and is currently being interrogated in connection with the three murders. The first of these cases were registered against the unknown person(s) at Mangalabag police station on July 26, while the second and third were lodged at the Chauliaganj police station a day later.

A preliminary report by police officials familiar with the matter had revealed that the three homeless people were attacked in the early hours of the morning when they were asleep. The weapon used in all three of these heinous crimes seemed similar, suggested investigators. The same is yet to be confirmed by the means of a forensic examination.
