Indian lawmaker suspected in crash that wounds rape accuser, kills two aunts

India's Bharatiya Janata Party, legislator Kuldeep Singh Sengar, bottom right, is suspected in a car crash that wounded rape accuser and killed her relatives.

More protests erupted in India today amid growing public fury over a car crash that critically injured a teenager who accused a lawmaker from the ruling party of rape and harassment.

Two of the 19-year-old's aunts were killed and her lawyer was badly injured when a truck collided with their car in northern Uttar Pradesh state Sunday, raising suspicions of foul play, AFP reports.

The incident will be investigated by federal investigators amid speculation that local police could favor her alleged rapist, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) legislator Kuldeep Singh Sengar.

Sengar, a four-term lawmaker, has been in jail since last year but reports say he still enjoys considerable clout.

The BJP said it had suspended the lawmaker long ago, India Today reports.

"Sengar was suspended by the party earlier and there is no change in his status," Uttar Pradesh BJP president Swatantra Dev Singh told Press Trust of India.

The young woman and the lawyer were battling for their lives in hospital in the state capital Lucknow.

The teenager had accused Sengar of raping her at his home in Unnao district in 2017 but police in the notoriously lawless state initially refused to take action. Her father was detained by police and severely beaten in custody -- allegedly by Sengar's brother -- and later died from his injuries.

The woman also tried to set herself on fire outside the home of state Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, a hardline BJP stalwart.

Members of opposition parties chanted slogans today as they protested outside the national parliament.

"The BJP government should answer how a lawmaker who is in jail is able to plan a murderous attack like this?" said Mahua Moitra, a member of the opposition Trinamool Congress. The teen's family members also staged a protest outside the Lucknow hospital, accusing Sengar of ordering the highway crash.

The demonstrations followed a rally late Monday, with supporters holding up banners with the words "you are not alone" in Hindi.

There are 40,000 rape cases reported in India every year.
