BJP-Sena loyalists fear being sidelined by Congress-NCP defectors

assembly elections

Congress MLA Kalidas Kolambkar

BJP-Sena

(L) Congress MLA Kalidas Kolambkar and NCP MLA Vaibhav Pichad; (R) NCP's Sandip Naik

Sachin Ahir

Congress-NCP

They may have to make way for the new faces in the upcomingFour opposition legislators resigned from the assembly on Tuesday amid speculations of their switching allegiance to the ruling BJP.and NCP’s Shivendrasinh Bhosale, Vaibhav Pichad and Sandip Naik handed over their resignation letters separately to Speaker Haribhau Bagade at Vidhan Bhawan. Following the exodus of Congress and NCP leaders to the Shiv Sena and BJP, loyalists from the ruling combine are a worried lot. With defecting MLAs likely to get tickets for the assembly polls and other senior leaders of the Congress and NCP trying to get berths in the legislative council, aspirants from the Sena and BJP, many of whom had fought the 2014 assembly elections against these defectors, fear that they will be pushed to the sidelines.Several of these aspirants were given a go-ahead to contest the elections by the party top brass and some have been working in their constituencies since 2014 when they had lost out. But with their rivals now being welcomed into the saffron parties, the scenario has changed drastically. BJP sources said that apart from those who are newly inducted, even those who had joined the BJP in the recent past will also be chosen for assembly tickets if they can pull off victories. This has left manyleaders, including siting MLAs, worried as they fear they might be asked to make way for newcomers.Kolambkar had defeated BJP candidate Mihir Kotecha in the 2014 assembly election by just over 800 votes. With Kolambkar now on his way to the BJP, sources said the party may ask Kotecha to step aside.“Kotecha is an old timer and a BJP loyalist. He was asked to work in Wadala. Even after he lost in 2014, he didn’t stop working and is now a key player in Wadala politics. If he is denied ticket and Kolambkar is chosen instead, it will send a wrong message and will hurt the BJP. The cadre is against Kolambkar,” said a senior BJP functionary. But party sources said Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis had cleared Kolambkar’s entry into the BJP since he was a sitting MLA.In Navi Mumbai, Naik’s impending entry has upset siting BJP MLA from Belapur Manda Mhatre. Due to her rivalry with Naik, Mhatre had quit NCP and joined the BJP in 2014. She won the 2014 assembly election from Belapur, defeating Ganesh Naik, Sandip’s father. With father-son duo set to join the BJP along with dozens of corporators, Mahtre will lose her position in the party.Last week, NCP city unit headjoined the Sena. While his entry was seen as a move to clear the roadblocks for Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Thackeray’s candidature, the move has reportedly miffed Sena MLA Sunil Shinde. With Ahir now in the Sena, party sources Shinde’s sidelining is inevitable.In Malad, there is a buzz that Congress MLA Aslam Shaikh might join the Sena. While Shaikh had denied any possibility of jumping ship in the past, his entry into the saffron fold will push out local BJP and Sena aspirants from the assembly election race. In Malad, former BJP corporator Vinod Shelar is a front runner. “However if Shaikh joins the Sena, Shelar won’t get the ticket. He has been working in that area for a few years now and is also a party loyalist,” said a BJP functionary from that neighbourhood.During the run-up to the Lok Sabha elections, both the Sena and the BJP accommodated several leaders from the Congress and NCP. Many like Dr Sujay Vikhe-Patil, son of former Congress leader Radhakrishna Vikhe-Patil, joined the BJP. Sujay was then given a ticket to fight from the Ahmednagar South Lok Sabha seat while the sitting BJP MP Dilip Gandhi was asked to step aside.While miffed party leaders have not spoken, the Sena cautioned the BJP in an editorial in Saamna, the party mouthpiece. “Neither BJP’s ideology nor its policies has triggered the entry (of defectors) into the party fold in recent years. It is only sheer preservation of self-interest,” said Saamna, quoting state BJP chief Chandrakant Patil on Monday.Saamna, even as it justified Sena’s move to roll out a red carpet fordefectors, said: “We don't intend to welcome rats and frogs who jump ship. We intend to induct into Sena the captain of the sinking ship — the brave ones.”
