Jamnagar, south Gujarat bear brunt of monsoon; more in store: Met

Heavy rains inundated several low-lying areas of the city with Jamnagar district bearing the brunt on Tuesday with at least three talukas recording over 100 mm of rainfall.



The highest rainfall was recorded in Jamnagar taluka which saw 152mm of rain from 6 am to 8 pm.



In fact, of the five talukas that received the highest rainfall, three were in Jamnagar. Apart from that, Jodia and Dhrol in the district recorded high rainfall.



Extremely heavy showers were recorded in many places in South Gujarat, particularly in Valsad and Dangs.



Rajkot received over 150 mm of rain past midnight on Monday and saw several areas flooded.

Dams, NDRF Teams Kept On Alert In all, 173 talukas in state received rains on Tuesday; of five talukas that got highest rain, three were in Jamnagar Despite the heavy rains, the state has so far received only 37.87% of its average annual rainfall of 816 mm Authorities said that many dams in Saurashtra region put on high alert, and 15 NDRF teams kept at the ready

The Meteorological department has warned that the development of a low pressure area in Madhya Pradesh will result in heavy to very heavy rainfall in South Gujarat, particularly in Surat and Navsari, in the coming days.



It has also warned of extremely heavy rains in isolated parts of Saurashtra and Kutch.



The state also held a meeting of its Emergency Operation Centre, following which Relief Commissioner Manoj Kothari said that 15 teams of the National Disaster Relief Force have been put on alert to deal with flood-like situations.



"Due to the heavy rains, Tapi alone has seen an average inflow of 53,500 cusec of water while 9,500 cusec is being received in catchment areas of Narmada close to Madhya Pradesh border," the state said in a release, adding that several dams in Saurashtra region have been put on high alert.



Rains have increased sowing to 58 lakh hectares in the state, which is 68% of the average sowing.



"We are particularly focused on areas that are seeing heavy rains in the last few days to deal with any eventuality," Kothari said.
