AASU delegation visits Golaghat Engineering College, demands steps for AICTE recognition

A Correspondent

GOLAGHAT: The general secretary of All Assam Students’ Union (AASU), Lurinjyoti Gogoi on Tuesday arrived in Golaghat and visited Golaghat Engineering College (GEC).

Lurinjyoti Gogoi along with Golaghat AASU delegates visited the GEC site. He said that it was very shameful that at a time when the Government of India was talking about ‘Skill India’, the GEC was on the verge of closing down. Despite having highly developed infrastructure in the college, only due to ignorance of the Assam Government, the GEC was facing such a situation of close down, he said.

“The AASU will never allow the government to shut down the college. The GEC has sufficient infrastructure for an engineering college. The Assam Government should take all steps to get the necessary recognition for GEC,” he added.

Further, he said that in Assam, other technical colleges were also facing various problems. Libraries, insufficient teaching and office staff, poor infrastructure and old model of laboratory instruments were some of the problems which technical government colleges in Assam were facing.

The Assam Government also does not take proper steps for placement of engineering students after completion of the course. The government has a responsibility to bring out capable engineers for the development of Assam. But the government has been a failure in this regard, lamented the AASU leader.

The AASU demanded the Assam Government as well as State Education Minister Siddhartha Bhattacharya to take immediate action for recognition of Golaghat Engineering College. Notably, the college was inaugurated by Chief Minister of Assam Sarbananda Sonowal in February, 2019 before the parliamentary election. The college was built at a cost of Rs. 46.68 crore on a sprawling 110 bigha of land with Civil, Mechanical and Chemical Engineering branches in the curriculum. The college has an intake capacity of 180. The college started its academic activities in 2018 with 92 students.

Later, a delegation of experts visited the college for inspection on March 4, 2019 and denied the recognition plea of GEC in an official letter on April 30, 2019 for not fulfilling the criteria of AICTE. As a result, as many as 92 students are now facing an uncertain future.

Also read: Golaghat Engineering College on way of closing down; Golaghat AASU stages protest
