Patidar agitation: Gujarat High Court grants bail to Alpesh Kathiriya in sedition case

Patidar quota agitation leader Alpesh Kathiriya got bail from the Gujarat High Court in connection with a sedition case against him in Surat on Wednesday.

Patidar Anamat Andolan Samiti (PAAS) leader Kathiriya, who along with now Congress leader Hardik Patel was the face of the quota agitation, was granted bail on the condition that he will not enter Surat. He will also have to regularly report to the investigation officer about his whereabouts.

In January 2019, a lower court had revoked the bail granted to him in December 2018, after he got into an altercation with cops. The state had moved the court for cancellation of his bail stating that he had violated the terms.

Following the cancellation, Kathiriya had moved high court seeking bail.

Conditions Apply Kathiriya was granted bail on the condition that he shall not enter Surat for 6 months & inform investigation officer about his whereabouts The High Court had also warned the PAAS leader against entering into a confrontation with police or any authority

Earlier while opposing Kathiriya's bail plea in the Gujarat High Court, the state government had said that the PAAS leader was well aware of the conditions levied on him by the sessions court yet within a few days of getting bail, he "misused his liberty and violated the bail condition". Kathiria had been accused of starting an agitation on December 25, 2018 at the Surat collector's office without due permission. He also entered into a scuffle with police officers at the Sarthana police station and obstructed traffic on December 27 and 28, the state had said.

Of the three prominent PAAS leaders arrested in connection with the quota agitation in August 2015 that resulted in violence across the state, Kathiriya is the only one who is still in jail. Hardik Patel, Dinesh Bambhaniya and Chirag Patel who were also booked for sedition managed to secure bail.

The Patidar agitation in the state left 14 people in Gujarat.
