New Delhi Private Hospitals May Lose License If They Refuse To Treat Road, Acid, And Fire Accident Victims

The government of New Delhi has warned all private hospitals in the capital of the nation that they could lose their licenses if they refuse to treat victims of fire, road, and acid attacks or accidents.

During a meeting that had the representatives of the hospitals with CM Arvind Kejriwal, the CM said that their licenses will be canceled if they fail to treat victims.

CM Kejriwal said, “It is said that the first hour is extremely critical for accident and burn injury victims and if medical help is provided to them during this time, their lives can be saved. The Delhi government had implemented this scheme keeping in mind this fact.”

The meeting was attended by 150 representatives of private hospitals in New Delhi.

Cm Kejriwal also reminded the representatives about the scheme that they implemented in February last year. The scheme states that victims of accidents, acid attacks, and burns will be treated without any cost at private hospitals.

The said scheme has saved the lives of 2501 victims in 14 months.

CM Kejriwal added that the High Court of Delhi and the Supreme Court made it mandatory for all hospitals to provide free treatment for victims with burn injuries and accidents to be treated without a cost at the first available hospital.

Despite the free scheme that was implemented by the state government, CM Kejriwal said that they have received a number of complaints against hospitals who refused to comply with the scheme.

CM Kejriwal added, “Delhi government is bearing the entire cost of treatment of accident and burn injuries victims under its scheme and there should be no complaint in this regard. I am happy that all the hospitals assured us that they will not refuse to treat any such victim.”

In 2019 alone, 1,604 people were killed in the nation’s capital and over 5800 people were injured.

The government of Delhi also launched the “Good Samaritan Scheme”. This will give Rs. 2000 to those people who will bring road accident victims to a hospital.
