Unnao rape case: All cases transferred to Delhi, 14-day deadline to probe crash, 45-day deadline for trial

Supreme Court has transferred all the five cases related to Unnao rape to New Delhi. (File photo)

The Supreme Court on Thursday transferred all five cases related to the Unnao gangrape case to Delhi. The Supreme Court also set a 45-day deadline for trails in these cases to be completed. The Central Bureau of Investigation was also ordered to complete its investigation into a road accident involving the Unnao rape victim within 14 days.

These orders came after the Supreme Court held a hearing following a week of unusual developments in the Unnao rape case. The rape victim was sent to the hospital in an extremely critical condition after a mystery road accident in Uttar Pradesh that raised eyebrows across the country.

The outrage over the accident forced the Supreme Court to take up the matter and take a stock of the situation.

The Supreme Court has now ordered that the Central Bureau of Investigation, which is probing all cases related to the Unnao rape case, complete its investigation into the road accident within seven days. The deadline may be extended by another seven days in an exceptional circumstance, the court said.

Follow live updates on Unnao case

The Unnao rape cases include:

The original rape case against BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Senger who is accused of raping a teenage girl in Uttar Pradesh in 2017.

A case over the alleged gangrape of the victim after she accused Kuldeep Singh Senger of raping her

A case against the Uttar Pradesh Police for filing a false Arms Act a case against the victim's father

A case against the Uttar Pradesh Police over the custodial death of the Unnao rape victim's father

A case over this week's accident that led the rape victim's hospitalisation

Apart from this, the Supreme Court also ordered that the trials in the Unnao rape-related cases be completed in 45 days and that day-to-day hearings be held to do so.

The Supreme Court also ordered the Uttar Pradesh government to pay Rs 25 lakh as compensation to the rape victim.

Earlier, the Supreme Court made strong observations on the status of the Unnao gangrape case and the accident that sent the rape victim to the hospital.

Here is what you need to know about the Unnao gangrape case:

Last year, a woman from Uttar Pradesh's Unnao accused BJP MLA Kuldip Senger of raping her teenage daughter in 2017. Kuldip Senger is a four-time MLA who represents Bangermau in the UP assembly.

The Unnao rape case, as it came to be called, made national headlines after the rape victim attempted self-immolation outside UP CM Yogi Adityanath's residence to protest against alleged police inaction.

Soon after the allegations against Kuldip Senger came to public limelight, the rape victim's father was arrested under the Arms Act. He died in police custody due to alleged custodial torture.

The outrage over the Uttar Pradesh Police's failure to adequately probe the rape allegations led the the Unnao rape case being transferred to the Central Bureau of Investigation. The CBI arrested Senger in April last year.

Earlier this week, a mystery road accident brought the Unnao rape case back into focus. A car in which the Unnao rape victim, her aunts and her lawyer were travelling in collided with truck on a road near Raebareli. The two aunts died while the rape victim and her lawyer were critically injured.

ALSO READ | What took BJP so long to expel Sengar? Hint: Votes

ALSO READ | Got 6,000 letters this month: SC official tells angry CJI on Unnao victim's delayed letter

ALSO WATCH | Unnao rape accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar expelled from BJP
