Jabalpur police to Zomato customer: Tweet hate, go to jail

A notice has been issued to Jabalpur man Amit Shukla after he cancelled an order from food aggregator Zomato because his order was being delivered by a "non-Hindu" rider. Amit Singh, Superintendent of Police, Jabalpur, told news agency ANI that the notice will be served to Shukla soon with a warning as well.

Action will be taken against Shukla, Amit Singh said, if Shukla tweets against the ideals of the Constitution.

"We have issued a notice. It will be served to Amit Shukla (Twitter user who cancelled food order over Zomato deliveryman's religion). He'll be warned, if he tweets anything which is against the ideals of the Constitution, action will be taken; he is on surveillance," Amit Singh told ANI. Police also sought a written undertaking from Amit Shukla that he would not spread religious hatred.

ALSO READ: Jabalpur man's bizarre clarification on asking Zomato for Hindu rider: It is the month of Saavan

Amit Shukla, on Wednesday, tweeted about cancelling his order from Zomato, saying, "Just cancelled an order on @ZomatoIN they allocated a non hindu rider for my food they said they can't change rider and can't refund on cancellation I said you can't force me to take a delivery I don't want don't refund just cancel."

ALSO READ: Zomato delivery boy on Jabalpur customer controversy: I am hurt but what can I do

Zomato, however, refused to change the delivery executive. "Food doesn't have a religion. It is a religion," the company tweeted in response to the customer's request for change of the rider.

While Zomato garnered a whole lot of praise online for its epic response, it was slammed by several quarters for remaining firm on its stand. While supporters trended #IStandWithZomato, those against the food aggregator populated Twitter with #BoycottZomato.

Meanwhile, Amit Shukla, asked about the incident, told India Today: "The constitution gives religious freedom to everyone. The month of Saavan is on, so I requested to change the rider. I will not order anything from Zomato now on. It was my right to deny, I was paying for it. I ordered food and they sent a non-Hindu rider. [When] I requested them to change the rider, they refused, so I asked them to cancel the order."

ALSO READ: Richa Chadha destroys Jabalpur Zomato customer with cutting tweet: Acidity ho jaati hai

Politicians including P Chidambaram and Omar Abdullah as well as actors such as Richa Chadha and Swara Bhasker applauded Zomato for their classic response.
