‘Gau rakshak’ shot dead in Haryana’s Palwal by alleged cow smugglers

Gopal | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The family members of the deceased have blamed the cow mafia for this brutal killing of Gopal Gopal was a very active member of the local gau raksha team and as per his friends the attack took place when he was trying to chase down a vehicle smuggling cows The incident was reported from Hodal-Nuh Highway

Palwal: A 35-year-old man was shot dead by alleged cow smugglers in Haryana's Palwal. The victim identified as Gopal was a member of ‘Gau Rakshak Samiti’ and was allegedly attacked and killed while chasing a vehicle allegedly loaded with stolen cows.

The case came to light on July 28. The victim tried to chase the vehicle and was shot dead by cow smugglers the moment he took out his phone to inform other members of the Samiti. His body was sent for postmortem and the investigation is ongoing.

Meanwhile, the family members of the deceased have blamed the cow mafia behind this brutal killing.

As per the initial reports, Gopal, 35, was a very active member of the local gau raksha team and as per his friends, the attack took place when he was trying to chase down a vehicle which had smuggled cows.

The incident was reported from Hodal-Nuh highway and additional security has been deployed in the area to stop any untoward incident.

Meanwhile, in Rajasthan’s Alwar, a suspected cow smuggler was thrashed after he fired shots on being confronted by a group of villagers, police said on July 31. Two villagers were injured and admitted to a local hospital along with the alleged cow smuggler. The incident was reported from Pahari village which comes under Kathumar police station limit.

Salim Khan and his close aides were caught moving 20 to 25 cows through farms when they were confronted by a group of villagers. This led to the trio abusing the villagers after which one of the accused fired in the air to scare the villagers.

Reports of cow smuggling have been coming in from all quarters and recently a BSF jawan lost his hand and was grievously injured after Bangladeshi cattle smugglers attacked him by hurling country-made bombs. The attack took place along the India-Bangladesh border in West Bengal.

The inured BSF official was identified as Constable Anisur Rehman and he suffered pellet injuries in his lungs, liver and stomach.

After the attack, the Border Security Force (BSF) lodged a strong protest with their Bangladeshi counterpart the Border Guards Bangladesh (BGB) to control the criminals on their side.

In June, two people were allegedly thrashed by a mob in Haryana's Gurugram district over the suspicion of smuggling cattle. Similarly, in May two men were tied to a tree in a village in Madhya Pradesh and were beaten for allegedly carrying beef in an autorickshaw.
