Karnataka: 14 rebel Congress-JD(S) MLAs move Supreme Court against their disqualification from Assembly

Rebel MLAs from the Congress-JD(S) coalition

Bengaluru: Nine more rebel MLAs have approached the Supreme Court against the former speaker KR Ramesh Kumar’s order of rejecting their resignation and disqualifying them for the rest of the term of Karnataka Assembly.

This development comes after all the 14 Karnataka rebel legislators, who were also disqualified by the Speaker said they would challenge the Speaker's decision in the Supreme Court on Monday.

The rebel MLAs were disqualified a day before the trust vote on the BS Yediyurappa government in the Karnataka Assembly for defying their party whips to attend the House on July 23, when former chief minister HD Kumaraswamy moved the confidence motion to vote for floor test but failed to do.

The rebel MLAs said they would challenge their disqualification in the SC as their joint petitions had sought its directive for accepting forthwith their resignations re-submitted on July 11 before the Congress and the JD(S) issued a whip to them to attend the session on July 23 and long before former Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy moved the confidence motion on July 18, IANS reported.

The Speaker was later forced to resign after a BJP functionary said that the saffron party was mulling a no-confidence motion against him.

Tendering his resignation KR Ramesh Kumar said, “I am resigning from this august post as Speaker for personal reasons. I thank all the members for cooperating with me during my 14-month tenure in this chair.”

Before resigning, the 70-year-old veteran Congress lawmaker presided over the proceedings that included HD Kumaraswamy losing the trust vote followed by BS Yediyurappa moving and winning the confidence motion by voice vote, thereby becoming the CM of Karnataka for the fourth time.

The former speaker’s last decision was approving the finance bill for the state budget for fiscal 2019-20 and its appropriation estimates.

Meanwhile, BJP MLA Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri has been elected as the Karnataka Legislative Assembly Speaker unopposed.

After the fall of the Congress-JD(S) government, former chief minister and Congress Legislature Party leader Siddaramaiah blamed the saffron party saying that the state had become "an experimental lab of the BJP."

The BJP, however, said that the government fell under its own weight.

Speaking on the issue, BJP working President JP Nadda took a dig at Congress-JD(S) coalition in Karnataka, saying there are several reasons behind the fall of the Karnataka government.

Marking an end to a two-week-long political crisis in the southern state, HD Kumaraswamy-led 14-month Congress-Janata Dal (Secular) coalition government collapsed after losing the trust vote on the floor of the state Assembly on July 23.
