Arnab Goswami expresses views on Zomato customer controversy

New Delhi: The Madhya Pradesh Police on Thursday issued a warning to Zomato user Pandit Amit Shukla of Jabalpur after he caused a huge public debate by refusing to accept food from a Muslim delivery boy. This came hours after Republic TV founder Arnab Goswami had demanded action against Shukla for defaming Hindu religion and India.





“I am a Hindu and I feel appalled that a case is not being filed against him. These people give the country a bad name,” Goswami had stunned his audience by a harsh stand against Shukla, whose Twitter handle described him a supporter of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Arnab Goswami’s tirade against the bigot is refreshing and assumes significance in light of the former’s support for the BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi. The bigot Pandit Amit Shukla from Madhya Pradesh is also a known BJP supporter.

While other TV channels had only discussed the topic, Goswami had explicitly demanded police action by referring Shukla as a bigot.

Jabalpur district police superintendent Amit Singh said that a notice had been issued against Shukla warning him to not repeat his hate-filled tweet. “We have issued a notice. It will be served to Amit Shukla. He’ll be warned, if he tweets anything which is against the ideals of the Constitution, action will be taken; he is on surveillance,” Amit Singh told ANI.

Cops are also believed to have sought a written undertaking from Shukla promising that he will not spread communal hatred in the future.

Meanwhile, Shukla has changed his Twitter handle @NaMo_Sarkaar by dropping the reference to Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Zomato had found plenty of support from across India with people lashing out at Shukla for practicing open bigotry. Zomato founder Deepidner Goyal had earned plaudits for refusing to cow down to bigots even if it meant losing businesses.

Shukla had found support from the Hindutva troll army, which had threatened to uninstall Zomato app to teach the food delivery app a lesson. However, many mobile users decided to support the company by installing their app and even ordering food to appreciate Zomato’s incredible stand against bigotry.
