Vadodara flood a product of apathy?

Months before 20 inches of rain battered Vadodara, a group of concerned citizens had warned about the ravines close to the Vishwamitri river being reclaimed and debris being dumped, thereby effectively filling them up. They had written a letter to the Vadodara Municipal Corporation and the chief secretary of the state warning them of the havoc that might be wreaked in form of floods due to the destruction of the ravines and wetlands of Vishwamitri.

"The ravines and wetlands of River Vishwamitri are being systematically destroyed and filled with debris and municipal solid waste in order to reclaim land for further development," the letter had warned.

It had also mentioned that such reclamation and illegal filling up of ravines would add to flooding woes in the city during monsoons.

Interestingly, the National River Conservation Directorate had also written to the forest department to protect the ravines and prevent illegal dumping of waste. It had also asked for an action taken report from the department.

Rohit Prajapati who was among those who wrote the letter said 20-inch rains would not have flooded the city had the ravines and wetlands been not encroached.



(PSI Govind Chavda rescuing a 45-day-old baby in Devpura - ANI)

"The city wasn't flooded because the Vishwamitri was overflowing. It happened because there was no natural outlet for rainwater. The ravines and wetlands have either been reclaimed or turned into a dump yard of municipal and building wastes. They usually work as natural sponges that soak up water; since we filled them up, the city was flooded," said Prajapati.

When contacted, Shalini Agrawal, district collector and in-charge VMC commissioner did not respond. A message to her also went unreplied.

Dr Deepa Gavali of Gujarat Ecological Society, a research-based NGO that focuses on water said that the natural drains (kaans) of the city have either being concretised, narrowed or destroyed by the municipal b; but we had destroyed it," said Gavali. She said but with the ponds being filled up and the kaans being ruined there was no way the water could find its natural course. "Don't call it flooding. There was no flooding what happened was waterlogging because we have ruined the natural drainage system," said Gavali. She said the citizens had time and again warned of the danger that the city faced in case of heavy rains but no one bothered.
