Terrorists planned to attack Amarnath yatra, Pakistani Army involved: Lieutenant-General

India

Terrorists planned to attack Amarnath yatra, Pakistani Army involved: Lieutenant-General

Terrorists planned to attack Amarnath yatra, Pakistani Army involved: Lieutenant-General

Written by Shalini Ojha Aug 02, 2019, 03:09 pm 2 min read

In a mind-boggling development, the Indian Army on Friday said they have recovered a rifle belonging to Pakistani Army from the Amarnath Yatra route. Addressing media, Lieutenant-General KJS Dhillon said the recovery of the weapon clearly indicates that the Pakistani Army is involved in terror operations in Kashmir. He, however, asked people to not panic as the situation was under control. Here's what happened.

Details Troops also recovered a mine

Apart from the Remington M24 sniper rifle, Indian troops also recovered a Pakistan Ordnance Factory mine, Dhillon informed the press. J&K DGP Dilbag Singh was also present in the meet. Further, Dhillon said the type of IEDs which were being found, and the IED "experts" who are being eliminated, point to the fact that Pakistan is trying to disrupt peace in Kashmir.

Quote Intel confirms terrorists are backed by Pakistan: Dhillon

"In the last three-four days, there were confirmed intelligence reports that terrorists backed by Pakistan and its army are trying to disrupt Amarnath Yatra and based on that a thorough search was conducted. We had major successes in these searches," Dhillon said.

Stone-pelting Those pelting stones today will become terrorists tomorrow: Dhillon

Dhillon also assured that no one can disrupt valley's peace. Reiterating his message for mothers of Kashmir, he said they should convince their children to give up stone-pelting. "83% of local people who pick up weapons had a record of stone-pelting. I request all mothers, if today your child throws stones at security forces for Rs. 500 then he'll become terrorist tomorrow," he said.

Statement Meanwhile, high-ranking CRPF officer said Yatra has been peaceful

Separately, Zulfiqar Hasan, the Additional Director General of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), said Amarnath Yatra has been peaceful despite serious threats. He said it was possible due to the hard work of personnel and the cooperation of people. "This year more than 10 serious attempts (terror attack attempts) were made at different places in the valley," added SP Pani, the IGP of Kashmir.

Troops Further, officer explained why troops were sent to J&K

On the heavy deployment of forces in Kashmir in the past couple of days, Dilbag Singh said, "Troops that had been deployed for several months needed to be given a break, relief." However, considering the threat we needed to keep the same or more level of forces, underlined Singh. He also claimed leaders of various terror outfits have been eliminated.
