Pawar should be ready for more desertions: Maha BJP leader

Maharashtra BJP chief Chandrakant Patil on Friday said NCP supremo Sharad Pawar should be ready mentally as more people are going to switch sides from the opposition party.

Several MLAs of the Congress and Nationalist Congress Party have either joined the ruling BJP-Shiv Sena or are reported to be preparing for a switch ahead of the state Assembly polls likely to be held in September-October.

Speaking at a function organised by Pune Union of Working Journalists, Patil said, "Pawar is so shocked after three people left the party (NCP). But he should make himself mentally ready as more people are planning to leave."



Replying to a query on Pawar's claims that the BJP was using probe agencies and state-controlled financial bodies to lure opposition leaders, Patil asked if the former did so when he brought in leaders like Chhagan Bhujbal and Ganesh Naik.

"So when you did it, it was an emotional appeal because of which Bhujbal came to you," he taunted.

Patil said institutions such as Election Commission, the judiciary, Income Tax and Defence did not brook any political interference.

"As far as Enforcement Directorate searches are concerned, they have to prepare well in advance," he added.

Pawar last week had alleged that Kagal NCP MLA Hasan Mushrif was made an offer by the BJP, but when he refused, the income tax department carried out raids at his premises in Kolhapur.

Talking about it on Friday, Patil said, "During a programme in Kolhapur, Mushrif jokingly told me to at least spare some (from being lured to switch sides) as we would need someone in the opposition. I told him we need an opposition, but you are a good face of the minorities."



He said the ED conducted searches (at Mushrif's premises) eight days later, following which allegations of coercion were levelled.

"Was the raid really possible in eight days, and that too at multiple premises," Patil questioned.

He also hit out at opposition parties for debunking EVMs and demanding a return to ballot papers, claiming that conducting polls was the prerogative of the Election Commission, an autonomous institution.

"The BJP believes in democracy, and whatever the EC decides, we will follow it. The BJP is ready for any method. Be it any medium, the BJP will win as it had reached the hearts of the people," Patil claimed.

He claimed the BJP, even if it could win 200 Assembly seats in Maharashtra fighting alone, would still contest in alliance with the Shiv Sena.

"There is not even remote possibility of a split in the alliance. The BJP and Sena will fight elections together," Patil reiterated.

When queried on whether the BJP had put up "housefull" boards after the steady influx of opposition leaders into the party, Patil quipped that it was like a theatre owner who places such a board but keeps aside a few cinema tickets for special entrants.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
