Panic gripped Kashmir on Advisory asking Yatris to cut short stay in Valley

Army says Amarnath Yatra is target of Pakistan terrorists

NL Correspondent

Srinagar Aug 02

Sighting the intelligence inputs about militancy related threats, State home Department has issued an advisory to Amarnath Yatris and Tourists to leave the valley immediately.

A formal Government order to this effect was issued on Friday, signed by Commissioner Secretary Home Department Shaleen Kabra, which reads that keeping in view latest inputs about militancy related threats, with specific targeting of Amarnath Yatra and given the prevailing security situation in valley tourists and yatris are advised to curtail their stay in the valley and take immediate measures to leave from here. It has been said that the advisory has been issued in the interest of their safety and security.

After the Advisory gone public and viral over the social media panic engulfed the entire Kashmir valley and rumour mills worked overtime to spread different versions of speculations in private public discourse.

Later, an official press conference revealed that there was a plan of targeting Amarnath Yatra but the same has been successfully thwarted by the security forces, by taking successful measures to avert any big tragedy.

This was stated by Chinar Corps Commander Lt General K J S Dhillon in Srinagar in a joint press conference, which along with him was addressed by Director General Police J&K, Additional Director General CRPF and IGP Kashmir.

General Dhilon said that situation on the LoC is under control and very much peaceful. He said that infiltration bids from Pakistan side are being successfully thwarted.

Accusing Pakistan of directly involved in disruption of peace in the state General Dhilon said that security forces have thwarted many attempts of attacking the Yatra, during which many IEDs, including one made in Pakistan Ordinance Factory.The said Anti Personal Mine along with an American M-24 Series Sniper Rifle was put on display on the occasion, which he claimed was recovered along the route of yatra.

Lt General KJS Dhillon said,” The type of IEDs recovered is being handled by Jaish Militants with the assistance of local militants”.

“IED expert militants we are capturing and eliminating, point to the fact that Pakistan is trying to disrupt peace in Kashmir. We assure ‘Awaam’ of Kashmir that no one will be allowed to disrupt peace”, he said.

Lt General added, “83% of those who are militants, were basically stone palters in past. My appeal to mothers is that if they see their sons pelting stones at security forces, chances are they will join path of terrorism. The militant will be eliminated in 1 year of picking up weapons.Today’s stone palters are tomorrow’s terrorists”.

He added that in 2019, 17 per cent militants were killed within 10 days of picking up guns, 9 per cent were killed within one month and 36 per cent were killed within six months, while 64 per cent in one year.

“During 3 days of search operation we have recovered a sizable quantity of explosives, while terror funding modules have been successfully targeted.”

He said that overall number of active militants in valley and Jammu region has significantly come down.

Dilbag Singh said, “Leaders of many militant groups have been eliminated, nullifying their activities. Large number of OGWs have been picked up, Jamaat e Islami & JKLF leaders & activists been booked”.

When asked about the reports of heavy numbers of security forces being moved in the valley Dilbag Singh said,” Troops that had been deployed for several months needed to be given a break, relief. It is the time for turnover. But considering the threat perception we need to keep the same or more level of forces”.

He added that the numbers portrayed by different quarters of security forces being shifted here are exaggerated and nowhere near the real numbers, which are quite low.

The GOC Chinar corps said that the situation at the Line of Control (LoC) is under control and peaceful as of now. He also informed that infiltration from Pakistan is being attempted regularly and the Indian Army has been foiling the attempts successfully, by giving befitting reply.

Speaking on the ceasefire violation by Pakistan, Lt. General Dhilon warned that if Pakistan makes an attempt again, India will reply.

He also said that terrorist leadership is the main target, especially Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), Hizbul Mujahideen (HM) and Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT).

“We have been able to eliminate most of the leadership. Work is still in progress”. The GOC informed that the IED threats are real and forces are capable and prepared to thwart all such attempts.

Omar terms advisory to pilgrims, tourists unprecedented

Srinagar, Aug 02

Terming Government advisory asking Amarnath pilgrims and tourists to curtail their stay and leave Kashmir valley as unprecedented, former chief minister Omar Abdullah on Friday said though this order would seem to suggest a genuine fear of a massive terror strike, but this will do nothing to dampen the sense of fear in the valley at the moment.

However, Mr Abdullah asked why the Government spent money flying journalists – foreign and Indian – to brief them about how good the situation is and about how well the yatra has been going, and then ordered yatris and tourists to leave immediately.

“Although this unprecedented order would seem to suggest a genuine fear of a massive terror strike directed at Amarnath ji yatris or/and tourists this will do nothing to dampen the sense of fear & foreboding that prevails in the valley at the moment,” Abdullah, wrote on micro-blogging site twitter after the advisory issued by Principal secretary Home Shaleen Kabra.
