Don’t want our special identity to be attacked: Mufti requests PM over rumours of scrapping Article 35A

PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti. | File image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The Valley has witnessed a sudden movement of close to 40,000 troops to the Valley over the past one week and the curtailment of the Amarnath Yatra today over intel on terror imminent attack Mufti, Sajad Ghani Lone, IAS officer-turned politician Shah Faesal and other Kashmiri leaders later met J&K Governor Satya Pal Malik at his residence to discuss the matter

Srinagar: Peoples Democratic Party chief Mehbooba Mufti on Friday addressed an emergency press conference, requesting the central government to not repeal Article 35A, after two back-to-back days of escalation of security preparedness in the state of Jammu and Kashmir.

“We have heard they are going to tinker with Article 35A. I request people with folded hands, along with Prime Minister Narendra Modi, to please save our constitutional guarantees... We don’t want our special identity to be attacked. We know we will get everything from this country only,” Mufti said at the press briefing today.

The Valley has witnessed a sudden movement of close to 40,000 troops to the Valley over the past one week and the curtailment of the Amarnath Yatra today over intel on terror imminent attack.

“We have seen many developments in the Valley for sometime now. It feels like something dangerous is going to happen. Students outside are living in fear and so are the people in the Valley. The government of India says everything is fine and on the other hand we see deployment of troops here.

Top officers of security forces issued an advisory through the Jammu and Kashmir government warning Amarnath pilgrims of a threat to security and a possible terror attack around August 15, India's Independence Day.

“In the interest of safety and security of the tourists and Amarnath Yatris, it is advised that they may curtail their stay in the Valley immediately and take necessary measures to return as soon as possible,” the advisory released by the Jammu and Kashmir Home Department said.

Speaking of the plight of Kashmiris, she said, “Today tourists have been told to leave and it’s creating chaos. Where will people of Kashmir go? You’re evacuating only tourists and pilgrims. People are in complete pain. I have seen such situations for the first time in my life. A psychological war is going on here.”

Mufti continued her plea to Prime Minister Modi, saying when PM talks about democracy, he should also give importance to kashmiriyat. “PM talks about insaniyat, jhamooriyat and kashmiriyat. I once again request the people of India, particularly those in Ladakh and Jammu, to stay united. There shouldn’t be a time in future when we get divided.”

Mufti, Sajad Ghani Lone, IAS officer-turned politician Shah Faesal and other Kashmiri leaders later met J&K Governor Satya Pal Malik at his residence to discuss the matter.

“We have spoken to the Governor. He has assured he will speak to New Delhi and get it cleared as to what exactly is happening in the state,” she told media persons.
