A lesson in Constitution

singhking99@yahoo.com

Aradhika Sharma

IT makes me so happy when I see a person or group or corporation stand up fearlessly and openly in support of diversity,” said Mandy, dipping into her chana-chawal in the office cafeteria at lunchtime today.

“It certainly does! I’m assuming you’re taking about the stand that Zomato took for its Muslim delivery executive Faiyaz when a user declared that he would not accept food delivery from a person of that religion in the ‘holy month’ of Shravan,” I said.

“Correct!” Shobha said. “The company tweeted: ‘Food doesn’t have a religion’. That’s going to be my mantra too.”

“And when the user threatened to uninstall the app, the founder said: “We are proud of the idea of India — and the diversity of our esteemed customers and partners. We aren’t sorry to lose any business that comes in the way of our values,” I added.

“It seems that the values of Zomato have permeated into the DNA of the company because even when the user threatened to cancel his order, the customer care executive responded: “At Zomato we don’t discriminate on basis of riders,” Mandy said.

“I feel like standing up and clapping for them! How wonderful that in today’s atmosphere of fear and distrust, a company has come out voluble and clear in support of its employee and in upholding the principals of inclusiveness and equality.”

“It is something that is a part of the Constitution of India, but the country seems to have forgotten. The Preamble lists values like liberty, secularity and fraternity as key values. People who challenge them should be questioned about their devotion to the key principles of the Constitution,” I remarked.

“Takes a Zomato to give the wake-up call, eh?” Shobha laughed.

“Maybe we should give Zomato a call too; send for rasgullas to celebrate diversity,” Mandy suggested.

“The nice thing is that so many people supported Zomato’s stand on this.”

“While one Tweeter asked the irate user how he could have ensured the religion of the cook was the same as his, another said that did he know that his cars run on “Muslim fuel”, that phone was developed by Christians, and that ‘the world is full of wonderful people who follow all sorts of belief systems,” added Shobha.

“Isn’t it great when people and organisations stand up for what’s right and defend the idea of a harmonious India?”

“Vaise, I’m pretty shocked at this guy’s bigotry. When I order food, the only thing I’m concerned about is how fast it is going to get to me, not the name and religion of the person who is delivering it?” I commented.

“Oh yes! And the sheer joy of not having to cook it,” Shobha agreed.

“And the anticipation of its deliciousness,” Mandy said dreamily.

I laughed: “Better order those rasgullas to add to the sweetness of the mood of sweet secularity.”

“Don’t forget to request that delivery executive Faiyaz should come to deliver it!” Mandy added.
