World Breastfeeding Week: 4 tips for lactating mothers to keep their child and themselves healthy

World Breastfeeding Week: 5 tips for lactating mothers to keep their child and themselves healthy | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights World Breastfeeding Week is celebrated from the 1st of August to the 7th of August. New mothers have a tough time getting used to breastfeeding. These tips can help women get more comfortable with the process and take care of their child better.

New Delhi: World Breastfeeding Week is being celebrated from the 1st of August to the 7th of August and aims to encourage breastfeeding and improve the health of babies around the world. The protection, promotion and support of breastfeeding worldwide are important, as it directly relates to the health of babies and even the mother. Breast milk is the first food that provides nourishment for a newborn baby and is the only source of nutrition for a few months before the baby is ready to consume other foods.

New mothers and babies can have a hard time adjusting to breastfeeding. Mothers of first-borns, who do not have experience of the practice can find themselves in situations they do not understand, and since it is about their babies health, they may want to be extra careful. Here are 5 tips for lactating mothers to make the process of breastfeeding easier, and help them take care of themselves and their child.

Exercise

It is very important for lactating women to stay healthy, to ensure that they are able to provide for their child. Any form of exercise, especially yoga, can help reduce stress, lose weight, improve milk production, and relieve back pain or neck pain that arises as a result of breastfeeding.

Understand your baby's needs

Babies do not necessarily have to cry to indicate that they are hungry. They do show some signs that can tell the same before they start crying due to hunger. They may repeatedly raise their head, stick out their tongue, suck on things, open and close their mouth repeatedly. This would mean that you can nurse them, and they will be happy to not have to fight or cry for your attention.

Relax!

The changes that you and your body are going through can make you anxious and it is only normal. However, it is extremely important to understand that this is part of your newly embarked motherhood, and you will soon get comfortable with it. Breastfeeding is an absolutely natural process, and there is nothing to be afraid of. Just learn as you practice it.

Keep your skin ready

When you begin nursing, you will soon realise that the skin around your nipples is very sensitive and delicate, and you need to take more care of it if you want to continue nursing. The skin can become dry, irritated, chapped, swollen, red, etc. If it is not properly taken care of. Cleaning, washing and moisturizing your skin is very important to be comfortable while nursing your baby.
