Delhi Police arrests two Jaish members for allegedly planning terror attacks on Republic Day

Srinagar:

The Delhi Police has arrested two members of Pakistan-backed banned terror outfit, Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), on charges of planning to carry out a terror attack in the national capital during Republic Day celebrations. According to the Delhi Police officials, they had received a tip-off from a very reliable source that a Jaish terrorist, the mastermind behind a series of grenade attacks in Srinagar recently, was planning similar terror strikes in heavy footfall areas in Delhi during Republic Day Celebrations.

The input was further developed and acting on it, the police arrested mastermind terrorist Abdul Latif Ganai with incriminating materials during the night of January 20 and January 21. Special cell team rushed to Jammu and Kashmir and recovered two IED/ grenades at his instance. The police also arrested another terrorist, Hilal, from Bandipora who had carried out a recce of target areas in Delhi.

Special Cell: Input was further developed & acting on it, during night of 20 & 21st Jan, mastermind terrorist Abdul Latif Ganai was arrested with incriminating materials. Special cell team rushed to J&K and recovered two IED/ grenades at his instance & arrested another terrorist — ANI (@ANI) January 24, 2019

Information about the module was shared with Jammu and Kashmir Police who have also thereafter arrested terrorists of this module involved in grenade attacks in the state.

Earlier in December last year, four terrorists – reportedly belonging to Jaish-e-Muhammad (JeM) outfit, were gunned down in an encounter in Hajin Payeen village.

Special Cell: The other terrorist Hilal from Bandipora had carried out the recee of target areas in Delhi. Information about the module was shared with Srinagar Police who have also thereafter arrested terrorists of this module involved in grenade attacks in J&K — ANI (@ANI) January 24, 2019

Meanwhile, the NIA arrested 12 men, including a 'mufti' from Amroha, also in western Uttar Pradesh, who it said were planning suicide attacks and serial blasts targeting politicians and government installations in Delhi and other parts of north India. The NIA had seized a locally made rocket launcher, material for suicide vests and 112 alarm clocks to be used as timers during its searches in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
