Resume work or face disciplinary action, AIIMS warns resident doctors protesting against NMC Bill

Doctors protest at Collector office road, opposing the National Medical Commission Bill in Visakhapatnam | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Will resume stir if bill not reintroduced in Lok Sabha: Resident Doctors Association Furnish reason for not taking disciplinary action for violations, AIIMS Registrar tells protestors Have cleared all misconceptions about NMC Bill: Union Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan

New Delhi: A protest called by resident doctors against the National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill, 2019, today took a new turn after the Registrar of the Academic Section of All India Institute of Medical Sciences issued an ultimatum against the demonstrating medical aspirants. In a public statement issued on Saturday, the registrar claimed that the protesting students are in violation of the code of conduct of Resident Doctors' Association and Students' Union.

The doctors have been asked to respond as to why disciplinary action should not be taken against them for violating the code of conduct, as directed by the Delhi High Court. This order comes hours after resident doctors staged a massive demonstration against the NMC Bill, 2019, outside Safdarjung Hospital in the national capital region. Protests were observed in other parts of the country, notably in Telangana where junior doctors boycotted all emergency services.

Going by the most recent inputs, the protesting doctors have been asked to resume work or face severe consequences. On Friday, the Indian Medical Association (IMA) also extended its support to the resident doctors. Our core concerns over the NMC Bill remain unaddressed, said a spokesperson for the IMA. In addition, the premier association of Indian doctors called for an emergency All India Action Committee meeting on Sunday.

A delegation of the doctors also met Union Health Minister Dr Hrash Vardhan to discuss the provisions in the NMC Bill which was passed in the Rajya Sabha on Thursday. The minister claimed that he cleared any and all misconceptions about the bill while requested the protesting doctors to end their strike and resume work.

In its list of demands, the AIIMS RDA has claimed that several of its concerns regarding the bill remain unaddressed. The resident doctors have alleged that this Bill will promote quackery, a practice the central government is not equipped to curb or control. Furthermore, they say that no pilot projects were carried out while introducing the concept of ASHA workers in the Indian Health Care System.

The protestors have also questioned the logic behind making final MBSS examination as the criteria of entry into post-graduate courses. In a letter to the authorities, the resident doctors demanded that lawmakers break across party lines and discuss the concerns raised by them about the National Medical Commission, Bill, 2019. In a letter signed by the President of the Students' Union and the Resident Doctors' Association, the protestors have sought for the Bill to be reintroduced to the Lok Sabha for ratification of official amendments made by the Rajya Sabha.
