What is Article 370? Explained here

Amit Shah introduces Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill in Rajya Sabha | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Article 370 of the Constitution of India grants special status to Jammu and Kashmir Kashmiri Pandits demanded the abrogation of Article 370 Article 370 falls under Part XXI of the Constitution of India, which deals with "Temporary, Transitional and Special provisions”

New Delhi: President Ram Nath Kovind on Monday issued Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 2019, which called for provisions of the Indian Constitution be applicable in the state "at once". Notably, the President's order will supersede the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954.

Following President's notification, Union Home Minister Amit Shah moved a resolution in the House to abolish Article 370 and also introduced the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill. The Bill says there will be two separate Union Territories of (1) Ladakh and (2) Jammu and Kashmir. While presenting the historic Bill in the Upper House, Shah said that the Union Territory for Jammu and Kashmir will have a legislature, but Ladakh will have no Assembly like Chandigarh. While announcing the details of the Bill, the Home Minister stated that Jammu and Kashmir will have a legislature like Delhi and Puducherry.

Shah's announcement led to huge uproar from the Opposition benches. Congress, Trinamool Congress, DMK, NCP and Left strongly opposed the move and stormed the well of the House.

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief ministers Omar Abdullah and Mehbboba Mufti slammed Modi government's move. While Abdullah termed the central government's move on Article 370 "unilateral and shocking", Mufti said the decision is illegal and unconstitutional.

Constitution(application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order 2019 pic.twitter.com/ueZWl8VU59 — ANI (@ANI) August 5, 2019

Article 370 of the Constitution of India, which granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir, evoked contrarian views. While Kashmiri Pandits wanted the abrogation of ‘discriminatory’ Article 370, political parties in the Kashmir Valley cautioned that tampering with the provision would lead to troubles that would be hard to manage.

Ever since Amit Shah took charge as the Union Home Minister in the second stint of Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA), speculation was rife that the Centre was planning to go ahead with the abrogation of Article 370 of the Constitution.

The Home Minister's hard stance over the matter has been displayed time and again with the BJP leader repeating that the Article is "temporary in nature" and "not permanent".

What is Article 370

“Article 370 was made in the Indian Constitution for the continuance of the State of Jammu and Kashmir with the Union of India on the basis of Instrument of Accession. Thus, Article 370 is a device to continue the existing relationship of State of Jammu and Kashmir with the Union of India,” the then Minister of State for Home Affairs, Haribhai Parathibhai Chaudhary, had said in the Rajya Sabha on February 25, 2015. “Through this Article, the Union Parliament gets jurisdiction to enact laws on matters specified either in the Instrument of Accession or by later addition with the concurrence of the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir,” he had added. It is usually believed, though inaccurately, that Article 370 was a part of the Instrument of Accession signed by the then Jammu and Kashmir ruler Maharaja Hari Singh on October 27, 1947. In actual, the provision was temporary and was designed to safeguard the rights of Muslim-majority Jammu and Kashmir and assuage the fears of the Kashmiri leadership. As per Article 370, the Indian jurisdiction in Jammu and Kashmir is only restricted to foreign affairs, defence, finance and communications matters. For other issues, Parliament needs the concurrence of the state government. Consequently, Indian citizens from other states cannot buy a piece of land or property in Jammu and Kashmir. Notably, the provisions of Article 238 shall not apply to the state of Jammu and Kashmir.

When was Article 370 of the Constitution adopted?

The Indian Constituent Assembly had, on October 17, 1949, adopted Article 370 of the Constitution, giving special status and internal autonomy to Jammu and Kashmir. On November 17, 1952, the Article became operative. Article 370 falls under Part XXI of the Constitution of India, which deals with "Temporary, Transitional and Special provisions”.
