India’s use of cluster bombs: Pakistan to brief envoys of UNSC’s permanent five

ISLAMABAD: Following Indian army’s use of cluster bombs across the Line of Control, Pakistan has decided to give briefing to the permanent five members of the United Nations Security Council.



Pakistan has also written a letter to the United Nations regarding the Indian violation of the borders.

Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said that India has lost control of the situation in the occupied Kashmir and it is wants to divert attention from this issue by creating a contentious situation.

On social media, Pakistan’s Ambassador at the UN Maleeha Lodhi said that FM Qureshi’s letter to UN Secretary General ‘on the grave situation in occupied Kashmir has also been circulated among members of the UN Security Council’.

She said that FM Qureshi’s letter to the UNSG expressed concern at the reports of India preparing to change status of the Occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

Earlier today, the Inter-Services Public Relations said the Indian army has been using cluster bombs to target civilians along the Line of Control (LoC).

“Indian Army uses cluster ammunition along LoC deliberately targeting Civilian population. This is a violation of the Geneva Convention and international humanitarian law,” the military’s media wing said in a statement.

Cluster munitions, or cluster bombs, are air-dropped or ground-launched explosive weapons that releases smaller 'bomblets' over a wide area. They pose serious risks to civilians during and after attacks, as the unexploded bomblets can kill or maim civilians long after a conflict has ended, and are costly to locate and remove.

"The 2008 Convention on Cluster Munitions prohibits the use, production, stockpiling and transfer of cluster munitions and requires States to ensure that they claim no further victims," says the ICRC.



The ISPR said it was time for the international community to take notice of India's "blatant violation of international laws on the use of cluster ammunition targeting innocent citizens".


