What Siddhartha and I have in common: A tale of harassment

Aakar Patel is a writer and columnist based in Bangalore. Why I Write, Patel’s book translating Saadat Hasan Manto’s non-fiction from Urdu to English was published in 2014. He has also translated the writing of India's prime minister Narendra Modi from Gujarati. Patel's book on India's culture, Low Trust Society, will be published in 2015. He is a former newspaper editor and has worked at publications across India. LESS ... MORE

There was dignity and restraint in the last words of VG Siddhartha, the founder of Cafe Coffee Day, and that is another reason to look at them closely. He accepted responsibility for what he said was his failure, though on balance it is not easy to look on his achievements as anything other than success.

He wrote, almost in passing, that his ability to do business had been hampered by an official from the Income-Tax department who he accused of harassment. The response of the department was to anonymously put out a story that the signature on the suicide note did not match the one on their records.

I thought it would interest readers to know what being at the receiving end of this looks like. Since October 2018, the organisation I lead has been facing something similar. Four government agencies (or perhaps it is five — one loses track beyond a point) have come down on it and more are lining up.

It is unimportant here to go over which organisation this is and what it does and why it upsets the great and mighty. The point is to illustrate what happens when the state uses its power and turns to coercion.

The first act was a case of sedition that was filed some time ago. The filing of the case, by a group associated with the ruling party, was accompanied by media coverage of the sort that only India’s television media is capable of. Ties and partnerships that had taken a long time to put together came under threat. The case was filed against the several instructions of the Supreme Court on such cases. It was investigated and a voluminous file was prepared showing that no crime had been committed.

It went to court, and the case was dismissed. The next action was a “raid” by a Union ministry, in which we were kept back and questioned till midnight. The things that were said to us will illustrate to readers what happens in these raids. Asked if our bank accounts would be frozen the next day, one officer replied: “Are sacrificial goats warned that their throats are about to be cut?”

Over several hours, my statement was recorded. When it was given to me to sign, I noticed that things I had not said were added and my words mangled. I said I could not sign such a statement. At this one officer became aggressive and, standing up, ordered me to come with him, saying he would keep me locked up all night. I felt this was preferable to lying and stood up to go with him. At this, his colleagues calmed him down and agreed to change my statement.

I asked for a copy of the statement after signing it, but was told this was not lawful and I would only get it if they filed charges (no complaint or FIR or anything else had been filed till that point, and none has been filed till date).

A few days later, a news television channel carried a two-hour special on my statement from 8pm to 10pm. When I asked the investigating officer why they had unlawfully given out something, I was told they were innocent and this had happened “from Delhi.”

One officer asked a colleague why I had chosen to hide my real name, which he insisted was Muslim. I did not challenge this officer because I thought about it and asked myself what was wrong if I had a Muslim name.

A few weeks after this, another Union ministry sent a team on “inspection” which spent two days with me. All of the work that I would have done otherwise was set aside. From this visit and from the raid, as I have said, nothing came. No case, no charge, no formal accusation. Except for the vilification in the media, not one thing.

A few days after this, our returns for a previous year were disallowed and a large sum had to be deposited while we fought to get our money back. A few days after this, supporters of the organisation were sent letters to verify their identity. A few days ago another Union agency sent notice that they wanted to come for an “inspection” and in preparation for this we had to send them documents already sent to three other Union ministries. More time spent collecting and signing the material.

This does not end, and I know exactly what it is that Siddhartha was referring to even though our circumstances are different. The fact is that there is no accountability in those arms of the state that are empowered to do what Siddhartha and I would say without question is harassment.

Organisations and individuals can be manhandled and libelled anonymously and with malice and are left to heal themselves while the officials move on to the next target.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
