Kashmir news: Tension in Jammu and Kashmir as troops arrive, outstation students asked to leave Valley

Read Also

SRINAGAR: Panic and fear, which have enveloped Jammu & Kashmir since the government called off the Amarnath Yatra citing terror threat from Pakistan , thickened on Saturday when the state administration asked outstation students to move out as soon as possible. The authorities made arrangements for outstation students at the National Institute of Technology, Srinagar , to leave the Valley in state transport buses.The principal of the Government Polytechnic College at Srinagar, too, instructed all residential students to vacate the hostel. The move came against the arrival of thousands of security personnel amid escalating speculation that the Modi government might implement BJP’s poll pledge to scrap Article 35A.Efforts by the authorities, including governor Satya Pal Malik , to tamp down the buzz about the “impending” decision of the Modi government have failed to quieten matters. Malik, who had late last night said that the decision to end the Amarnath yatra and send back pilgrims and tourists was necessitated only by the threat of an attack by Pakistan-backed terror groups, repeated his statement when a National Conference delegation called on him to seek clarity.However, to many the latest denial did not sound unambiguous, with the governor admitting he wasn’t sure what might unfold later. “They’ve gone satisfied. Whatever they expected from me I did. As far as I know, there’s no inclination that something is going to happen here. I don’t know about tomorrow. That’s not in my hands. But till today, there’s nothing to worry,” Malik said after meeting Omar Abdullah and other NC leaders.The uncertainty saw people scampering to stock up on medicines, edible oil, salt, tea, pulses, vegetables and other essentials. There were long queues at fuel stations, while people also rushed to ATM outlets. According to a commuter, Manzoor Ahmad Khan, petrol pumps in Srinagar had “completely dried up” and people are now trying to procure fuel from north Kashmir districts. Rumour-mongers had a field day.Authorities had to struggle to quell one about local police being disarmed. ADG (law & order) Munir Khan denied cops have been disarmed and CRPF and Army have taken control of the situation. Authorities also intensified efforts to send back Amarnath yatris and tourists. Besides putting the road transport system on full throttle, state authorities also arranged Air Force planes to airlift them. “We are giving a 72-hour window to yatris and tourists to leave,” a government source said. Security has been put on high alert.“Airbases and military installations in Jammu have been put on high alert and told to be in ‘ready’ mode,” an official said. Drones were seen hovering over the Air Force station and Jammu’s only civil airport. An official said several battalions of paramilitary forces have been deployed in Kishtwar, Bhaderwah, Doda, Banihal and Ramban in Jammu in addition to additional deployment of Army and BSF personnel along the IB and LoC. RAF and paramilitary BSF have been moved to Rajouri and Poonch to deal with any internal trouble, reports said.
