Rains continue, flood alert in many areas

Two including 10-year-old die in separate incidents; 2,000 people rescued; Godavari in spate

Relentless showers continued to pound Pune, Satara and Sangli districts in western Maharashtra, and Nashik in north Maharashtra throughout Sunday. District authorities evacuated more than 2,000 persons from inundated areas.

Ten-year-old Kunal Ajay Dodke was killed and his younger sister injured after a wall of their house caved in on Sunday morning in Lonavala, around 70 km from Pune. The police said heavy rain might have triggered the wall collapse.

In what is thought to be another rain-related accident, one person drowned while another was feared dead in Satara after their car plunged into a waterfall near Koyna dam late on Saturday. According to the Satara police, the two people were travelling to Kamargaon when the driver lost control of the car. The driver has been identified as Satara resident Nitin Shelar, while rescue teams are searching for the other occupant of the car.

Schools closed today

Pune city and district were battered by near-continuous rain since Saturday evening through the better part of Sunday.

Pune Collector Nawal Kishore Ram declared a holiday for all schools in the district on Monday, taking into account the grim forecast for the next 48 hours, making use of powers recently bestowed by the State Education Department on district collectors to declare school holidays in case of a disaster or emergency.

“Going by the India Meteorological Department’s (IMD) forecast of heavy rain in the forthcoming days and in wake of the continuous rainfall that commenced since Saturday in the Maval, Mulshi, Bhor, Velha and Junnar talukas of Pune among other areas, we have decided to declare a holiday for school-going students to preclude any untoward incident,” Mr. Ram said.

In Pune city, with over 41,000 cusecs (cubic foot per second) of water released from the Khadakwasla into Mutha river, the Bhide bridge was submerged and there were traffic snarls at several points in the city.

The relentless downpour especially threw the commute awry in Pimpri-Chinchwad and Wakad areas, after over 35,000 cusecs discharged from Mulshi dam flooded Sanghvi and Wakad.

Discharge from the Khadakwasla dam inundated low-lying areas in Balewadi, Baner, Aundh, Yerwada, Sinhgad Road and Bopodi.

Rescue teams moved more than 300 families dwelling in low-lying of the city to safer zones owing to the discharge of massive quantities of water from the Khadakwasla, Pavana, Mulshi and other dams.

Several people were trapped in residential areas in Pimpri and Sanghvi after their homes were flooded. More than 50 residents of old Sanghvi were successfully rescued by the fire department and local police in the morning.

Following the discharge of water from Mulshi dam, the district administration issued stern warnings to deter monsoon picnickers. Seven members of a family stranded at a house in the water-logged Kamshet area were also rescued by a team of the NDRF, said authorities.

Karad, Sangli on alert

The rain has led to the four major dams in Pune district — Khadakwasla, Panshet, Varasgaon and Temghar — to fill up to more than 90% of their cumulative storage capacity of 29.15 TMC.

With the Pavana dam swelling to capacity owing to continuous rain in the past week, the Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal Corporation scrapped the water rationing it had enforced throughout the summer.

Pune and Satara are expected to receive heavy showers for the next 48 hours, IMD officials said. With the steep increase in the discharge of water (more than 50,000 cusecs) from the Koyna dam, a high alert has been sounded for Karad (in Satara) and Sangli cities.

Discharge of 20,000 cusecs from the Chandoli dam in Sangli led to flooding in nearby villages, while in adjacent Kolhapur district, heavy rains disrupted communications between several villages in the district.

Mumbai: August 04, 2019: River Godavari is in full flow and flooded amny areas in Nashik on Sunday. Photo: Special Arrangement | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

Nashik inundated

The Nashik District Collector, too, has declared a holiday for schools and colleges on Monday.

With the Godavari river in spate and the continuing release of water from the Gangapur dam, parts of the district, including the holy spots of Trimbakeshwar and Panchavati, were completely deluged, making them out of bounds for tourists.

River waters reached up to the neck of the Dutondya Maruti, a statue of Hanuman, in Panchavati, and even entered the Trimbakeshwar temple as showers continued to lash Nashik city and the talukas of Igatpuri, Trimbakeshwar, Peint, Surgana and Dindori.

According to authorities, the Trimbakeshwar tehsil had received more than 300 mm rain till Sunday morning while Nashik city received 84 mm rain.
