2 city residents duped by online fraudsters

Ludhiana: Two more city residents have been duped by online fraudsters. PAU and Jamalpur police on Saturday registered a complaint against unidentified accused for withdrawing money from their account. In the first case, Pradeep Gupta (50) of GTB Nagar said he had to send a courier to Rajasthan, for which he searched for a courier company online on July 11. He then got the contact number of a company near Valmiki Chowk of Rahon Road.

Gupta added he had asked the accused to reveal their proper address so that he could drop the parcel in their office. However, the accused said their worker would collect the parcel from his house, for which he had to just make an online payment of Rs10. Minutes later, the accused sent an online link for payment, and when Gupta tried to make the Rs10 payment, the transaction failed. But immediately after that, he received a message that Rs49,000 had been withdrawn from his account.

Gupta then called on the same number, but it was switched off. Thereafter, he lodged a complaint with police. Jamalpur SHO inspector Harjinder Singh said the police had registered a case against unidentified accused under sections 420 (cheating), 120-B (criminal conspiracy) of the IPC and IT Act. The FIR was lodged following an inquiry.

In a similar case, a resident of Pushpa Vihar in Barewal lost Rs75,000 to online fraudsters. In this case too, the accused asked the victim to pay Rs10 as fee, and later withdrew the money from her account. Complainant Rubina Agarwal (29) of Barewal said she was looking for a job and uploaded her bio-data on some online websites for the same. On January 8, he received a call from a person who claimed to be from an online recruitment website. He told her there was a vacancy in a Ludhiana-based firm, and to apply for it, she would have to make a payment of Rs10 online. The accused further sent her a link on her mobile, and when Rubina tried to make a payment, the transaction failed. However, later on, two transactions of Rs25,000 and Rs32,000 had got withdrawn from her account.

Then, Agarwal lodged a complaint with the police, following which PAU police registered a case against the unidentified accused under sections 420 (cheating), 120-B (criminal conspiracy) of the IPC and IT Act. The police are now trying to trace the accused, though the mobile numbers are switched off.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
