Godavari floods in Andhra: Over 17,000 shifted to relief camps, state on high alert

Godavari floods in Andhra: Over 17,000 shifted to relief camps, state on high alert

According to the report by Andhra Pradesh State Disaster Management Authority, the initial damage is being pegged at Rs 6.45 crore.

news Flood

The Andhra Pradesh State Disaster Management Authority (APSDMA) on Sunday released a preliminary damages report on the Godavari floods. The report estimates the cost of total damages at Rs 64,58,378. The maximum damage is reported to have occurred to roads and buildings.

According to the report, a total of 52,500 persons from 32 villages in East Godavari district have been affected by the floods, while in West Godavari district, 21,568 persons from 39 villages were affected.

The report says that as part of evacuation plans, 17,632 persons were shifted to 32 relief camps in East Godavari, and 47 medical camps were set up in West Godavari.

The report says that at 12 pm on Sunday, the flood water had a discharge at the rate of 13,43,836 cusecs per hour from the Dowleswaram barrage in Rajamahendravaram. The inflows also stood at the same figure as the outflows.

Authorities in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana had issued the first warning alert when the water level of the river rose to 43 feet. According to the APSDMA report, the second-level warning is still in place.

The India Meteorological Department (IMD) has predicted moderate to heavy rainfall in the next two days in several parts of coastal Andhra Pradesh. Officials expect the flood level to rise further in the region.

The state government announced the distribution of 25 kg of rice and other essential commodities to the affected families. According to the report, 35,264 food packets have been distributed in East Godavari, while 36.004 MT (million tonnes) of rice were distributed in West Godavari. Other commodities such as kerosene, dal, palm oil, onions and potatoes were also distributed in West Godavari.

Road services to 19 villages have been cut off in East Godavari, while two submerged bridges in West Godavari have caused transportation problems, according to the report.
