Politicos condemn Kashmir bloodletting

LAHORE: State terrorism by the Indian army in the Occupied Kashmir has been widely condemned.

Punjab Chief Minister Sardar Usman Buzdar condemned the oppression of the Kashmiris by the Indian armed forces and expressed sorrow and grief over the loss of lives.

Extending sympathies with the martyrs’ families, he said the Indian army had spilled blood of the innocent Kashmiris but he warned that New Delhi could not suppress the independence movement of the Kashmiris with state terrorism.

He lamented the silence of the international community over the issue and said it was unjustified and urged the comity of nations to play its role in bringing an end to Indian atrocities. He said the international community would have to wake up to blatant human rights violations by India.

He said independence was the right of the Kashmiris and they should be given their right at any cost. He said Pakistani nation stood by the people of Kashmiris and would continue to extend them moral and diplomatic support.

He said firing cluster bombs on the civilian population at the Line of Control was a barbaric act of the Modi government and Indian war hysteria could destroy peace of the region.

PML-N president Shahbaz Sharif asked Mr Modi to be sensible and stop cruel treatment of the Kashmiris. He also urged the UN secretary general to take notice of the Indian violations on the LoC and loss of lives.

Jamaat-i-Islami Emir Sirajul Haq assured the Kashmiri leadership that Pakistani nation would always side with their Kashmiri brothers and would do their utmost to help them win their freedom from the Indian yoke.

Punjab Energy Minister Dr Akhtar Malik said sanity and reason must prevail over arrogance and brute force by Modi government. He said time had come for a negotiated and peaceful settlement of the issue in accordance with the aspirations of the people of the Valley.

He condemned the massive use of cluster ammunition by Indian security forces targeting innocent civilians along the LoC. He said it was a blatant violation of the Geneva Convention and international laws. “The use of cluster toy bombs on civilians has shown the real face of India and such

tactics cannot deter the young Kashmiris from demanding their inalienable right to liberty and freedom,” he said.

He warned that Modi and his cohorts should refrain from tampering with the Article 35 (a) of the Indian Constitution as it could lead to more chaos in the Valley because of resultant demographic changes.

Published in Dawn, August 5th, 2019
