Jammu and Kashmir bifurcation updates | U.P., Haryana police told to ensure safety of Kashmiri students

The government, on Monday, introduced a resolution to remove provisions of Article 370, which provides special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

In addition, Home Minister Amit Shah also introduced a Bill bifurcating the State of Jammu of Kashmir into Union Territory of Ladakh and the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir.

Here are the live updates:

Haryana Police has issued an alert across the State. Additional Director General of Police (Law and Order) Navdeep Singh Virk said that all Commissioners of Police and district Superintendents of Police have been directed to take adequate steps for safety and security of Kashmiri students studying in various educational institutes in the State.

Uttar Pradesh DGP O.P. Singh instructs all district police chiefs and divisional police chiefs to not allow any kind of motorcycle rallies or processions keeping in view the situation around J&K. Issues advisory to police to ensure safety of Kashmiri students and working people and protect them from misbehavior.

5.40 p.m.

The RSS on Monday congratulated the Central government for taking away the special status of Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 of the Constitution.

“We congratulate the government for this bold initiative which was very much necessary in national interest, including the State of Jammu & Kashmir. Everyone should welcome this notwithstanding any personal interests or political differences,” said RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat and his deputy Suresh (Bhaiyyaji) Joshi through its official Twitter account. — Devesh Kumar Pandey

5.30 p.m.

Shah introduces J&K resolutions in LS

Home Minister Amit Shah moved a resolution in the Lok Sabha for bringing a bill to reorganise the State of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories. Moving the resolution following the President’s order abrogating Article 370, Mr. Shah sought the permission of the House to bring the bill.

He assured the Opposition members that he would move the bill and the resolution for consideration of the House on Tuesday and was only seeking the permission of the House for the same now.

“I will move the bill for consideration and passage tomorrow. The Opposition can have detailed discussion on the same. I am ready to give the reply,” he told the House, amid protests by Opposition members and thumping of desks by treasury benches. - PTI

Full text of J&K Reorganisation Bill

Explained | How the status of Jammu and Kashmir is being changed

Jammu and Kashmir enjoyed special status under Article 370 of the Constitution of India. This Article describes it as a temporary provision and that it will cease to be operative if the President issues a public notification to that effect. However, prior to that, a recommendation is necessary from the Constituent Assembly of Jammu and Kashmir.

As a result of Article 370, Jammu and Kashmir had its own Constitution, and all laws passed by Parliament will not be applicable to the State, unless the State government gives its concurrence. The President is empowered to decide what provisions of the Constitution of India would be applicable to the State and what are the exceptions, but with the State government’s concurrence.

12.50 p.m.

Monumental decision towards national integration: Arun Jaitley

Former Union Minister and senior BJP leader Arun Jaitley said the government’s move on Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir is a monumental decision towards national integration.

Asserting that separate status led to separatism, he said in a blog that no dynamic nation could allow this situation to continue.

11.50 a.m.

According to the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation bill, introduced by Mr. Shah, the UT in Ladakh will have no legislature like Chandigarh while the other UT of Jammu and Kashmir will have a legislature like Delhi and Puducherry.

Acrimonious scenes were seen in the House soon after the announcement of the Home Minister.

Follow live updates from the Parliament here.

A photograph of the document carried by Home Minister Amit Shah | Photo Credit: AFP

11.30 a.m.

Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh to be Union Territories

The State of Jammu and Kashmir has been bifurcated into two union territories (UT) -- the Union Territory of Ladakh and the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, reports our Political Editor Nistula Hebbar.

The UT of Ladakh will not have a legislature.

"The Ladakh Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir has a large area but is sparsely populated with very difficult terrain. There has been a long-pending demand of the people of Ladakh to give it the status of a Union Territory to enable them to realise their aspirations," a statement from Home Minister Amit Shah said. "The Union Territory of Ladakh will be without Legislature," the statement said.

"Further, keeping in view the prevailing internal security situation, fuelled by cross-border terrorism in the existing State of Jammu and Kashmir, a separate Union Territory for Jammu and Kashmir is being created. The Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir will be with legislature," the statement added.

"Darkest day in Indian democracy"

Former Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir Mehbooba Mufti tweeted saying that today marked the darkest day in Indian democracy.

"Decision of J&K leadership to reject 2 nation theory in 1947 & align with India has backfired. Unilateral decision of GOI to scrap Article 370 is illegal & unconstitutional which will make India an occupational force in J&K," she tweeted.

"It will have catastrophic consequences for the subcontinent. GOIs intentions are clear. They want the territory of J&K by terrorising it’s people. India has failed Kashmir in keeping its promises," she added.

11.20 a.m.

Amit Shah moves resolution to revoke provisions of Article 370

Home Minister Amit Shah has moved a resolution seeking to introduce a Bill revoking provisions of Article 370.

PM Narendra Modi called up NDA allies before the announcement by Mr. Shah. A presidential order has withdrawn the 1954 order applying provisions of the Constitution to Jammu and Kashmir with modifications.

Notification regarding Article 370.

10.45 am

Oppostion parties meet to discuss security situation in J&K

Leaders of Opposition parties on Monday met in the Parliament complex to discuss the security situation in Jammu and Kashmir.

The meeting took place at a time when the Union Cabinet was meeting amidst speculation that it will take a crucial decision on the state.

Opposition parties have also given adjournment notices in both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha to discuss the Kashmir issue in the wake of heightened tensions in the border state.

10.30 a.m.

Two PDP Rajya Sabha MPs seek Opposition help

In a plea to the Opposition parties, two Peoples Democratic Party MPs in the Rajya Sabha have written to them seeking their support to get answers from the government in Parliament on the situation in Kashmir.

PDP MPs staging a protest against the recent developments in Kashmir at Parliament house in New Delhi on Monday, August 5, 2019. | Photo Credit: R.V. Moorthy

Nazir Ahmad Laway and Mir Mohd Fayaz in a joint letter to all the Opposition parties have said that their own attempts to seek answers all of last week failed and need the Opposition’s help to amplify the issue. The government needs to “break its silence” and make a statement to settle the matter.

“The people do not know as to what is cooking between top brasses of the present government vis-a-vis the Kashmir issue,” they noted.

10.20 a.m.

U.P. cancels leave of all officials

Uttar Pradesh government has canceled the leave of all officials, citing Independence Day, festivals and other important law and order issue as reasons.

10.00 a.m.

Amit Shah to address Parliament

Home Minister Amit Shah will address both Houses of the Parliament and will make a statement on a subject related to Kashmir, reports our correspondent Vijaita Singh.

He will speak in Rajya Sabha at 11 a.m. and in Lok Sabha at 12 p.m.

Meanwhile in Kashmir, most journalists not given curfew passes, with the exception of few prominent personalities.

9.40 a.m.

No Zero Hour in RS till completion of legislative business

The Rajya Sabha has issued a notice saying that there would be no Zero Hour in the House till the Legislative business for the day concludes. "The Matters to be Raised with Permission (Zero Hour submissions) will be taken up after the completion of the Legislative business listed for the day," the notice said.

Meanwhile, the Union Cabinet meet has begun.

9.15 a.m.

HM Amit Shah, Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad, NSA Ajit Doval reach PM's residence ahead of Cabinet meet.

Union Home Minister Amit Shah and Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad were the first to reach the prime minister’s residence, where the meeting is taking place, officials said.

A meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Security, the country’s highest decision making body, and another meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs are also expected to be held separately, sources told PTI.

9.00 a.m.

Congress spokesperson Manish Tiwari gives an adjournment notice on the Kashmir issue, asks Prime Minister Narendra Modi to respond.

-- Nistula Hebbar

8.45 a.m.

Law Minister meets Amit Shah ahead of Cabinet meet

Ahead of the Cabinet meeting, Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad met Home Minister Amit Shah.

8.40 a.m.

Amit Shah reaches 7, Lok Kalyan Marg, the Prime Minister's residence, an hour ahead of the Cabinet meeting., reports Nistula Hebbar.

CPI(M) MPs have moved a resolution Section 267 to suspend business in the Rajya Sabha to discuss Kashmir, reports Sobhana Nair. The party seeks an explanation for the troop build-up in Kashmir.

"The unprecedented cancellation of the Amarnath Yatra mid-way, the instructions to tourists to leave the valley, and the alleged house arrest of political party leaders have heightened tensions and anxieties among the people," the resolution said.

"All this has fueled apprehensions that some drastic measures affecting the Constitutional status of Jammu & Kashmir is contemplated with reference to Article 35 A and Article 370," the resolution added.

8.30 a.m.

P. Chidambaram condemns house arrests

Congress leader P. Chidambaram condemned the house arrests of Jammu and Kashmir leaders.

"I had warned of a misadventure in J&K. It seems the government is determined to embark upon one," he tweeted.

"The house arrest of J&K leaders is a signal that the government will defy all democratic norms and principles to achieve its objects. I condemn the house arrests. Before the day is over we will know if there will be a major crisis in J&K. Keeping my fingers crossed," he tweeted.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is set to chair a Union Cabinet Meeting on Monday, August 5, morning.

7.00 a.m.

Complete lockdown in Kashmir, restrictions continue. No violence reported yet, security apparatus not been told anything yet, Omar Abdullah, Mehbooba Mufti and others are under house arrest: a source to The Hindu.

- Vijaita Singh

"The incoming call facilities to the dialled number is currently not available" : all phone numbers in Kashmir right now. — vijaita singh (@vijaita) August 5, 2019

4.a.m.

Schools, colleges closed, Section 144 imposed

Schools and colleges in Jammu, Kishtwar, Resai, Doda and Udhampur districts were also ordered to remain close on Monday, the officials said.

The authorities imposed night curfew in Kishtwar and Rajouri districts and Banihal area of Ramban district, while restrictions were imposed in Jammu, Resai and Doda districts, besides Srinagar on Sunday, they said.

“We have imposed night curfew in Kishtwar district from tonight as a precautionary measure”, Deputy Commissioner, Kishtwar, Angrez Singh Rana, told PTI.

He said all schools and colleges have been closed in the district.

The authorities in Jammu have also imposed restrictions under Section 144 of the CrPC in the district and banned all types of congregation, the officials said.

Schools, colleges and academic institutions are advised to remain closed as a measure of caution, Deputy Commissioner, Jammu, Sushma Chauhan, said.

Mobile Internet services have been suspended in the Kashmir Valley, they said, adding that satellite phones are being provided to police officials and district magistrates.

- PTI

2 a.m.

Omar Abdullah, Mehbooba Mufti under house arrest

Former Chief Minister Omar Abdullah said he was placed under house arrest in Srinagar. “The process has already started for other mainstream leaders. No way of knowing if this is true but if it is then I'll see all of you on the other side of whatever is in store. Allah save us,” he tweeted.

To the people of Kashmir, we don’t know what is in store for us but I am a firm believer that what ever Almighty Allah has planned it is always for the better, we may not see it now but we must never doubt his ways. Good luck to everyone, stay safe & above all PLEASE STAY CALM. — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) August 4, 2019

Former Chief Minister Mufti said, “In such difficult times, I’d like to assure our people that come what may, we are in this together and will fight it out. Nothing should break our resolve to strive for what’s rightfully ours.”

Mr. Omar Abdullah and Ms. Mufti earlier in the day had warned the Centre against abrogation of Article 35A and Article 370, which gives special status to J&K.

How ironic that elected representatives like us who fought for peace are under house arrest. The world watches as people & their voices are being muzzled in J&K. The same Kashmir that chose a secular democratic India is facing oppression of unimaginable magnitude. Wake up India — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) August 4, 2019

There is no official word on the arrests by the Governor’s administration.

-- Peerzada Ashiq
