Govt proposes to reorganise state of Jammu and Kashmir: Here’s how J&K map could look like

Here's how the future map of Jammu and Kashmir could look like

New Delhi: In a move with far-reaching implications, the Government of India on Monday revoked Article 370 of the Indian Constitution by way of a Presidential order. In a Gazette Notification issued this morning, it was announced that the Constituent Assembly of Jammu and Kashmir will now be referred to as the Legislative Assembly.

The government also introduced a Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill in Parliament. Introducing the Bill in the Rajya Sabha, Home Minister proposed to divide the state into two Union Territories. Ladakh will be a Union Territory without a legislature while Jammu and Kashmir will be a separate Union Territory with a legislature.

The government aims to put the Bill to vote on Monday itself in both houses of Parliament. Once the Bill is passed and it gets assent from President Ram Nath Kovind, the map of India will change with regard to Jammu and Kashmir.

Here’s how Jammu and Kashmir might look like once all formalities with regard to the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill are completed.

Today's crucial announcements came amidst hectic development in Jammu and Kashmir. Nearly 40,000 troops were moved to Kashmir over the past two weeks. It was said that the troops were deployed in the state to strengthen counter-terrorism grid and improve law and order situation.

The Army, meanwhile, said terrorists were plotting to target the Amarnath Yatra in Jammu and Kashmir and said weapons and explosives had been recovered along the two routes. The Jammu and Kashmir administration, swiftly moved to issue an advisory and asked the yatris to curtail their pilgrimage and leave the state immediately. The Machail Yatra was also suspended for security reasons.

The administration last night invoked Section 144 in the state and put mainstream political leaders under preventive custody / house arrest ahead of today's announcements.
