Kashmir, nexus of conflict between nuclear antagonists India and Pakistan, faces crackdown, plunges into fear

India and Pakistan have fought two wars and engaged in countless cross-border military skirmishes over Kashmir.

Now India has plunged the mountainous region into fear by revoking Kashmir’s constitutionally mandated “special privileges.” The federal government in Delhi sent in thousands of troops over the weekend, and Kashmiri political leaders have been put under house arrest. Internet service to the area has been cut off or restricted.

Kashmiri politicians such as Mehbooba Mufti, as well as other residents of the region, took to Twitter before the imposition of internet restrictions to tell the world what was happening there.

How ironic that elected representatives like us who fought for peace are under house arrest. The world watches as people & their voices are being muzzled in J&K. The same Kashmir that chose a secular democratic India is facing oppression of unimaginable magnitude. Wake up India — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) August 4, 2019

My parents are making last minute phone calls to friends and family. I am shaken by their calmness. They sent money to my brother (outside of Kashmir) not knowing their own fate post midnight in a very matter of fact way. Our lives are survival.#KashmirBleeds #StandWithKashmir — Zara Bakshi (@BakZara) August 4, 2019

The crackdown did not come as a surprise: The Delhi government ordered tourists out of the Himalayan region last week, warning of a possible terrorist attack.

Kashmir has been claimed by both Hindu-majority India and Muslim-majority Pakistan -- and administered by India -- since the two countries won their independence shortly after World War II. Great Britain partitioned its colony on the Indian subcontinent in 1947 before pulling out, sparking widespread violence. “Under the partition plan provided by the Indian Independence Act,” the BBC notes, “Kashmir was free to accede to India or Pakistan” -- and the region’s maharaja at the time chose India, even though the population is predominantly Muslim. This led to a two-year war between India and Pakistan, with another one erupting in 1965.

In the 1990s, both India and Pakistan successfully tested nuclear weapons and began stockpiling warheads. Various armed separatist outfits have been operating in Kashmir for decades.

In response to the weekend crackdown in Kashmir, Pakistan’s political leaders have said their country must respond.

“The people of Kashmir cannot be left alone at this moment,” said Pakistan Muslim League president Shahbaz Sharif. “We will go to every extent to defend the human rights and legal rights of Kashmiris.”

Last month, President Donald Trump claimed Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi asked him to mediate Kashmir talks between India and Pakistan.

“I was with Prime Minister Modi two weeks ago, and we talked about this subject,” Trump told the press. “And he actually said, ‘Would you like to be a mediator or arbitrator?’ I said, ‘Where?’ He said, ‘Kashmir.’”

The Indian government insisted no such conversation took place.

-- Douglas Perry

@douglasmperry

Visit subscription.oregonlive.com/newsletters to get Oregonian/OregonLive journalism delivered to your email inbox.
