Minority meet calls for law against lynchings, moots platform to promote amity among different faiths

NEW DELHI: On a day the government made announcements axing the special status of Jammu and Kashmir in Parliament, next door, at the Talkatora indoor stadium a congregation of thousands of Muslim community members gave voice to the demand for the enactment of a stringent law against mob lynching. The “Aman Aur Ekta Sammelan” saw leaders of different faiths vociferously condemn hate crimes in the name of religion or patriotism. The speakers, however, cautiously steered clear of making any public statements on the government’s recently enacted law against instant triple talaq or the Centre’s decision on Kashmir.Organised by minority organisation Jamiat Ulama -i- Hind, the congregation saw participants unanimously vow to fight against the menace of mob-lynching. JUH general secretary Maulana Mahmood Madani shared that it has been decided to establish ‘Jamiat Sadbhawana Manch’ at the district and city level to promote amity and friendship among people of different faiths, caste and creed.In a joint declaration adopted at the meet, it is stated that “various misconceptions and falsehoods tainting Islam with terrorism, radicalism and gender injustice are being spread by forces inimical to the eternal truths of our Islamic faith and heritage. Terrorism in all its forms is condemnable and against the basic tenets of Islam.” Madani said that this sadbhawana manch will be a medium to dispel these misconceptions being spread by “a small section trying to create a majoritarian perception”.Through the declaration, the community sought legislation against mob lynching providing for strict punishment to the perpetrators and police and administrative officials found negligent in fulfilling their duty.“Killing, burning, and elimination of unarmed vulnerable civilians in the name of religion or patriotism and publicising such acts on social media to terrorise the public at large as the most repugnant and abominable acts. It cannot be tolerated in any civilised society. We disown and denounce any such barbarous movements and organisations. We demand effective action against them,” it is stated.Maulana Arshad Madani appealed to the government to ensure a safe environment for the minorities. He warned those trying to create unrest between Hindus and Muslims by saying that “the brotherhood between the two communities is too strong and the foundation of this unity cannot be shaken by anyone.”Besides leaders from the minority community, other faith leaders too participated in the meeting including Swami Chidanand Saraswati Maharaj President of Parmarth Niketan Ashram, Acharya Lokesh Muni, Gyani Ranjeet Singh and Anil Joseph Thomas among others.
