BMRCL takes a rail out of Chennai Metro

Namma Metro

Chennai Metro

BMRCL

guards

non-technical personnel

to outsource security personnel on CMRL's suggestionBangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) has begun the process of outsourcing its employees. In May this year,Rail Limited (CMRL) had askedand Kochi Metro Rail Limited (KMRL) to outsource a team of employees to stand in for regular employees if they go on protest, so that the operations aren’t disrupted. Some time back, when Chennai Metro employees were on strike, the agency managed its operations with a team of 106 operators, working in shifts.BMRCL is only outsourcing itsand. On Monday, BMRCL called tenders for 29 security supervisors and 414 security guards, for underground stations. 28 security supervisors and 338 security guards have been called for Reach 4 and 4A, which has stations like National College, Lalbagh, South End Circle, Jayanagar, RV Road, Banashankari, JP Nagar, and Yelachenahalli. For Reach 3 and 3A, consisting of Peenya depot and 10 metro stations, 39 security supervisors and 395 security guards have been called. BMRCL will be paying the security supervisors Rs 18,025.22 and Rs 16,664.62 to the guards, including all allowances. The scope of work would include manning entries and exits, frisking the entrants, manning the Automatic Fare Collection (AFC) gates, and checking the CCTVs, among others.AS Shankar, executive director, Operations & Maintenance, BMRCL, says, “Chennai Metro has already employed an outsourced team for emergencies, but we are yet to take a call on it. It's too early to say anything as nothing has been decided yet. But we have outsourced employees in certain sectors, like security guards and will continue to do so.”Suryanarayana Murthy, Vice President of Bangalore Metro Rail Employee Union (BMREU) says, “According to Chennai Metro, the 100 outsourced employees will be deployed during strikes, but who will be accountable if there is any mishap? Not only will the regular employees be deprived of their work but there will be no accountability with the outsourced employees. They lack knowledge and training. Our loco pilots are recruited after passing examinations and receive three to six months of internal training in Delhi. Even the station staff is well trained. I suggest that for maintenance and station control work, employees must not be outsourced, but outsourcing should only be done for jobs like housekeeping or security.”
