CM, lawmakers slam Indian aggression in Kashmir

Pakistani Kashmiri chant slogans during an anti-Indian protest at the diplomatic enclave in Islamabad. PHOTO: REUTERS

LAHORE: Punjab Chief Minister Sardar Usman Buzdar presided over a cabinet meeting which strongly condemned the illegal and unconstitutional step taken by the Modi government to revoke the special status of the Indian occupied state of Jammu and Kashmir.



The meeting also condemned the targeting of the civilian population with cluster bombs along the LOC. The ministers slammed what they called state-sponsored Indian terrorism in the region. The cabinet expressed its strongest concern over the decision of the Indian government and termed it a nefarious effort to usurp the fundamental rights of the Kashmiri people.



Addressing the meeting, Usman Buzdar said that the Modi government is taking disastrous measures under a policy of brute military jingoism. He asserted that this step will be remembered as the darkest day in Kashmir’s history.



“In fact, India is snatching the rights of the people in occupied Kashmir through state-sponsored terrorism,” he added. He reiterated that the Pakistani nation stands by Kashmiris. He vowed to extend diplomatic, political and moral support to the Kashmiri people.



The CM ordered ministers and MPAs to fully participate in a rally organized at Faisal Chowk to show solidarity with Kashmiris. He warned that India could never usurp the fundamental rights of Kashmiris through military aggression. “The peaceful struggle of the Kashmiri people aims to achieve the goal of self-determination,” he said.



He said that durable peace and stability cannot be achieved in the region without first solving the core issue of Kashmir. He stressed on the international community to play a role for the security, peace, and freedom of the Kashmiri people.



The meeting offered Fateha for the deceased and prayed for the early recovery of the injured. Auqaf minister Saeed ul Hassan Shah offered the prayer.



MPA submit resolution



Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) lawmakers have strongly condemned the cluster bomb attacks on civilians and Indian aggression in Kashmir.



The opposition’s legislators demanded that the United Nations and international human rights organisations take notice of the violations by Indian forces in Kashmir. Similar demands were put forward by MPAs Hina Pervez Butt, Azma Zahid Bukhari, Sumaira Komal and Saida Taimoor through separate resolutions submitted in the Punjab Assembly Secretariat.



Hina Butt warned India that Pakistan would never tolerate further aggression on the Kashmir issue. She said the Pakistani nation stood by its armed forces which were ready to respond to any aggression by India.



She contended that India violated the Geneva Convention by using cluster bombs on Kashmiris.



She urged the UN to come forward and play its role to resolve Kashmir’s issue.



Meanwhile, in her resolution, MPA Azma Zahid Bukhari expressed her sorrow over the death of citizens, including children. She said India wanted to divert the world’s attention from the actual issue of Kashmir by such cowardly attacks on residential areas. She also emphasised on exposing the attacks of Indian forces on the global level. She said there is a need to launch a diplomatic campaign to project Kashmir’s imbroglio.



Published in The Express Tribune, August 6th, 2019.
