Valley Silenced, Two Former CMs Detained While India Briefs Key Nations On J&K Overhaul. Here Are Major Developments

Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led NDA government at the centre pushed the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill 2019 in the Rajya Sabha as Home Minister Amit Shah led his government in the Upper House with his signature firebrand oration to bring a complete overhaul in the structure of the northernmost state of India.

The Bill has today been placed in the Lok Sabha, leading to a face-off between the government and the Congress-led Opposition. Internet and mobile services continue to be cramped in the valley, two of J&K’s former Chief Ministers have been detained while voices of Kashmiris is absent from the mainstream discourse that is going to directly impact their lives.

Mr Shah’s statement put weeks of speculations in the wake of the Centre’s consecutive steps to ensure tight security in the state and an upsurge in the deployment of army in the valley to rest but it raised fresh concerns among the Opposition parties as well as activists and human rights groups.

The proposal which is set to have massive repercussions for the state of Jammu and Kashmir not only seeks to abolish the controversial provisions of Article 370 and Article 35A but it is also directed at bifurcating the state into two Union territories -- Jammu and Kashmir, which will have a legislature of its own and Ladakh, which, according to the proposal, will be without a legislature.

Here are the major developments over the past 24 hours:

BJP finds new allies coming to its support on the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill 2019. BJD, BSP, AIADMK, TRS, TDP, AAP, and YSRCP extend support to the government, largely citing national interest.

“A border state, which is culturally, geographically, historically, and politically different was bound together by Article 370. Drunk in power and to get votes, BJP scrapped 3-4 things. They've cut off the head of the country. Political parties will fight and stand with J&K,” argued Ghulam Nabi Azad, Leader of Opposition as PDP, Congress, JD(U), CPM, TMC, DMK, RJD, and MDMK opposed the move.

Other leaders such as Sharad Pawar argued that the government should have taken J&K leaders into confidence but the government manages to pass the bill effortlessly in Rajya Sabha where it does not have a majority.

Centre tells states to take special care of J&K residents

Following the passage of the Bill in the Rajya Sabha, Centre tells states to take special care of J&K residents, particularly students hailing from state, against any mischief or breach of peace. It has been customarily seen that everytime a crisis such as this unfolds, Kashmiri students and residents are targeted in different parts of the country.

Pakistan reacts:

Pakistan ministry of Foreign affairs criticises India’s move. “As the party to this international dispute, Pakistan will exercise all possible options to counter the illegal steps. Pakistan reaffirms its abiding commitment to the Kashmir cause,” it says in a statement.

Indian High Commissioner to Pakistan Ajay Bisaria was summoned by Pakistani foreign secretary after resolution to revoke Article 370 was passed in the Rajya Sabha. “J&K is purely an internal matter of our country. Who is Pakistan to question us on that? If there is any issue that needs to be highlighted, it is the illegal occupation of parts of Kashmir by Pakistan, nothing else,” retorted Ram Madhav.

Today you have lost Kashmir: Kapil Sibal

Congress leader and former Union Minister warns the government. Today we should think about why we're here and what should democracy involve. I know Bill will be passed as you have manufactured a majority, therefore, we can do nothing about it. While you call this a historic moment, only history will judge whether it was historic or not. Today you have lost Kashmir,” Sibal said.

Bringing another twist to the already complicated tale, Mr Shah said: “Several MPs have asked how long will J&K remain a Union Territory- I want to assure them when the situation gets normal and the right time comes, we're ready to make J&K a state again. It may take a little longer, but it will become a state once again, one day”.

Later in the evening the Indian Parliament was illuminated following the J&K Reorganisation Bill being passed in the Rajya Sabha.

At about the same time, Former J&K chief minister Mehbooba Mufti was put under preventive detention, followed by Omar Abdullah, also a former Chief Minister. They have not been able to register their protest on the issue since then, nor has the native Kashmiri population had a say on the matter.

The Dark Night

It remained a largely dark night in the Valley as very little reports or communication could reach out of the region which was placed under Section 144 CrPC. Isolated instances of stone pelting were reported later in the night but no concrete picture of the current situation in the valley could reach out to the rest of the country. Even the local newspapers remained helpless in conveying the news. A glance through their websites late Monday night revealed that they had not been updated as no news pertaining to developments in the Rajya Sabha and the scrapping of Article 370 and 35A found mention on them.

Come Tuesday, and a fresh debate on the Bill that is set to be passed in the Lok Sabha has begun to unfold in the Parliament. In the meanwhile, India has unequivocally conveyed to key nations about its position and that it is an internal issue for India. Foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale on Monday met envoys of key countries, including the US, China, UK, France and Russia, to explain India’s reason behind this move. It was highlighted that the proposals which are currently under consideration of Parliament of India are internal to India and that they are aimed at providing good governance, promoting social justice and ensuring economic development.
