`Madman on the loose`: How Pakistan media covered India`s decision on article 370

Home >> Delhi `Madman on the loose`: How Pakistan media covered India`s decision on article 370

Some Pak newspapers warned the Indian government of serious consequences while others termed it the darkest day in history.

Pakistan media aggressively reacted to India`s decision of revoking Article 370 in Jammu & Kashmir. Union Home Minister Amit Shah in a historic move on Monday announced the removal of Article 370 in Jammu & Kashmir that gave special status to the state and also moved a proposal to bifurcate Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh into two Union Territories.

Some Pak newspapers warned the Indian government of serious consequences while others termed it the darkest day in history.

Here`s a look at what some of the prominent media sites are saying about Article 370:

The Dawn: IHK`s grim reality

Dawn called the decision a move to "avoid the lawful route of a constitutional amendment". It said that India is committed to "forcibly convert occupied Kashmir into a Union Territory in violation of all its commitment, including those made at the UN".

"Meanwhile, a bill in parliament called for separating Ladakh from J&K, but if this amounted to justifying the division of areas on the basis of faith, it was not something that the BJP leaders were likely to lose sleep over, reassured of their own powers of intimidation after their election win earlier this year," mentioned the editorial on Dawn.

The Dawn editorial warned that the move will have violent consequences.

It added that Pakistan has "vowed" to campaign against the revocation of Article 370. It also blamed the international community for "watching in silence" as troops trickled into J&K.

The News: Dark days in Kashmir

The News said that the move exceeded even the worst predictions of critics. It further added that the move gave India a "free hand to create massive demographic change, possibly ending the Muslim majority of Kashmir".

The site too, warned about impending violence. "Analysts have expressed fears over genocide and terrible violence. There has been increased concern over the safety of Kashmiris since intensified violence across the LoC began a few weeks ago, with cluster bombs being said to have been used by Indian forces," it said.

It further added that Pakistan has initiated contact with other countries over the revocation of Article 370.

The Nation: Darkest Hour

The piece on the nation begins by saying, "Kashmir`s worst fear has been realised". It said, "...India has attempted to annex Kashmir without their consent." "That the move is unconstitutional and illegal is clear for anyone to see. A Frankenstein`s monster of presidential decrees, stolen provincial autonomy, and parliamentary resolutions cannot amend the constitution - a two-thirds majority and consent of the Kashmiri people is needed. The audacity of this constitutional perversion is surely to be challenged in the Indian courts, but can they rule fairly with the Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) breathing down their neck?" it said.

The piece also said that the "world is expected to do little; the major powers had already turned their back on the crisis long ago..."

Daily Times: What now in Kashmir?

The editorial in Daily Times said, "Modi is going all the way in changing the demographics of Kashmir. Next he will facilitate his hardline base to spread there and dilute the Muslim majority. Pakistan`s only option, really, is to get the international community to push India towards talks."

Pakistan Today: Modi`s gambit

"Among other things, the sudden change in occupied Kashmir`s special status is meant to allow the government to settle tens of thousands of outsiders in the Valley, thus changing its demographic structure," said the editorial on Pakistan Today.

It further said, "The change in the status of the occupied Kashmir will harm Pak-India relations. After India taking Kashmir out of the list of disputes, the attempts to normalize relations will face a setback."
