Army warns Pakistan against taking disruptive course on Kashmir, says ‘cost will be prohibitive for you’

Security personnel deployed in Kashmir | Photo Credit: PTI

Jammu: The Indian Army on Tuesday said Pakistan is making efforts to boost the number of terrorists at terror launch pads set up by it along the Line of Control (LoC). General Officer Commanding in Chief, Northern Command, Lt Gen Ranbir Singh said the efforts have been underway for the past few days and Islamabad had been trying to push infiltrators into Jammu and Kashmir.

Lt Gen Singh made the remarks after chairing over a meeting of the Core Group of Intelligence and Security Agencies at Srinagar. The meeting took stock of the existing security situation in the wake of the Union government revoking Article 370 and reviewed the operational readiness to deal with any contingency.

Stating that Pakistan has also been violating ceasefire along the LoC, Lt Gen Singh said the Army has giving a befitting response to the Pakistan Army. Their nefarious designs of causing disturbances in India are being thwarted, he added.

“If Pakistan Army continues with disruptive course, the Indian Army will respond with resolve and cost will be prohibitive for them,” the senior Army Commander warned in no uncertain terms.

He further assured that the forces are in high level of readiness. "Necessary security arrangements have been put in place for ensuring peace and security," he said further, adding the forces would not allow law and order situation to deteriorate.

#LtGenRanbirSingh, #ArmyCdrNC chaired a meeting of the core group of intelligence & security agencies at Srinagar; assured high level of readiness to thwart inimical designs; lauded synergized efforts of all stake holders to ensure peace & security in J&K.@adgpi @PIB_India pic.twitter.com/32nP59Ds2F — NorthernComd.IA (@NorthernComd_IA) August 6, 2019

The Army Commander further called on people not to spread rumours and dissuade their kin from indulging in same.

"#Lt Gen Ranbir Singh, #ArmyCdrNC chaired a meeting of the core group of intelligence & security agencies at Srinagar; assured high level of readiness to thwart inimical deigns; lauded synergized efforts of all stake holders to ensure peace & security in J&K (sic)," the official account of the Northern Command said on Twitter.

Section 144 continued to be imposed in Jammu and Kashmir with curfew-like restrictions prevailing, a day after the government scrapped Article 370 that applied to J&K and moved a Bill in Parliament seeking to divide the state into two Union Territories.

Ahead of the move, the government had moved in nearly 40,000 troops to the Valley amid speculation that the Narendra Modi government could take some decisive measures on Jammu and Kashmir.
