Pakistan asks OIC to show solidarity with Kashmiris through action

-

JEDDAH, Saudi Arabia: Pakistan has asked the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) to show solidarity through action with the people of Indian Occupied Kashmir (IOK) by recognizing that the unilateral step by India to end Jammu and Kashmir’s Special Status was against the very status of IOK as enshrined in the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) resolutions, the Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi said.

In a series of tweets on Tuesday, Qureshi – who today addressed the Emergency Meeting of OIC Contact Group on Kashmir in Jeddah which had been convened in wake of latest situation in Occupied Jammu and Kashmir erupted after revocation of Article 370 by the Indian Parliament – told that the OIC recognizes that this aggression puts more than 1.5 billion people of South Asia at risk.

The foreign minister told that at the meeting, he reiterated Pakistan’s stance on the peaceful resolution of Jammu and Kashmir dispute and that India’s hostility doesn’t give me much hope for a covenant for peace.

Shah Mahmood Qureshi told the participants that revocation of Article 370 and 35-A by the Indian Parliament Lok Sabha, is a clear violation of international laws.

The foreign minister told that about 100,000 Kashmiris have been martyred by Indian forces in Occupied Jammu and Kashmir since 1989. He said that about 22000 Kashmiri women became widowed, 108,000 children orphaned and 12000 women were raped in Occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

Qureshi said that India’s sending more troops, closure of educational institutions and imposition of emergency like measures by India in Occupied Jammu and Kashmir, which is the most militarized area in the world, was indicating intentions of India.

Shah Mahmood Qureshi said that India’s steps taken in Occupied Jammu and Kashmir can endanger peace in South Asia. He urged the participants of the OIC meeting to pay immediate attention towards this issue.

The delegations of Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Azerbaijan, Turkey and other member Countries participated in the meeting.
