Maharashtra: Bharatiya Janata Party sets difficult terms for ally Shiv Sena

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has created a plan B for the Maharashtra polls. Under it, the party plans to fight maximum seats, reap the benefit of its current resurgent form, and stake claim for the chief minister's chair post poll. This proposed plan is likely to upset Shiv Sena and jeopardise the alliance. This, observers feel, may lead to both parties fight the polls separately.



"Under the new formula, each party will fight the number of seats that they had won in 2014. This means 127 for BJP and 65 for the Shiv Sena in the 288 seats Assembly as per their current tally. Following that twenty seats will be left for smaller allies. After that, the remaining seats shall be equitably distributed between both the allies. This means the Shivsena will fight on 103 seats whereas BJP will fight on 165 seats, " said a senior BJP leader privy to the pre-poll alliance discussion.



The president of the state unit Chandrakant Patil confirmed that the party is considering this formula. Patil reminded that earlier CM had also hinted at this formula.



"Why should we lose our existing MLA seats for any party? No one will do this. We will ensure a fair seat sharing. We hope that the Shiv Sena understands its strength and accepts this seat-sharing formula so that our alliance comes back to power again in Maharashtra," said Patil.

A BJP leader said anonymously that unlike 2014 they are not desperate to tie up with the Shiv Sena and will do the alliance only on their terms. No big leader will come from Delhi and visit Matoshree to soothe the ego of Sena President Thackeray. BJP will do truck with the Shiv Sena only if the party agrees on these conditions otherwise fight the polls on its own. Senior Shiv Sena minister termed this pro-BJP seat sharing a bit Orwellian quoting from the epic book Animal Farm by George Orwell.



"All animals are equal but some animals are more equal than others. The BJP seems to be applying this adage to their formula and hence demanding a huge chunk of seats to fight the polls on. We are against this pro-BJP formula. However, the final call on alliance rests with Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray," said a Sena minister requesting anonymity. Another Shiv Sena leader confided DNA that Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray's Jan Ashirwad yatra is getting the overwhelming response across Maharashtra. Hence, the party cadre is also buoyant to take on a resurgent BJP.



"We are prepared to go solo this time. We knew the BJP is not the party that can be trusted blindly. They ditched us in 2014 state polls and we are anticipating the same in 2019. The only difference is in 2014, we were not prepared while 2019 we are ready to go solo," the Sena leader added.



Clearly the problem of plenty seems to have stung both the allies.
