UAE, Sri Lanka root for India, United States urges 'caution', Delhi rebuffs China's criticism

Global reactions have been pouring in after India revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, with United Arab Emirates and Sri Lanka reacting positively while the US coming out with a cautious statement.



UAE envoy to India Dr Ahmad Al Banna said the bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir and removal of its special status under Article 370 is India's internal matter. "We expect that the changes would improve social justice and security and confidence of the people in the local governance and will encourage further stability and peace," he said.



Recent years have seen India and UAE forging close ties, with and an increase in the number of high-level visits between the two countries. Earlier this year, UAE awarded its highest civilian award, the Zayed Medal, to PM Modi.



Sri Lankan Premier Ranil Wickremesinghe tweeted that "creation of Ladakh and consequential restructuring is India's internal matter". He tweeted: "With 70% of Ladakh's population being Buddhist, it will be the first Indian state with a Buddhist majority... it is a beautiful region well worth a visit."



The United States state department came out with a statement and noted "that the Indian government has described these actions as strictly an internal matter", but added it is "concerned about reports of detentions" and urged "respect for individual rights and discussion with those in affected communities."



The US also called on India and Pakistan "to maintain peace and stability along the Line of Control".



Its state department made no mention of US President Donald Trump's mediation offer on Jammu and Kashmir, which was rejected by New Delhi. Meanwhile Indian diplomats upped their efforts to thwart any propaganda by Pakistan and ensure that the global community understands New Delhi's action.

‘Not Your Business’ India issued a strongly worded statement after China criticised the ‘modification in domestic law’, asking Beijing not to comment on its internal affair New Delhi hasn’t commented on recent protests in Hong Kong, nor has it remarked on the crackdown in Tibet or on Uighur Muslims in Xinjiang province

The Indian envoy to Russia Bala Venkatesh Varma told reporters in Moscow, "It's an internal matter and it is also an internal administrative matter... we are not surprised that Pakistan is raising this, but our response will be the same that it is not a matter that concerns Pakistan."



The ministry of external affairs continued briefing of envoys on Tuesday on the administrative developments in Kashmir which included briefings for Latin American and Caribbean countries' envoys and envoys from neighbouring countries. Envoys from United Nations Security Council and Asean countries were briefed on Monday, with India explaining that the changed have been made to spur socio economic development of the region.



On Tuesday, India issued a strongly worded statement in response to China's reaction to the abrogation of Article 370, asking Beijing not to comment in its internal affair. The Ministry of External Affairs in a statement said, "India does not comment on the internal affairs of other countries and similarly expects other countries to do likewise."



New Delhi hasn't commented on the recent protests in Hong Kong. In the past, it has not made any statements on crackdown in Tibet or on the minority Muslims in the restive northwestern province of Xinjiang.



The Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying, reacting to India removing the special status for Jammu and Kashmir, said, "The Indian side has continued to damage China's territorial sovereignty by unilaterally modifying the form of domestic law. This practice is unacceptable and will not have any effect."

—Zee Media Newsroom
