Heavy rainfall expected in Coimbatore, Nilgiris; light showers for Chennai

Heavy rainfall expected in Coimbatore, Nilgiris; light showers for Chennai

As of August first week (1-6), Chennai has received 25% more rainfall than normal, recording 251.3 mm on the whole.

news Weather

As rains continue to lash Karnataka, the Regional Meteorological Department in its latest bulletin predicts heavy to very heavy rain at isolated places over Nilgiris and Coimbatore districts of Tamil Nadu. Light to moderate rain is likely to occur at a few places over Tamil Nadu until August 10.

As for the capital Chennai, light rain is likely to occur in some areas for the next two days. With cloudy skies, maximum and minimum temperatures are likely to be around 35 and 27 degree Celsius respectively. As of Tuesday morning, Kattankulathur and Mahabalipuram received highest rainfall in the city at 25 mm. Kancheepuram recorded 21 mm with Kelambakkam getting 19 mm of rainfall.

As of August first week (1-6), Chennai has received 25% more rainfall than normal, recording 251.3 mm on the whole.

With monsoons picking up in Cauvery and Krishna catchment areas, Avalanchi in Nilgiris district of Tamil Nadu recorded highest rainfall of 18 cm as of August 6. Valparai Pto, Coimbatore received 14 cm while G Bazar and Upper Bhavani in Nilgiris received 11 cm each.

Pradeep John, weather tracker and blogger, wrote on his Facebook post that good rainfall is expected over catchment areas in the next 10 days.

Pradeep, who goes by the moniker TN Weatherman on social media, also advised travellers to avoid ghat areas of Nilgiris, Valparai, Kodagu, Wayanad and Munnar for the next few days.

A flood warning was sounded to people residing on the banks of river Bhavani in Mettupalayam on Monday following the likely discharge of surplus water from the Pilloor reservoir that has a full capacity of 100 feet. On Tuesday, over 6000 cusecs of water was discharged from Krishnarajasagara (KRS) reservoir in Karnataka to Tamil Nadu following heavy rainfall in the Kodagu catchment area.
