Kashmir shell-shocked as state loses its special character

rchopra@tribunemail.com

Ishfaq Tantry

Tribune News Service

Srinagar, August 7

The move by the Centre to revoke Article 370 has been received with complete shock in the Kashmir Valley, which has been under curfew for the second consecutive day since August 5.

That day, the Rajya Sabha approved the resolution to this effect and also the bill to re-organise the state into two union territories.

Though the security agencies were expecting a spontaneous and violent reaction to the decision aimed at doing away with the special status, for the past two days the Kashmir region has by and large remained peaceful with strict curfew and an information blockade in place across all districts of the Valley. The only source of news and window to the outside world left with people in Kashmir is the television and radio.

However, the residents in Srinagar while expressing their shock at the decision termed by vast majority here as unilateral and unconstitutional, including the mainstream Kashmir leaders cutting across party lines, warned of long-terms consequences.

“I have not been able to eat properly since last morning when the resolution was first tabled in Parliament. They cannot do it without taking the people of the state into confidence,” said Asif Ahmad, a hotelier in Khanyar area of Srinagar, while sitting in his newly renovated restaurant which, he said, was full of guests and tourists till the other day, when the government issued a circular asking all outsiders to leave Kashmir.



Another youth, who identified himself as Zuhaib, said that back home, both his mother and sister had not been able to eat and are in complete shock thinking over the ramifications of the decision taken by Parliament. “This unilateral decision is aimed at facilitating demographic changes in Muslim-majority J&K. But this will have long-term and disastrous consequences,” he said.



Zahid Bashir, another middle-aged man from Rajbagh, who was pleading with the policemen manning a barricade near a hotel, termed the revoking of Article 370 and reorganisation of the state into two union territories as “murder of constitutional and democratic norms”.

“Look, today they have arrested two former chief ministers of the state for opposing the revocation of Article 370 and re-organisation of the state. The mainstream people braved bullets of militants and social exclusion just to uphold the Constitution of India and keep the flag hoisted. But today they have been decimated with no space left for them,” Bashir said, while terming the current events akin to the August 9, 1953 arrest of Sheikh Abdullah, when he was the Prime Minister of J&K.

A group of on-duty Kashmiri policemen was taking rest in the shade of a tall building at Poloview, one of the tourist markets in the city. They were armed with just plastic canes (lathis), with none of them having a gun. Asked how they viewed the decision, a havildar-rank policeman remarked, “What has been left with us now? See, we are holding lathis in our hands and not guns. All is gone.”

Jammu: DC Reasi Indu Kanwal Chib said all schools and colleges will remain closed on Thursday whereas all government offices and banks to resume services from Thursday. Restrictions imposed under Section 144 to continue till further orders, he said.
