Chanda Kochhar: CBI files case against former ICICI Bank chief Chanda Kochhar

NEW DELHI: The CBI on Thursday booked formerhead Chanda Kochhar on charges of criminal conspiracy, cheating and abuse of official position for “dishonestly sanctioning loans to the Videocon Group”.Kochhar, who was the MD of ICICI Bank until last October, is accused in the CBI FIR of allegedly receiving “illegal gratification through her husband, Deepak Kochhar , from Videocon MD VN Dhoot for sanctioning a term loan of Rs 300 crore to Videocon International Electronics Ltd”. This apart, her alleged role in influencing disbursal decisions in relevant committees of the bank has also been brought under the scanner.The CBI has also registered a case against Deepak Kochhar and VN Dhoot. It has also mentioned unknown public servants in the FIR. The agency is probing allegations of ‘quid pro quo’ in the loans granted to Videocon by ICICI Bank.The FIR says the role of senior bank officials, including former chairman KV Kamath (currently president of New Development Bank, formerly BRICS Bank), current ICICI Bank MD Sandeep Bakhshi, K Ramkumar, Sonjoy Chatterjee (CEO, Goldman Sachs India), NS Kannan, Zarin Daruwala (CEO, Standard Chartered India), Rajiv Sabharwal (CEO, Tata Capital) and Homi Khusrokhan, might also be probed. These individuals were part of the sanctioning committee that cleared loans amounting to Rs 1,575 crore. The CBI conducted searches on Thursday at the Nariman Point offices of Deepak Kochhar’s company NuPower Renewables Limited (NRL), the Videocon Group and Supreme Energy Pvt Ltd (SEPL). Videocon’s offices in Aurangabad were also searched.Sources told ET the raids have led to seizure of what they described as key documents based on which the CBI is expected to soon summon Chanda and Deepak Kochhar as well as Dhoot for further questioning. Sources added that Dhoot was in his Mumbai office when the searches took place. He was quizzed by the CBI sleuths. “This was just preliminary questioning. He will be summoned on a later date to be confronted with the seized items,” said the person.An individual close to Chanda Kochhar, however, claimed the FIR is technically flawed. “Eight ICICI Bank executives besides Chanda Kochhar have been named in the FIR. If this is a case of quid pro quo, then how do you prove that for these executives? This is a basic flaw in the FIR and while we will cooperate with the authorities, we will also fight this FIR.” According to the FIR, ICICI Bank disbursed six “high-value loans” between June 2009 and October 2011.“On August 26, 2009, a rupee term loan of Rs 300 crore was sanctioned to Videocon International Electronics Ltd (VIEL) in contravention of rules and policy by the sanctioning committee… Kochhar was one of the members of the sanctioning committee, who in criminal conspiracy… dishonestly by abusing her official position sanctioned this loan in favour of VIEL,” the FIR said.“On September 7, 2009, this loan was transferred to VIEL... On September 8, 2009, Dhoot transferred Rs 64 crore to NuPower Renewables, managed by Deepak Kochhar... this was the first major capital received by NRL to acquire its first power plant,” the FIR said. The allegation against Chanda Kochhar is that she received “illegal gratification through her husband from Dhoot for sanctioning the Rs 300 crore loan”.The FIR further said that ICICI Bank also sanctioned loans in violation of its credit policy to the Videocon Group to help it repay unsecured loans. Loans to Videocon Industries Ltd (VIL) and its group of companies were declared non-performing assets (NPAs) on June 30, 2017.On the role of other senior officials, most of whom have left ICICI Bank, the agency said that between June 2009 and October 2011, loans amounting to Rs 1,575 crore were sanctioned by various committees having senior officials of the bank as members. These loans included: Rs 175 crore to Millennium Appliance India Ltd on June 30, 2009; Rs 240 crore to Sky Appliances Ltd and Rs 110 crore to Techno Electronics Ltd on November 17, 2010; Rs 300 crore to Applicomp India Ltd on May 30, 2011; and Rs 750 crore to VIL on October 31, 2011.“These loans have turned NPAs resulting in wrongful loss to ICICI Bank and wrongful gain to the borrowers and accused persons. The role of these senior officials may also be investigated,” the FIR said.The CBI’s case is that Chanda Kochhar, who took over as MD of ICICI Bank in May 2009, was one of the key committee members. “Credit limits to the above-mentioned group companies were sanctioned after she took over the charge of the bank as MD… these loans were sanctioned by different sanctioning committees... Kochhar was one of the committee members which sanctioned RTL of Rs 300 crore to VIEL and Rs 750 crore to VIL,” the FIR said.On the alleged role of her husband, the FIR said Deepak Kochhar, Dhoot and Saurabh Dhoot were directors of NRL, which was incorporated in December 2008. Dhoot allegedly allotted 1,997,500 warrants to Deepak Kochhar at the rate of .`10 per warrant, on an initial payment of Re 1 per warrant. In June 2009, shares of NRL held by Dhoot and Kochhar’s Pacific Capital Services Pvt Ltd were transferred to Supreme Energy Pvt Ltd, which became a 95% shareholder of NRL. Dhoot resigned from the directorship of SEPL in January 2009 and subsequently transferred control of the company to Deepak Kochhar by selling/transferring his shares to Pinnacle Energy Trust managed by Kochhar.All these entities — VIEL, VIL, NRL and SEPL — have been identified as accused in the FIR.Amid these allegations and probes by multiple agencies, ICICI Bank appointed a committee under former Supreme Court Justice BN Srikrishna to investigate allegations of conflict of interest and quid pro quo against Chanda Kochhar. She stepped down last October.
