Unnao rape case disaster: How the system failed the victim at several levels; cosmetic steps serve no purpose

Representative Image | Photo Credit: IANS

The Unnao rape case has tormented the conscience of the nation now for the last two years. The case was registered on June 11, 2017, and the survivor also named MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar in an application sent to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on 22nd July 2017. Instead, a case, allegedly under the influence of the MLA, was registered on 4th April 2018 against the rape survivor’s father.

The rape survivor’s father was arrested, in undue haste and sent to jail, where, unfortunately, he died due to the alleged brutality by Atul Singh Sengar, the brother of the MLA. The MLA Kuldeep Singh was proving to be an embarrassment for the Government and therefore his Y category security has since been withdrawn. Incidentally, on 3rd August 2019, the District Magistrate of Unnao also cancelled the firearms licence of Sengar’s weapons - a rifle, a revolver and a single barrel shotgun. In any case, these cosmetic measures are meaningless now.

This incident has unfolded as a grotesque miscarriage of justice and delivering too little or nothing, too late. All that the Allahabad High Court and the CBI have done could have been accomplished at the level of the local police station if they had been proactive, fair prompt and had acted as per law. The whole grisly episode has two significant ingredients-delay and one-sided action to the favour of the accused! The FIR of the survivor was lodged after considerable delay, and only after the survivor attempted self-immolation near the Chief Minister’s residence. The name of the accused was incorporated after the substantial loss of time, the arrest came only after the admonition by the Allahabad High Court, that the CBI arrested Sengar on 13th April 2018 at 4 am.

The survivor was provided with “security” of around 10 police personnel, who looked the other way when gang members came to openly threaten the survivor and her family members. It seems they also failed to report this repeated bullying to the local police station and if they did, it is a matter of deep concern that the police station refused to act swiftly and reinforce the security. The survivor is on record to have submitted no fewer than thirty-three applications to all higher officials in the state and the country, tragically no action was taken on them. After the truck accident that took place on 28th July 2019, this matter was reviewed and the shameless explanation that came out was that all the applications were promptly enquired into and that there was no merit to any of them.



Not once did any officer explain as to the action taken against the local goons who were a constant nuisance, proven to the hilt by the video evidence of their misdemeanours that were also furnished with these petitions. The security staff was so irresponsible, that they just stayed back when the survivor said that there was space constraint in the car. It was the duty of the security personnel to have apprised the headquarters of this development and sought reinforcements of men and material. Obviously, the security personnel were taking their duty very casually and failed to inform their superior officers.



Not only this, the predators were not booked for this naked goondaism and not challenged under the Cr.P.C. for breach of peace and no security proceedings were undertaken to vide provisions of Section 116(3) of the same act. The supervisory officers, like the Circle Officer, Additional Superintendent of Police, and the S.P. displayed gross dereliction of duty and their superiors also failed to provide them clear and unambiguous instructions. The explanation of some higher-ups that they were not “informed” and chose to be blissfully ignorant of the ground reality, is nonsense and shows their lack of professionalism. The senior officers are privy to intelligence updates and they are also expected to have their own channels of information. Was there no police station inspection, crime review and consequent scrutiny of wanted criminals? These are horrible fault lines that the top police leadership needs to be addressed immediately. Police modernisation apart, there should be greater emphasis on traditional policing that has its foundation in criminal intelligence, ground surveillance, beat patrolling and robust public interface.

Another sensational news that has just surfaced is the fact that in the year 2004, the then superintendent of police, Ram Lal Varma, sustained serious gunshot injuries in the shoulder and abdomen, when Varma had gone to raid the criminals, indulging in illegal mining on the banks of the Ganga in Shuklaganj. It is alleged that this shoot out was instigated by Sengar. Ram Lal Verma had to undergo repeated and long life-saving surgeries. Normally the entire might of the state comes down like a ton of bricks on such hardened criminals, who have dared to attack one of their own. Unfortunately, this was not to be.



It is said that the case, though charge-sheeted, the case diaries went missing and consequently the trial has not begun, even after fifteen years. It is hoped that the local officers wake up now, fix responsibility of the police officers who "lost" the sensitive case diaries, put the case to trial and see if the conviction of the serial offender is possible.

The Supreme Court ordered the airlifting of the survivor from Lucknow to Delhi and it is everyone’s prayer that the survivor emerges safe, given the super speciality medical care available at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi. The moot question is that Unnao is adjacent to Lucknow, the state capital. If this gross partisan conduct of the police, leading to an even worse miscarriage of justice can happen here, then what to talk of remote areas of the state. This case has highlighted that we continue to suffer from the syndrome, "Show me the man and I will show you the rules”; it is for all to see and note that there is no uniform application of rules and law.

No political party has shown any keenness to enforce Police Reforms, as ordered by the Supreme Court in the landmark judgement of Prakash Singh versus Union of India. To the contrary, there is visible reluctance on their part, because it serves their purpose to have an unprofessional, untrained and obsequious police force. An efficient force that is impartial will certainly put the brakes on such brazen misuse of authority and handle the likes of MLA Sengar in an exemplary manner.



Vikram Singh is a guest contributor. Views expressed are personal.
