Kashmir issue: Pakistan decides to downgrade diplomatic ties, suspend trade with India

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – Following India’s decision to end special status of Occupied Kashmir, the National Security Committee (NSC) on Wednesday decided to downgrade diplomatic relations and suspend bilateral trade with India.

Prime Minister Imran Khan chaired the NSC meeting at Prime Minister’s Office. The meeting was attended by Foreign Minister, Defence Minister, Interior Minister, Minister for Education, Minister for Human Rights, Minister for KA&GB, Law Minister, Adviser Finance, CJCSC, COAS, CAS, CNS, SAPM on Information, DG-ISI, DG-ISPR, Secretary Foreign Affairs and other senior officers.

The Committee discussed situation arising out of unilateral and illegal actions by Indian govt, situation inside Indian Occupied Kashmir and along the Line of Control (LoC).

The Committee has decided to review bilateral arrangements, take the matter regarding revocation of Article 370 and 35A to the United Nations, including the Security Council.

It was also decided in the meeting that 14th of August to be observed in solidarity with brave Kashmiris and their just struggle for their right of self-determination, whereas, 15th of August will be observed as Black Day.

Meanwhile, the PM directed that all diplomatic channels be activated to expose brutal Indian racist regime, design and human rights violations. He also directed Armed Forces to continue vigilance.

Earlier on Tuesday, Prime Minister Imran Khan formed a seven-member committee to review the political, diplomatic and legal aspects of the occupied Kashmir.

The committee comprised Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, Attorney General of Pakistan Anwar Mansoor, Foreign Secretary, ISI Director General Lieutenant General Faiz Hameed, DG Military Operations (DGMO), Director General Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) Major General Asif Ghafoor and Special Representative of Prime Minister Ahmer Bilal Soofi . A formal notification for the formation of the committee was issued yesterday.

Chief of the Army Staff (COAS) General Qamar Javed Bajwa had also chaired the Corps Commanders Conference (CCC) at the General Headquarters (GHQ), Rawalpindi to analyze the deteriorating situation in the India-occupied Kashmir (IoK) and expressed concern over the situation in occupied Kashmir and decided to support the Kashmiris’ struggle till end.

According to the ISPR, a detailed review of the situation in Kashmir was taken at the Corps Commanders Conference and a strong support for the government’s stand against Indian action was announced.

The Corps Commander Conference declared that the “forum fully supported Government’s rejection of Indian actions regarding Kashmir. “Pakistan never recognized the sham Indian efforts to legalize its occupation of Jammu & Kashmir through article 370 or 35-A decades ago, efforts which have now been revoked by India itself”, COAS Bajwa.

The Army Chief said that the Pak Army is with legitimate struggle of Kashmiris to their success. “The Pak Army is fully prepared to fulfill its responsibility and will go to any extent in this regard”, COAS added.

On Sunday, Pakistan’s civil and military leadership warned India that Islamabad would respond to any “misadventure” or aggression against Pakistan.

The warning came in a statement from the Prime Minister’s Office after a meeting of the National Security Committee, a forum of top civil and military official, chaired by Premier Imran Khan.

"Pakistan remains ready to defend itself against any Indian misadventure or aggression and will continue to provide all-out diplomatic, moral and political support to the brave people of IoK [Indian-occupied Kashmir] in their indigenous struggle to get justice and their right to self-determination in line with UNSC resolutions," the statement said.
