LPU becomes first Institution in Punjab to onset Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendra at the Campus

Jalandhar: Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences (LFAMS) at Lovely Professional University (LPU) has opened Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendra (PMBJK) at the Campus. The Bureau of Pharma Public Sector Undertakings of India (BPPI), Under Department of Pharmaceuticals Government of India, has selected LPU for this humane cause. Being a township University, the Kendra will bring down the healthcare budget of thousands of people at the campus by providing “Quality generic medicines at Affordable Prices”. LFAMS at LPU endeavoured the whole process for general benefit of students, members of staff and thousands other who keep on visiting the campus. Senior Business Development Manager at BPPI Arafat Ali and District Drug Inspector Anupama Kalia, both Pharma Studies alumni of LPU, inaugurated the ‘Kendra’ and its selling counter at the campus.

Noteworthy, BPPI is the only implementing agency for opening Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendras across India, and it does not have any subsidiary. Hon’ble Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers), Govt. of India, D V Sadananda Gowda holds that with a vision to make quality medicines available at affordable prices for all, particularly the poor and disadvantaged, through exclusive ‘PMBJP(Pariyojna)’ outlets, this endeavour is to reduce expenses in healthcare.

Upholding the slogan ‘ live a better life with less medical expenses’; LPU Registrar Dr Monica Gulati informed that with this humane establishment, LPU has ushered as the first institution in Punjab state to onset Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendra at its campus. She further elaborated that the mission here is to create awareness regarding generic medicines; that high price of medicines need not be synonymous with high quality; and, more.

Illustrative, LPU has on-campus Uni-Hospital which is operational 24×7 with facilities to manage all sorts of medical emergencies. It has 20+ Emergency Helplines; 20+ Doctors and Nursing Staff-members; 24hrs Ambulance Service; and, 25+ Specialized Hospitals Tie-ups. It also has Physiotherapy clinic, which is open to all students and staff members for consultation and rehabilitation. In addition, LPU keeps on organizing in-campus and out campus medical camps at regular intervals to spread health awareness.

In fact, endeavour of BPPI is to make available at PMBJ Kendras commonly used generic drugs covering all the therapeutic groups. In the coming years, PMBJP scheme shall provide the complete spectrum of Health care products and services. Under this, product basket is to contain 800 Drugs, 154 Surgical items, and even to include stents and replacements.
