Sushma’s timely action rescued hundreds of stranded TN fishers

Madurai: “We will never allow any Indian to suffer on foreign land. We will bring all the people back. Don’t worry,” were the words of the then minister of external affairs Sushma Swaraj to the founder of International Fishermen Development Trust, P Justin Antony. The veteran BJP leader, who passed away on Tuesday, gave this assurance when Antony spoke to her over phone in February 2018 to bring back 15 Tamil Nadu fishermen detained by Iran for close to six months.

Antony remembers that this was the only occasion he had to speak to her on the issue. “In fact, an email to her office was all that was needed to initiate timely rescues. She has helped bring back 298 Tamil Nadu fishermen stranded in the Gulf countries and Diego Garcia Island (in the British Indian Ocean Territory) from 2016 to 2018,” Antony said attributing it to her determination and cordial relationship with other countries.

M Crosslin, a fisherman of Manapad in Tuticorin, is among those who have been rescued by her direct intervention. The 46-year-old single parent, who lost his wife in an accident, worked as a fisherman in Dubai from 2015. “In August 2017, we were fishing near the Iran border when we were caught by the Iran Navy. We were detained and did not get help for six months till the intervention of Sushma Swaraj madam,” he said.

Crosslin’s health was deteriorating and due to severe chest pain he had to be in hospital on and off but did not get the treatment he needed. As a special case he was first brought back to India in February 2018 and the 14 others detained with him were flown back three weeks later. “There was no response from the Indian embassy there. They even did not answer our calls till the minister intervened. I am indebted to her,” he added.

H Arokkiaraj, a former research intern at the India Centre for Migration (ICM) during her tenure at MEA, recalled that she opened up the online and social media complaint platforms through which many from Tamil Nadu and across India have been rescued. “She took the complaints made by the victims stranded in other countries under tough working conditions on her Twitter handle seriously,” he said. Arokkiaraj, who has helped rescue many Indians stranded abroad, said he has guided at least five people to directly lodge complaints on their plight on her twitter handle. “All of them got help. She introduced MADAD portal to report on Indians in distress overseas among other online initiatives such as registration of foreign employers, registered recruiters and manpower consulting firms,” he added. Though these platforms face shortcomings, he lauded her role in initiating them to come out with a transparent system.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
