Mumbai: Man sends obscene messages to woman, threatens to kill her mother

The accused and the victim had met in 2018 during a wedding (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused has been identified as Atif Sayed Sayed used to send obscene messages to the woman and had even threatened to kill her mother when she did not respond to his advances The accused has been booked under sections of the IPC and IT Act

Mumbai: A man from Nallasopara was arrested by the Mumbai Police on August 4 for allegedly sending inappropriate messages to a woman and threatening to kill her mother. The accused, Atif Sayed has been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Information and Technology (IT) Act.

The woman was harassed from February 5 and May 29, after which, she approached the police. The police traced the accused through his call records and arrested him from outside his residence. He confessed to the crime during the interrogation. A police officer said, "We will use these messages as evidence in the court. "

The accused and the woman had met in 2018 during a wedding. The woman works at an event management company. Sayed allegedly called the woman in January last year requesting her to help with an event.

A police officer related to the case said, "He claimed he needed women staffers for a programme. From then, Sayed started sending messages on a regular basis. A majority would be 'good morning' messages texts asking whether she had eaten lunch and dinner."

The victim requested Sayed not to send messages late at night but he continued. Tired of the constant messaging, the woman eventually stopped replying. When the woman did not respond to the messages, Sayed lost his temper and started sending abusive messages, he also threatened to kill her mother.

Hyderabad woman denies man's advances, he creates fake profile and earns money through sex chats

A man from Hyderabad was arrested by the Hyderabad's Rachakonda cyber crime police for harassing a woman. The accused, Naveen Kumar had allegedly made a fake social media profile of the woman where he used to post morphed pictures of her. When the woman learned about the fake profile, she approached the police and lodged a complaint. Kumar was booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and IT Act.

The accused and the woman had gone to the same school. The accused allegedly made several advances at the woman but she denied all of them. After being rejected constantly, Kumar started sending inappropriate messages to the woman on WhatsApp groups. Tired of being harassed, the woman blocked him.

Kumar then used Facebook and created a profile with the woman's name. He used the website to make money on the pretext of sexual conversations. Kumar charged Rs 500 to Rs 1,500 for sex chats and nude video calls. He also posted morphed pictures of the woman. The customers were supposed to pay the money through an online portal.
