Ram Kamal Mukherjee's next first film to be endorsed by UN's campaign Free and Equal

Ram Kamal Mukherjee

United Nations

Rituparno Ghosh

transgender

Changing attitudes is never easy but it has happened on other issues and it is happening already in many parts of the world on this one — Celina Jaitley

A Tribute to: Season’s Greetings has become the first film to be endorsed by United Nations’ Free and Equal campaign that aims at raising awareness against homophobic and transphobic violence and discrimination. It will be screened across the world. UN official Rikke Hennum says, “We know from experience that films like this can play a critical role in starting and sustaining conversations to help raise awareness of some of the issues the film touches upon—from acceptance of same sex relationships, to the lives of LGBTQIA people in India.”Director Ram Kamal Mukherjee, who started out with the intention of acquainting mainstream audiences with Rituparno’s work, reveals that issues faced by the LGBTQIA community became a part of his film organically. “Just before we began shooting, the Supreme Court abolished Section 377 on September 6. Since Rituparno was always vocal about the community’s rights, it made sense to incorporate it. In the film, September 5 is an important date,” he informs.He took the film to the UN on his leading ladies, Celina Jaitley and Lillete Dubey’s insistence. “I was not sure about it because I felt it would be difficult for them to relate to, since the film is set in India. But I have been proved wrong,” says Ram. Celina, who has been an active supporter of LGBTQIA rights, shares, “Changing attitudes is never easy but it has happened on other issues and it is happening already in many parts of the world on this one. With the UN coming on board as a social partner, we are hoping this film will strike a chord globally.”The film also marks the debut ofactor Shree Ghatak. Quiz Ram if it was a conscious choice and he says, “I wanted an established actor but everyone was sceptical about playing a transgender. Celina and Lillete voiced concerns over taking a non-actor for the role but it was a risk we took and I am happy with the result.”
