Green space near Aarey Colony under development threat, activists to protest

Pahadi village

Goregaon

No Development Zone

cemetery

Western Express Highway

Sanjay Gandhi National Park

Aarey Colony

Mumbai

Despite resistance from the green activists, to convert 5,000 sq mt of land atinEast for Metro Bhawan and allied activities, the Maharashtra government has made a formal proposal in this regards and asked for suggestions and objections. The land comes underand a part of the land is reserved for ChristianThe plot is situated near Aarey Colony, adjoining theand touches the borders of(SGNP).is one of the last remaining green lungs of the city. Green activists had protested against killing the forest land to pave the way for the Metro car shed in that area.In its notification dated August 6, the Urban Development Department said "part of bearing CTS no 589(A) of village Pahadi Goregaon (E) admeasuring about 5000 sq mt is reserved for cemetery and remaining land is proposed to be deleted from No Development Zone and is proposed to be included in Residential Zone and reserve it for Metro Bhavan and Metro Rail allied users."Terming the proposal as an attack on the green space, activist Godfrey Pimenta said that he would raise an objection to it. "The entire green space of Aarey has been attacked from all sides by changing the reservation like this. I had filed an RTI some years back that had shown out of 3,000 acres of land in the colony 50 per cent was given for development. Now, in recent time, the land of Aarey was given to the Force One, Metro car shed, rehabilitation of the slum dwellers from SGNP. A proposal of zoo is also there," he said."One can imagine that these decisions are eating the urban jungle and load on the green space to survive. The area comes near the boundary of SGNP where incursion of leopard is rampant. We are entering the space of the animals and destroying their natural habitat," said Pimenta, who has planned a protest in this regards next week.Questioning the Metro project's intention, D Staline from Vanshakti said that it's commercialising the green spaces. "The Metro project is being used as an excuse to enter into No Development Zones, commercialise them and make money. This is all under the guise of public vital projects which is the hallmark of the entire Metro business.was an industrial city and there should have been land reserved for the industries. But these industrial plots are being changed into commercial and residential ones and builders are setting up complexes. These areas were never given out for the purpose they meant for. I would be sending my objections to this proposal," Stalin said.When contacted the Urban Development Department, a senior official said that the proposal was long pending. "In public interest, it is expedient to change the land use for Metro Bhavan and allied activities excluding a portion of the land for Christian cemetery. We have invited suggestions and objections as per the rules and the final decision would come after considering it," the official said.
