Pakistan decides to move Security Council against controversial steps of India

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said Pakistan has decided to go to Security Council against controversial steps taken by India with regard to Occupied Kashmir issue.

Addressing a press conference, Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi said he conveyed Pakistan s concerns in a telephonic conversation with High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Federica Mogherini this morning.

The Minister said he informed the EU Representative for Foreign Affairs that Pakistan will take the matter to the UN Security Council.

He said he also briefed the EU official representing twenty-eight member bloc about the possible far reaching and dangerous consequences of the Indian act of revoking Article 370.

The Minister said the Indian External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar had told the EU Representative for Foreign Affairs that changing of status of Occupied Kashmir was their internal matter and the step was aimed at socio-economic development of the territory.He said India has converted the whole valley into a jail, adding that 0.9 million Indian forces are deployed in Occupied territory.

Qureshi said Kashmir is an internationally recognized disputed territory and India has ordered curfew in whole valley.

He said India calls Kashmir its internal matter which is not true, questioning that if India is doing welfare work by doing oppression in occupied territory. The minister said India’s former PM Jawahir Lal Nehru had said destiny of Kashmir would be decided by Kashmiries. He said unilateral decisions on Kashmir issue would have negative impacts on the people of Kashmir. He said India can do a Palwama like incident.

PTI leader said Samjhauta Express would not run now and Air service for India has not been closed. He said Pakistan would not back from its stance on Kashmir issue.

Qureshi said closure of trade with India wont effect Afghanistan and work on Kartarpur corridor would continue. He said for how long India would impose curfew on 1 crore 40 lac Kashmiries. He said Kashmiries would protest after the curfew is lifted.
