Congress-mukt Bharat

Sunil Sharan is the author of three books: (i) Lockdown: India Under Siege from Corona (RosettaBooks), (ii) Modi 2.0: Beyond the Ordinary (Bloomsbury), and (iii) How I Came to Christ (Wipf and Stock). LESS ... MORE

It was a woman of foreign origin, Annie Besant, who helped the Congress to flower in India. It is a woman of foreign origin, Sonia Gandhi, who has led it to its demise.

Narendra Modi romped home to power in 2014 promising to rid India of the Congress. In five years he’s played his part, but Sonia has played a bigger one.

Ghulam Nabhi Azad and P. Chidambaram could not have been fulminating against the abrogation of Article 370, frothing and foaming at their mouths, without Sonia’s assent. What these leaders said — that this was a black day in Indian history, that J&K has a different culture than the rest of India, that now every Indian state could be broken into smithereens — must have had Sonia’s approval.

Who may I ask, Mr. Chidambaram, broke Andhra Pradesh into smithereens? Do you remember your own clarion call at Madam’s instance?

Azad and Chidambaram are part of what I call the Delhi cabal: those set of purported leaders that Sonia surrounds herself with who cannot even win an election in their home states, in the case of Azad and PC, J&K and Tamil Nadu respectively. Jayalalithaa got right on your case, didn’t she, Mr. Chidambaram? Now that she’s dead, why don’t you fight an election from TN?

Can Sonia’s own son, Rahul, contest and win from his home state, UP? Oh, I forgot, his home state is now Kerala. The Gandhis sure know how to switch home states, from J&K to UP to Andhra to Kerala to where now? Pan-Indian, aren’t they?

It is a measure of how much Sonia and leaders around her are out of tune with not just the rest of the country but also their own petrified party–a party in which everybody is petrified to fill in the vacant post of president two months after it fell vacant–that voices, brave voices on behalf of Modi’s 370 move are at least speaking up in the petrified party.

Actually if you hear those voices, they will tell you that they are not brave. They will say that they are not utterly foolhardy. They just don’t want to commit the political suicide that Sonia and her cabal are committing. These are the voices of the old turks, the not-so-old turks, and the young turks. The old turks include Janardan Dwivedi, former general secretary (administration) of the Congress and a man who would have been calling the shots in the Congress in the absence of its president in his capacity as general secretary (administration).

Sonia appointed Rahul, Dwivedi, Ahmed Patel and AK Antony to run the party’s affairs when she had gone to the US for treatment. This close he was to Sonia. But in 2104, Dwivedi fell afoul of Rahul, and since then has been put out to pasture by Sonia.

The not-so-old turks include the Congress’s chief whip in the Rajya Sabha, Bhubaneshwar Kalita, whose primary job it was to herd all the Congress MPs in the upper house to vote against Modi. Well, what did Kalita do? He said that Sonia was committing suicide and resigned not just from the Rajya Sabha but also from the Congress itself. Do you know what it takes to become an MP, albeit of the Rajya Sabha. And now this man has no party to call his own.

Of the young turks, there is a plethora of dissenting voices. Most prominent, the Maharaja of Gwalior, and a general secretary of the party, Jyotiraditya Scindia, a man many would like to see as the Congress’s new president. Also Milind Deora. Also Deepender Hooda. The political future of all these guys is in front of them. They don’t want to give it up because of Sonia.

And the most popular replacement for Rahul, Sachin Pilot, is silent. What is he thinking? Why is he not saying it?

Some members of the media friendly to Sonia say that she should give a clarion call to all those who broke away from the parent Congress to form their own regional outfits–Sharad Pawar, Mamata Banerjee, Jaganmohan Reddy, et all–to return to the party’s fold. They forget though that the very reason that many of these entities had left the party was because they were exiled by Sonia. Doesn’t once bitten, twice shy hold?

Then other pundits say that if Sonia doesn’t do something quick, what’s stopping the Pilots and the Scindias and the Deoras and the Hoodas from breaking away from the already almost-defunct Congress. I’ll tell you what’s stopping these people from breaking away. Almost all who broke away did so when the Congress was the dominant party of India. The BJP was either fledgling or in disarray. Now they will all have to deal with a powerful BJP.

Pawar, Banerjee, Reddy, all of them had fire in their bellies. Once outside the Congress, they stuck it out for years trying to displace their local opposition from power. Pawar finally became union cabinet minister, and Banerjee and Reddy chief ministers of their respective states. But it had been one hard slog. Do the Scindias and the Pilots and the Deoras and the Hooda, princelings all, have it in them to emulate Pawar and Banerjee and Reddy.

So the young turks hesitate to go it alone. But Modi has now given them the chance to find their own voice. Against Sonia. Against her Delhi cabal. The Delhi cabal can keep shouting against Modi and for Sonia. It cannot commit suicide. Only those can commit suicide who have life in them. The Delhi cabal has lost not only its life but also its collective conscience.

Besant must be turning in her grave. Her fellow sister from Europe is so assiduously destroying what she herself had so assiduously built, and rendering many of us political orphans, with neither party nor ideology. In the Congress’s case, a defunct party ideology.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
