Kashmir issue: From PM Modi’s healing touch to Pakistan’s 'no-samjhauta' in 10 points

As restrictions imposed in the wake of scrapping Article 370 continued for another day in Kashmir, high drama unfolded throughout Thursday.

While the day ended on a good note with PM Modi's speech, declaring a new era of development in Jammu and Kashmir, it saw heightened hostility from Pakistan leaders, who have opposed the abrogation of Article 370 that grants special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

Pakistan stopped Samjhauta Express before it crossed the Wagah border and asked India to send its own crew to escort the passengers across the international border. Meanwhile, there were also reports that over 500 political workers and leaders were detained in Kashmir in the wake of the restrictions.

Here are 10 top developments that unfolded throughout the day:

Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed the nation in a 40-minute televised address, explaining the reason behind the government's Article 370 move. Modi said the scrapping of Article 370 will usher a new era of development in Jammu and Kashmir, while the bifurcation will also help Ladakh prosper as a separate Union Territory. He listed the government's plan to end corruption, atrocities, and violence in Jammu and Kashmir. He also urged a wide array of industries to come and invest in Jammu and Kashmir. The prime minister also asked the nation to stand in support of Kashmiris, adding that the restrictions will be removed soon. He also requested filmmakers from Bollywood, Tollywood and other regional film industries to shoot films in the Valley.

Read: Band Baja Barat goes for a toss in Kashmir Valley: Marriage season severely hit amid restrictions

PM Modi also listed the benefits that Jammu and Kashmir citizens will enjoy now. PM Modi said there will be an immediate review of government employees and police in the state. They will now enjoy the same benefits as other government employees posted in other states of India. He also said that central laws and schemes will now benefit minority communities in Jammu and Kashmir. He also spoke about how education will prosper in the state after the scrapping of Article 370. Healthcare and export industry will also flourish in the absence of Article 370, said PM Modi.

During his entire speech, PM Modi mentioned Jammu and Kashmir 69 times and barely mentioned Pakistan. The prime minister's speech on Kashmir had stark differences when compared to his earlier speeches. He mentioned the word development 19 times but mentioned Pakistan just five times, making it clear that the decision was taken in the best interest of citizens of Jammu and Kashmir. PM Modi even avoided speaking about Congress during his speech. Meanwhile, PM Modi mentioned Ladakh around 28 times during his televised address to the nation.

While PM Modi's speech may have lightened the mood around today's developments around Kashmir, Pakistan has been trying to disrupt the Indian government's decision. On Thursday, Pakistan clarified that it is not planning any military action in the wake of the move. However, Pakistan's Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi made it clear that the country would only review its decision against India if it "reconsiders" its actions in Kashmir. Qureshi's remarks came a day after Pakistan expelled the Indian High Commissioner as part of its decision to downgrade the diplomatic ties with India.

Also Read: In first speech on Article 370, PM Modi talks development in J&K

That's not all. Pakistan had even stopped the Samjhauta Express just before the Wagah border and asked India to send its own crew to drive it across. According to a Pakistani news channel, the country had suspended Samjhauta Express in protest against India's move to scrap Article 370. The Pakistan government did not inform India regarding its decision to suspend the special train. As a result, a number of passengers were left stranded. Soon after, Indian Railways sent an engine with three crew members to retrieve the train from Wagah. Earlier on Wednesday, Pakistan expelled Indian High Commissioner Ajay Bisaria, just moments after it downgraded diplomatic ties with India over the decision to scrap Article 370. Bisaria left Pakistan on Thursday.

India's Ministry of External Affairs retaliated strongly after Pakistan's decision to suspend bilateral ties after the government's move to scrap Article 370. India slammed Pakistan and accused it of presenting an alarming picture to the world. "The reasons cited by Pakistan are not supported by facts on the ground," MEA said. India also added that the abrogation of Article 370 is an internal affair and asked it not to interfere. "The Constitution of India was, is and will always be a sovereign matter. Seeking to interfere in that jurisdiction by invoking an alarmist vision of the region will never succeed," MEA added.

Meanwhile, the United States issued a warning to Pakistan, adding that US President Donald Trump is closely watching India's Kashmir move. Following its statement that India did not inform the United States about its move on Kashmir, a US official has said the country was closely monitoring the developments in Jammu and Kashmir. "The US is closely following India's legislation regarding the new territorial status and governance of Jammu and Kashmir. We note the broader implications of these developments, including the potential for increased instability in the region," a State Department spokesperson said.

Must See: BJP hails PM Modi's speech on J&K, Cong says it lacks conviction

Earlier in the day, the Jammu and Kashmir administration said they were working towards restoring normalcy in Jammu and Kashmir. As part of the move, it has asked government employees to resume work immediately from Friday while schools and colleges will also be re-opened. Meanwhile, Section 144 was also imposed in Kargil districts after several groups of locals protested against the Indian government's move to scrap Article 370. At least 300 people took part in protests while several of them were detained by security forces in the Valley. On the other hand, massive celebrations were planned in Leh after Ladakh was declared a Union Territory.

As the government tries to explain its stand on scrapping Article 370, opposition parties have remained critical of the move. Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad lashed out at National Security Advisor Ajit Doval after a video of him having lunch with locals in Shopian surfaced. Azad, who was sent back from Srinagar airport on Thursday, said, "Paise dekar aap kisiko bhi saath le sakte ho [You can buy anyone with money]." Meanwhile, Tehseen Poonawalla also filed a petition in Supreme Court against the government's decision to impose restrictions in Jammu and Kashmir.

The Supreme Court on Thursday also refused to hear a plea challenging decision on Article 370. The court told the petitioner that his plea challenging Presidential Order on Article 370 will be heard in due course. "CJI will pass appropriate orders on the listing," Justice NV Ramana said.
