Caught on camera: BDA officials ‘working’ in office

BDA engineers

smoking

drinking

gambling

Bangalore

BDA

A circular directed employees to be punctual and diligent

I will not tolerate employees tarnishing BDA’s image.We are introducing biometric attendance system at all BDA offices. – Dr G C Prakash, BDA Commissioner

By Y Maheswara ReddyTwoand a draughtsman reveal why your work seldom gets done; they’ve been suspended forduring office hoursAnd just when you thought theDevelopment Authority (BDA) cannot surprise you anymore, comes the news that three of its employees have been suspended for their shocking behaviour. No, it’s not for taking bribes. What you’re about to hear will pale in comparison.Three employees from the RT Nagaroffice were caught on camera drinking, gambling and smoking on office premises. The recording, videographed by one of their colleagues, shows two engineers and one draughtsman consuming alcohol, smoking and gambling during office hours. One of them is seen in the video hiding currency notes under a sheet on the table where gambling is in progress.After learning about the incident, BDA Commissioner Dr G C Prakash issued an order on Thursday suspending, with immediate effect, MS Shankara Murthy, assistant engineer of 4th North subdivision and DM Narayanaswamy, assistant engineer of 3rd North subdivision and J Muralidhar, a draughtsman working at RT Nagar BDA office.“I will not tolerate employees tarnishing BDA’s image. I want the BDA employees to work hard during office hours,’’ said the BDA Commissioner.Dr Prakash had already issued a circular, directing employees to be punctual and diligent. It is said the Commissioner, who assumed office on Tuesday, found some BDA employees coming late to office on Wednesday and shot off the circular.“We are introducing biometric attendance system at all BDA offices. All the employees have to be in office by 10 am and should remain at work till 5.30 pm. We can tolerate employees coming a few minutes late due to traffic or transport problems. But they should be ready to put in a few extra hours if required,” said the BDA Commissioner.The BDA Commissioner said he is also thinking about putting an end to the menace of middlemen at the BDA head office. A few dedicated employees would be assigned to monitor the entry and exit of the middlemen, he said.“Our staff keeps an eye on middlemen. We are installing CCTV cameras at all entry points. If our staff find a particular person or group of people making frequent visits to the BDA office, measures will be taken to ban the entry of such people into the BDA office premises,” said the BDA Commissioner.Many people have appreciated the BDA Commissioner for taking measures to discipline employees and regulate the entry of middlemen into the BDA office.“I do not know how long the new BDA Commissioner will remain here but I want him to make the BDA engineers and other employees work hard,’’ says Jnana Prakash, a visitor to the BDA office.“I am very happy to see the BDA Commissioner suspending the employees for misusing the BDA office. I welcome the Commissioner’s initiative to prevent middlemen from entering the BDA head office. I want the BDA Commissioner to address the issues at newly formed layouts and also redress the grievances of farmers who have handed over their lands for the formation of layouts,” says Sai Datta, a social activists.
