Coastal Karnataka Fights Nature’s Fury Yet Again, Landslides On The Western Ghats Disrupt Movement

A communique from South-West Railways (SWR) said that the tri-weekly expresses, including the overnight express, plying between Mangaluru and Yeshwantpur were cancelled on Wednesday due to fresh landslides on the ghat stretch.

Divisional Railway Manager of SWR's Mysuru Division, Aparna Garg, who was camping at the affected ghat stretch, said fresh landslips, including one near a bridge and another between Siribagilu and Subrahmanya Road, have occurred since last night.

“About 20,000 cum of earth came down between hill cuttings at km 90/900-91/000 off Siribagilu at 10.40pm last night,” said Garg. Three earth movers were working to clear the debris and workers were on the site even in the face of heavy rains, slush and gusty winds.

The Ghat Section Roads In Shambles

All the six ghat routes through Agumbe, Charmady, Shirady, Sampaje, Barebail and Bisale are experiencing very heavy rainfall, resulting in landslides and road cracks on many spots along the road connecting Bengaluru to Mangaluru.

The ghat roads connecting Dakshina Kannada and Chikkamagaluru districts that experienced heavy rains and resultant landslides were closed for traffic last week. Six kilometres of roads are still under ankle-level slush and driving on these roads has become a nightmare.

The district administrations of Dakshina Kannada and Chikkamagaluru have cleared the ghats for traffic but motorists had begun avoiding this ghat as the 6-8 kilometres of slushy roads on the Charmady-Annappa temple sector are very risky for motoring.

“I had taken my family to show them the splendour of Charmady ghat during the monsoons and the cascading waterfalls just everywhere en route to Malaya Maruta (a hill station) near Kottigehara. The pleasure trip became a nightmare as the car started swerving and skidding over the slushy road. It took me great effort to come out unscathed from this road on Monday,” said Ajay Shetty a motor enthusiast.

Engineers who visited the Charmady ghat stretch that experienced landslides are apprehensive that the loosened earth is likely to cause mud run-off from the hills and the slushy water might flow through the roads if the rains continue incessantly.

Officials warn that the Chikkamagaluru side of the Charmady ghats (12 kilometers) is normal for driving while the Dakshina Kannada part (18 kilometres), including the 10 hairpin bends are not yet conducive for motoring. With the Shirady ghat opening still a long way off and with the Bisale ghat also out of action, motorists who decide to use the Charmady sector will be taking a risk that they must be aware of.

According to Deputy Commissioner of Dakshina Kannada, Sasikanth Senthil, the relief machinery in case of flash floods and landslips have been kept in readiness and there would not be another occasion that will force the closure of the ghats entirely. But the advisory on slow movement and the ban on heavy vehicles will stay for some more days, he points out.
