Gemini™ Rice Bran Oil highlights better cholesterol reduction in first campaign

Click on the Image to watch the TVC.

Gemini™ Rice Bran Oil, the new extension of brand Gemini™, has unveiled its first campaign with a strong focus on innovating for the Indian market. Cargill launched this product to meet the needs of the discerning Indian customers.

Aimed at better cholesterol reduction through its ‘cholesterol cutter’ proposition, the Gemini™ Rice Bran Oil campaign highlights the product benefits of 40% more Oryzanol, working to reduce bad cholesterol in the body more effectively. This integrated marketing campaign comprises print, OOH, digital and in-market visibility initiatives.

Advertisement

The narrative of the campaign pivots around communicating the brand’s unique proposition as a ‘Cholesterol Cutter’ using the school teacher as the protagonist and showcasing a day in her life. The teacher, in her early 30s, believes in disciplining her students in an approachable and friendly manner and uses ‘marks’ as her trump card. Through various scenarios, throughout the day at school, she warns students that she will ‘cut marks’ if they are not behaving as per her expectations. Finally, once school ends and she is at home, in her kitchen, she acknowledges that “Kuch cheezein kat ti hai toh bura lagta hai, par cholesterol kat ta hai toh acha lagta hai”, thereby introducing “Gemini™ Rice Bran Oil, Aapke family ka cholesterol cutter. This is based on the insight that in life, when things get cut, one feels bad. However when cholesterol is cut, one undoubtedly feels good.

Oryzanol helps in increasing good cholesterol while reducing bad cholesterol in the body. As a result, food cooked in Gemini™ Rice Bran oil would work as an effective weapon in the fight against cholesterols. Enriched with anti-oxidants, Gemini™ Rice Bran Oil is fortified with Vitamin A, D, & E and is suitable for Indian cooking.

Advertisement

Subin Sivan, Marketing Head, Cargill’s oils business in India, said, “Studies indicate that 80% of consumers are concerned about their heart health and cholesterol. In a move to fuel Indian kitchens with healthier alternatives, we launched Gemini™ Rice Bran Oil with a stronger cholesterol reduction claim supported by the presence of 40% more oryzanol as compared to any regular rice bran oil. The ‘cholesterol cutter’ campaign aims to establish this product superiority and build greater resonance among consumers regarding the benefit of choosing Gemini™ Rice Bran Oil, as their preferred cooking medium.”

Janmenjoy Mohanty, Regional Creative Officer, Lowe Lintas, said, “When you have sharp product delivery, the onus is on the idea to deliver a hook that neatly grasps the consumer’s attention — and so the ‘Cholesterol Cutter’ was born. In the campaign, a bittersweet story talks about how it hurts when things like marks get cut, but not when it comes to cholesterol. A playful music track holds everything in place memorably. Though cholesterol is a much-repeated talking point, we created a signature style and tone for Gemini with ‘Cholesterol Cutter’ to make a difference in the conversation.”

Advertisement

Campaign:

Advertisement

Credits:

Client: Gemini™ Rice Bran Oil

Creative Agency: Lowe Lintas

Account Management: Naveen Gaur, Tanul Bhartiya, Dallbir Singh, Yogesh Potaliya

Account Planning: Anurag Prasad, Madhumita Chandrasekaran

Creative: Prateek Bhardwaj, Janmenjoy Mohanty, Aarti Srinivasan, Manzoor Alam, Sonakshi Singh, Lalit Bharadva

Production House: Ubik Films

Info@BestMediaInfo.com
