Beginning of A New Era In J&K, Ladakh: PM Narendra Modi

NEW DELHI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi in his address to the nation on Thursday said that it is the beginning of a “new era” in Jammu and Kashmir and asserted that the rights of all the people across the country are now same.

“This is the beginning of a new era in Jammu and Kashmir. Now the rights as well as responsibilities of people across the country are equal,” Modi said in his first address to the nation after the formation of the 17th Lok Sabha.

In his almost 40-minute long speech, Modi also congratulated the people of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh after the scrapping of Article 370 of the Constitution which gave special status to the region, and the Parliament’s nod to bifurcate the State into two Union Territories — Jammu and Kashmir with an Assembly and Ladakh sans one.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday assured the Assembly elections to elect a new government in Jammu and Kashmir will be held in transparent manner, like the panchayat polls last year. He said that he wanted the local young leaders of the region to enter politics and participate in the polls.

The Prime Minister urged the J&K Governor to complete at the earliest formation of the block development councils, pending for the last two-three decades.

“I am confident that after the removal of Article 370, when these Panchayat members get a chance to work in the new system, they will do wonders. I am confident that the people of Jammu and Kashmir will defeat separatism and move forward with new hopes,” Narendra Modi said.

Modi also asserted that the dream of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, B.R. Ambedkar, Syama Prasad Mookerjee and former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajapyee has been fulfilled by abrogating Article 370.

“Like one family, one nation - we have taken a historic decision on Jammu and Kashmir. Such a system, due to which the people of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh were deprived of many rights, which was a major obstacle in their development, have now gone away.

“The dream of Sardar Patel, Baba Ambedkar, Shyama Prasad Mookerjee and Atal Bihari Vajpayee and crores of patriots have been fulfilled,” he said in his address.

Modi further said that all vacant government posts in the new Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh Union Territories will be filled soon.

He also said that Article 370 was used as a tool by Pakistan to terrorise Kashmiris. Nearly 42,000 people died over the last three decades. Earlier, laws made by the Parliament didn’t benefit the people of Kashmir. Now all laws made by the Parliament will be applicable in J&K and Ladakh.

Modi said that “People who came to India after 1947 couldn’t contest polls in Jammu and Kashmir... they had rights everywhere else, but not in Jammu and Kashmir. With the scrapping of Article 370, rights to those who had migrated will be restored.”

Pointing out that Kashmir was the preferred destination for Bollywood movies, Prime Minister Modi said, “When the situation is normal, people from world over would shoot movies there. The region has the potential to become the world’s biggest tourism destination. Filmmaking would provide employment.”

Referring to the huge untapped potential in Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh, Prime Minister Modi said, “In Ladakh, a plant called Solo, which is a boon to those living in high altitudes, can be sold worldwide as it has vast medicinal properties.”

Jammu and Kashmir will touch new heights of development and attract people from all over the world. Ease of living will improve the lives of people in the region, the Prime Minister assured.

Stating that Jammu and Kashmir didn’t develop at the desired pace, the Prime Minister said, “The future of the people of J&K and Ladakh will become brighter now. “ (IANS)

Also Read: PM Narendra Modi likely to address nation at 8 pm today on the revocation of Article 370

Also Watch: Four Suspected ULFA(I) linkmen Apprehended by Dibrugarh Police
