Red warning for 9 Kerala districts on Friday, orange warning for Saturday

Red warning for 9 Kerala districts on Friday, orange warning for Saturday

Ernakulam, Idukki, Thrissur, Palakkad, Malappuram, Kozhikode, Wayanad, Kannur and Kasargode have been issued a red warning for Friday.

news Kerala Rains

Update on IMD prediction: Rain fury to continue in Kerala: Red warning for 7 districts on Saturday

Following heavy rainfall in Kerala, the India Meteorological Department has issued a red warning in nine of the 14 districts in the state on Friday. Ernakulam, Idukki, Thrissur, Palakkad, Malappuram, Kozhikode, Wayanad, Kannur and Kasargode have been issued a red warning. Among these, Idukki, Palakkad, Malappuram, Wayanad and Kannur are expected to receive extremely heavy rainfall (more than 204.4 mm).

Pathanamthitta, Alappuzha and Kottayam have been issued an orange warning. Thiruvananthapuram and Kollam have been given a yellow warning.

However, there is no red warning issued for Saturday or the days after. All the nine districts given red warning on Friday have been issued an orange warning for Saturday and Sunday.

As of Friday morning, 10 people have died due to the rains – 14, according to unofficial reports. Among these, two people died in a landslide at Pazhassi colony, Wayanad and two others died in a flash flood in Kuttiyadi, Kozhikode.

Wayanad and Nilambur in Malappuram are the worst affected districts with landslides reported from Pazhassi colony and Puthumala in Meppadi, Wayanad. According to reports, rescue personnel have not been able to reach Puthumala as the road is inaccessible.

The National Disaster Response Force personnel have rescued 54 people from Puthumala and one more team is on the way to Wayanad.

Palakkad town and Pala town in Kottayam in central Kerala are flooded. In Attappadi, some of the tribal hamlets are reportedly cut off.

As many as 386 relief camps have been opened, more than 100 of them in Wayanad. The number of people housed there are 26,069.

Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan has assured that the state is fully equipped to deal with the situation and people should not panic. The CM on Thursday night visited the Kerala State Disaster Management Authority headquarters in Thiruvananthapuram to assess the situation.

Wayanad MP Rahul Gandhi had earlier tweeted: “The flood situation in my parliamentary constituency, #Wayanad is grim. I’m monitoring the situation closely & have spoken to the Kerala CM and key Govt officials to expedite relief. I will be reaching out to PM Modi as well to brief him & request Central Govt. assistance.”

Update on IMD prediction: Rain fury to continue in Kerala: Red warning for 7 districts on Saturday

A red warning means extremely heavy rainfall, an orange warning indicates very heavy rainfall and a yellow warning indicates heavy rainfall.
