Thar Express suspended: MEA slams Pak for 'unilateral decisions'

Follow us on Image Source : ANI MEA slams Pak over 'unilateral' moves against India, says ‘time for reality check’

India on Friday said it was high time for Pakistan to accept the reality and stop interfering in the internal affairs of other countries.

The reaction by the Ministry of External Affairs came in response to Pakistan shutting down the Thar Express -- its last remaining train link with India, amid rising tensions between the two neighbours after New Delhi's decision to revoke Article 370 granting special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

Pakistan had earlier closed the Samjhauta Express.

Addressing the media, External Affair Minister spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said that suspending Samjhauta Express and Thar Express trains showed that Pakistan was trying to present an alarming picture of bilateral relationship.

“It is time for Pakistan to accept the reality and stop interfering in internal affairs of other countries,” he said.

“Actions taken by Pakistan is unilateral. This has been done without consulting us. We have urged them to reconsider their decision. Our sense is that whatever is being done by Pakistan is to present an alarming picture of bilateral relationship,” the MEA spokesperson added.

He said, "Our views are very clear. Whatever steps we have taken in view of Article 370 is an internal matter. This is something which has been properly explained, but beyond that if Pakistan decides to internationalise it, we'll see what needs to be done."

MUST READ | Pakistan army warns India against 'misadventure', vows stronger response than Feb 27

He further informed that Pakistan airspace is operational and only re-routing has been done.

When asked about India's High Commission to Pakistan Ajay Bisaria, who was earlier told to return to India by Pakistan, Raveesh Kumar said that the Indian envoy has not returned to Delhi yet.

“He is not in Delhi. We have requested Pakistan for review of their decision. The timing of his return will be determined later,” he said.

The spokesperson said the ministry as well as External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar have briefed a number of foreign governments and multi-lateral organisations about India's steps on Kashmir, and conveyed to them that "they constitute a sovereign jurisdiction, and relates to our internal affairs".

To a question on Pakistan planning to internationalise the Kashmir issue, he said: "When Pakistan decides to internationalise it, we will decide what is to be done."

On Pakistan's plans to raise it at the UN Security Council, he said: "Our view on the UNSC is very clear. The steps we have taken in relation to Article 370 are an internal matter."

"We feel the steps have been taken keeping in mind the best interests of Jammu and Kashmir," he said, adding that Prime Minister Narendra Modi had on Thursday clearly articulated his vision of J&K and Ladakh.

ALSO READ | Samjhauta Express arrives in Delhi day after Pakistan suspended train service

ALSO READ | China calls for Indo-Pak dialogue as Pakistan foreign minister arrives in Beijing

Latest India News
