Karnataka's Netravati river swells; residents asked to shift

Watch: Karnataka's Netravati river swells due to incessant rains, increased inflow

MANGALURU: Netravati river in Dakshina Kannada district has been swelling due to heavy rain and increased inflow. The water level in the river has touched the danger level at many places on Friday.Dakshina Kannada district administration has warned people residing on the banks to shift to safer places. Meanwhile, team of officials with rescue forces has been deployed to help residents.“Since the inflow into Netravati river is increasing considerably due to heavy rain, all residents near the river should shift to safer places. Residents on either side of the Netravati river between Uppinangady and Mangaluru should shift immediately. Officials have been camping in identified spots where there are possibilities of flooding. Our teams are fully prepared to face any situation,” said deputy commissioner S Sasikanth Senthil.The water level of Netravati river at Bantwal has gone up to 8.4 meters against the danger level of 8.5 meters. Water level of the river at Uppinangady has touched 31.5 meters, which is the danger level. The water level of River Kumaradhara at Uppinangady has increased to 26 meters against the danger level of 26.5 meters. The water level in Gundya river too has touched the maximum level of five meters on Friday.The district administration has opened 30 gates of Thumbe dam in Bantwal taluk, which has a maximum storage level of 7 meters, following an increase in inflow. Similarly, 18 gates of AMR dam on Netravati river also have been opened after the water level increased to 18.75 meters against the maximum level of 18.9 meters.Meanwhile, roads on national highways and state highways in the district have been flooded due to heavy rain. Road stretches on Bengaluru – Mangaluru national highway at Panjala, Valalu, Udane and Lavathadka in Uppinangady have been flooded. While the flood water level on national highway at Panjala, Valalu and Udane is three feet, the road stretch at Lavathadka is flooded by two feet.
