Women want their stories to be told and heard: Aranya Johar

Next Story : Malala on Article 370: We must prioritise safety of women and children

Aranya Johar set the internet ablaze when she released her videos A Brown Girl’s Guide To Gender and A Brown Girl’s Guide To Beauty in 2017. Since then, the spoken word poet has continued to put forth notable content on beauty standards, gender equality and mental health among other subjects, garnering 75.3k followers on Instagram. Most recently, she became the youngest member of the Gender Equality Advisory Council for the G7 2019, which took place in Biarritz, France.Not much changed around me. My support system kept me grounded. Every time something would get to my head, they would say, ‘Remember Malala got shot in the head?’ Instantly, I would know where I stood. Yet, when Lakshmi (the acid attack victim she mentions in her poem) shared my video, it felt huge because I could evoke an emotion in the audience just like she evoked in me.Women have come to realise that the system in general, no matter the kind of art, has been pitted against women. In the 1900s, they had to use pseudonyms to enable their books to sell, but now, there has been a huge change. Women are demanding the stage because they want their stories to be told and heard, and they can’t wait for someone to pass the mike; they are creating their platforms.This wouldn’t qualify as weird, but I once got a death threat from a terrorist community. If it takes a woman’s life to help people realise that feminism is required in 2019, I’d be happy to volunteer. As for absurd, I was 17 when A Brown Girl’s Guide To Gender released. Sadly, some ignored the point of the video, and commented that I look like Mia Khalifa. I do think that she is beautiful, but the piece was so much more than that.First, Divya Kandukuri. She has been instrumental in making me acknowledge my caste privilege. She is unapologetic about who she is, and her work. Also, she demands an equal moral, and isn’t afraid to anger people. Second, Faye D’souza, for she says things as it is. She faces immense backlash online, but we love to support, defend, and protect her. To see a woman on primetime TV who is loud, confident, unapologetic, and demanding what really matters is incredible. Third, Rega Jha. She addresses beauty in a unique way. Finally, Trinetra Haldar Gummaraju, a transwoman. What I love about her is that she talks about male privilege in a beautiful way.I completed my first year of college at Sophia College For Women, Mumbai, but now I’m pursuing distance learning with Mumbai University. I travel a lot, and fortunately or unfortunately, on social media, one needs to be relevant, and a lot of hard work goes behind it. However, I have support from the University.Comedy can effectively make people realise the flaws in society. I do see myself making humorous series on YouTube about (maybe) misconceptions around sex education, gender, and equality. Also, humour helps people approach subjects with a more welcoming perspective which, in certain topics, is great.
