Monsoon mayhem: Over 50 killed as 9 states face flood fury, red alert in Kerala

Incessant rains wreaked havoc in at least nine states, including entire Peninsular India, killing over 50 people and rendering lakhs displaced. At least 5375 personnel of the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) have been pressed into rescue missions across the nation along with several columns of Army, Navy, Air Force as well as teams of local police and SDRFs.

According to a statement by NDRF, it has rescued over 42,000 people in Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat. Apart from these six states, parts of Tamil Nadu were also on the brink of the deluge, while Goa and Odisha were reeling under the after-effects of floods as the water levels receded to unveil a trail of destruction.

Here is a state-by-state look at flood situation:

Kerala

A year after Kerala was ravaged by the deadliest monsoon that led to the worst deluge in the state’s history in a century, it was again at the receiving end of nature’s fury, prompting the government to seek the help of Army and Air Force. A red alert has been sounded in the state.

Worst-affected areas

With at least 35 deaths in the last three-days, Kerala is the worst-affected state by rain in India. Rail and air services were hit in Kerala as Kochi airport had to be shut due to water-logging and over 20 trains were cancelled by Southern Railway. Educational institutions remained shut.

Several districts on Kerala faced the wrath of the deluge, but Wayanad and Malappuram were most-affected. Authorities scrambled to rescue people from low-lying and submerged areas.

Kavalapara near Nilambur in Malappuram District suffered heavy loss with nearly 40 houses being washed away due to a massive landslide, officials said. Several people are feared missing from the hilly region.

Also read | Kerala floods: Toll goes up to 35, 27 injured, 7 missing

Sreekandapuram in Kannur and adjacent areas have been submerged. The Parassinikadavu shrine in Kannur district has been inundated with people being rescued in country-boats.

The government has suspended the iconic Snake Boat Race which was scheduled to be held in Alappuzha on Friday in the wake of heavy rain. Examinations of the Kerala Public Service Commission and various universities across the state, scheduled for Saturday, have been postponed, officials said.

Rescuers help people to cross a flooded area after a landslide caused by torrential monsoon rains in Meppadi in Wayanad: REUTERS

India Meteorological Dept (IMD) had issued Red alert for nine districts of the state for Friday. Red alert was issued for Ernakulam, Idukki, Thrissur, Palakkad, Malappuram, Kozhikode, Wayanad, Kannur and Kasargod districts.

Rescue ops

Rescue and relief operations were on in full swing in Kerala with the involvement of the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), Police, the Fireforce and forest department.

A total of 738 relief camps have been opened across the State with over 64,000 people displaced from their houses by the floods and rains being shifted there. CM Pinarayi Vijayan has sought Indian Air Force's help to rescue 40 people, who are feared to have been trapped under debris in landslips in Wayanad and Malappuram.

Weather updates

The Met department has issued a red alert in Ernakulam, Thrissur, Idukki, Palakkad, Malappuram, Kozhikode, Wayanad, Kannur and Kasaragod districts of the state for Friday and in Ernakulam, Idukki, Palakkad, Malappuram, Kozhikode, Wayanad and Kannur for August 10.

Who said what

In New Delhi, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi, who represents the Wayanad Lok Sabha seat from Kerala, spoke to Prime Minister Narendra Modi on the floods and sought aid. ...The PM has assured to provide any assistance required to mitigate effects of the disaster, he tweeted from his Wayanad MP Twitter handle.

Karnataka

The flood situation in Karnataka worsened on Friday with no let-up in rains as the authorities battled to reach out to the needy in the state, where the toll went up to 16.

Worst affected areas

Floods and rains have left a trail of destruction in vast areas of north, coastal and Malnad districts of the state. Other affected districts include Bagalkot, Vijayapura, Raichur, Yadgiri, Uttara Kannada, Dakshina Kannada, Shivamogga, Kodagu and Chikkamagalur. Four members of a family died in a landslip in Kodagu district on Friday following incessant rains.

People in Gadag district, which is among the worst-hit areas due to a dam breach, tried to lay siege on Karnataka CM's cavalcade, complaining of inadequate relief. The police made a mild baton charge to disperse the group and allow his vehicle to proceed.

Rescue ops

Rescue teams comprising personnel from Fire and Emergency Department, State Disaster Response Force, National Disaster Response Force and Army have evacuated 2,07,212 people, an official statement said on Friday. Deluge has affected over 650 villages, damaging over 11,000 houses. The South Western Railways has throw open its railway stations to flood-hit displaced people.

Indian Navy: Teams deployed in Mallapur village near Kadra &, Kaiga in Uttara Kannada district of Karnataka evacuated over 750 people today, bringing the total number of rescued personnel in this area alone to 2219. #KarnatakaRains pic.twitter.com/BWARsbfoE8 August 9, 2019

Weather updates

The weather office has predicted widespread heavy to very heavy rains likely over coastal Karnataka and adjoining parts of Malnad and Interior Karnataka districts and scattered to widespread light to moderate rains likely over SIK and isolated to scattered light to moderate rains over NIK districts. Bengaluru mayor has put the authorities on standby due to weather alert.

Who said what

CM BS Yediyurappa said he was in constant touch with the Centre and Modi, Home minister Amit Shah and Defence minister Rajnath Singh have been briefed on rescue and relief efforts. The CM asked people to remain calm and assured that the government was with them.

The CM, who continues to be one-man-army with a cabinet, has been facing some opposition ire as they claim that it will be difficult for him to handle the situation alone.

Former PM and JDS leader HD Dewe Gowda today urged the PM office to intervene. "The flood situation in Karnataka has worsened. I strongly urge @PMOIndia to declare the floods in Karnataka as National disaster of severe nature and extend additional support at the earliest," he tweeted.

Maharashtra

Over 2.85 lakh people were affected due to the devastating floods in Western Maharashtra’s five districts, with the death toll reaching 29 on Friday.

Worst-affected areas

The region, including the worst-hit Kolhapur and Sangli, is being pummelled by rain over the last few days, and major rivers including the Krishna and Panchaganga are in the spate.

A total of 28 villages in Sangli and 18 villages in Kolhapur are completely surrounded by water and the only mode of reaching them is by boats. However, the floodwaters began to recede in Kolhapur and Sangli after Karnataka opened the flood gates of Almatti dam.

The NH 4 (Mumbai-Bengaluru National Highway) was shutdown for traffic after landslide near Shirdi. Some 18,000 vehicles were stranded on the highway.

Rescue ops

A total of 1,34,119 and 1,11,365 people have been evacuated to temporary camps in Sangli and Kolhapur districts, respectively. In Satara district 9,521 people have been evacuated, 6,819 in Pune and 23,437 in Solapur. The government has decided to release relief compensation to flood victims immediately. In cities, Rs 15,000 will be given per family and in rural areas Rs 10,000.

A total of 34 rescue teams are working in Kolhapur and 36 in Sangli. These include teams of the NDRF, Navy, Coast Guard and State Disaster Response Force (SDRF).

Flood-affected people are evacuated to a safer place after heavy rains in Kolhapur: REUTERS

Who said what

The state government drew flak for announcing that financial aid would be given to people in only those areas which were inundated for more than two days. Opposition Congress said the Government Resolution (order) should be scrapped.

Also read | Almatti dam water released, may ease Maharashtra flood woes

Tamil Nadu

Even as Tamil Nadu's capital Chennai grapples with water scarcity, parts of the state are being battered by Monsoon. At least five people have been killed in rain-related incidents in Nilgris. The government has asked the Indian Air Force to be on stand by to be deployed for rescue activities.

Worst-affected region

With torrential rains and landslides, Nilgris district is the worst-affected area in Tamil Nadu. The district recorded 911 mm rainfall on Thursday. It had earlier received 820 mm on Wednesday.

A woman and her daughter died when the wall of their house collapsed while bodies of of two women estate workers were recovered from a blocked drain at Kuruthukuli Friday. A 65-year-old man had died in a wall collapse on Thursday.

Rescue operations

A total of 491 people including personnel from NDRF, SDRF and Army have been deployed in relief activities. Further, 1704 persons affected due to floods and landslides have been sheltered in 28 relief centres and were being provided with food, drinking water and other amenities. As many as 36 medical teams, including mobile units and 30 ambulance vehicles have been deployed.

Steps have been taken to provide food to 40 persons marooned in Avalanchi from helicopter. The IAF (station) in Sulur (in Coimbatore) has been asked to be on standby to take up rescue activities.

Weather updates

The Regional Meteorological Department predicts heavy to very heavy rain at isolated places over Nilgiris and Coimbatore districts of Tamil Nadu. Light to moderate rain is likely to occur at a few places over Tamil Nadu until August 10.

Watch | Flood fury: Ground report from Kerala's Meppadi

Who said what

Chief Minister K Palaniswami announced a relief of Rs 10 lakh each to the families of the victims.

"The family of the five persons who died due to heavy rains has been given deep condolences and condolences and has been ordered to provide Rs 10 lakh," Chief Minister K Palaniswami said on Twitter.

"The Indian Air Force at Sulur has been asked to prepare for rescue operations. Honorable Minister @Udhayakumar_RB has ordered the Revenue & Disaster Management Department officials to go to Nilgiris to speed up the recovery and relief work," the CM informed in another tweet.

Andhra Pradesh

In Andhra Pradesh, 31 members belonging to the fishing community, including 12 women, who were trapped in the raging Godavari river at Polavaram were rescued by the Navy.

A Navy helicopter, which was deployed from Visakhapatnam for the rescue operation, airlifted the stranded fisherfolk to Dowaleswaram in two sorties, State Disaster Management Authority said.

Gujarat

Heavy rains threw normal life out of gear at many places in central and south Gujarat, resulting in swollen rivers and water-logging in residential areas.

Worst-affected areas

Earlier in the morning, 26 out of 30 gates of Sardar Sarovar Dam on the Narmada were opened following heavy inflow of water from upstream.

Mahudha taluka of Kheda district received a staggering 300 mm of rainfall between 8 am to 8 pm on Friday. It was followed by Galteshwar in Kheda (242 mm), Barvala in Botad district (220 mm), Dhandhuka of Ahmedabad (212 mm), Ranpur in Botad (184 mm), Dhrangadhra of Surendranagar (183 mm), Godhra in Panchmahal (180) and Chhota Udepur taluka of Chhota Udepur district (179 mm).

Rescue ops

The state government said 18 teams of the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) and 11 teams of the State Disaster Response Force have been deployed at various places. As many as 154 roads in Chhota Udepur and Tapi districts are closed due to water-logging.

District administration of Surat and Navsari urged people living in low-lying areas to remain alert. In a tweet, Navsari district collector M D Modiya alerted that the water level of the Purna river was rising. Surat collector Dhaval Patel asked people not to go near the Tapi river as 75,000 cusec water has been released from Ukai dam.

Weather updates

India Meteorological Department has issued a warning of heavy to very heavy rainfall over the next two days in parts of Gujarat. Heavy to very heavy rainfall was reported from districts of Chhota Udepur, Dahod, Panchmahal, Sabarkantha, Mahisagar, Narmada, Dang, Vadodara, Tapi and Surat, said the IMD. Some parts of Saurashtra and Kutch would also receive heavy rainfall during the next two days.

Also read | Sardar Sarovar's Dam water level at all-time high of 131.5 metre

Goa

Flood-situation improved in Goa as rains took a break in the state on Friday, prompting the government to expedite the restoration work in several villages in North Goa were inundated following heavy showers and release of water from Tillari dam.

Worst affected areas

Heavy rains had lashed several parts of Goa, including the state capital Panaji, on Thursday morning. However, rains took a break on Friday. Pernem, Bicholim and Bardez talukas were affected the worst due to the floods. At several places trees fell down while portion of roads in some parts got washed out.

Rescue ops

Around 150 families had been evacuated to safer places in Pernem, Bicholim, Canacona and Bardez tehsils following heavy rains and release of water from Tillari dam on Goa-Maharashtra border, the state government had said on Thursday.

Talking to reporters, Goa Chief Minister Pramod Sawant said normalcy would be restored in the flood-hit parts over the next two days.

We have taken all the necessary steps for flood relief with all the departments getting involved in the process. The rains have subsided for now, but it will take at least two days to restore the normalcy, he said.

State Ports Minister Michael Lobo handed over a cheque of Rs five lakh to the chief minister’s relief fund, Sawant said. He also appealed to the people to similarly come forward to donate, so that it can help the state in carrying out the relief work.

Also read | Maharashtra minister lands in row over selfie videos during flood survey

Madhya Pradesh

Around 1,000 people were evacuated in Madhya Pradesh on Friday with the river Narmada flowing above the danger mark, as rains lashed all parts of the state. At least one death in rain-related incidents was reported, along with cases of people being swept away in flooded rivers and going missing. Sluice gates of seven of the 28 dams in the state have been opened due to a rise in water levels.

Worst-affected areas

Incessant rains and overflowing river affected Dhar and Barwani districts the most. An officer of the Narmada Valley Development Authority said the Narmada was flowing 7 metres above its danger mark of 123.28 meters in Rajghat village in Barwani district at 2 pm on Friday. Fifteen sluice gates of the Bargi dam on the Narmada in Jabalpur district were opened following incessant rain in eastern Madhya Pradesh, officials said.

Tushar Solanki (10) was crossing a bridge on the overflowing Balwati river on a bicycle at Badnawar in Dhar district on Friday evening when he was swept away. Some passers-by pulled him out of the water but he died at the hospital.

Kapil Jatav (22) and Rohit (16) were crossing a small bridge over a swollen rivulet on a motorbike when they were washed away near Bheelkhedia village in Shajapur district, said Sub Divisional Officer of Police Vijayshanker Dwivedi. Rajkumar, a police personnel, and a villager named Bheru Singh pulled out Rohit from the gushing waters and saved his life, while Jatav was still missing, he said.

Bhopal: Water level of 'Bada Talab' increases to 1666.30 feet following rainfall in the region; maximum capacity is 1666.80 feet. The 'Bada Talab' which is also known as Upper Lake had reached dead storage in June. #MadhyaPradesh pic.twitter.com/8Mjaal5b2S ANI (@ANI) August 9, 2019

Rescue ops

Three persons on a motorbike were swept away in a swollen nullah around 11.30 pm on Mohri Road in Ashoknagar district on Thursday, police said. Two of them swam to safety, but a third rider, Mahendra Singh (40), was still missing, said police officer P P Mudgil.

A truck parked near the Khuj river was swept away in a flash flood in Dharmpuri tehsil of Dhar district. Owner Rakesh Rathore had to deploy a crane to pull it out.

Weather update

Heavy to very heavy rainfall is likely in 21 districts, including Rajgarh, Guna, Sehore, Harda and Hoshangabad and Ujjain and Indore divisions till 8.30 am on Saturday. The authorities have asked schools to remain closed in Barwani, Jhabua, Ujjain and Mandsaur districts.

Odisha

The heavy and incessant rains in the south and west Odisha earlier this week has claimed at least three lives, left two missing and hit over 1.3 lakh people in nine districts.

The damage caused by the rain was known after the rainwater receded from the submerged areas on Friday and the situation returned to normal.

Met officials said the recent spell of downpour was triggered by a deep depression which has now weakened and moved out of Odisha.

However, a fresh bout of rainfall is likely to lash the state after three days due to a cyclonic circulation in the area, they said.

Preliminary reports said the pounding rains left one person dead in each of the districts of Koraput, Kandhamal and Kalahandi, an official said.

Two of them died after being swept away by the gushing waters in Jeypore area of Koraput and in Belghar in Kandhamal district, while a third person was killed in wall collapse in Lanjigarh area of Kalahandi, he said.

Two others - one each in Kandhamal and Kalahandi districts went missing after being swept away by floodwaters and efforts are on to trace them.

In all, 1,30,072 people in 1012 villages and five urban areas spread over nine districts were affected by the torrential rains which had created a flood-like situation in some areas, a report from the special relief commissioner’s office said.

A total 14,322 people were evacuated from the vulnerable low-lying areas to safe shelters, the report said adding 95 free kitchens were opened to provide cooked food to them, it said.

Seven teams of Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force (ODRAF) and several teams of fire service have been deployed for rescue and relief operations.

The affected villages are located in 43 blocks of Rayagada, Koraput, Nabarangpur, Kandhamal, Gajapati, Malkangiri, Kalahandi, Bolangir and Sambalpur districts where more than 2,000 houses have been damaged due to the incessant rains, it said.

The highest number of 90,162 affected people are from 763 villages in Kalahandi district, followed by Rayagada where 14,645 people in 145 villages had been hit, it said. Life had been thrown out of gear in these districts due to torrential rains and flash floods which caused extensive damage to roads and bridges, officials said.
