Telangana Junior Doctors Call Off Strike Against NMC Act

Hyderabad: Vowing to continue their struggle against provisions objectionable to them in the National Medical Commission Act, junior doctors in Telangana, who have been agitating on the issue, called off their stir on Friday.

The junior doctors announced their decision following a meeting with state Health Minister E Rajender who assured them that he would convey their grievances to Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan.

Rajender, who met Vardhan in Delhi on Thursday, quoted the Union Health Minister as having said that the new legislation would be progressive.

The protesting junior doctors told reporters that they cannot continue the strike as the next parliament session would take place only after three months.

They said they have asked the state health minister to convey their concerns to the Centre once again.

The Telangana Junior Doctors Joint Action Committee said in a release that their plan of action include challenging the NMC Act legally, holding a protest in Delhi and calling for an indefinite strike, if necessary, before commencement of the winter session of parliament.

They said they will resume services, including non-emergency services, from August 10.

President Ram Nath Kovind on Thursday gave assent to the key legislation aimed at ushering in mega reforms in the medical education sector and replacing the nearly 63-year-old Indian Medical Council Act.

The National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill, passed by both houses of Parliament, will be notified in the gazette soon, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan said.

The NMC will replace the scam-tainted Medical Council of India. The president dissolved the MCI in 2018 and a Board of Governors was appointed to perform its functions.

Terming the NMC Act, a "progressive" legislation, Vardhan said it will ensure probity, quality education and bring down costs of medical education. It simplifies procedures and provides wider access to people for quality healthcare.

Referring to protests against certain provisions of the NMC of the NMC Bill, Vardhan said, "Medical students and residents doctors had some misunderstandings and misconceptions about some provisions of the bill. I have cleared their doubts."

Also Read: NMC Bill: Medicos Stage Sit-in At Dharna Chowk Hyderabad

Also Read: Why Are Doctors Protesting Against The NMC Bill, 2019?
