4 dead in Gujarat’s Kheda after 3-storey building collapses, rescue operation underway

Several people are trapped inside the debris | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The IMD has also issued a warning of "heavy to very heavy rainfall" over the next two days Normal life was thrown out of gear at many places in central and south Gujarat due to heavy rainfall Heavy rains in the area are said to be the reason behind the collapse of the building

Kheda: At least four people died after a three-storey building collapsed in the early hours of Saturday in Gujarat’s Kheda district. Several people are still trapped inside the debris of the building and rescue operations are underway.

As per the initial reports, heavy rains in the area are said to be the reason behind the collapse of the building. The India Meteorological Department (IMD) has also issued a warning of "heavy to very heavy rainfall" over the next two days.

Normal life was thrown out of gear at many places in central and south Gujarat due to heavy downpour leading to swollen rivers and water-logging in residential areas.

Mahudha taluka of Kheda district received a staggering 300 mm of rainfall between 8 am to 8 pm on Friday followed by Galteshwar in Kheda (242 mm), Barvala in Botad district (220 mm), Dhandhuka of Ahmedabad (212 mm), Ranpur in Botad (184 mm), Dhrangadhra of Surendranagar (183 mm), Godhra in Panchmahal (180) and Chhota Udepur taluka of Chhota Udepur district (179 mm), reported PTI.

Meanwhile, the District administration of Surat and Navsari urged people living in low-lying areas to remain alert.

In a tweet, Navsari district collector MD Modiya alerted that the water level of the Purna river was rising while Surat collector Dhaval Patel asked people not to go near the Tapi river as 75,000 cusec water has been released from Ukai dam.

As per the IMD, "Heavy to very heavy" rainfall was reported from districts of Chhota Udepur, Dahod, Panchmahal, Sabarkantha, Mahisagar, Narmada, Dang, Vadodara, Tapi and Surat.

Some parts of Saurashtra and Kutch would also receive heavy rainfall during the next two days.

The Gujarat government has deployed 18 teams of the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) and 11 teams of the State Disaster Response Force at various places in the state.

As many as 154 roads in Chhota Udepur and Tapi districts are closed due to water-logging.

Earlier in the morning, 26 out of 30 gates of Sardar Sarovar Dam on the Narmada were opened after a heavy inflow of water from upstream.

So far, over 21,000 people have been shifted to safer places in south Gujarat region over the last few days.
