Maharashtra To Kerala, 9 States Are Under Flood, Over 100 Killed, Millions Displaced, Red Alert Issued In Bengaluru

From Maharashtra to Kerala, peninsular India is under the grip of an intense spell of rains that have affected normal lives in nine Indian states.

This is perhaps the first time in recent history such massive floods have been reported in such levels.

Currently, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Kerala are facing floods while Odisha and Goa are facing the aftermath of floods.

In Maharashtra, 30 people have lost their lives in the floods in the last few days. Kolhapur and Sangli were the worst affected districts of Maharashtra, where according to report some places are 30-40 feet under the water.

AFP

Among dead, nine were in Sangli, four in Kolhapur, seven in Satara, six in Pune and one in Solapur. More than 2.52 lakh people have been displaced in the floods so far and have been moved to relief camps. Helicopters have been pressed into service to provide emergency aid including food to those who are still stranded in locations inaccessible for rescue teams.

In Madhya Pradesh, incessant rains have also triggered flooding in several parts of the state.

Around 1,000 people were evacuated to safer places in Barwani and Dhar districts in western Madhya Pradesh following flooding caused by the heavy downpour.

BCCL

According to IMD, heavy to very heavy rainfall is likely to occur in 21 districts, including Rajgarh, Guna, Sehore, Harda, and Hoshangabad in Ujjain and Indore divisions.

The flood situation In Karnataka too has worsened in the past 24 hours, with heavy rains spreading to more places. 16 have been killed and around 1.4 lakh people have been displaced across the state so far.

BCCL

Belagavi is the worst affected district, in the state where six people have lost their lives. Other affected districts include Bagalkot, Vijayapura, Raichur, Yadgir, Gadag, Uttara Kannada, Haveri, Hubballi-Dharwad, Dakshina Kannada, Chikkamagaluru, and Kodagu. Almost all rivers in Karnataka are in spate, including the Krishna, Cauvery, Bhadravati, Hemavati, Tungabhadra, and Kabini.

A red alert has been issued in Bengaluru and the weatherman has warned of heavy rain over the next couple of days.

In Tamil Nadu, Nilgiris district and adjoining areas have been receiving incessant rains for the past couple of days. With more downpours predicted, the government has asked the Sulur IAF station in Coimbatore to be on stand by for possible deployment for rescue activities.

Neighbouring Kerala is probably the worst hit in the ongoing floods, where 44 people have been killed in the past four days of heavy rains. The death toll is likely to go up further as some 40 people who went missing in a landslide are still unaccounted for.

AFP

Over one lakh people have been shifted to relief camps, but thousands are feared to trapped in isolated locations where rescue teams have not been able to reach.

In Odisha and Goa, the intensity of the rain has reduced on Saturday bringing some much-needed respite to the affected people.

India Meteorological Department has issued a warning of heavy to very heavy rainfall over the next two days in parts of Gujarat. Heavy to very heavy rainfall was reported from districts of Chhota Udepur, Dahod, Panchmahal, Sabarkantha, Mahisagar, Narmada, Dang, Vadodara, Tapi and Surat.
