Minda sees auto sector revival in festive season

Parts maker expects govt. package

Minda Industries, which registered a 24% decline in consolidated net profit for the April-June 2019 quarter, said it was bullish on the automobile industry in the long term despite the current slowdown.

“There are multiple reasons for the current slowdown in the sector... NBFC crisis, insurance price increase etc. negatively impacting the market sentiment. Also, there is no clarity for electric vehicles. People are waiting [as to] when they will come...But all this is short-term. Not just me, but the entire industry is bullish... Our per capita car is 27 compared to 145 in China and 400 in Germany. The auto industry will continue to grow,” N.K. Minda, CMD, Uno Minda Group, said.

Asked about loss of jobs, he said: “Across industry, there are some losses and some people have stopped recruiting. In our case, new jobs have been frozen. We have not resorted to job cuts yet. But, day by day, the situation is getting worse... If the slowdown lasts for long, unemployment will be an issue in the sector.”

Pre-buying, before BS VI

Auto component industry body ACMA has last month warned of about 10 lakh job losses in the sector, seeking urgent government intervention. The components industry employs around 50 lakh people.

Asked by when he sees recovery in the sector, Mr. Minda said: “It is anybody’s guess. We are hopeful for the festive season which is about to begin. If the festive season doesn’t go well, then it’s open to guesses... some say the slowdown will last for a year, some say more, some say six months.”

He, however, added that the government seems “serious about helping the industry... We expect some kind of stimulation package should come to help us.”

On the year ahead, Sunil Bohra, the executive director and Group CFO, said that it is very difficult to set targets for this year as it all hinges on industry revival. “We have been saying that we will out perform the industry and that we are doing. We have a topline growth while industry in declining. The PAT has declined because of various capacities that we built up last year... costs increased due to interest and depreciation.”

He added that the second half of the year may see growth on the back of festive season as well as pre-buying by some consumers before new BS VI norms kick in, which will make vehicles more expensive. “While some people may defer purchses waiting for latest technology BS VI vehicles, there will be people who will say they don’t really care about what engine, especially once price difference between BS VI and BS IV becomes visible. They may come to buy in the festive season.”

The company is also looking at growing its exports, which currently account for 17% of its total revenues. “Around 7% of this is exported from India and 10% is produced outside...We have clear road map in terms of increasing our offerings in global markets. For example, in ASEAN markets, we currently sell two products – lamps and switches. We are now focussing on bringing our other products to such markets, there is a team working on this,” Mr. Bohra said.
