Edappadi K Palaniswami plans US, UK trip to woo Tamil diaspora

CHENNAI: Chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami will soon be charting his own path by breaking away from his leader J Jayalalithaa’s legacy of keeping away from foreign trips while in office. His 14-day trip plan to the US and the United Kingdom to woo investors to the state, interact with the Tamil diaspora and study best practices in various fields, is known only to a select few in the government.The departments of health, industries, energy, information technology and dairy development are involved in charting the itinerary. “The visit likely to begin on August 28 will see some ministers and officials accompanying him. The move is aimed at giving shape to his ambitious ‘Yaadhum Oorey’ project to attract investments and get brand ambassadors from among the Tamil diaspora,” said an official. Conspicuous by his absence will be his deputy O Panneerselvam. As per the tentative schedule, Palaniswami will attend a health sector programme in London, before visiting 999 emergency vehicle headquarters or London ambulance service, that operates ambulances for emergency medical requirements within London. He will also visit the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, a world-renowned institution known for its research and postgraduate studies in public and global health, and later drop in at King’s College Hospital. A brief meeting on skills for health and artificial intelligence in health care is also on the cards.That apart, the CM plans energy sector programmes in Suffolk, and a visit to Ipswich, the county town to assess smart grid technology. He will leave for the US and visit a dairy in Buffalo, the largest city in Western New York. “The chief minister, being a farmer himself, has shown keen interest in the best practices followed in the dairy sector. He will meet investors in New York, Tamil entrepreneurs and members of the diaspora, and make known his government’s initiatives in the industrial sector, especially the successful conduct of the second global investors’ meet in January this year when Rs three lakh crore investment commitments were made,” another official said.In July, Palaniswami announced an exclusive web portal and special division for ‘Yaadhum Oorey’ to create awareness, share the ideas and attract investments. Special units will also be set up to provide guidance in countries like Japan, South Korea, America, China, Taiwan, France, Israel, and Germany. Sources said the chief minister will also visit San Francisco to meet Tamil entrepreneurs and select investors. “Visits to Tesla’s electric vehicle manufacturing centre and University of California’s Davis Farm would also form part of his itinerary,” the official said.
