Rain subsides in Nilgiris, work on to restore traffic

Rain-battered Avalanche in Nilgiris district

COIMBATORE: Rain continued to pound Avalanche, Gudalur and Emerald in the Nilgiris on Saturday, while other parts of the hill district such as Ooty, Coonoor, Lovedale and Kotagiri got some respite with the clear skies becoming visible on and off. Though lesser in intensity, the rain delayed relief measures. However, the district administration swung into action once the skies cleared and removed road blocks and mud slips.

People in the hill station heaved a sigh of relief after the heavy rain with strong winds reduced to heavy drizzles and clear skies became visible. While Ooty recorded only 41.6mm rainfall on Saturday, Coonoor received 26mm rain and Kotagiri, 12mm.

K Ramakrishnan, a resident of Ooty, said, “The rain has stopped in Ooty city areas and there are no road blocks anywhere. All the main roads such as Ooty-Lovedale, Ooty-Coonoor and Ooty-Gudalur are cleared for traffic. All the shops have reopened, and life has returned to normalcy. Buses are running too.”

However, the outskirts continued to receive rain on and off. While Avalanche topped list with 450mm rainfall, Upperbhavani received 189mm rain, followed by Gudalur (126mm) and Emerald (99mm). “Gudalur is still in bad shape, with the area still being flooded. People are still in the rescue centres,” said Mahesh, a resident and rescue worker.

A source with the district administration said they had deployed 20 earthmovers to clear landslides and fallen trees. “Also, 12 generators are used to power 12 of the 27 rescue camps in the district”.

Revenue department officials said a 43-year-old man, identified as Sainudeen, of Ellamalai in O-Valley, had been missing since Friday evening. They said chances of him having trapped in the landslide was high. He was a daily wage labourer. K V Rajkumar, revenue divisional officer, Gudalur, said personnel from the Madras Regimental Centre, and police and fire and rescue services departments were trying to find the missing person.

Speaking to the media on Saturday, chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami said 34 people, who were stranded in Kaattukuppai region, were rescued by the disaster rescue teams. He said as the rain was still continuing, around 5,500 people were still in relief camps and another 15,000 were staying in their relatives’ houses. “We have deputed revenue minister Udhaykumar to oversee the relief and rehabilitation work in the region. He visited the region personally on Friday.”

The district administration also warned the people to stay away from the river banks in Glenmorgam, Moyar, Masinagudi and Thengumarhada as they released water from the Pykara Dam through the day. They said the water level in the dam had reached the maximum capacity at 2am.


