Former Pakistan envoy to India warns of war if India crosses 'red line' in Jammu & Kashmir

Former Pakistan High Commissioner to India Abdul Basit | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Abdul Basit said 'Kashmir struggle' has four options including NC's petition in India's SC Basit earlier warned of dragging India to ICJ over J&K Pakistan downgraded diplomatic ties with India and deferred sending high commissioner-designate to India

New Delhi: A day after Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s Twitter rant against India on Jammu and Kashmir, former Pakistan envoy to India Abdul Basit has warned of war if India crosses a 'red line’

Pakistan’s former high commissioner to India Basit, on August 5, said that Pakistan has the option of dragging India to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) over the matter.

In a statement on Twitter, Basit said the “Kashmir struggle” has four options including the Jammu and Kashmir-based National Conference’s plea in India’s Supreme Court, Pakistan pursuing self-determination of Kashmiris, and Pakistani/Kashmiri diaspora "doing their bit". He added that there is also a fourth option of war if India crosses a ‘red line’.

Kashmir struggle on four fronts:1. Legal battle by NC et al in Supreme Court for two articles; 2.Pak pursuing self determination diplomatically 3. Pak/Kashmiri diaspora doing their bit; 4. Most important sustained political resistance in IOK. If India crosses redline, then war1/2 — Abdul Basit (@abasitpak1) August 12, 2019

“Kashmir struggle on four fronts:1. Legal battle by NC et al in Supreme Court for two articles; 2.Pak pursuing self determination diplomatically 3. Pak/Kashmiri diaspora doing their bit; 4. Most important sustained political resistance in IOK. If India crosses redline, then war,” Basit said on twitter.

Pak must establish Jammu and Kashmir Cell in Foreign Office headed by Special Envoy on J&K. Appropriate organisational structure is a must for coherent and effective diplomacy. Time for as hocism on Kashmir long gone. 2/2 — Abdul Basit (@abasitpak1) August 12, 2019

“Pakistan must establish Jammu and Kashmir Cell in Foreign Office headed by Special Envoy on J&K. Appropriate organisational structure is a must for coherent and effective diplomacy. Time for ad hocism on Kashmir long gone,” he added.

Pakistan on August 7 decided to shut down the Wagah border and downscale diplomatic ties with New Delhi in wake of Indian Parliament repealing the special status of Jammu and Kashmir under provisions of Article 370. Pakistan's decision was taken in the National Security Committee meeting presided over by Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan at his office.

Pakistan also decided to send back Indian High Commissioner Ajay Bisaria back to India and also deferred sending its High Commissioner-designate Moin-ul-Haq, who was supposed to take charge later this month, to New Delhi. Bisaria and deputy envoy Gaurav Ahluwalia have both been officially informed about Pakistan's decision. Bisaria has also returned to India.
