Chandigarh: Elante Mall evacuated after hoax bomb threat triggers panic [WATCH]

Elante Mall is the second-largest shopping mall in Northern India | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Elante Mall is the largest mall in Punjab, Chandigarh, Himachal Pradesh, and Jammu and Kashmir Reports first suggested it was a mock drill by police ahead of the Independence Day However, SSP (Traffic) Chandigarh Shashank Anand tweeted to clarify that it was not a mock drill

Chandigarh: The Chandigarh Police on Monday evacuated Elante Mall in Chandigarh following an input which suggested there was a bomb on the premises. Following the input, shoppers were asked to move out, leading to chaos in the mall. It was later found out that the input was just a hoax.

The popular shopping mall in Chandigarh was hugely crowded because of the Eid festival. The Chandigarh Police are now on the lookout for the person who tipped them off.

Units from police's bomb disposal squad, anti-sabotage teams, crime branch teams, operation cell teams, and local police teams carried out intensive searches of the mall and nearby areas. Senior Superintendent of Police, UT Chandigarh, Nilambari Jagadale, had got the area around the mall sealed as a preventive measure.

Earlier today, the police control room received a phone call, alleging that a bomb had been planted in the Elante Mall.

As the bomb squad entered the Elante Mall to conduct a search, reports first suggested it was a mock drill by police ahead of the Independence Day. However, SSP (Traffic) Chandigarh Shashank Anand tweeted to clarify that it was not a mock drill and urged people to cooperate.

According to Chandigarh SP (crime) Vineet Kumar, "A PCR call was received at 1:06 pm today regarding information about a bomb in the mall. We evacuated the mall, conducted a thorough search and sanitisation operation. After four hours, we've completely searched the premises of Elante Mall. We haven't found anything objectionable. We're in the process of registering a case. Legal Action will be taken against the caller. The mall will be opened soon."

It is not a mock drill. Please cooperate. — SSP/Traffic, Chandigarh (@ssptfcchd) August 12, 2019

Panic gripped the shoppers as they started leaving the premises after mall authorities and police used loudspeakers to tell them to evacuate.

Following video was shot by one of the shoppers inside the Elante Mall:

"Chandigarh Police received a call that a bomb could have been placed in the Elante Mall premises," Deputy Superintendent of Police (East) Dilsher Singh said, adding the cops did not waste time in evacuating the mall.

"Chandigarh police's bomb disposal team, anti-sabotage check team, Operations cell, Crime Branch and local police units were carrying out coordinated search of the mall," he said.

"We haven't found any explosive in the mall so far. However, a thorough search was going on. We are also trying to trace the person who made the call," added the DSP.

Meanwhile, a local resident said initially, he thought a mock drill was going on as Independence Day was approaching. "But soon I realised that something serious had happened. I along with my family members, who had come to watch a movie, rushed out in panic," said Ajay Kumar.

Developed by Larsen & Toubro Group, Elante Mall is the largest mall in Punjab, Chandigarh, Himachal Pradesh, and Jammu and Kashmir. It is the second-largest shopping mall in northern India.

Elante Mall has over 220 shops besides restaurants, a food court, and an entertainment zone with a multiplex.
