IIM Calcutta Admission 2022: Check Revised Eligibility, Fees, Placement, Selection Process

IIM Calcutta, the oldest IIM with three International Accreditations from AACSB, AMBA and EQUIS, has announced many changes in its Admission Criteria 2022 for the flagship 2 years full time MBA 2022-24 programme. Announcing its MBA admission policy for 2022-24 batch on August 27, 2021, IIM Calcutta has brought out many changes and important modifications in admission process 2022.

IIM Calcutta Admission 2022: Key Changes in Criteria & Selection Process

No Weightage for graduation marks in Shortlisting. Last year 15% weightage was given

Maximum Weightage points in Shortlisting are awarded out of 85 for MBA 2022-24 batch, instead of 100

The maximum merit score in admission 2022 is reduced to 90, after taking out the 10% weightage for WAT

Writing Ability Test (WAT) is scrapped from the final selection process

IIM Calcutta may conduct PI round online instead of in-person interviews, depending upon the Covid pandemic situation at the material time and GoI guidelines

CAT 2021 Cut off is reduced to 85 percentile for admission 2022

CAT 2021 sectional cut off for Quantitative Ability reduced to 75 percentile for General category

For other categories also QA minimum required percentile has been reduced to 65 and below

Weightage for CAT 2021 score is 56 points out of maximum 85 in shortlisting for PI round

Weightage for Academics and Diversity is increased to 29 points out of 85 in shortlisting process

Class 10 score weightage is 10 points out of 85 in shortlisting process

Class 12 score weightage is 15 points out of 85 points in shortlisting

EWS category reservation as per GoI norms has started with reduced CAT percentile

Analysis of Changes in IIMC Admission Policy 2022: 5 Key Points

IIM Calcutta has increased the weightage for CAT exam score to 66%. The maximum weightage points are now 85 and out of this, CAT score will get 56 points in shortlisting which means a weightage of about 66% will be awarded to CAT score in shortlisting. IIMC has removed the weightage for graduation marks in shortlisting for PI round. A 15% weightage was awarded to graduation marks last year. As such, this year the overall weightage to academics is reduced to 25 points for admission 2022 instead of 40 points last year. IIM Calcutta has kept the CAT 2021 score cut off to 85 percentile as was last year. IIM Calcutta did not conduct WAT in its final selection process last year, and this year too, it will not conduct WAT. With the weightage for Writing Ability Test, scrapped and PI round expected to be conducted Online depending upon the Covid-19 pandemic situation at the material time, the total maximum points in final selection process are now 90 for admission 2022.

IIM Calcutta: Key Highlights & USPs

Indian Institute of Management (IIM) Calcutta is one of the top management institutes in India. It offers prestigious flagship 2 year MBA apart from one year full time MBA and wide range of executive MBA and doctoral programmes meant for different categories of candidates including fresh graduates as well as for working professionals and top executives. Key USPs of IIMC include

Highly Ranked : IIM Calcutta is ranked #3 in Govt of India MHRD, NIRF Ranking 2020 among top 100 management institutes in India. It is ranked #1 in MBAUniverse.com B-School Ranking 2021.

: IIM Calcutta is ranked #3 in Govt of India MHRD, NIRF Ranking 2020 among top 100 management institutes in India. It is ranked #1 in MBAUniverse.com B-School Ranking 2021. Triple Crowned with International Accreditations: IIM Calcutta is the first IIM to have earned triple International Accreditations. It is accredited by AACSB (Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business), AMBA (Association of MBAs) and EQUIS, the three prestigious international accreditations for Business Schools.

IIM Calcutta is the first IIM to have earned triple International Accreditations. It is accredited by AACSB (Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business), AMBA (Association of MBAs) and EQUIS, the three prestigious international accreditations for Business Schools. Institute of National Importance : IIM Calcutta was established by the Government of India in November 1961 in collaboration with Alfred P. Sloan School of Management (MIT), the Government of West Bengal, The Ford Foundation and Indian industry. It is declared as the Institute of National Importance. During its initial years, several prominent faculty formed part of its nucleus, including Jagdish Sheth, J. K. Sengupta, among others.

: IIM Calcutta was established by the Government of India in November 1961 in collaboration with Alfred P. Sloan School of Management (MIT), the Government of West Bengal, The Ford Foundation and Indian industry. It is declared as the Institute of National Importance. During its initial years, several prominent faculty formed part of its nucleus, including Jagdish Sheth, J. K. Sengupta, among others. IIMC- Fee & Placement – Offers High RoI : IIM Calcutta MBA fee for two years is Rs.22.50 lakhs. IIMC offers high placement and has registered an average salary of Rs.29 LPA, median salary of Rs.27 LPA and Highest Domestic Salary of Rs.60 LPA and Highest International Salary of Rs.80 LPA in Placement 2021. Read details below

: IIM Calcutta MBA fee for two years is Rs.22.50 lakhs. IIMC offers high placement and has registered an average salary of Rs.29 LPA, median salary of Rs.27 LPA and Highest Domestic Salary of Rs.60 LPA and Highest International Salary of Rs.80 LPA in Placement 2021. Read details below Top Alumni: IIM Calcutta Alumni are spread across the Globe. They are serial entrepreneurs, CEOs, other front ranking executives and business leaders occupying top Positions

IIM Calcutta Alumni are spread across the Globe. They are serial entrepreneurs, CEOs, other front ranking executives and business leaders occupying top Positions International Exchange: IIM Calcutta and ESCP-EAP, now ESCP Europe have developed a fruitful collaboration through a student exchange programme. Every year students from both the schools get the opportunity undergo one academic term at the partner institute.

IIM Calcutta and ESCP-EAP, now ESCP Europe have developed a fruitful collaboration through a student exchange programme. Every year students from both the schools get the opportunity undergo one academic term at the partner institute. Accomplished Leadership: IIM Calcutta is led by Professor Uttam Kumar Sarkar as its Director. He has an outstanding academic record, and is a leading researcher in the field of information systems with numerous publications in prestigious international journals to his credit. Prof Sarkar has vast experience in key leadership roles in India and extensive exposure to universities and academic communities worldwide. Read More

IIM Calcutta MBA Batch Profile: Key Highlights

480 students have joined the IIMC flagship MBA programme

Batch comprises 31% Women and 69% Men

25% of the batch is made up of Non-Engineers

57% of the total students are professionals with prior work experience

Students with Work Experience

Shared below is the detailed analysis of male and female students with period wise work experience

Work Experience Male Female Total students 0 Month 142 64 206 1-24 Months 126 55 181 25-48 Months 62 28 90 >48 Months 1 2 3 Total 331 149 480

Academic Diversity at IIM Calcutta

Below is shared the details of academic diversity with academic streams, number of male and female students admitted at IIM Calcutta in the MBA programme

Educational Background Male Female Total students Arts 6 7 13 Commerce 31 27 58 Engineering 265 95 360 Others 8 8 16 Science 21 12 33 Total 331 149 480

IIM Calcutta to Award MBA Degree instead of PG Diploma

The MBA at IIM Calcutta was earlier known as PGP but after the implementation of IIM Act 2017, IIM Calcutta has changed the name of PGP diploma programme to MBA degree programme. The two-year MBA Programme in Management at IIM Calcutta is full-time residential post-graduate degree course. The MBA Programme has a two-tier structure. It consists of a core curriculum (compulsory credit courses and compulsory non-credit courses), a summer internship (compulsory industry training between first and second year) and elective courses (optional courses in the second year).



IIM Calcutta Fees

The total programme fees payable by PGP students at IIM Calcutta is Rs 22,50,000/- + a refundable caution deposit of Rs.10,000/-.

Laptop computer, personal expenses on boarding, travel, clothes and laundry are extra.

The total programme fees for the 2022-2024 batch may increase further

IIM Calcutta Placement

IIM Calcutta has concluded its final placement 2021 for its 56th batch of PGP class 2021 with 520 offers made by 172 recruiters to the large batch of 467 participating students. Achieving yet again 100% placement from top recruiters, the average salary in Placement 2021 has gone up at Rs.29 LPA from Rs.28 LPA. While Consulting sector alone has claimed 32% share in placement 2021 with Accenture, Boston Consulting Group emerging as top recruiters, the consulting and Finance domains have contributed around 50% share in placement 2021.

IIM Calcutta will award MBA degree instead of PGDM to the passing out PGP 2019-21 batch. The highest international salary at IIM Calcutta is Rs.80 lakhs and highest domestic salary in placement 2021 is Rs.60 lakhs.

Key Highlights in Placement 2021

Following are the key highlights of IIM Calcutta Placement 2021:

The whole placement process was conducted virtually amid the pandemic.

Achieves 100% placement for the class 2021 with more offers despite the largest batch

Average salary increased to Rs.29 LPA in Placement 2021 from Rs.28 LPA last year

Median Salary has gone up at Rs.27 LPA from Rs.25.5 LPA last year

All time High Average Salary

Number of students participated in Placement 2021 icreased to 467 from 439 last year

Number of Recruiters making placement offers increased to 172 from 136 last year

Total number of offers increased to 520 from 492 last year

149 students comprising 32% Batch Placed in Consulting domain

Finance & Consulting together have 50% share in Placement 2021

Accenture, Boston Consulting Group emerge as top recruiters

Read More

IIM Calcutta MBA Programme 2022-24: Intake

IIM Calcutta has a sanctioned intake of 520 students in its flagship 2 years full time MBA programme. IIM Calcutta has divided the current 2021-23 batch in 6 sections of 80 students each and has commenced the online classes through ‘iPearl.ai’, a digital learning platform of a firm, TalentSprint.

IIM Calcutta MBA Admission 2022: Important Dates

Admission process with the opening of CAT 2021 registration and application has started at IIM Calcutta. Important dates related to admission activities at IIM Calcutta are as below:

IIM-C Admission Activity Important dates Remarks Admission 2022 Application Starts August 4, 2021 (10 AM) Apply for CAT 2021- tick on the IIM Ahmedabad PGP programme, choose preferred interview cities in the application form. No extra application fees to be paid. Last date to Apply September 15, 2021 (5PM) Last date may be extended by a few days Shortlist Announcement for PI-WAT January 10, 2022 It could vary by one or two days Final selection (PI-WAT) round start date First week of February 2022 Will continue till March 2022 Final Admission Offer Second week April 2022 After receiving admission offer, confirm acceptance by April 2022 last week

Change in PI Process

IIM Calcutta may conduct Personal Interview round without WAT and in view of the Covid pandemic, it is possible that instead of conducting in-person Personal Interview the PI may be conducted online. Sharing the rider in final selection process, IIM Calcutta has informed, “Any possible disruptions related to COVID-19 can impact the MBA admission process of IIM Calcutta. The information as specified in the Admission Policy is subject to the advisories and guidelines of Central and State Government during the admission process for 2022-24 Batch. Interested candidates are advised to keep this external factor in mind due to the current pandemic.”

MBA Specializations at IIM Calcutta

While the first year of MBA is committed to developing business fundamentals through compulsory courses spanning the areas of economics, finance, marketing, operations, systems and organizational behavior, the second year offers a range of electives in different functional areas that students can choose based on their desired area of pursuit in Finance, Human Resource Management, Economics, Management Information Systems, Marketing, Operations Management, Organizational Behaviour, Public Policy and management, Strategic Management among others.



Dual Degree Programme at IIM Calcutta

IIM Calcutta and ESCP-EAP, now ESCP Europe have signed a comprehensive Cooperation Agreement and have developed a fruitful collaboration through a student exchange programme. Every year students from both the schools are provided with an opportunity to enroll in the students’ exchange programme and undergo one academic term at respective campuses as part of their Post Graduate Programmes.

A select group of students from both the schools get an opportunity to obtain Post Graduate Diploma/Degree from both IIMC and ESCP Europe. As for IIMC this programmeis open to the participants joining IIM Calcutta’s MBAprogramme only. As for ESCP Europe, the programmeis open to the Master in Management students only.

The present arrangement is for the Paris campus of ESCP Europe and can be extended to other campuses of ESCP Europe with mutual consent in the future.

Students of IIM Calcutta are selected on the dual degree / diploma track according to ESCP Europe rules. The selection process involves use of CAT/ GMAT score and performance in Group Discussion and an interview. Students of MBAprogramme of IIMC with at least one year work experience are eligible for this programme.

IIM Calcutta: International Centre of Excellence

The vision of the Institute is to emerge as an International Centre of Excellence in all facets of Management Education, rooted in Indian ethos and societal values. Over the past 4 decades, IIM Calcutta has developed into one of Asia's finest Business Schools. Its strong ties to the business community make it an effective mechanism for the promotion of professional management practices in Indian organizations. Today, IIM Calcutta attracts the best talent in India to its faculty and the best and brightest young men and women pursue its academic programs.

IIM Calcutta Admission 2022: Key Parameters

IIM Calcutta admission 2022 process describes the admission eligibility with CAT 2021 cut off and weightage for CAT score in first stage shortlisting as well as in final selection process. At the same time IIMC has increased the weightage to other parameters like academics, diversity, work experience among others.

IIM Calcutta MBA Admission Eligibility Criteria

IIM Calcutta eligibility criteria require that the candidate must hold a bachelor's degree, with at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA (in case of the candidate belonging to SC/ST/PwD category, the eligibility criterion is relaxed to 45% Candidates who graduated in the years 2020 or 2021 or are expected to graduate in 2022, for whom the university did not conduct the exams or did not award marks or CGPA but awarded only pass or pass marks or promotion in one or more years/semesters of bachelor’s degree/equivalent qualification, can also apply. Such candidates will have to submit a certificate from the Principal/Registrar of his/her University/College/Institute stating that the university did not conduct the exams or did not award marks or CGPA but awarded only pass or pass marks or promotion in one or more years/semesters, as the case may be The candidate should appear in CAT 2021 exam and must score minimum prescribed sectional and overall score to become eligible for admission If the candidate is awarded grades/CGPA instead of marks in the academics, the equivalence to determine PGP admission eligibility would be based on the equivalence certified by the institution/university from where the bachelor's degree is obtained. In case the institution/university does not have any scheme for converting the CGPA into equivalent marks, the equivalence would be established by IIM Calcutta by dividing the obtained CGPA by the maximum possible CGPA and multiplying the resultant by 100 to confirm the Admission eligibility of the candidate. A candidate appearing for the final year bachelor's degree/equivalent qualification examination and those who have completed the degree requirements and are awaiting results is also eligible to apply for IIM Calcutta Admission 2022. Such a candidate must produce a certificate from the principal/head of the department/ registrar/director of the institution/university certifying that the candidate is currently in the final year or is awaiting final results and has obtained at least 50% marks or equivalent (45% in case of the candidate belonging to SC/ST/PwD category) based on latest available grades/marks. IIM Calcutta Eligibility further clarifies that such a candidate, if selected, will become ineligible for the IIM Calcutta admission unless he/she submits a certificate latest by June 30, 2022 from the principal/head of the department/registrar/director of the institution/university (issued on or before June 30, 2022) stating that they have completed all the requirements (the result may, however, be awaited) for obtaining the bachelor's degree/equivalent qualification on the date of issue of the certificate. It is mandatory for a final year student, who is provisionally considered eligible by IIM Calcutta and offered admission, to submit the mark-sheet and degree certificate of the final year bachelor's degree examination held on or before June 30, 2022. The deadline to submit the mark-sheet and the certificate is December 31, 2022. For candidates who are in the final year of the dual degree course, the aggregate percentage of marks obtained in all the years/semesters till October 31, 2021 will be considered for awarding points, considering the practice followed by the university/institution from where the candidate has obtained the degree.

IIM Calcutta MBA Admission Criteria

IIM Calcutta Admission Criteria 2022 will be a two step process involving the preliminary screening and shortlisting criteria with 66% weightage for CAT exam score (56 points out of 85) and the Final admission selection Criteria with only 30% weightage to CAT exam score.

1. IIM Calcutta Shortlisting Criteria

The first part of IIM Calcutta Admission criteria is the shortlisting criteria before final selection round. IIM Calcutta will shortlist the candidates on the basis of CAT 2021 score, past academic performance, and other criteria as under:

The 1 st stage of shortlisting in IIM Calcutta Admission Criteria awards 66% weight to CAT 2021 score (56 points are given out of max 85 for CAT score), 34% weight to Academics and Gender Diversity (29 points are given out of 85)

stage of shortlisting in IIM Calcutta Admission Criteria awards 66% weight to CAT 2021 score (56 points are given out of max 85 for CAT score), 34% weight to Academics and Gender Diversity (29 points are given out of 85) The candidate must have scored minimum sectional percentile of 75 in Quantitative Ability (QA) section in CAT 2021 and 80 percentile in each of the two sections – ‘Data Interpretation & Logical Reasoning' (DILR) and ‘Verbal and Reading Comprehension' (VARC)

A candidate must have scored minimum overall percentile of 85 in CAT 2021

If the candidate does not score minimum prescribed percentile in CAT 2021, he/she will not be considered for shortlisting for final selection stage.

The candidate with excellent academics will be awarded higher points in shortlisting criteria

80% & Above marks in Class 10 will be awarded top rating of 10 points out of 85 points

For Class 12, 80% and above marks will be awarded 15 points out of 85 points

No Weightage will be awarded for Bachelor’s degree marks.

Gender Diversity will be awarded 4 points in the IIM Calcutta shortlisting criteria for final admission round.

IIM Calcutta Admission Shortlisting Criteria Weightage Parameters are shared below:

Components Weights out of 85 points Method of calculation CAT 2021 overall score 56 Points (66%) Candidate’s Total CAT 2021 score/ Maximum CAT 2021 Score X56 Class X marks 10 Points (12%) On Scoring 80%+ marks Class XII marks 15 Points (17%) On Scoring 80%+ marks Bachelor’s Degree No Weightage Last Year weightage was 15%, Removed for admission 2022 Gender Diversity factor (Women candidates) 4 Points (5%) Available only for Women candidates

IIM Calcutta CAT 2021 Cut Off

IIM Calcutta Cut-off has been liberalised for admission 2022. Only the candidates above the minimum cut-offs in the CAT 2021 sectional percentile ranks, the overall percentile rank and obtaining a positive (greater than zero) raw score in all sections of CAT-2021 will be considered for all the subsequent stages.

Category Section-1 VARC Section-2 DILR Section-3 Quant Overall CAT 2021 percentile General (Open) 80 80 75 85 NC-OBC 70 65 65 75 EWS 70 65 65 75 SC 65 60 60 70 ST 55 55 55 65 PWD 45 45 45 55

IIM Calcutta Cut Offs: Important points to Note

Please note that the actual section-wise and overall percentile cut-offs may be much higher than the above mentioned minimum percentiles as it will depend upon the number of candidates to be called for personal interview (PI) in each category.

From the candidates satisfying the above criteria, shortlisted candidates will be called for Personal Interview (PI) based on the composite score derived using the components and the corresponding weights as specified above

After deriving the composite scores, composite cut-offs will be decided in each category for short-listing candidates for final selection process. The number of candidates to be short-listed for PI in each category depends upon the size of the in-coming batch and would be at the sole discretion of the Institute.

2. Final Admission Selection Round Criteria

All the shortlisted candidates are eligible to participate in Final selection round for admission to IIM Calcutta

IIM Calcutta selection criteria after final admission round award highest weight to Personal Interview(PI); four Point Weight to Academic Diversity; eight point Weight to Work Experience and thirty points weight to CAT 2021 Score.

For admission 2022 IIM Calcutta may not conduct the Academic Writing Test (AWT). The weightage of 10% which is awarded for AWT is removed from 100 points and the candidate’s performance will be assessed out of a maximum score of 90.

Candidates with any of the following bachelor’s degree are eligible to get the points for Academic Diversity : BA, BA(H), B.Sc, B.Sc.(H), BS, B.Com, B.Com(H), BCA, BBA, B.Pharma, LL.B, MBBS, BDS or any other Non-Engineering subject areas at the Bachelor’s level not mentioned above.

BA, BA(H), B.Sc, B.Sc.(H), BS, B.Com, B.Com(H), BCA, BBA, B.Pharma, LL.B, MBBS, BDS or any other Non-Engineering subject areas at the Bachelor’s level not mentioned above. The maximum weightage of 8 points for work experience will be awarded by IIM Calcutta in final selection round on the basis of length of service as on January 31, 2022. The candidate with managerial work experience will be considered for the award of the work experience. Maximum weightage of 8 points will be awarded for the work experience of 31 to 36 months after graduation. No weightage will be awarded for the work experience below 12 months. Besides, Training/Project work/work done as an integral part of curricular requirement will not be considered.

Final Merit List for Admission 2022

For the candidates who have appeared in PI round, a composite score for final selection will be derived using the parameters and the corresponding weights as given below. This composite score will be used for preparation of category-wise merit list.



IIMC Final Selection Criteria weights for Admission 2022

Component Weight Points out of 90 CAT 2021 Score 30 Personal Interview (PI) 48 Written Ability Test (WAT) May Not be Conducted Academic Diversity (Points awarded for Academic Diversity at Bachelor’s level for Non- Engineering degree) 4 Work Experience 8 Total Weightage 90

IIM Calcutta Admission 2022: Step by Step Process

Following steps are included in the IIM Calcutta Admission process:

Step 1: The candidate must have appeared and scored the minimum required sectional and overall percentile in CAT 2021 to be considered for first stage screening process for admission at IIM Calcutta

The candidate must have appeared and scored the minimum required sectional and overall percentile in CAT 2021 to be considered for first stage screening process for admission at IIM Calcutta Step 2: Candidates are short-listed for Personal Interview (PI) from among the candidates who have a valid CAT-2021 score, who have applied to the programme and who satisfy the eligibility criteria for the programme of IIM Calcutta

Candidates are short-listed for Personal Interview (PI) from among the candidates who have a valid CAT-2021 score, who have applied to the programme and who satisfy the eligibility criteria for the programme of IIM Calcutta Step 3: After the PI round, admission offers are made by IIM Calcutta to successful candidates. The final selection is based on a diverse set of attributes which includes performance in CAT, performance in PI, academics, co-curricular and extra-curricular achievements, work experience among others

After the PI round, admission offers are made by IIM Calcutta to successful candidates. The final selection is based on a diverse set of attributes which includes performance in CAT, performance in PI, academics, co-curricular and extra-curricular achievements, work experience among others Step 4: Final Admission Offer will be made to the candidates in the third week of April 2022 on the basis of Final Score arrived after awarding the weightage scores on all the components.

IIM Calcutta has changed the name of its flagship management programme to MBA. Now it will award MBA degree instead of Post Graduate Diploma. The two years MBA of IIM Calcutta is a full-time residential course for graduates from all disciplines wishing to choose a career in management.

The Indian Institute of Management Calcutta (IIMC) was established as the first national institute for Post-Graduate studies and Research in Management by the Government of India in November 1961 in collaboration with Alfred P. Sloan School of Management (MIT), the Government of West Bengal, The Ford Foundation and Indian industry.

Over the years, IIMC has grown into a top B-school and matured institution with global reputation, imparting high quality management education. It has been playing a pioneering role in professionalizing Indian management through its Post Graduate and Doctoral level programs, Executive Training Programs, Research and Consulting Activities.

Stay tuned to MBAUniverse.com for more updates on IIM Calcutta Read Full Details IIMs Admission: Eligibility, Fees, Admission Proces, Shortlisting Criteria and Important Dates

Aslo Read
