Delhi Airport receives bomb threat call, turns out to be hoax

CBSE result 2022 to be released soon on Digilocker

Delhi Airport receives bomb threat call, turns out to be hoax

New Delhi

oi-Vikas SV

By Vishal S

New Delhi, Aug 12: Delhi's Indira Gandhi International (IGI) on Monday received a call in which a person claimed that he had placed a bomb at Terminal -2.

The officials swung into action and evacuated the departure area, said reports. The passengers arriving from other cities were asked to stay in the plane, while a thorough search was carried out. The threat call turned out to be a hoax.

"A person called up Delhi airport terminal-2 and said he had placed a bomb at the airport. He later denied when police identified him. Police is still carrying out a search as a precautionary measure," DCP Airport told ANI.

Delhi international airport's operations were affected for around 70 minutes.

[BJP HQ receives bomb threat call, Delhi Police say it was a hoax]

"After a detailed search operation for about an hour by the Bomb Disposal Squad (BDS) and Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), it was found to be a hoax," reports quoted an official as saying said.

The officials mentioned that at 10 pm operational normalcy was restored in departure as well as arrival area of Terminal 2.

On June 27, an Air India flight has made a precautionary landing following a bomb threat. The AI 191 Mumbai Newark flight made a precautionary landing at the London Stansed Airport following a bomb threat.

On June 18, Maharashtra Minister Girish Mahajan's office had received a bomb threat. Around 7 pm on June 18 the local police received three calls threatening a bomb explosion near Mahajan's Public-Relations office in Jalgaon. Following the threat, the police along with a dog squad and and crime branch officials reached the spot. However, no suspicious object was found, said reports.

In April, a truck driver was arrested for making a hoax call telling them that a terror attack would be carried out in seven states, including Karnataka.
