Elizabeth Hurley's son Damian, 16, is the spitting image of her on holiday in India

Elizabeth Hurley proved her son Damian is the spitting image of her on Thursday, after he took to Instagram to post a snap while soaking up the sun in India.

The 16-year-old showed he had the same defined features and long tresses as the stunning actress, who looked equally stunning in a busty selfie of her own.

Elizabeth and Damian have been enjoying some mother-son time as they rang in 2019 in Mumbai, India, and the actress has been posting all manner of snaps as she showed off her amazing bikini body.

Cool: Elizabeth Hurley proved her son Damian is the spitting image of her on Thursday, after he took to Instagram to post a snap while soaking up the sun in India

In his post, Damian could be seen relaxing by the pool with his brown bobbed locks hanging loosely, turning the tables for once as Liz was presumably the photographer.

The aspiring actor also posted a short GIF to his Instagram page, tucking his dark hair behind his ears as he pouted into the lens.

Just hours later, Elizabeth took to her own Instagram to post a busy selfie, sparkling in a plunging black dress as she enjoyed another night in Bombay.

She wrote in the caption: 'More #BombayNights #India.'

Pose and pout: The aspiring actor, 16, also posted a short GIF to his Instagram page, tucking his dark hair behind his ears as he pouted into the lens

Model behaviour: The teenager proved the apple certainly doesn't fall far from the tree when it comes to the Hurley looks as he smouldered in front of the lens

Jaw-dropping: Damian's post came as Elizabeth, 53, also took to Instagram to post an extremely busty selfie on Thursday

Liz has been regularly posting on social media as she documented her Indian break with her son, and has also been stunning fans with an array of skimpy bikini snaps.

And as she marked the end of 2018, the star showed off her breathtaking curves in a plunging purple sequinned gown, while Damian donned traditional Indian dress for the New Year's Eve bash.

Damian, who has six godfathers including actor Hugh Grant and Sir Elton John and his partner David Furnish, is often rubbing shoulders with his mum's celebrity pals, as she insists she has an 'open house' policy in order for her son to meet her friends.

Dressed to impress: Liz has been regularly posting on social media as she documented her Indian break with her son, as they both rang in 2019 in Bombay

Revealing: Elizabeth has previously confessed that she often ropes Damian into taking photographs of her - including her bikini-clad snaps

Elizabeth has previously confessed that she often ropes Damian into taking photographs of her - including her bikini-clad snaps she posts to social media - but ridiculed claims made suggesting she takes him on holiday to purposely play photographer.

Speaking of their relationship, she told You: 'Damian is a great photographer, and he instinctively knows what younger people want to see, but that’s all.

'Our downtime together is usually spent watching something scary on Netflix or Vikings on Amazon Prime.'

'By default we spend a lot of time together and we are utterly comfortable in each other's company.'

Elizabeth also dismissed claims that her only son was 'embarrassed' by his mother and 'wanted her to cover up a bit more', given the nature of her racy snaps, branding them 'absolutely rubbish'.
