Protests by hundreds of chanting Kashmiri Muslims are snuffed out by Indian forces

Several hundred Kashmiri Muslim protesters chanting, 'We want freedom' were snuffed out by Indian troops on Monday, amid an unprecedented lockdown.

Indian troops patrolling Kashmir had allowed some to attend mosques to mark the Eid al-Adha festival, despite stripping the region of its autonomy last week.

Hundreds of protesters in Srinagar chanted, 'We want freedom' and 'Go India, go back,' during a brief demonstration before troops dispersed crowds.

The news comes as Pakistan declared on Saturday it would table a motion at the UN as it seeks Chinese backing to condemn India's decision to strip its part of the territory of its special status.

Hundreds of protesters in Srinagar chanted, 'We want freedom' and 'Go India, go back,' on Monday

A security person stands guard at a deserted street during a security lockdown in Srinagar yesterday

A Kashmiri woman cries during the Eid-al-Adha prayers at a mosque during restrictions on Monday

India's Ministry of External Affairs issued a blunt warning to China today, saying the Kashmir dispute was 'an internal matter concerning the territory of India.'

The statement continued, 'India does not comment on the internal affairs of other countries and similarly expects other countries to do likewise.'

It followed talks by top Indian and Chinese diplomats in Beijing yesterday, with China's Foreign Minister saying it hoped India will 'play a constructive role in regional peace and stability.'

The countries went to war in 1962 over their disputed border and engaged in a 10-week standoff in the neighbouring state of Bhutan in 2017.

According to Pakistani officials, China 'has assured full support' ahead of their proposed condemnation of India at the UN Security Council.

Foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi told a press conference on Saturday: 'We will be needing China's help there.'

The security lockdown was keeping people in Indian-administered Kashmir indoors for a ninth day on Tuesday.

Troops had allowed shops to open briefly on previous days but residents were running short of essentials under the near-constant curfew and communications blackout imposed by New Delhi.

The lockdown is expected to last at least through Thursday, India's independence day.

Kashmiris fear India's moves bringing the region under greater New Delhi control will alter its demographics and cultural identity.

India said its decisions to revoke Kashmir's special constitutional status and downgrade it from statehood to a territory would free it from terrorism.

Rebels have been fighting Indian rule for decades. Some 70,000 people have died in clashes between militants and civilian protesters and Indian security forces since 1989. Most Kashmiris want either independence or a merger with Pakistan.

Kashmiri Muslims shout slogans during a protest after Eid prayers in Srinagar, they were soon dispersed by Indian forces

Security personnel stop motorists for questioning during a lockdown in Srinagar on Monday

Soldiers speak to men travelling through Srinagar during their lockdown of the city on Monday

India and Pakistan both claim Kashmir and have fought two wars over it.

The first one ended in 1948 with the region divided between them and a promise of a UN-sponsored referendum on its future. It has never been held.

Islamabad has denounced the changes as illegal and in response has downgraded its diplomatic ties with New Delhi, expelled the Indian ambassador and suspended trade and train services with India.
