Article 370 impact: We have to be always prepared, says Bipin Rawat on Pak army movement

New Delhi:

Responding to questions on reports of military movement by Pakistan along the Line of Control (LoC), Indian Army chief General Bipin Rawat on Tuesday asserted that everybody takes precautions and one should not be too concerned. The Army chief also noted that the security forces are prepared for any kind of adverse actions by Pakistan.

While speaking to the media on the sidelines of a seminar on defence start-ups organised by the Society of Indian Defence Manufacturers and the Confederation of Indian Industry, General Rawat said, "If the adversary wants to activate the LoC, that's their choice. Everybody does precautionary deployment, we should not get too concerned about it. Forces are prepared for any kind of adverse actions by Pakistan."

On the removal of special status under Article 370 and bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir by the PM Modi-led central government last week, General Rawat said, “Forces are interacting with Kashmiris normally like before and they would further hope to meet them without guns, also like before.” "Our interaction with Kashmiri people is normal like earlier. We used to meet them without guns in the 70s and 80s and we hope that we continue to meet them without guns," he added.

Last week, centre passed the order of abrogation of Article 370 and 35A in Jammu and Kashmir. The centre also announced the bifurcation of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh.

Following reports of a possible terror threat from sea, Indian Navy has put all its bases and warships on high alert. The Indian intelligence has reported movement of terrorist like Rauf Azhgar, brother of terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed Masood Azhar, to Pakistan-occupied Kashmir in recent days. The Indian intelligence reports further suggest that JeM is planning for fidayeen attacks in India. Reportedly, JeM terrorists have been asked whether to kill, or die. The intelligence agencies have also warned about a possible terror attack in the hinterland outside of Jammu and Kashmir.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
