Reliance Capital mulls Rs 10,000 crore defamation suit against PwC

Reliance Group Chairman Anil Ambani | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Reliance Capital received a clean chit from two law companies firms against allegations levelled by PwC A Reliance Capital spokesman says the company’s board will take all appropriate legal steps to safeguard interests of all stakeholders Shares of Reliance Capital tumbled 48 per cent since June 11, the date when PwC resigned

New Delhi: Anil Ambani’s Reliance Capital is said to be considering filing Rs 10,000-crore defamation suit against its erstwhile auditor, Price Waterhouse & Co (PwC). Besides, some shareholders of the Reliance Group companies are also reportedly considering filing a class action lawsuit against the global audit firm for eroding the value of their investment.

It is worth noting that PwC resigned in June this year as the statutory auditor of two Anil Ambani companies Reliance Capital and Reliance Home Finance, saying the management of the two companies had failed to give satisfactory answers to questions that the auditors had raised with respect to certain transactions. Reliance Capital had rebutted the allegations, saying the charges were “completely baseless and unjustified”.

The development assumes significance as the diversified financial services company received a clean chit from two law firms, a senior counsel and its current auditor, against charges levelled by PwC. “The board met on Thursday and it was decided that legal action must be taken against the auditor. A separate class action lawsuit against PwC would also be taken as some shareholders had approached the company regarding this,” a person familiar with the told a financial daily.

He went on to add that the global audit firm caused reputation loss, defamation and also a huge loss to shareholders of the company.

“The Board also took note of the views of legal experts who independently carried out an in-depth examination of the matter and the issues raised by PWC. The Board noted the independent legal opinion from reputed law firm confirming that there was no violation attracting Section 143(12) of the Companies Act, and which concluded that the PWC letter is devoid of any rationale or basis and is invalid,” Reliance Capital had said in a BSE filing last week.

A Reliance Capital spokesman, however, said the company’s board will take all appropriate legal measures to protect interests of all stakeholders.

The publication quoted an unidentified source as saying that the company has only decided the amount of the defamation suit. Plus, some shareholders would file the class action suit separately with either the promoters or Reliance companies themselves could also become parties in the class action suit.

“Several stakeholders are planning a separate class action suit under section 245 of the Companies Act, 2013 claiming damages against PwC for the loss caused by its action. Shares of Reliance Capital and Reliance Home Finance have declined 48 per cent and 58 per cent, respectively, since June 11, the date when PwC resigned,” a person aware of the matter told the publication.
