Top 5 upcoming 250 cc motorcycles - IAB Picks

The world is slowly getting back to the quarter-litre segment. India is getting a taste of this surge with the Suzuki Gixxer 250 and Suzuki Gixxer SF 250. Indonesia, a country which loves its 250s, is getting ready to bring out a maniac new 4-pot Ninja! That’s not all, Honda too is gearing up to bring an update to their twin-cylinder quarter-litre. Here is a list of upcoming 250 cc motorcycles to be launched by 2020:

Suzuki Intruder 250: Japanese power cruiser in the making

With the Gixxer 250 launched, Suzuki is likely working on a higher capacity version of its popular Suzuki Intruder. The Intruder 250 will carry several of the design elements from the existing 155 cc Intruder. Besides that, the Intruder 250 will have some new design details to look more appealing. The Intruder has been a success for Suzuki due to its unconventional looks and the new bike won’t be any different.

Powering the bike will be the same 249 cc single-cylinder, oil-cooled, SOHC engine which goes duty in the Gixxer SF250. Coupled to a 6-speed gearbox, the engine can produce 26.5 PS of power and 22.6 Nm of torque. However, the Suzuki Intruder 250 may be a BS-VI compliant bike from Day 1. To make this happen the output may expect a slight drop in output.

The Suzuki Intruder 250 will be suspended on standard telescopic fork up front and a monoshock at the rear. The latter will get adjustable preload. The features list will include an LED headlamp, refreshed digital instrumentation and discs at both ends.

The Suzuki Intruder 250 is expected to make its debut at Auto Expo 2020. The price tag of the quarter-litre ‘modern’ cruiser will hover around INR 1.8 lakh (ex-showroom) mark.

Royal Enfield 250

Royal Enfield recently tried to beat the slump with the new Bullet 350 and Bullet 500. But to become an even more accessible brand, it is reportedly working on an all-new 250 cc motorcycle. India will be the first market to get the new Royal Enfield 250.

The Royal Enfield 250 model is said to be in development at the R&D centre in Chennai. There is no confirmation on the origins of the new powertrain, but we would love to see Royal Enfield bid adieu to the old pushrod-based configuration. In fact, both the Himalayan and the new 650 twins get an overhead cam layout. The new engine will likely be a torque centric unit like the 346 cc air-cooled unit seen in the Royal Enfield Bullet 350. In its present tune, the latter can produce 20.07 PS of power and 28 Nm of torque at the crank!

Royal Enfield’s most affordable model, Bullet 350, is priced from INR 1.12 lakh (ex-showroom, Delhi). This price will be raised with the BS-VI upgrade by March 2020. It will be interesting to see the company can price the quarter-litre model, which will be BS-VI compliant from the get-go, around INR 1 lakh (ex-showroom).

Also Read: 5 retro styled Royal Enfield competitors we want in India

New Yamaha MT-25: Japanese quarter-litre war has begun

With both Honda and Kawasaki jumping on the aggressive gun, Yamaha will continue to please the masses. The new MT-25 will be based on the new Yamaha R25. It will have the new upside-down fork up front, seen in its faired sibling. Besides that, the front headlamp section is expected to include the much-needed LED upgrade. In fact, we would not be surprised if we see a structure like the one seen in the MT-15.

Powering this will be the same 250 cc inline twin-cylinder, liquid-cooled, DOHC mill. Coupled to a 6-speed gearbox, the engine churns out 36 PS of power and 23.6 Nm of torque at the crank. The ECU, though, is expected to get an update. Also, Yamaha may throw in a slipper clutch to appease the feature lovers. Besides that, other changes will include the digital instrumentation from the R25 and possibly a new handlebar position for a sportier approach.

Changes seen in the MT-25 will also percolate to the Yamaha MT-03. Based on the Yamaha R3, the MT-03 is retailed in the European markets. Unlike in Indonesia, there is no capacity restriction in Europe. However, this one will have to meet the upcoming Euro 5 norms. Indonesia, meanwhile, continues to be in Euro 3 conditions. Yamaha may launch the MT-03 in India next year.

Also Read: 5 Tips to get back to riding after a motorcycle crash

Kawasaki ZX-25R: The 4-pot mean machine!

The power wars are back! Kawasaki will reportedly introduce a new four-cylinder 250 cc motorcycle this October at the Tokyo Motor Show. Design inspirations for the Kawasaki ZX-25R may be borrowed from the Kawasaki ZX-6R. Besides that, the motorcycle will bear an overall aggressive look.

There has been some chatter in the South-East Asian media about the new maniac pocket rocket’s specifications. In fact, reports have gone on to claim that the peak output will reach a high of 60 PS! Also, the engine will redline at possibly a high 20,000 rpm mark. Expect the Kawasaki ZX-25R to be loaded to the gills with features like traction control and riding modes.

Braking duties will be administered by twin discs at the front and a single unit at the rear. The suspension system will include upside-down fork up front and a monoshock at the rear. We would love to see Kawasaki throw in adjustable preload settings at both ends, a feature seen even in the affordable 2019 Honda CBR150R.

All this means that the ZX-25R will bear a steep sticker price. In, fact, we wouldn’t be surprised if the pricing is close to that of the Ninja 650. However, do not expect the bike to make its way to India anytime soon.

New Honda CBR250RR: Total Control to enter a new league

With the rising threat from the Kawasaki ZX-25R, Honda is a gearing up to introduce an updated CBR250RR. The new motorcycle will possibly include new colour options. But the changes will not be limited to be just skin deep as seen in Honda motorcycles in India. In fact, the new CBR250RR will have several new mechanical upgrades.

The already loaded motorcycle is expected to get a slipper clutch and a smart key for keyless ignition. Besides that, a quick-shifter is also on cards. At present, the Honda CBR250RR is powered by a 249.7 cc parallel-twin mill. The output figures stand at 38.7 PS of power and 23.3 Nm of torque. Features include throttle-by-wire and three riding modes (Comfort, Sport and Sport+).

Also Read: 5 Honda motorcycles we wish to see in India

The debut is expected to take place at the Tokyo Motor Show in October 2019. A price hike is also on cards. The bike will first go on sale in the Indonesian market first, followed by Japan and other ASEAN regions. This model is not expected to be sold in India.

Also Read: 5 upcoming motorcycles (up to 200cc) in India
