Business hit as shops forced to down shutters

Ludhiana: The bandh call given by the Ravidassia community against the demolition of a historic temple in Delhi crippled daily business in the city on Tuesday.

Major roads and chowks including GT Road, Sherpur Chowk, Jalandhar Bypass, Gill Road, Preet Palace Road, Mohan Dai Oswal Chowk — which all lead to industrial and commercial areas — were blocked by protesters, preventing businessmen and workers from reaching their destinations.

There were reports of businessmen being heckled, threatened and one coming from other state being attached by the mob. However, the victims refused to come on the record or lodge a police complaint, citing fear and sensitivity of the issue.

As per the information, several factory owners near Shivpuri area said when they started operations in the morning, protesters barged into their premises and warned them of dire consequences if they did not shut shop.

One such businessman told TOI, “It was nothing short of a nightmare. Within an hour of opening my factory, a group of protesters forced themselves into the premises and threatened us to close the factory within 15 minutes, saying that they shouldn’t be held responsible for any damage to the factory or workers later. They left me no choice and I had to stop operations and head home.”

On Gill Road — one of the biggest trading hubs of Punjab — similar scenes were witnessed where groups of protesters were seen hurling abuses and threatening shopkeepers for running business on the day. A showroom owner at Vishwkarma chowk said, “Roads leading to Gill Road and Dholewal from the bus stand were blocked by the protesters, so we decided to open our shops in the afternoon. But, within a few minutes, a group of motorcycle-borne youths sporting wooden sticks and other objects started parading in front of our shops and hurled abuses on us. So, we downed the shutters and fled.”

The Chamber of Industrial and Commercial Undertakings (CICU) issued a statement to the media blaming political parties and district administrations for the disorder. It read, “CICU respects all communities, but bandhs like these create a bad impression of law and order on investors and costumers coming to the city from other countries. We had a meeting with a multinational firm, but their delegates couldn’t come from Chandigarh due to the bandh.”

‘Delegates attacked’

CICU shared a message by a prominent industrialist who said some business delegates who had come to visit him were heckled. He said one of them was hit by a wooden rod and fell down near Jagraon bridge.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
