5 things to know about Sartaj Singh, Saif Ali Khan's character in Sacred Games

5 things about Saif Ali Khan's Sartaj Singh in Sacred Games | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Sacred Games 2 would be made available for streaming on Netflix August 15 onwards The series stars Saif Ali Khan, Nawazuddin Siddiqui, Pankaj Tripathi, among others The second season has been directed by Neeraj Ghaywan and Anurag Kashyap

The time has come, well almost! Sacred Games Season 2 is just a day away from being dropped online and those who loved the first season of the Netflix series are eagerly waiting to know what happens next. "Sab mar jayenge, Trivedi bach jaega" is the new "Baahubali ne Katappa ko kyun maara?" and the thrill to know it all is real.

For the second season of the show, Vikramaditya Motwane has taken the backseat and has become its showrunner. He directed Saif Ali Khan's track as police officer Sartaj Singh in the first season and has now been replaced by Masaan director Neeraj Ghaywan. Anurag Kashyap, however, continued directing Nawazuddin Siddiqui and his character Ganesh Gaitonde.

While there are other characters played by Pankaj Tripathi, Surveen Chawla, Kalki Koechlin, Ranvir Shorey, Elnaaz Norouzi, Jatin Sarna, Karan Wahi, among other actors, in the second season, here's revisiting Sartaj Singh, the hero of the show.

Here are 5 things to know about Sartaj Singh, Saif Ali Khan's character in Sacred Games:

1. Sartaj Singh is a righteous police officer in the show. While most of his seniors are corrupt, he is 'the' ideal cop dedicated to fighting crime and that too, fearlessly. He is also wise at being the cop who is able to crack codes, connect the missing pieces of the puzzle.

2. He is a troubled person as he hasn't come to terms with his marriage ending. He's heavily dependent upon sleeping pills while he's grappling with his marital separation.

3. He seeks validation from his seniors. He is constantly striving to prove his mettle and somehow, gets involved in this big case wherein he receives a bolt-from-the-blue sort of a call by gangster Ganesh Gaitonde. He warns him that something bad is about to happen to Mumbai within the next 25 days and gives him a chance to prevent it from happening.

4. His link to Ganesh Gaitonde, the prime baddie in the show, is revealed later towards the first season. Sartaj Singh's father was a helpful prison official who helped Gaitonde by providing him food and water during his torturous imprisonment under lockup.

5. He is ridden by guilt as he holds himself responsible for Nayanika's murder. Voices of Anjali Mathur, Radhika Apte's character echo in his head and flashback glimpses of Katekar and Nayanika's death replay in his head. Yet, he has nothing left to sacrifice.

Stay tuned to zoomtv.com for more updates.
