Kerala rains: Death toll hits 95, Centre sanctions Rs 52 crore assistance

Kerala rains: Death toll hits 95, Centre sanctions Rs 52 crore assistance

This was announced by Minister of State for External Affairs V Muraleedharan, who added that medicines worth Rs 4 crore would also be sent.

news Kerala Rains 2019

As more bodies were found from Malappuram’s Kavalappara which was hit by a massive landslide following heavy rains in Kerala, the death toll in the state has shot up to 95. Meanwhile, the Centre has sanctioned Rs 52 crore as immediate assistance to the state.

The Centre’s financial aid was announced by Minister of State for External Affairs V Muraleedharan. He also added that medicines worth Rs 4 crore will also be sent to Kerala.

"I was told by the Union Minister of State for Home that when he asked the Kerala Chief Minister if he was happy with the Centre's response, Pinarayi Vijayan remarked, 'this is enough', said Muraleedharan, who will be touring Wayanad and Malappuram on Friday.

As per the latest official figures till Wednesday morning, Malappuram remains the worst hit with 35 deaths and there are around 1.89 lakh people housed in about 1,118 relief camps across the state.

Meanwhile, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Tuesday took to Facebook to say that Kerala needs all the help that it can receive at this critical juncture. “This disaster that has befallen us as we are completing a year since the historic floods, will affect us severely. Our united intervention will be required to overcome this,” the CM wrote.

The state government has announced that it will provide three-month free ration for the affected people. "Of course, the Centre has to provide supplies. But what we have in stock will be distributed," said Minister for Food and Civil Supplies P Thilothaman on Tuesday.

The India Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued a red colour warning - which implies the district authorities to take action - in Malappuram and Kozhikode districts for Wednesday. Orange colour warning which implies that the district administration should be prepared, has been issued for Idukki, Thrissur, Palakkad, Wayanad, Kannur and Kasaragod.

Educational institutions in 11 districts – Alappuzha, Kottayam, Pathanamthitta, Idukki, Ernakulam, Thrissur, Malappuram, Kozhikode, Wayanad, Kasaragod and Kannur – will remain closed on Wednesday, reports Asianet News.

As people who were in relief camps in some districts have started to go back to their houses, the Health Department has issued caution against various diseases. State Health Minister KK Shailaja after a review meeting said, "Special counselling sessions would be conducted and people are advised to follow medical professionals' advice.” The Health Department has also stated that people in direct contact with floodwaters should take a dose of doxicycline.
