Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan vows to teach India a lesson

Imran Khan has vowed to 'teach India a lesson' after warning that military action from Delhi in Pakistan-administered Kashmir is imminent.

Speaking in Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan-administered Kashmir, on Independence Day, Khan said the army has 'solid information' that India will launch an attack in the region.

He claims a military offensive on Pakistan-administered Kashmir would be an Indian attempt to deflect attention from alleged human rights abuses in the areas of Kashmir under Delhi control.

Khan said: 'The Pakistani army has solid information that they are planning to do something in Pakistani Kashmir, and they are ready and will give a solid response.

'We have decided that if India commits any type of violation we will fight till the end. The time has arrived to teach you a lesson.'

Earlier this week, Khan lambasted the international community for failing to challenge India over Kashmir and said turning a blind eye to the spread of Indian Hindu nationalism was the same as appeasing Hitler, a comparison he made again on Wednesday.

Meanwhile, India's crippling 10-day-old curfew in Kashmir will ease after Thursday, according to the state governor, but phone lines and the internet will remain cut.India

Speaking in Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan-administered Kashmir, on Independence Day, Imran Khan has vowed to teach India a lesson

He claims an attack on Pakistan-administered Kashmir is imminent. India's Border Security Force (BSF) soldiers patrol near the India Pakistan border fencing at Garkhal in Akhnoor, about 22 miles west of Jammu, India

Khan used an address celebrating Independence Day on Wednesday to accuse India of planning the military action in the disputed Kashmir region, which has long been a flashpoint between the two nuclear-armed neighbours.

India revoked the special status of its portion of Kashmir, known as Jammu and Kashmir, on August 5 and moved to quell widespread unrest by shutting down communications and clamping down on freedom of movement.

Islamabad retaliated by suspending bilateral trade and all public transport links with India, as well as expelling New Delhi's ambassador to Islamabad.

On Wednesday, Khan travelled to Muzaffarabad, making his first visit to the region since becoming Pakistan's leader in 2018.

He used an address celebrating Independence Day on Wednesday to accuse India of planning the military action in the disputed Kashmir region

Kashmiris walk past a blockade put up by residents to prevent security personnel from sealing a mosque ground ahead of the Eid-al-Adha prayers

In the speech, he told the region's parliament that India planned more extensive action than that of February, when its fighter jets struck inside Pakistan, following a dramatic escalation in tension between the rivals.

'They have made a more horrendous plan to divert world attention from their move in Kashmir, they plan action in Azad Kashmir,' Khan said, referring to the portion held by Pakistan.

India to ease Kashmir curfew 'after Thursday' - but phone lines and the internet will remain cut off India's crippling 10-day-old curfew in Kashmir will ease after Thursday, according to the state governor, but phone lines and the internet will remain cut. India shut off communications and severely restricted movement in the part of Kashmir it controls on August 4, a day before New Delhi stripped the Muslim-majority region of its autonomy. Fearing protests and unrest in the long-restive region, tens of thousands of extra Indian troops have been deployed, turning the picturesque main city of Srinagar into a warren of barbed wire and barricades. While rules on the movement of people would be eased after India's Independence Day celebrations on Thursday, state governor Satya Pal Malik said that phone lines and the internet would remain down. 'We don't want to give that instrument to the enemy until things settle down,' Malik told the Times of India. 'In a week or 10 days, everything will be alright and we will gradually open lines of communication.' The lockdown has not completely prevented anger at Prime Minister Narendra Modi's move bursting out into the open, however. According to residents around 8,000 people protested after Friday prayers, with security forces firing tear gas and pellet-firing shotguns to break up the rally. Only on Tuesday did the Indian government confirm that clashes, blaming them on stone-throwing 'miscreants' and saying its forces reacted with 'restraint'. Footage filmed by AFP on Monday showed hundreds of people protesting in the Soura area of Srinagar, shouting slogans such as 'We want freedom' and 'India go back' as helicopters buzzed overhead. 'What India has done is unacceptable to us. Our struggle will continue even if India keeps Kashmir locked down for months,' one protester told AFP. India's home ministry said Tuesday that since the curfew was imposed, 'no bullets have been fired'. But Munir Khan, a senior police officer in Kashmir, said that the military has used pellet-firing shotguns. Advertisement

'The Pakistani army is fully aware that they (India) have made a plan of taking action in Azad Kashmir.'

Representatives of India's armed forces and its foreign ministry did not immediately respond to requests for comment on Khan's remarks.

India shut off communications and severely restricted movement in Kashmir on August 4, a day before it stripped the Muslim-majority region of its autonomy.

Fearing protests and unrest in the long-restive region, tens of thousands of extra Indian troops have been deployed, turning the picturesque main city of Srinagar into a warren of barbed wire and barricades.

While rules on the movement of people would be eased after India's Independence Day celebrations on Thursday, state governor Satya Pal Malik said that phone lines and the internet would remain down.

'We don't want to give that instrument to the enemy until things settle down,' Malik told the Times of India. 'In a week or 10 days, everything will be alright and we will gradually open lines of communication.'

Pakistan's foreign ministry says it has summoned an Indian diplomat to protest the killing of a civilian by Indian fire in disputed Kashmir.

The ministry said in a statement on Wednesday that a 38-year-old villager was killed the day before by an 'unprovoked cease-fire violation by Indian troops on the Pakistani side of Kashmir.'

However, India's home ministry said Tuesday that since the curfew was imposed, 'no bullets have been fired'.

Munir Khan, a senior police officer in Kashmir, disagreed and said that the military had used pellet-firing shotguns.

'There have been 2-3 pellet injuries but they are nothing major. There is nothing grave,' Khan told AFP. He added that some security personnel were also injured.

In Srinagar's main SMHS Hospital, one young man was nursing his eye, saying he had been shot by pellets fired by soldiers as he came out of a mosque on Monday.

'We could not pray in peace on the day of Eid. A large number of soldiers surrounded the mosque,' a man by his bedside said, also declining to give his name.

Elsewhere in the ward, six-year-old Munefa Nazir slept with her right eye bandaged as her family took turns waving a handheld fan to keep her cool.

According to her uncle, she was shot in the eye by a marble fired from a catapult by an Indian soldier at a checkpoint as they rode on his scooter on Monday evening.

'She screamed and blood from her eye started oozing through her fingers as she covered her face with both hands,' Farooq Ahmad said.

The 1,000-bed SMHS is usually busy but because of the curfew only a few beds were occupied in some sections. Many pharmacies have also run out of some supplies.

'We have run out of a lot of prescription drugs people here look for,' said Mubashir Hussain, a salesman at a medical shop in the Jawahar Nagar area where restrictions on public and vehicular movement have been eased since Monday.

India rules the populous Kashmir Valley and the Hindu-dominated region around Jammu city, while Pakistan controls Azad Kashmir, a wedge of territory in the west.

China holds a thinly populated high-altitude area in the north.

Leader of Pakistan-controlled Kashmir says his government will no longer recognize the decades-old Line of Control The leader of Pakistan-controlled Kashmir says his government will no longer recognize a decades-old border after India stripped the portion of the disputed Himalayan region it administers of its statehood in a surprise move in Parliament last week. The Line of Control was brokered to end a 1971 war between India and Pakistan. Both claim Kashmir in its entirety but agreed at the time to respect the status quo that it was split between them. Raja Farooq Haider says he will instead interpret the border as a cease-fire line, which if crossed by Indian forces would constitute an act of war. However, without an army of its own, Haider's government has no power to enforce the change. Advertisement

India and Pakistan have fought two wars over Kashmir since gaining independence from Britain in 1947.

They came close to a third in February after a deadly attack on Indian police by an alleged Pakistan-based militant group resulted in air strikes by both countries.

India's revocation of special status for Jammu and Kashmir blocks the state's right to frame its own laws and allows non-residents to buy property there.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government has said old laws prohibiting people from outside Kashmir from buying property, settling there and taking up government jobs had hindered its development.

Restrictions were lifted in five districts of Jammu and nine districts of Kashmir on Monday, India's home ministry said, adding that security would be heightened for both countries' Independence Day celebrations and Muslim Friday prayers.

In Islamabad, posters urged residents to express solidarity with Kashmiris and roadside vendors sold Azad Kashmir flags as well as the Pakistan flag which is commonly displayed on August 14.

'Independence Day is an opportunity for great happiness, but today we are saddened by the plight of our Kashmiri brothers in occupied Jammu and Kashmir who are victims of Indian oppression,' Khan said in an earlier statement.

'I assure my Kashmiri brothers that we stand with them.'

Pakistan has also said it will observe India's Independence Day on August 15 as a 'Black Day' this year, with flags flown half-mast on government buildings in protest at India's decision.
