Will become brand ambassador of Kashmir on international forums: Imran Khan

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Wednesday said he will "become the brand ambassador" of Kashmir on all international forums and threatened to go to "any extent" to defend the "freedom" of Kashmiris.

Speaking at PoK assembly, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said Pakistan has filed a petition with the United Nations and will approach "each and every global platform to uncover the atrocities in Kashmir".

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan visited Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK) and addressed the legislative assembly.

Warning Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Imran Khan said that any action by India in Pakistan would be countered with a stronger response.

"We will go to every global forum. We will go to the International Court of Justice. We are mobilising the global community of Kashmiris and you will see a historic number of people come out," Khan said.

He even raised an alarm over the current situation in Jammu and Kashmir, saying that the Muslims living in Kashmir are in danger. "We are all concerned at moment about the truth of the humanitarian crisis and the atrocities created by this lockdown that has been imposed," Khan said.

Criticising the Indian government, Khan said the decision to scrap Article 370, which granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir, is a strategic blunder. "He (Narendra Modi) is playing his final card but it is going to be very expensive for India," Khan added.

"The first important development is that Kashmir is now a global narrative; we have spoken to Donald Trump about it; we brought it up at the OIC," he added.

In the days following the scrapping of Article 370, Pakistani politicians including Imran Khan have been caught making false claims about the situation in Kashmir to ignite fears among locals.

However, the Indian government and local authorities in Jammu and Kashmir have made rubbished all claims made by Pakistan and assured that normalcy will soon return to the Valley. Indian authorities have also told Pakistan to stay out of its business.

(With inputs from Hamza Ameer)
