Delhi Traffic Police issue traffic advisory for Independence Day and Raksha Bandhan

Metro train services will ply normally with some restrictions on entry and exit points at Violent Line. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights 7 major arterial roads in Delhi shut to traffic for I-Day security Massive security cover in Delhi for I-Day and Raksha Bandhan Metro train services will ply normally with some restrictions on entry/exit points

New Delhi: With elaborate arrangements for the 73rd Independence Day security, the Delhi Police have issued traffic advisory for people to avoid any inconvenience on August 15. Police have taken extra caution as the festival of Rakhi coincides with Independence Day celebrations.

The police advisory maintains that Lothian Road, Netaji Subhash Marg, Chandni Chowk Road, Nishad Raj Marg, SP Mookerjee Marg, Esplanade Road, its Link Road, Ring Road from Rajghat to Y-Point-Hanuman Setu will remain shut for common people between 4 am in the morning to 10 am.

According to a report, the bus routes ending at Red Fort, Jama Masjid and Delhi's Railway Station will be diverted.

Metro services

However, Metro train services will ply normally with some restrictions on entry and exit points at Violent Line stations.

At four Metro Stations on the Violet Line- Lal Qila, Jama Masjid, Delhi Gate and ITO- the commuters will be allowed entry/exits only from the selected gates during the I-Day ceremony time, while some of the gates will remain closed.

The parking services at the Metro stations have been suspended on Wednesday and will remain shut till Thursday afternoon.

The Metro authorities have opened additional counters to tackle the Independence Day rush at Jama Masjid and Red Fort Stations.

Multi-Layered security set up has been formed with the help of the National Security Guard (NSG), elite SWAT commandos of Delhi Police for Independence Day celebration.

Raksha Bandhan celebration

Meanwhile, the Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) has said it will provide free rides to celebrate the festival of Raksha Bandhan on August 15. The free rides will be applicable on both AC and non-AC buses to women passengers.

Commuters moving in the national capital between 4 am to 10 am should keep in mind traffic restrictions put in place in various parts of Delhi for Independence Day.
