Indian Institute of Skills (IIS) To Be Set Up In Mumbai -

Corporate India to focus more on engaging apprentices; says Dr. Pandey during his industry interaction

Seven participants from Mumbai to be a part of Skill India Team competing at World Skills 2019

In a bid to take skill training and entrepreneurship development to the next level, Dr. Mahendra Nath Pandey, Minister for Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) today met Shri Devendra Fadnavis, Chief Minister of Maharashtra, for a discussion on ongoing activities and the way forward for the State.

Dr. Pandey said the Government is working towards fulfilling Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi’s vision of setting up world-class Skill Training Institutes in India and enabling the young generation to acquire skills at par with global standards. He said the first step was being taken in the form of Indian Institute of Skills (IIS).

“The idea was conceived by our Hon’ble Prime Minister during his visit to Singapore’s Institute of Technical Education,” he added. “The Minister informed Shri Fadnavis that the foundation stone of the institute would be laid soon.”

Earlier in the day, Dr. Pandey paid a visit to the National Skill Training Institute (NSTI), Mumbai, where he reviewed the IIS project and discussed its progress at length. The Minister said the project would be executed in PPP mode wherein construction would be done by Tata Educational and Development Trust (TEDT).

“The Government has provided 4.5 acres of land for the project and the Tata Group will invest around Rs. 300 crore. Work on the project is expected to start by September. On completion, IIS will have a capacity of training 10,000 trainees. Besides traditional areas, the institute will provide skilling in various areas including security, aerospace, iron and natural gas. Two more institutes in Ahmedabad and Kanpur will also be set up soon,” he added.

The Minister announced that he would take steps for modernization of NSTI Mumbai, for benefit of trainers and faculty of the institute. The Minister visited the NSTI and interacted with the trainees and faculty. He also paid a visit to the site in the NSTI campus where the IIS is proposed to be built. Interacting with the media and other members, the Minister said, “The formation of a separate Ministry for Skill Development has ushered in a skill development movement in the country, giving it enhanced priority and attention. A message has gone to the industry that skilling is a must and it is crucial in tapping the potential of our youth for making them globally competitive” he further added.

After meeting with Shri Devendra Fadnavis, Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Union Minister said that Maharashtra has made remarkable progress in skill development and has set the benchmark for other states by skilling a large number of the youth. Under the leadership of Shri Devendra Fadnavis, the State has taken rapid strides to ensure skilling programs reach everyone at the district and local levels, including farmers. Opportunities are being created for the skilled youth and a clear pathway is being laid for candidates to chart their careers. This is a model worth emulating.

Dr. Pandey also congratulated Shri Fadnavis on the spectacular performance of youth from Maharashtra in the IndiaSkill Competition. Seven top performing participants from Maharashtra have made their way to WorldSkills 2019, popularly known as Olympics of Skills. Being held in Kazan, Russia, between August 21 and 27, the seven candidates from Maharashtra will be part of the 48-member Indian team and will pit their skills against the best in the world. Tushar Phadatare (Automobile Technology), Vaibhav S Raut (Electrical Installations), Shweta Ratanpura (Graphic Design Technology), Divya Umesh Godse (Information Network Cabling), Omkar Shivaling Gurav and Rohan Ravidra Hanagi (Mobile Robotics) and Shrenik J Gugale (Print Media Technology) are the candidates from Maharashtra. Shri Fadvanavis extended his best wishes to the Team and said that he is happy about India Team’s growing participation at WorldSkills International Competition.

Dr. Pandey also met captains of the industry at a CII convention yesterday discussing the role of corporate India in skill development and laid emphasis on increasing engagement with apprentices within the industry. Private sector participation was an important aspect of a strong apprenticeship programme that could set India on the path to growth like Germany, Dr. Pandey said. He also met Shri AM Naik, Chairman, NSDC and Group Chairman, Larsen & Toubro Limited, during his visit to Mumbai to discuss how NSDC’s role can be further strengthened in the ecosystem.
