India’s actions in Kashmir are increasing chances of conflict

The state of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) bordering India and Pakistan has long been a source of contention between the two countries. Being India’s only Muslim majority state, it had symbolic value for India’s first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru to showcase that India was a secular democracy, which allowed Muslims to be citizens in equal status with majority Hindus.

For the Muslim nation of Pakistan, which was created through the partition of the sub-continent as the British left South Asia in 1947, Kashmir was proof of the duplicity of India’s Congress politicians.

They would not allow the Muslims of Kashmir to rightfully join the new Muslim homeland of Pakistan. This prompted several wars between India and Pakistan for control of this region — soon after independence in 1948, again in 1965, and most recently in 1999 in Kargil.

In early 1950s, certain special provisions were created through Article 370 of the Indian Constitution, under which the Indian central government would control defence, foreign affairs, and communications in the state of Jammu and Kashmir but other issues of governance would be left to the provincial elected government, which was also allowed its own constitution.

Added to this was Article 35-A, which allowed only “permanent residents” of the state to own property and to have certain special rights in public sector jobs and universities in the state, which provided safeguards to the local Muslim population. This special status has always been controversial, and the current Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government had long opposed it on grounds that it was appeasement of Muslim minorities.

The BJP recently won the May 2019 national elections with an even larger majority than it did in the 2014 elections. Bolstered by its electoral victory, the new BJP government took the historic decision on Aug. 5 of abrogating Article 370 and Article 35-A through a presidential order.

Also J&K was reduced to the status of a Union Territory (UT) from being a state, and was partitioned to create a new UT of Buddhist-majority Ladakh bordering China. This was accompanied by infusion of large number of security forces and the shutting down of internet and phone services in Kashmir, and also the house arrest of the two leaders of the main political parties of Kashmir, Omar Abdullah of the National Conference and Mehbooba Mufti of the People’s Democratic Party.

This move has been loudly opposed by the Congress party and other secular and leftist parties. There have also been street protests by opposition groups and students in India. However, BJP Prime Minister Narendra Modi has strongly defended this decision by suggesting this will bring more development to Kashmir and stop the scourge of insurgency in its tracks.

Instead of reducing violence, this action may actually lead to further intensification of the long lasting insurgency in Kashmir, which has been going on since 1989. As scholars of rebellion have theorized, political exclusion of ethnic minorities by the state can lead to violent rebellion.

The initial spark for the onset of insurgency in Kashmir was the excessive interference by the central government and rigging of the 1987 legislative assembly elections. By reducing political autonomy through revoking Article 370, and putting the previous chief ministers of the state under house arrest, the BJP has severely curtailed political space for Kashmiri youth, who could feel further alienated. This could lead to resurgence of violence in coming months.

It may also cause re-escalation of tensions between nuclear-armed India and Pakistan, which had increased as recently as February and March.

Already the Pakistani government has sent back the Indian envoy and suspended bilateral trade, though New Delhi has requested this decision to be reviewed. According to The Hindu, the Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan, warned on Aug. 6 that India’s decision could trigger more violent incidents in Kashmir.

This should be taken seriously by the BJP government, since some Kashmiri terrorist groups in the past have received indirect support by Pakistan intelligence agencies and the current decision to reduce Kashmir’s autonomous status may lead to a resurgence of insurgency by aggrieved youth.

Shivaji Mukherjee is an assistant professor of political science at the University of Toronto.

Read more about:
