Amid drought, plants in Chennai guzzle 21 million liters of groundwater per day – “We are moving towards a groundwater disaster. On one hand, the surface water resources are being destroyed, and on th

Diagram showing water distribution in Chennai and Tamil Nadu, India. Packaged drinking water and carbonated beverage factories in and around Chennai draw at least 21 million liters of groundwater every day. Graphic: TNN / TOI

By Yogesh Kabirdoss

22 July 2019

CHENNAI (TNN) – Drought-prone Tamil Nadu has the highest number of licensed packaged drinking water and carbonated beverages units in the country. These water-guzzling plants operating in and around Chennai draw at least 21 million litres of water every day. For the record, water-starved Tamil Nadu has 40 percent of the total ‘over-exploited’ groundwater resource locations in India.

Data released by the Union ministry of Jal Shakti in Lok Sabha last week revealed that TN has 3,299 licensed mineral water, packaged drinking water and carbonated beverage units and bottling plants, which is 18 percent of the total such units running in the country. The licences were issued by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) in Tamil Nadu.

According to the Tamil Nadu Packaged Drinking Water Manufacturers Association, there are around 500 units in Chennai, Kancheepuram and Tiruvallur districts. Vice-president of the association M S Ezhangeswaran said each unit has different production capacities and working hours based on demand.

“A packaged drinking water unit with an average production capacity of 3,000 litres per hour and running for seven hours requires 42,000 litres of water a day. About 50 percent of the sourced water, which is subjected to reverse osmosis, would end up as reject water,” he said. “Water is either drawn from ground or purchased through tankers whose source is also groundwater,” he said.

Dead fish lie on the parched bed of the Chembarambakkam reservoir in India, 19 May 2019. Photo: The News Minute

This apart, two carbonated beverage units of leading soft drink brands are operating in Kancheepuram and Tiruvallur districts. Each draw at least five lakh litres of groundwater a day, said a hydrogeologist. However, their drawing capacity could not be independently verified.

Besides these, sources said 15 unlicensed packaged drinking water units are also operating in Tiruvallur district near the Andhra Pradesh border.

G Sundarrajan of Poovulagin Nanbargal, a voluntary organisation that canvasses for the environment, said the revelation has come in the backdrop of NITI Aayog warning that 21 Indian cities including Chennai will run out of water by 2020. “We are moving towards a groundwater disaster. On one hand, the surface water resources are being destroyed and on the other groundwater resources are being over-exploited,” he said. Waste water from the units are let into the surface polluting the groundwater further, he said. [more]

Amid drought, plants in Chennai guzzle 21 million litres of groundwater a day
