No compromise on Kashmir issue, says COAS

ISLAMABAD: Chief of the Army Staff Gen Qamar Javed Bajwa said on Wednesday that there could be no compromise on Kashmir as he reaffirmed his troops’ readiness to play their role in support of the (Kashmir) cause.

Gen Bajwa’s message on Kashmir Solidarity Day, observed on August 14 in the aftermath of India’s annexation of occupied Kashmir, was released on Twitter by the military spokesman, Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor.

“Reality of #Kashmir was neither changed by an illegal piece of paper in 1947 nor will any other do it now or in future. Pakistan has always stood by Kashmiris against India’s hegemonic ambitions, will always do. There can never be a compromise on #Kashmir,” the first of the two tweets attributed to the army chief read.

“We shall stand in the face of tyranny, regardless of the cost. Pakistan Army is fully alive to the sanctity of Jammu & Kashmir and will remain fully ready to perform its part in line with our national duty for Kashmir cause,” read the second tweet.

Bajwa says Army is ready to perform its part for Kashmir cause in line with national duty

Kashmir Solidarity Day was observed on the occasion of the 72nd anniversary of independence as decided by the National Security Committee. Black Day would be observed on Aug 15 (today), when Indians celebrate their independence day, to protest against its continued occupation of Kashmir and the latest move of annexing it.

Gen Bajwa’s message, therefore, contained a rejection of the Indian action related to Kashmir, a pledge to support the Kashmiris against Indian oppression, and a signal of the troops’ readiness to play their part if the situation so demands.

His message closely echoed the decisions taken at the recent corps commanders’ meeting that discussed the developments in Kashmir.

Pakistan fears that the Indian move would threaten peace and stability in the region. The government has written a letter to the United Nations Security Council president asking him to convene an emergency session of the council to deliberate on the evolving situation.

Prime Minister Imran Khan, in his speech at the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly, mentioned the intelligence, available with Pakistani agencies, that India was planning aggression against Azad Kashmir to distract the world from happenings in Occupied Kashmir. He said the Indian plan was more sinister than the aerial raid during the post-Pulwama stand-off.

Gen Bajwa, meanwhile, during a visit to the troops deployed at the LoC over Eid, had cautioned that India could do any mischief in a bid to shift global attention away from Occupied Kashmir to the Line of Control and Pakistan. He, therefore, emphasised that Pakistan must not give India any opportunity to cover up its crimes in the occupied valley.

Published in Dawn, August 15th, 2019
