Imran Khan threatens war with India over Kashmir decision

Imran Khan threatens war with India over Kashmir decision

Islamabad : Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Wednesday threatened to go to a war with India following the government's decision to abrogate Article 370 in Jammu and Kahsmir and bifurcate it into two Union Territories.

In his latest address to Pakistan, Prime Minister Imran Khan said that they are ready to fight for the freedom of Kashmir.

He criticised the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), which is the parent organisation of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

Talking about lynching incidents of Muslims in the country, he claimed that the community is living in fear and it is an alarming situation for Muslims in Kashmir.

"We are all concerned at moment about the truth of the humanitarian crisis and the atrocities created by this lockdown that has been imposed," he said.

Accusing the Indian government of making a "strategic blunder", the Pakistan prime minister said, "He ( Narendra Modi) is playing his final card but it is going to be very expensive for India."

"Kashmir was not on the radar of the international community, but we as Pakistan have to ensure that this new momentum continues where Kashmir is in the global narrative. I pledge to be the ambassador of Kashmir," Imran Khan said.

"Now, I will become the brand ambassador and take Kashmir issue to all possible platforms," Khan said.

"The first important development is that Kashmir is now a global narrative; we have spoken to Donald Trump about it; we brought it up at the OIC," he added.

Citing danger to almost 18 crore Muslims living in India, he made another accusation. He said: "Pro Indian Kashmiri politicians today are endorsing two-nation theory."

"Our army is battle-hardened fighting a nearly 20 year war against terrorism. Our people are ready to defend our freedoms. We are observing where the events go from here. Pakistan is fully ready; our army, our people are on one page. We have decided we will not tolerate any violation and are fully ready to counter it," he added.

India, on the other hand, has already warned Pakistan to stay away from the internal matters of the nation.
