Dialogue only solution to differences with India, Russia tells Pakistan on Kashmir

Shah Mehmood Qureshi (file photo) | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Resolve differences only via political and diplomatic means - Russia told Pakistan Islamabad has so far failed to garner support from the international community on its stand on the Kashmir issue, which is actually India's internal matter

Moscow: Russia, on Wednesday, told Pakistan that the only solution to the Kashmir issue is through bilateral and diplomatic means. In a telephonic conversation between Pakistan's foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi and his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov, the Russian side stressed that there was a need to de-escalate tensions along the borders.

"During the conversation, the situation in South Asia was discussed amid the worsening relations between Pakistan and India after the decision made by New Delhi to change the legal status of the state of Jammu and Kashmir. The Russian side emphasized the need for de-escalation of tensions, and that there is no alternative to resolve differences between Pakistan and India except bilaterally through political and diplomatic means. Representatives of Russia to the UN adhere to this consistent position," a statement by Russian Foreign Ministery read.

The call was a part of Pakistan's outreach to the diplomatic community across the globe to garner support against India in light of the latter's decision on Article 370 of the Indian Constitution applicable to Kashmir. Earlier, that country's PM Imran Khan had also reached out to Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Malaysian PM Mahathir Bin Mohamad, and Iranian President Hassan Rouhani.

Moscow has earlier supported India's decision to abrogate Article 370 saying New Delhi's action was within the constitutional framework. The US has also stood by India's decision to abolish the special status of Jammu and Kashmir.

While Khan has threatened to take all possible measures against India's decision, New Delhi has vehemently stated that its actions in Kashmir are India's internal matter.
