Pakistan on the path to progress, says Governor Imran Ismail

PHOTO: FILE

KARACHI: Sindh Governor Imran Ismail has said that Pakistan is moving on the path toward progress at a very fast pace. In a statement issued on Wednesday, the governor felicitated the nation on the 72nd Independence Day and said that the rule of law and democracy was being strengthened in our beloved country.



He said August 14 is a day of happiness. "We should thank Allah Almighty and also reiterate that we will work hard day and night for the progress of the country," he added. "Today, we shall also remember those great martyrs who laid their lives for the freedom and sovereignty of our country."



The governor said with the restoration of peace in the country, all the economic, cultural and literary activities are gaining momentum. The day is not far when Pakistan will be listed among developed countries, he added.



"Although Independence Day is a day of celebrations, we must not forget our Kashmiri brethren who are facing Indian atrocities," he said. "We as a nation assure our Kashmiri brothers and sisters that we are standing by their side and Pakistan will continue to support Kashmiris in their struggle for self-determination. The time is not far when Kashmiri people will also enjoy freedom."



PTI rally



Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) organised a rally on Wednesday to celebrate Independence Day and express solidarity with the people of Kashmir. The participants, led by PTI Sindh president Haleem Adil Sheikh, MNA Faheem Khan, MPAs Khuram Sher Zaman, Raja Azhar Khan, Kareem Bux Gabol, Bilal Ghaffar, Sanjay Gangwani, Adnan Ismail, Hunaid Lakhani, Adil Ansari, Muhammad Ali Shewani and Subhan Ali Sahil, marched from Insaf House to the Quaid's mausoleum. A large number of citizens and PTI workers participated in the rally.



Addressing the rally, Sheikh said that the Kashmiris are a great nation and that Pakistanis stand shoulder to shoulder with their Kashmiri brethren. He said Pakistanis are ready for every sacrifice for the freedom of Kashmir.



Sheikh said India had been deceiving the Kashmiris as well as the international community for decades. "Kashmir is our jugular vein and we will fight for it," said Sheikh, adding that time had again proved that the two-nation theory of Quaid-e-Azam was correct.



Published in The Express Tribune, August 15th, 2019.
