Modi reaches out to Afghanistan, launches veiled attack on Pakistan for promoting terror

NEW DELHI: PM Narendra Modi , a day after Pak PM Imran Khan threatened war against India, launched a veiled attack on Pakistan for promoting terror in the region including in Afghanistan, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh. Modi from the ramparts of Red Fort also reached out to Afghanistan ahead of its 100th independence-day anniversary amid US-led peace talks with Taliban and efforts by Pakistan to play a role in that process.Addressing the nation on the 73rd Independence Day at Red Fort, Modi ahead of his visit to France for G-7 Summit where countering terrorism steps will be a priority, outlined the need for all global powers to come together to fight against terrorism stating that his government's policy for eradicating terrorism was firm and clear.“From the ramparts of the Red Fort, I give my greetings to the people of Afghanistan who are marking 100 years of freedom,” he emphasised amid Pakistan’s aim to play a bigger role in the landlocked country. Afghanistan celebrates its Independence Day on August 19.Modi emphasised that peace and security are two important aspects of the development and said, "Different parts of the world are struggling with conflicts and security crisis. For world peace, India has to play its role. In global aspects, India cannot stay a silent witness to it. We all must come together to identify those who support or breed terrorism. We are committed to fighting against terrorism".Elaborating about India's role in the fighting against terrorism, Modi in an indirect reference to Pak policy said, "India is strongly fighting against those who are spreading terrorism. Terrorism in any part of the world is a war against humanity and hence all humanitarian forces should come together to expose the real face of those who harbour, promote or export terrorism. Those who give protection and support terrorism must be completely exposed."Referring to the impact of menace in the Indian subcontinent, Modi said, "Some people have troubled not only India but also our neighbours through terrorism. Bangladesh, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka also are affected by terrorism. All countries in the world need to come together to fight this menace. India should play its role in uniting all global forces to eradicate terrorism. When we fight against terrorism then we are actively playing our role in enhancing security and peace in this whole region."
