Opposition cries foul over CBI raids on Bhupinder Singh Hooda

Crying foul over the raids carried out by the CBI in the residence of former Haryana chief minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda, the Congress warned bureaucrats that governments change and that the agencies should be ready for accountabilities of their actions.

Senior Congress leader Anand Sharma said that bureaucrats must remember that governments do not have any permanency. "When a new government takes over, every action taken by any officer to harass, intimidate, frame and defame the political opponents on the orders of their political masters will be made accountable," said Sharma.

He further said that the Congress condemns the raids. "We condemn in the strongest terms the raids, which has been carried out with the sole purpose of harassing and defaming. The ill-will and timing is quite clear. This was the last day of campaigning for Jind by-elections and to stop Hoodaji from campaigning, they have carried out these raids," he said.

The Congress had made the Jind by-elections, scheduled for January 28, a high-profile poll by fielding party communications chief Randeep Singh Surjewala.

In West Bengal, chief minister Mamata Banerjee, too, sent out series of angry tweets against the CBI. She said that the BJP was continuing with its 'political vendetta' in harassing Opposition allies, from Kolkata to Delhi and beyond. "From @yadavakhilesh to Behen Mayawati Ji, nobody is spared. From north to south. From east to west. Political vendetta by BJP. Are they scared ? Are they desperate ? [sic]," her tweet read.

"One headless agency has now become spineless BJP ! [sic]," read another.

On twitter, she found support from Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal as well as RJD leader Tejaswi Yadav. "Modiji is fighting political battles through enforcement agencies. From @yadavakhilesh & Mayawati in UP to @MamataOfficial in Bengal and AAP in Delhi, Modi-Shah duo has spared no political opponent," read Kejriwal's tweet.

"The CBI has become BBI (BJP Bureau of Investigation). Whoever joins hands with the BJP gets clean-chit and becomes Raja Harish Chandra & those who criticise them are hounded by agencies. Even my father was not spared, because he is a critic of the RSS and BJP led Central Govt (sic)," tweeted Tejaswi.

Warns Babus

Saying that governments do not have permanency, the Congress warned bureaucrats to be prepared for accountability of their present actions when the government changes.
