Indian govt’s actions will lead to severe repercussions, warns PM

KARACHI: Prime Minister Imran Khan has cautioned the international community about the risks the world peace faces because of revocation of Article 370 by India which has ended special status of the disputed region of Kashmir.

In Twitter postings on Thursday, the prime minister recalled the provocative and tyrannical steps taken by New Delhi in held Kashmir over the past few weeks. He said: “In IOK [India occupied Kashmir], 12 days of curfew, presence of extra troops in an already heavily militarised occupied territory, sending in of RSS goons, complete communication blackout; with the example of [Indian Prime Minister Narendra] Modi’s earlier ethnic cleansing of Muslims in Gujarat”.

Mr Khan then asked: “Will world silently witness another Srebrenica-type massacre & ethnic cleansing of Muslims in IOK? I want to warn international community if it allows this to happen, it will have severe repercussions & reactions in the Muslim world setting off radicalisation & cycles of violence.”

Prime Minister Khan has been trying to draw the world’s attention to the explosive situation caused by the Indian government in held Kashmir.

On Wednesday, he warned India that any aggression on its part in Pakistan or Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) to divert attention from the situation in IHK would be met with a strong response.

Speaking at the special session of the AJK Legislative Assembly held to mark Independence Day of Pakistan as Solidarity Day with struggling Kashmiris, Mr Khan said he was in 100 per cent agreement with AJK Prime Minister Raja Farooq Haider that India would not restrict itself to Kashmir and its hatred-filled ideology would try to make its way to Pakistan.

“We have information which we have discussed in two National Security Committee meetings and the Army also knows that India is contemplating launching some dreadful action in Azad Kashmir on the pattern of the Balakot attack,” the prime minister said, referring to the intrusion into Pakistani airspace by Indian jets on Feb 26.

“This action will be aimed at diverting world attention from occupied Kashmir but I have a message for Narendra Modi: you take action and we will respond to your brick with stone,” he warned.

Prime Minister Khan noted with pride that Pakistan had a battle-hardened army which was fully prepared to take on the enemy. “Not only the Army, but the entire nation is ready to fight shoulder to shoulder with their troops.” He pointed out that the Muslims had never initiated wars because this was against the teachings of Islam. “But the Muslims are not afraid of death either and this is their strength. I repeat, we will confront and take you to the end.”

Addressing the UN, Mr Khan said: “What will you do to them [Kashmiris]? You have pledged a referendum to the Kashmiris through 11 resolutions to help them decide their fate, but Mr Modi has thrown them into the dustbin.”

Published in Dawn, August 16th, 2019
