As ISIS finds footing in South Asia, greater vigilance needed in Kashmir

A file picture of protests in Kashmir. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights This is the first time that the ISIS has been more active outside of the Middle East than inside the region Earlier this month, the US warned that ISIS remained a global threat despite its losses in Syria and Iraq. The Sri Lankan bombers were believed to have had links to the ISIS as well as a local Islamist terror group.

Indian intelligence agencies will have to be mindful of the fact that the Islamic State (IS) terror group is finding new havens in countries such as India and Sri Lanka.

Among the recent reports pointing out to this new strategy of the terror group was the one released by the US-based Armed Conflict Location and Event Data (ACLED). The report also named other countries such as Afghanistan, Turkey and Sri Lanka where the ISIS (as the terror group is also known) has found a footing even as its influence has reduced considerably in its territories of origin Syria and Iraq.

Titled ‘Branching Out: Islamic State’s Continued Expansion’, the report said that the terror group “greeted its loss of territory in Iraq and Syria in 2018 with expanded global presence in 2019”.

This is the first time that the ISIS has been more active outside of the Middle East than inside the region, the conflict monitoring and crisis mapping organisation had said in its report.

Earlier this month, the US warned that the ISIS remained a global threat despite its losses in Syria and Iraq. The “ISIS brand lives on around the world,” the State Department counterterrorism coordinator Nathan Sales said.

Loss of territory

The so-called Caliphate of the Isis came to an end formally in March this year when the terror group lost its final territorial stronghold in Syria. The Caliphate had been announced by the group in 2014 and at its peak, included swathes of Iraq and Syria.

The end was brought about by a coalition comprising Arab and Kurdish troops backed by special forces from US and its European allies.

The Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) at the time had warned that ISIS sleeper cells continued to pose a “great danger on our region and the whole world”.

New theatres of terror

Intelligence agencies of various countries have been warning about the ISIS's attempts to regroup and spread its terror sleeper cells to other parts of the world. Contrary to earlier reports, the leader of the group Abubakr al-Baghdadi is widely believed to be alive and in hiding.

“Through the first five months this year, the IS has placed unprecedented emphasis on its global operations… In his first video in five years (after the Sri Lanka Easter bombings in April), Baghdadi focused largely on the group’s activity in South Asia, North, West and Central Asia,” the ACLED report said.

Churches and luxury hotels were targeted in a series of coordinated bombings in Sri Lanka that claimed around 260 lives. The bombers were believed to have had links to the ISIS as well as a local Islamist terror group.

The Supreme Court this month upheld the conviction of a woman from Kerala for being a member of the ISIS . There have been other instances of Indian youth joining the ISIS too.

Significantly, the ISIS is said to have opened up a new branch in Kashmir, called the "Wilayat al-Hind". There have been reports in the past of ISIS flags being waved in Kashmir, though authorities have dismissed claims that the global terror group has any presence in the area. Nevertheless, Intelligence agencies in India will be keeping a very close eye on the Valley to ensure that local youth are not attracted to the extremist ideology in wake of the discontent triggered in sections of the population by the scrapping of the region’s special status.
