No need for legislature if elected govt. cannot function freely: CM

Narayanasamy says his govt. undertook development works despite hurdles

There is no need to have a legislature if an elected government cannot function freely, Chief Minister V. Narayanasamy said here on Friday.

Addressing freedom fighters who fought for the Union Territory’s liberation from the French rule, the Chief Minister said “if there are no powers to an elected government why should there be elections to appoint legislators.”

He was speaking after unfurling the Tricolour at Keezhur village, which was the venue for the referendum on October 18, 1954 to decide whether Puducherry should remain a French territory or be merge with the Union of India.

Indirectly referring to the turf war with Lieutenant Governor Kiran Bedi, the Chief Minister said his government could undertake welfare and development works despite hurdles.

“Even after our hands were tied we could perform. If we are allowed to function, the Union Territory will be made the number one region in the country,” he added.

The government would ensure that the rights of the people are protected at all costs.

“That is why we went to the Madras High Court and got a favourable verdict (referring to the judgement upholding the rights of an elected government). We will continue to fight for the rights of the people,” the Chief Minister said.

The Chief Minister recalled the contributions of Muthu Kumarappa Reddiar, Venketasubba Reddiar, Subbaiah and Goubert for their in liberating the territory from the French rule.

Mr. Narayanasamy on his arrival at Keezhur was given a ceremonial guard of honour.

Museum

He also visited the museum where portraits capturing various facets of Puducherry’s freedom struggle have been displayed.

Before the arrival of Chief Minister, Ms. Bedi visited the place and offered floral tributes at the memorial.

Speaker V. P. Sivakolundhu, Minister for Public Works A. Namassivayam, Minister for Social Welfare M. Kandasamy, legislators and senior officials attended the function.
