5 times that Syed Akbaruddin rocked as nation's voice in India and abroad

Syed Akbaruddin, India's Ambassador & Permanent Representative at the UN. | Photo Credit: PTI

‘Stop terror & we will talk to you, Pakistan,' says Syed Akbaruddin, India's Ambassador & Permanent Representative to the United Nations. His composure, his wit, his confidence define the rockstar diplomat that Syed Akbaruddin has always been. This is not the first time that Akbaruddin, the son of a former diplomat father and a professor mother has taken down an aggressive (diplomatic) attacker with grace and assertion.

Here are the five times the 1986 batch Indian Foreign Service officer showed he got the moves:

1. Right after the Pulwama attack on 27 February 2019, while speaking to an American TV channel, Akbaruddin very smartly avoided any knee-jerk responses to probing and provocative questions. When asked if India considers military action, he said he had no clue why the anchor imagined that on India's behalf. When asked if India was seeking UNSC sanctions against Pakistan, he said: "We are far from that (at the moment); but what we would like at the moment is: No. 1 - A clear condemnation from everybody (member states) against such terrorist acts. No. 2 - We would like a listing that ensures that the leaders of such entities are also listed and proscribed. No. 3 - We would like all member states to abide by their commitments that are enshrined in several security council resolutions.

2. In February 2013, during media briefing when Syed Akbaruddin was the official spokesperson for the Ministry of External Affairs, one could see how he deftly handled all queries by national and international journalists. A Japanese journalist wanted to know if the DPRK had informed India before carrying out a nuclear test, and an Italian journo asked about the agreement between Italy and India on the Italian marines issue. An Indian journo wanted to know if Yasin Malik cavorting with Hafiz Saeed in Pakistan will cause his passport to be revoked or impounded. Akbaruddin answered them all, allotting each one question and no more. The presser was being controlled by him. No shouting, no debating. What's even more beautiful was that he responded to most journalists by using their first names though they could not be heard saying their names out at that moment.

3. In November 2017, when India's Justice Dalveer Bhandari was re-elected to the International Court of Justice, it was the first time that a non-permanent member of the Security Council had won an election to the ICJ beating a permanent member of the UNSC. Akbaruddin told an Indian TV channel that it is a first and a big deal to get a broad majority of the non-permanent member and it is a reflection of a change in the global order. He did not take any credit for the win, saying that he was a mere trench warrior and though he was a visible face, there was an unprecedented effort made globally to get this done by the country's leadership and the External Affairs Minister.

4. At the UNSC, on 9 July 2019, during an open debate on 'Threats to International Peace and Security: Linkages between International Terrorism and Organised Crime', Akbaruddin highlighted Pakistan's support covert and overt to terrorists like Dawood Ibrahim, but he did so without naming Pakistan. Watch his statement video and also read here a part of what he said - "The success of collective action to denude ISIL is a pointer that the Council’s focussed attention can and does yield results. A similar degree of interest in addressing the threats posed by proscribed individuals, such as Dawood Ibrahim and his D-Company, as well as proscribed entities, including the Jaish-e-Mohammad and Lashkar-e-Toiba, listed as affiliates of Al-Qaeda, under the 1267 sanctions regime, will serve all of us well."

Terrorism & Organised Crime r both malicious organisms drawing sustenance from same swamp.



D-Company’s illegitimate economic activities from a safe haven that declines to acknowledge his existence r a real & present danger.



Full statementhttps://t.co/Tp4Ubf7wRg pic.twitter.com/cDezqrn2Ll — Syed Akbaruddin (@AkbaruddinIndia) July 10, 2019

5. To lead and highlight India's commitment in the fight against Climate Change, Akbaruddin's team distributed multi-use linen bags to all the staff at the UN HQ in New York on 28 July, urging all to give up the use of single-use plastic bags. The linen bag carried a sketch of the charkha of Mahatma Gandhi and the logo of the 150 years of the Mahatma's birth celebrations imprinted upon it.

Small gestures, help change habits



No to single use plastic.#WeekendWisdom pic.twitter.com/KOoSjGa1WL — Syed Akbaruddin (@AkbaruddinIndia) July 28, 2019

Like Abhijit Iyer Mitra, a senior fellow at the Institute of Peace & Conflict Studies focussing on defence economics & lawfare summed it up: "Akbaruddin is the silent kind who believes publicity & smart Alec comments are the icings on the cake. He’s known for his quiet, behind-the-scenes efforts and patient explanations. Most people point to his stint as the Spokie of the MEA. For me, however, it was the India-Africa summit with 50 odd heads of states in Delhi that he pulled off seamlessly. That highlights the man he is... all about quiet, hard groundwork/spadework & he doesn’t seek publicity."
