Modi govt burnt all bridges for dialogue in Kashmir, say Gandhians

AGENCIES

New Delhi

A statement by 24 eminent Gandhians, scholars and activists has severely criticised the Modi government’s action on Kashmir, warning it that once the lockdown was over “people will come out and their anguish will burst forth.”

They denounced arrest of the state’s political leaders terming it as ironical as they were urging the Kashmiri people to maintain peace and abide by the rule of law.

“We have burnt all the bridges for a possible dialogue.”

The statement said, “The picture is far from bucolic. The leaders of the ruling party are busy displaying their ugly private fantasies and greed in public statements on Kashmir. This naked display of the desire to exploit Kashmir in the guise of investment and development has become disgusting.”

The statement wondered whether the Kashmiris could trust Prime Minister Narendra Modi when he said the “celebrations” over abrogation of Article 370 are “premature”.

“But how does one trust his words? The Parliament was illuminated with celebratory lights right after the passage of the Bill. What is there to celebrate in the unfortunate step we have taken in our own country, against our own people?” it said.

Such celebrations, the statement went on, “only deepen the wounds of the Kashmiris.”

The signatories appealed to “those who truly love India and care about its honour and its sovereignty” to step in to “compensate for the failure of vision, leadership and integrity.”

Expressing optimism, the signatories said, “What happened in Parliament is not irrefutable or inevitable. Duly elected lawmakers can reverse decisions. If the Emergency could be overturned, there is no reason why the abrogation of Article 370 cannot be undone, provided enough MPs feel that way. What is harder to undo is the damage done to our democratic political culture. What cannot be bridged is the trust deficit.”

The statement further said, “We must stand with the Kashmiris in their hour of crisis, which is equally our hour of crisis. Our helpless fellow-citizens who have been imprisoned must know that all right-thinking Indians share their anguish. The government must protect law and order, but it must also allow free expression at every level. That will help us to normalise the situation.”

The signatories included Kumar Prashant, president, Gandhi Peace Foundation, Ashis Nandy of the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies, Ashok Vajpeyi of Raza Foundation, Satypal Grover of Servants of India Society and Shabnam Hashmi, social activist.
