Gandhi gives Independence Day speech

NEW DELHI, India -- Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi said today on his nation's 41st anniversary of independence that India has made significant strides since 1947 but conceded more must be done to eliminate its endemic problems of poverty, unemployment and 'too many people.'

Millions of people celebrated Independence Day across the country but one ceremony in western Gujarat was marred by the slaying of a ruling Congress (I) Party state assemblyman, the Press Trust of India reported.

Advertisement

Popatlal Sorathia was shot in the head as he distributed prizes and his assailant was arrested, the Press Trust said, adding 'old emnity' was given by police as the motive for the attack.

'I am ready to sacrifice everything to strengthen the unity and integrity of this country and make India a great nation,' Gandhi declared in a nationally televised speech kicking off the national holiday commemorating the end of British colonial rule.

Advertisement

Gandhi, mixing an upbeat assessment of the future with admissions of shortcomings, spoke before more than 10,000 people from the ramparts of Old Delhi's 17th century Red Fort in a ritual begun by his grandfather and India's first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru.

Security was heavy, with thousands of police stationed around the fortress, in the crowd and on the streets and roofs of the surrounding area. Three air force helicopters patrolled overhead.

Gandhi, under threat from Sikh extremists demanding independence for northern Punjab state, was flanked by three security men and a bullet-proof vest was apparent under his brilliant white tunic.

But Gandhi, 44, who has escaped at least one attempt on his life since he succeeded his mother, Indira Gandhi, after her October 1984 assassination, dispensed with the bullet-proof glass screen he has used on previous ocassions.

Although India last year experienced the worst drought of the century, Gandhi said there was enough food for its 800 million people and 'for the first time we did not have to go to others with begging bowls.' He attributed the achievement to the agricultural policies of his mother and grandfather.

Gandhi cited a settlement to insurgencies in the northeastern states of Assam, Tripura, Mizoram and West Bengal but said 'while there has been improvement in Punjab,' progress in ending Sikh separatist violence that has claimed more than 1,800 lives this year has 'not been as much as we expected.'

Advertisement

Gandhi said the government had 'done a lot' to help the more than 270 million people living below the poverty line, but added that 'still a lot has to be done.'

'We have to help agriculture (and) if agriculture has to improve, then land legislation has to be made more effective,' he said.

Simultaneously, industrial development must continue, he said, adding that 'with improvements in these two fields' unemployment can be cut.

'Another problem that India faces is too many people,' said Gandhi, acknowleging the spiriling birth rate of about 19 million new babies annually, which will bring the population to more than 1 billion by the year 2000.

'Economic development has been frittered away by the increasing population,' Gandhi said, stopping short of making any new birth control initiatives.
