Pakistan decides to intensify lobbying for highlighting Kashmir situation

-

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan: The Special Committee on Kashmir met in Islamabad on Saturday to discuss the future course of action on Kashmir dispute, and decided that Pakistan would intensify its lobbying efforts to effectively highlight the prevailing situation in the Indian Occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

It was apprised by the Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi who briefed the media about details of the decisions taken in the Special Committee on Kashmir’s meeting along with the Director General Inter Services Public Relations (ISPR) Major General Asif Ghafoor.

The foreign minister said that all options were discussed during today’s meeting. He said that an action plan will be prepared, which will be presented to Prime Minister Imran Khan for his approval.

Qureshi said that it has also been decided in the meeting to establish a Kashmir Cell in the Foreign Office in order to give impetus to the ongoing efforts and pursue a focused approach on Kashmir. He said that the Foreign Secretary Sohail Mahmood has been directed to prepare a structure for the Kashmir Cell and present before him for approval.

Shah Mahmood Qureshi said that it has also been decided to establish Kashmir Cells in Pakistan’s Embassies in the key Capitals. He said that a focal person in each of these Embassies will ensure coordinated effort.

The foreign minister further said that Pakistan is keeping a close eye on the evolving situation in the Indian Occupied Jammu and Kashmir and the process of consultations will continue.

Qureshi also warned the International Community that India can carry out any false flag operation near the Line of Control (LoC) to divert world attention from its illegal actions and human rights violations in the Occupied Kashmir.

Shah Mahmood Qureshi said that today’s India is not that of Nehru but of Modi and there is a clear difference between the two. He said that we have doubts on the Indian intent and actions.

However, he added that the nation and its institutions are ready to respond to any Indian belligerence.

In addition, he said that the UN Security Council meeting on Kashmir is a big diplomatic victory of Pakistan and defeat of India. However, he said that this is a continuing process and the Country will fight the Kashmir cause on all fronts.

The Special Assistant to the Prime Minister on Information and Broadcasting Dr Firdous Ashiq Awan and the Chairman Kashmir Committee Syed Fakhar Imam were also present at the Press Conference.
