Armed forces will never disappoint Pakistanis against Indian aggression: DG ISPR

ISLAMABAD – Pakistani military’s spokesman has strongly rejected the propaganda of cross-LoC infiltration or attempts in this regard and termed it false, saying the armed forces with complete backing of its nation are were fully ready to respond to any aggression or misadventure by the Indian forces.

Major General Asif Ghafoor, the director-general of Inter Services Public Relations (ISPR), was addressing a press conference along with Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, Adviser to PM on Information and Broadcasting Firdous Ashiq Awan and Kashmir Committee Chairman Syed Fakhar Imam in Islamabad on Saturday.

The military spokesman further asserted that the armed forces of Pakistan are alert on the LoC and in case of any misadventure or aggression, they will go to the last extent to defend the motherland with full support of the nation.

About the statement of Indian defence minister Rajnath Singh about reconsidering India’s ‘No First Use’ policy, Maj-Gen Asif Ghafoor termed it irresponsible and said “responsible states do not talk in such manner”.

He also called upon the international community to take cognizance of this irresponsible statement.

Singh on Friday had told Indian media that the future "circumstances" would determine what would happen to India's "no first use" policy of nuclear weapons.

“Pakistan is a responsible country. The Indian aggression and designs always posed threat to Pakistan borders and LoC but the armed forces are always ready to face all such challenges,” he said, adding that the nation had full confidence in their armed forces and in their professional capabilities.

Under such grave situation, he further said, Pakistan could not afford any event which could undermine its efforts over the Kashmir cause.

UNSC session a testimony that world fully ... 10:20 AM | 17 Aug, 2019 ISLAMABAD - Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi Saturday termed the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) ...

Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, who opened the press conference, termed the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) deliberations on the grave situation in Indian Occupied Jammu & Kashmir (IoJ&K) as a huge development in the last five decades which vindicated Pakistan's stance over the Kashmir issue.

He told the nation that it has been decided to establish a Kashmir Cell in the Foreign Office besides similar desks at Pakistani embassies in the key capitals across the world to give impetus to the ongoing efforts.

Qureshi also cautioned the international community that India could carry out any false flag operation near the Line of Control (LoC) to divert world attention from its unilateral and illegal actions and serious human rights violations in IoK.

He assured the media that Pakistan would take all steps to remind the world body about the irresponsible, illegal and unilateral steps taken by the Modi led government.
