Information boards on highways confuse travellers

‘Information and indications on roads related to road safety should be a focus area for officials.’

Different spellings on the information boards for a city or town, difference in distance mentioned on two nearby boards / stones for the same place, different sizes of information boards on the same stretch of a road - these are all common on many highway roads in the city.

“I have seen so many times and in so many places difference in distance mentioned in two nearby stones for the same place,” says Jothiramalingam, a driver.

“Various spellings for the same city on the information boards is common,” points out Mohan, a professional. The information provided on the boards on a highway are confusing at several places, points out Prem, who travels long distances by car regularly.

The Indian Road Congress has specified standards for caution boards, instruction boards, and name boards, says K. Kathirmathiyon, secretary of Coimbatore Consumer Cause. “But, even those who put these boards do not know about the specifications on several instances,” he adds.

“When a new road is developed, the boards are placed according to the IRC standards, even the distance between two boards is maintained.

However, after some years, some boards go missing. We keep writing to the contractor to put a new board.

Sometimes they do, sometimes they do not,” says an official with the National Highways Authority of India. There are different standards for the boards placed during construction of the road and after completion of the road. The NHAI follows all these rules, the official adds.

“We try to correct the errors whenever we notice one. Sometimes the old board remains and a new one is placed. So there could be difference in sizes,” said an official of the State Highways Department.

Another official, who did not want to be identified, said the contractor who takes up the road works puts the boards too. Sometimes the spellings are taken from the internet and mistakes crop in. “We need to take up a special drive on all the roads and rectify these,” the official said.

Mr. Kathirmathiyon pointed out that there are specifications by the IRC on the shape and measurements for the boards and only the official spelling for each city or town should be used. He points out that caution boards and diversion boards should be placed at the distance specified by the IRC so that the road user is aware of the diversion ahead or speed breaker ahead. “Even for an important city as Tiruppur, there is no diversion board on the Chengapalli-Neelambur Highway. The board is placed after the exit point and if a new road user follows it he will have to travel a longer distance,” he says.

Such problems arise not only for name boards and information boards but also in markings for speed breakers and zebra crossings. With lack of visibility many people suffer injuries in accidents, he says. “No place in Coimbatore has a proper indication for a speed breaker. The design of the speed breakers is also not according to the norms. This leads to several accidents. Sometimes, the white lines before a speed breaker gives the impression that it is a zebra crossing. This issue was taken up with the District Collector three months ago and he had given instructions to the officials concerned. But the problem has not been rectified,” he adds.

Information and indications on roads related to road safety should be a focus area for officials. “No one cares to look into such details. Since there is no accountability no one gives importance to it,” Mr. Kathirmathiyon says. Further, advertisements on such information boards should be removed.

The advertisers name is in larger font that the information on the board in some places. Road contractors and officials should be well-informed on the specifications, he says.
