Linking Kashmir with Afghan peace is reckless: Afghan envoy in US

pardeepdhull@gmail.com

Washington, August 19

Linking the current situation in Kashmir with the ongoing peace efforts in Afghanistan is “reckless, unwarranted and irresponsible”, a top Afghan diplomat has said, slamming her Pakistani counterpart in this regard.

“The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan strongly questions the assertion made by Pakistan’s ambassador to the United States, Asad Majeed Khan, that the ongoing tensions in Kashmir could potentially affect Afghanistan’s peace process,” Roya Rahmani, the Afghan Ambassador to the US, said on Sunday.

“Any such statements that link the evolving situation in Kashmir to the Afghan peace efforts are reckless, unwarranted and irresponsible,” the top Afghan diplomat said in an unusual lengthy statement here.

Asserting that Kashmir is “a bilateral issue” between India and Pakistan, Rahmani said her country believes Pakistan’s motive and insistence to purposely tie Afghanistan to the Kashmir issue is a deliberate attempt to prolong the violence happening on Afghan soil.

“It is a poor excuse used by Pakistan to justify its inaction against the Taliban and to avoid taking a decisive stance against the militant group,” she asserted.

Rahmani said the assertion by the Pakistani Ambassador that the Kashmir issue could compel Pakistan to reposition its troops from its western frontier with Afghanistan to its eastern border with India is “a misleading statement which inaccurately suggests that Afghanistan poses a threat” to Pakistan.

“There is no threat from Afghanistan to Pakistan. The Afghan government sees no credible reason for Pakistan to maintain tens of thousands of military troops on its western frontier,” she said.

“On the contrary, Afghan stability is frequently threatened by Pakistan-based, sanctioned and supported militant and terrorist groups,” Rahmani said.

These groups operate openly from Pakistan-governed spaces and regularly spill over into Afghanistan, she alleged.

“Pakistani authorities should address this problem by undertaking a sincere and forceful law and order measure through police actions inside Pakistan,” she said.

Rahmani said the statement by her Pakistani counterpart runs contrary to the positive and constructive engagement Afghan President Ashraf Ghani had with Prime Minister Imran Khan and Pakistan Army Chief General Qamar Javed Bajwa on his recent visit to the country. PTI
