PM Modi to visit Kochi, Kerala on January 27

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will visit Kochi in Kerala on January 27. During the visit, he will unveil the plaque to mark the dedication to the nation of Integrated Refinery Expansion Complex, BPCL Kochi. He will also lay the foundation stone for Petrochemical Complex at the same venue. PM will inaugurate Mounded Storage Vessel at IOCL LPG bottling plant, Kochi and lay the foundation stone for Skill Development Institute at Ettumanoor.

Integrated Refinery Expansion Complex will be a modern expansion complex and transform Kochi refinery into the largest PSU Refinery in India with world class standards. It will be equipped for the production of cleaner Fuels for India. It will double the production of LPG & diesel and commence production of feedstock for petrochemical projects in this plant.

Mounded Storage Vessel, IOCL LPG Bottling Plant, Kochi will have a total storage capacity 4350 MT. Storage capacity at the plant is enhanced to meet the LPG requirement of nearly 6 days bottling capacity of the plant. It is the safest storage vessel ensuring the highest level of safety for plant and adjacent areas. LPG receipt through the pipeline will bring down movement of LPG tankers on roads.

Petrochemical complex, BPCL Kochi refinery is a Make in India initiative aimed at reducing dependence on imports. Propylene derivative petrochemical & polyol project will catalyze many downstream industries.

Skill Development Institute at Ettumanoor backed by the Ministry of Petrochemical & Natural Gas will provide vocational training and enhance employability and entrepreneurship for deserving youth both in oil & gas and other industries.

This world-class institute will be set up at an eight-acre campus allocated by Government of Kerala. It will have a capacity to skill around 1000 youth per year in 20 different skills.

PM earlier visited Kerala on January 15, 2019, to inaugurate Kollam bypass and also visited Padmanabhaswamy Temple in Thiruvananthapuram.
