Road to Manali/Mandi cleared; exercise caution if visiting

Jalori Pass - You can advance to Shimla via Banjar and then Jibhi. Please note that the route is open only to small vehicles for now. Bajoura (ahead of Kullu) - Thereon, advance to Mandi via Kataoula, proceed to Una via Bhota.

As per the latest reports, the road to Manali/Mandi has just been cleared by the authorities. Efforts are on to move vehicles that have been stuck in Kullu for long now; as of now, only one lane traffic is allowed on the stretch. Travellers are advised to postpone any upcoming plans to the region as more rains are expected.Incessant rainfall over the past few days had snapped road connectivity to Manali and the surrounding areas, also affecting the road from Manali to Leh. Travellers on their way back to Delhi or Chandigarh are advised to exercise caution, especially those on their way back or to Kullu, Manali, Tirthan and Parvati Valley.Reportedly, the road stretches that are closed for now are Mandi - Kullu, Mandi - Jogindernagar (to open soon), Mandi - Chandigarh (closed at Panjipiri and Bilaspur), Mandi - Pathankot, Mandi - Rewalsar, Mandi - Kataula - Bajoura, Kullu - Aut - Luhri, Manali - Keylong. Those planning a road trip from Manali to Ladakh also need to exercise caution and halt further plans till any further notification. A number of landslides and flash floods were reported from places in the state as well as the neighbouring state of Uttarakhand, especially Chamoli.Traffic on the Chandigarh - Manali road was closed on Sunday, leaving hundreds of passengers stranded for hours in pelting rain. As per the reports, some of the travellers on route were stuck near Bilaspur in massive jams that were more than 15 hours long. Amidst all this mayhem, Shimla is seeing a surge in the number of tourists as most people on the way to the hills have taken a detour. The road from Mandi to Shimla, as of now, is all clear and open to vehicular traffic.All buses between Manali and Delhi have either been cancelled or are stuck en route.Those stuck en route Delhi from Manali, can take these alternate routes that are open as of now:
