Shehla Rashid spreading fake news to incite violence in Jammu and Kashmir: Indian Army

Even as the security forces and administration are trying to ensure normalcy in Jammu and Kashmir, Shehla Rashid has levelled a series of fake allegations about torture and high-handedness in the state. The Army has rubbished these allegations in a statement, referring to her charges as "baseless".



Coming down heavily on the Jammu and Kashmir People's Movement leader for spreading disinformation, the Army stated, "Allegations levelled by Shehla Rashid are baseless and rejected. Such unverified and fake news are spread by inimical elements and organisations to incite unsuspecting population."



Alakh Alok Srivastava, a Supreme Court lawyer, on Monday filed a criminal complaint against Rashid, seeking her arrest for spreading fake news against the Army and the government.



The complaint copy stated that Rashid is intentionally spreading fake news with the intention to incite violence in Jammu and Kashmir and in other parts of the country.



It further stated that her tweets are being shared by many Twitter users on international platforms, causing irreparable injury to India's reputation.



The complaint alleged that she has tried to excite disaffection towards the government, which is an offence of sedition under Section 124-A of the Indian Penal Code.



(Vehicles move on Jehangir Chowk-Rambagh flyover after it was thrown up for the public - ANI)



Among other allegations, Shehla had claimed the armed forces were "ransacking" houses of common people and "picking up boys" in Jammu and Kashmir.



She had alleged that four persons were detained by Army men and tortured in Shopian.



In a series of tweets, she quoted "people" as saying Jammu and Kashmir Police has no handle on the law and order situation. "They've been rendered powerless. Everything is in the hands of paramilitary forces," read a tweet by her.



According to Shehla, while petrol and diesel are available in the region, "people have started running out of medicines now".



Government authorities have repeatedly warned people against relying on unverified information.



Several departments, including the Jammu and Kashmir Police, have also intermittently issued statements about the prevailing situation in the region.



While there is unprecedented security cover across Jammu and Kashmir, no major violence has been reported from any part. The government has categorically said that there have been sporadic incidents of protests with not more than 20 people participating in each.



Speaking to Zee News on Sunday, senior IPS officer and Jammu and Kashmir Governor's advisor K Vijay Kumar had said that the situation in the region was getting back to normal, thanks to the new strategy by Union Home Minister Amit Shah, National Security Advisor Ajit Doval and Union Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba.

—(With inputs from agencies)
