Breaking News August 20: ED opposes Ratul Puri's anticipatory bail plea

New Delhi:

Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa will expand his ministry on Tuesday by inducting 17 ministers in the first phase. This will be the first-ever expansion of Yediyurappa's ministry after he assumed office on July 26 and proved his government's majority on the floor of the Assembly on July 29. Meanwhile, the White House is considering cutting taxes or revering tariffs to head off a recession, US media reported, despite President Donald Trump's insistence on the economy's health.

Check all the LIVE UPDATES here:

3.30 pm: Agusta Westland money laundering case: Businessman Ratul Puri being taken to Rouse Avenue Court from Enforcement Directorate (ED) office in Delhi.

3:00 pm: AF cautious and alert, says Air Chief BS Dhanoa amid Indo-Pak tensions.

2:50 pm: A leopard cub was rescued, by police and forest department, from a residential area in Pithoragarh today.

Uttarakhand: A leopard cub was rescued, by police and forest department, from a residential area in Pithoragarh today. pic.twitter.com/He5TeM0pDT — ANI (@ANI) August 20, 2019

2:45 pm: The Enforcement Directorate on Tuesday opposed the anticipatory bail plea of businessman Ratul Puri, the nephew of Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath, in a money-laundering case related to the VVIP chopper scam.

2:40 pm: A high-level committee, chaired by Union Home Minister Amit Shah, approves Rs 4432.10 Crore of additional central assistance to Odisha, Karnataka and Himachal Pradesh

2:35 pm: Three construction workers injured after structures on an under-construction building, at the premises of Coimbatore Institute of Technology, collapsed in Coimbatore today. All the injured have been taken to a hospital.

2:30 pm: Home Minister Amit Shah reviewed the issues related to final publication of National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Assam. The review meeting was attended by the Chief Minister of Assam, Union Home Secretary, Chief Secretary Assam and senior officers.

2:20 pm: CS Vaidyanathan appearing for 'Ram Lalla Virajman' further added that pillar bases found by Archaeological Survey of India establish existence of a huge structure at site of Babri Masjid and other evidence reveal that it was a Hindu religious structure.

2:15 pm: Jharkhand Chief Minister Raghubar Das attended a review meeting of State Nutrition Mission, with Union Minister for Textiles and Women & Child Development, Smriti Irani, today.

1:40 pm: Himachal Pradesh Minister RL Markanda airlifted from Kaza to Shimla, he was stuck in Kaza for the last 3 days. He says, "I was stuck in Kaza, Spiti for last 3 days as roads were closed due to rainfall,127 ppl were also stuck in Chandrataal due to snowfall who have been rescued."

1:30 pm: A Special Court in Mumbai convicts Rajendra Nikhalje alias Chhota Rajan for attempt to murder of hotelier BR Shetty. Arguments on quantum of sentence to commence later today.

1:10 pm: Union Home Minister and BJP president Amit Shah, BJP working president JP Nadda, and BJP national general secretary (organisation) BL Santosh are holding a meeting with election in-charges of the states of Haryana, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Delhi.

1:10 pm: Pakistan violated ceasefire in Krishna Ghati sector in Poonch at about 11 am today.

1:05 pm: Delhi High Court reserves order on anticipatory bail plea of businessman Ratul Puri in Agusta Westland money laundering case.

1:00 pm: The joint mountaineering expedition 'Pulkit' of Eastern and North Eastern Frontiers ITBP climb towards the summit of Mt Kangchengyo (6889 M) in North Sikkim, on 14 August. The 32 member mountaineers team was led by Digvijay Singh, DC.

#WATCH The joint mountaineering expedition 'Pulkit' of Eastern and North Eastern Frontiers ITBP climb towards the summit of Mt Kangchengyo (6889 M) in North Sikkim, on 14 August. The 32 member mountaineers team was led by Digvijay Singh, DC. pic.twitter.com/fs6LxRrvJz — ANI (@ANI) August 20, 2019

12:45 pm: Maharashtra CM, Devendra Fadnavis paid tribute to Former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi on his 75th birth anniversary, at the Mantralaya, today.

12:30 pm: I have no connection with the business they are doing. To me, it appears to be a purely mala fide action. I have full faith that courts will take corrective stand in this: Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister, Kamal Nath on arrest of his nephew and businessman Ratul Puri.

12:24 pm: Jharkhand Chief Minister Raghubar Das met Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Delhi, today.

12:15 pm: Country has been witnessing some disturbing trends over the past few years. These trends of growing intolerance,communal polarization,growing incidents of violent crimes propelled by hatred of certain groups & mob violence can only damage our polity: Former PM Dr. Manmohan Singh.

12:10 pm: Congress Interim President Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi, Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla, LK Advani, Subramanian Swamy, Ghulam Nabi Azad, and other MPs pay tribute to former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi on his 75th birth anniversary, in the Parliament.

12:09 pm: SC issues notices to Centre, Twitter, Google & YouTube on plea filed by Facebook for transfer of petitions pending in High Courts across the country that demand to interlink Aadhaar database with social media profiles for authentication of identity,to SC; Next hearing on Sept 13.

12:00 pm: A 14.4-feet long python was rescued today and released back into the wild by the forest department with the help from a rescuer, in Nagaon's Rekapahad.

Assam: A 14.4-feet long python was rescued today and released back into the wild by the forest department with the help from a rescuer, in Nagaon's Rekapahad. pic.twitter.com/14BfDUA5fy — ANI (@ANI) August 20, 2019

11:50 am: 6000-7000 people from low-lying areas have been shifted to 1100 tents, food and sanitation facilities being provided. Their health check-up are also being conducted: ADM East, Arun Gupta.

11:40 am: Next major event will happen on 2nd September when the lander will be separated from the orbiter. On 3rd September we will have a small maneuver for about 3 seconds to ensure that the systems of the lander are running normally, says ISRO Chief K Sivan.

11:35 am: Chandrayaan2 mission crossed a major milestone today, the precise lunar orbit insertion maneuver was carried out at 9 am for about 30 minutes and Chandrayaan 2 was precisely inserted in the defined orbit, says ISRO Chief K Sivan.

11:30 am: National Investigation Agency Spokesperson on alleged bribery charges against 3 NIA officers in connection with a terror funding case: An inquiry into the allegations is being conducted by a DIG rank officer.The 3 concerned officials transferred out to ensure a fair probe.

11:22 am: 2 fishermen rescued by a team of Municipal Corporation & Fire Brigade after water level suddenly rose in a water stream, following the opening of Kerwa Dam's gates.

#WATCH Bhopal: 2 fishermen rescued by a team of Municipal Corporation & Fire Brigade after water level suddenly rose in a water stream, following the opening of Kerwa Dam's gates. #MadhyaPradesh pic.twitter.com/XRmHka3YKN — ANI (@ANI) August 20, 2019

11:18 am: Indian Air Force Chief Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa on the three year extension given to Pakistan Army Chief Gen Qamar Javed Bajwa: I don’t know what is their system and how it works.

11:15 am: Moser Baer statement: The arrest by Enforcement Directorate is unfortunate. Moser Baer had operated in accordance with all legal compliances and this case now, when Moser Baer is in National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT), is motivated.

10:55 am: We've just approved the proposal for providing test facilities of govt entities to the private defence sector. A formal govt order to be issued, this has removed various bottlenecks which used to come in way of using test facilities by private entities says Defence Minister Rajnath Singh.

10:53 am: Water level of Yamuna river rises to 205.94 meters, 0.61 meters above the danger level of 205.33 meters; Old Loha Pul closed for pedestrians and vehicular traffic.

Delhi: Water level of Yamuna river rises to 205.94 meters, 0.61 meters above the danger level of 205.33 meters; Old Loha Pul closed for pedestrians and vehicular traffic. pic.twitter.com/gZ7WAQwsPb — ANI (@ANI) August 20, 2019

10:49 am: Supreme Court commences 8th day of hearing in Ayodhya case.

10:43 am: CN Ashwath Narayan and Govind M Karjol take oath as Karnataka Cabinet Ministers, in Bengaluru.

C N Ashwath Narayan & Govind M Karjol take oath as Karnataka Cabinet Ministers, in Bengaluru. pic.twitter.com/8rTgPtGudV — ANI (@ANI) August 20, 2019

10:40 am: Defence Minister Rajnath Singh and IAF Chief Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa launch books on indigenisation efforts of defence equipment by services at a seminar on indigenisation plans of the Indian Air Force.

10:35 am: AgustaWestland money laundering case: A special court in Delhi defers the hearing on Enforcement Directorate plea seeking bail cancellation of Rajiv Saxena for August 29.

10:30 am: Indian Air Force is a technologically advanced and extremely potent force, the recent offensive strike against terrorist outfits in our neighbourhood speaks volumes about the reach and lethality of the formidable arm of the Indian Armed Forces, says Defence Minister Rajnath Singh.

10:22 am: 2 workers killed, 4-5 workers feared trapped after a part of Jhilimili coal mines in Koriya district caves in; rescue work underway, police present at the spot.

10:18 am: We can't wait for indigenous technology to replace obsolete warfighting equipment,neither will it be prudent to import every defence equipment from abroad. What we're doing is replacing our high-end obsolete weapons with indigenously developed ones, Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa.

10:05 am: Lunar Orbit Insertion of Chandrayaan2 maneuver was completed successfully today at 0902 hrs IST.

10:00 am: Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) is conducting search & rescue operation in Tikochi and Arakot in Uttarkashi district on the banks of river Tons, following cloudburst in the area. One body recovered, 4 vehicles feared trapped under debris.

Uttarakhand: Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) is conducting search & rescue operation in Tikochi and Arakot in Uttarkashi district on the banks of river Tons, following cloudburst in the area. One body recovered, 4 vehicles feared trapped under debris. pic.twitter.com/Jk7iaOA9vX — ANI (@ANI) August 20, 2019

9:55 am: Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel flags off & participates in "Sadbhavna run" on the occasion of 75th birth anniversary of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi.

9:45 am: National Highway 3 (Manali-Leh) blocked after a landslide occurred in Marhi near Rohtang, Kullu district. An oil tanker got stuck under a boulder following the landslide.

9:39 am: Indian Air Force chopper has taken off from Jollygrant for Mori block in Uttarkashi carrying food material.

9:20 am: Zakir Naik banned from giving speeches in Malaysia: Reports

9:05 am: Businessman Ratul Puri was arrested by Enforcement Directorate (ED) in connection with a bank fraud case, yesterday. He will be produced before a court, today.

9:00 am: Sri Lankan Navy apprehend 4 Indian fishermen from Kottaipattinam in Pudukottai district near Delft Island today.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
