Siddaramaiah warns of protest if govt cuts down Anna Bhagya rice

‘Modi ignoring K’taka’

BENGALURU: The Congress on Saturday threatened to launch a protest if the Yediyurappa government goes ahead with its plan to reduce the quantity of rice provided to BPL families under the Anna Bhagya scheme in the state.“There is a discussion at government level to cut down the 7kg of free rice being offered to the poor and divert funds to the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi scheme. We’ll not sit quite of Yediyurappa tampers with the scheme,” said former chief minister Siddaramaiah on Saturday.Siddaramaiah said the government should find funds elsewhere, instead of cutting down the quantity of rice. “The poor will not tolerate this move and the Congress will protest the decision,” he added.Yediyurappa had recently hinted that his government was planning to review the scheme to check its misuse. However, facing criticism, the CM on Friday issued a clarification stating that there’s no such plan to stop any pro-people schemes, including Anna Bhagya.Soon after taking over as the CM, Yediyurappa had announced Rs 4,000 cash incentive to farmers in addition to the Centre’s Rs 6,000 for the scheme. “It’s a good scheme. But it shouldn’t be at the cost of food given to the poor,” he added.In 2013, Anna Bhagya scheme was unveiled by Siddaramaiah by offering 30kg of rice at Re one to nearly one crore poor families across the state. At present, around 1.2 crore people are its beneficiaries. “There was a plan to increase the quantity of rice from 7kg to 10kg if the Congress had returned to power in 2018 assembly polls,” Siddaramaiah claimed.‘Release fund for Indira Canteens The former CM slammed the BJP government for “not releasing funds for Indira Canteens in Bengaluru”. This was another pet scheme launched by Siddaramaiah ahead of the assembly polls. “The government is not providing the fund, which is around Rs 200 crore per annum, and instead asked the BBMP to bear it. The state should fund it,” he said.Siddaramaiah also accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi of ignoring flood-hit Karnataka . “The Centre is unmoved even after seeing the severity of the flood. It should immediately declare this as a national disaster and release Rs 5,000 crore. If Yediyurappa is scared to counter Modi, he should lead an all-party delegation,” he said.In Hassan, KPCC chief Dinesh Gundurao, who is touring flood-affected areas in Malnad district, said the Modi government is focusing more on modifying laws and amending the Constitution rather than addressing natural calamities. “The PM is yet to carry out an aerial survey in Karnataka,” he said.
