Alert in Ludhiana as Sutlej swells, water level rises seven times in a day

The district administration said a warning has been sounded in about 23 villages around the Satluj and all emergency measures were in place

LUDHIANA: Villagers living near the Sutlej were on their toes ever since the news of release of more than 2 lakh cusecs of water from Ropar waterworks into the river spread on Sunday. As the day proceeded, the river swelled, with its level rising almost seven times in a single day.

Executive engineer, drainage, Harjot Walia said, “The water level in Sutlej was 38,000 cusecs on Saturday. It reached 2,30,000 cusecs on Sunday. The previous record water inflow was 2,25,000 cusecs in 1988 when Ludhiana witnessed floods. But this time, the situation is under control as we have adequate arrangements in place. All the river banks have been strengthened to hold water.”

Sources said it took about six hours for this water to reach Sutlej and since morning, groups of residents of different villages of Ludhiana were visiting the banks to keep a check on the rising level and update their fellows.

Sikandar Singh of Ladhowal village said, “I have been camping here since morning and giving hourly updates to villagers on phone. We were here on Saturday as well and the water level has risen quite a lot in a span of few hours. We are living under constant threat of flood and can do nothing except pray for safety.”

The district administration said a warning has been sounded in about 23 villages around the Sutlej and all emergency measures were in place. Cabinet minister Bharat Bhushan Ashu and deputy commissioner Pradeep Kumar Agrawal, along with other officials, visited the areas adjoining the river to review the ground situation and preventive measures.

Ashu directed the authorities to take immediate action if locals report about any breach and remain in the field to monitor the situation. He further said the situation of Ludhiana was better as compared to other districts, so there was no need for evacuation.Meanwhile DC Ludhiana Pradeep Agrawal urged residents not to believe in rumours. He appealed them to share only confirmed information.

However in one untoward incident locals in Koom Khurd village used logs to build a makeshift bridge to cross the drain after a concrete bridge connecting 5-6 nearby villages collapsed today morning. Shiromani Akal Dal MLA Ranjeet Dhillon who reached the village to inspect the spot criticized Punjab government and said, " Poor people of the state are suffering and bearing the brunt of nature's fury but leaders like chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh are taking helicopter rides and claiming they monitoring the flood situation and everything is under control. I bet not even single piece of brick will be laid here to reconstruct the collapsed bridge"


