Supreme Court cautions government on linking Aadhaar with social media

NEW DELHI | MUMBAI: The Supreme Court cautioned the government about the privacy implications of linking social media accounts with Aadhaar after attorney-general KK Venugopal created a stir with his remarks suggesting that such a move would help stamp out crime, terrorism and fake news among other scourges. The court agreed to hear the pleas of Facebook and WhatsApp seeking the transfer of four public interest litigations (PILs) on such a linkage that are pending before the Madras, Bombay and Madhya Pradesh high courts.The platforms wanted the court to resolve the question of whether this was feasible and appropriate under various central laws. Messaging app WhatsApp is owned by social media platform Facebook.The bench, comprising justices Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose, issued notices to the central and the Tamil Nadu governments besides other entities such as the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Trai) after arguments that touched upon the merits and technical aspects of moving the cases to the top court.The Supreme Court will next hear the case on September 13 after getting responses from all stakeholders.In the interim, the bench allowed the Madras High Court to conclude proceedings in the case before it without passing any final, definitive ruling.Though the PILs had sought linking of social media accounts with Aadhaar, the Madras High Court had gone beyond this issue to examine whether such a move could resolve issues such as cyberbullying besides ascertaining intermediary liability to trace the originator of any message causing mischief.The social media companies moved the top court after 18 hearings in the high court. Venugopal, the central government’s top law officer, cited this to oppose the move to have the case transferred to the top court at what he said was the fag end of the hearing in the Madras High Court. Appearing for the state of Tamil Nadu, he said the top court should instead await the high court ruling before delving into the issue.In this context, he referred to the challenges faced by the government in dealing with problems such as the reported addiction among youth of games such as the Blue Whale Challenge.“Criminals have to be identified,” he said. “Crime, criminal investigations, law and order are state subjects. The Union of India is struggling. So many people have died due to the Blue Whale Challenge. No one knows who the creator is!” He seemed to suggest that various problems could be resolved if the originators of suspect messages were identified. This would warrant the companies breaking encryption codes, which they say is impossible.Justice Gupta said this would impinge on the “privacy” of citizens. The court will eventually have to balance the security needs of the state with the citizen’s fundamental right to privacy, he said.WhatsApp was represented by senior advocate Kapil Sibal and Facebook by senior advocate Mukul Rohatgi . Both counsel expressed fears about the privacy implications of any such move and said that multiple high court rulings would only add to the confusion on this score. This would also create an uneven privacy protection regime across the country. The companies also pointed out that information passing through them were currently encrypted and could not be accessed by third parties, not even themselves.This issue had cropped up after Tamil Nadu police had in the PILs claimed that they needed access to the originators of fake news and those encouraging criminal activity. The social media sites said they can only pass on basic account information to law enforcement agencies in urgent situations or under court orders. They said messages can’t be accessed because of encryption protocols aimed at protecting user privacy. The high court had enlisted the help of an Indian Institute of Technology-Madras professor who however said that the information could be accessed.All these issues will be examined by the top court if it decides to transfer the cases to itself. The social media companies argued that any court directions would have global ramifications for them, urging the Supreme Court to transfer the cases to itself.Digital advocacy group Internet Freedom Foundation (IFF), which had been allowed to become part of the high court case, opposed Aadhaar linking. “We have taken a categorical stand that linking Aadhaar to social media imperils users,” said IFF director Apar Gupta.A lawyer who specialises in technology matters said the move by the social media platforms to approach the top court was a “risky manoeuvre.”“Now it will become a high-profile matter,” he said. “The Madras High Court is in advanced stages on the case. The whole case hearing will have to be restarted as the bench will be new. Courts will not wait for the new intermediary guidelines to come out.”In another case pending before justice RF Nariman, another bench of the top court asked the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to respond within six weeks on whether the Google and WhatsApp payment systems were complying with data localisation norms. The court also asked the central government to find out if social media platforms could appoint grievance officers based outside India.WhatsApp had appointed a grievance officer located overseas after NGO Centre of Accountability and Systemic Change (CASC) moved the court demanding that it do so in compliance with Indian laws. CASC lawyer Virag Gupta intervened in the Aadhaar linking and encryption issue today on behalf of RSS ideologue KN Govindacharya.He accused the two companies of being the worst violators of the privacy of their users.
