ABVP installs Savarkar bust, sparks a row

Ahead of the Delhi University students' union polls, the RSS-affiliated ABVP put up statues of Veer Savarkar, Subhas Chandra Bose and Bhagat Singh overnight, right outside the gate of the varsity's Arts Faculty in North campus.

The statues were put up by ABVP-led Delhi University Students' Union President Shakti Singh without approval from the Delhi University administration. Shakti Singh said that they had approached the administration repeatedly for permission to install the statues but there was no response from them.

"We wrote a couple of letters to the varsity administration. We even met the Vice Chancellor in March. But when we noticed that the students' union is not being taken seriously, we had to helplessly install the statues in the hope that the youth would be inspired by them," said Shakti, adding that the busts were installed on Tuesday morning.

The student leader said that they installed the bust to erase the false narrative spread against such freedom fighters. "We demanded earlier that the room below the vice chancellor's office where Bhagat Singh was held hostage for a few days be made public. And also, his statue be installed inside the campus," said Shakti.

The incident has led to an ideological clash within the campus. Until Monday evening, the incident did not lead to any tension but the students did come in for a shock because there was nothing outside the arts faculty until a day before but when they came to college on Monday morning, they found the statues installed.

Notably, one requires permission not just from DU but also from the civic authorities to put up such statues in a public place, which was not done in this case. The incident gives rise to the question that is the ABVP trying to legitimise Savarkar's ideas in the garb of Bhagat Singh and Subhash Chandra Bose? Also, does the ABVP to plan to fight the coming university elections on BJP's nationalist ideology? Notably, the DU students' union polls will be held next month do the dates for the same have not yet been announced.

Also Read | ABVP, NSUI protest DU college notice asking students not to attend political rallies

Also Watch | ABVP students assault professor , blacken face
