This will be quite a challenge: Legal advisor at ICJ raises doubt over Pakistan's 'genocide' claims in Kashmir

ICJ at The Hague

Key Highlights Reema Omer, legal advisor, South Asia, at the ICJ, questioned how Pakistan would overcome its 'jurisdiction-related issue' on Kashmir Omer also said that proving 'genocide' in Kashmir could be 'quite a challenge'

New Delhi: Shortly after Pakistan's foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi claimed that Islamabad will approach the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on the Kashmir case, Reema Omer, legal advisor at the ICJ, has questioned how Pakistan would overcome the "jurisdiction-related issue" on Kashmir.

Taking to Twitter, the legal advisor, South Asia at the ICJ said that it would be "a challenge given how genocide is defined under international law". "SMQ (Shah Mehmood Qureshi) clarified on ASKKS that the Govt. is considering approaching the ICJ against India regarding #Kashmir using the ground of 'genocide'. Jurisdictional hurdles aside, this will be quite a challenge given how genocide is defined under international law," she said in a tweet.

Earlier, after its claims were rejected by the United Nations Security Council (UNSC), Pakistan's FM Qureshi had said that Islamabad will take the Kashmir case to the ICJ. "We have decided to take Kashmir case to the International Court of Justice," a Pakistani newspaper had quoted Qureshi as saying.

"Important statement. Would really help if SMQ could clarify how Pakistan plans to overcome jurisdiction issues related to taking India to ICJ on #Kashmir, particularly in light of India’s declarations under Art 36(2) of ICJ statute + Court’s judgment in the 'Aerial Incident' case (sic)," Omer said in response to Qureshi's claim.

RELATED NEWS Humiliation at UNSC not enough, Pakistan now decides to take Kashmir issue to ICJ

Last week, the UNSC dismissed Islamabad's complaints over Indian actions in Jammu and Kashmir. India later reiterated its long-stated stand that Kashmir is a bilateral issue between New Delhi and Islamabad. Pakistan has already downgraded diplomatic relations with India over New Delhi's decision to dilute Article 370 and revoke the special status of Jammu and Kashmir.

Meanwhile, on Tuesday, US President Donald Trump offered to mediate in Kashmir dispute. "There are tremendous problems between those 2 countries. I'll do the best I can to mediate or do something. Great relationship with both of them. But they aren't exactly friends at this moment (sic)," Trump had said in an interview with a news broadcaster.
