Man swept away, fresh breaches as Punjab sees 1988-like floods

Fearing theft, many villagers stay back

GIDARPINDI (JALANDHAR): As Punjab battled the monsoon fury, reminiscent of the state's worst floods in 1988, one person was swept away in the Satluj at Mandhala village on Monday late evening while a major breach occurred at Saroopwal village on Tuesday morning nullifying efforts by villages to plug the hole. The Jalandhar administration has sought the help of the Indian Air Force to airdrop food packets to those marooned in flood-hit areas.With four fresh breaches in Jalandhar, the number of breaches in the district has risen to eight. In Jalandhar district alone, crops on 30,000 acres are under water and around 50 villages marooned.The villagers said they had tried to stop Vijay, 32, from venturing near the edge of the breakwater, but he didn't heed their warning. He lost his balance and fell into the water and was swept away. The NDRF personnel tried to look for him, but it was too late. Jalandhar (Rural) SSP Navjot Singh Mahal said they were trying to locate his body.The villagers said the volume of flood water reminded them of the floods in 1988 when Bhakra Beas Management Board had released water without any warning, leading to huge loss of life, crops and material.The villagers said this time the government’s warning and alerts by officials had saved lives and material.“The quantum of water was less in 2008 floods. This time, it is like the 1988 floods,” said Swaran Singh of Gidarpindi village. This view was echoed by others as they watched the water gushing in their fields. The Railway staff were trying to dsave a railway track passing through the village.“Throughout the night we worked to plug the breakwater, but a breach took place at around 7.30 am,” said farmer Jaswinder Singh. The farmers said that some members of all families have stayed back in the flooded houses fearing theft.Farmers of Gidarpindi and Mandhala villages said desilting was required below the old bridge on the Satluj. Santokh Singh, 54, said that they had seen even tractor trolleys passing below the bridge, but now most of the 21 spans were filled with silt. “Silting under the bridge increases pressure on the banks,” added Baldev Singh Even as Jalandhar DC Varinder Kumar Sharma and SSP Mahal along with Shahkot MLA Hardev Singh Laadi Sherowalia went to the marooned villages on motorboats and motorcycles, several residents refused to leave their houses. However, the officials persuaded quite a few of them to shift out women and children to safer places. Kapurthala administration officials also said that people were not ready to leave their flooded houses unattended.Jalandhar DC Varinder Kumar Sharma said despite repeated efforts by the district administration some people had not left their homes. “We have taken the help of Indian Air Force to airdrop food packets to the needy.Ten teams of Army, National Disaster Response Force and state disaster response force are evacuating the people,” he said.
