The man in the shadows: The legendary RN Kao who founded RAW

RN Kao

Key Highlights Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, keenly conscious of the shortcomings in the existing intelligence structure in India, formed the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) in 1968. Kao warned president Sheikh Mujibur Rahman that some Bangladeshi army officers were plotting a coup against him. The merger of Sikkim into the Indian union in 1973 also had Kao’s stamp all over it.

Union Home Minister Amit Shah delivered the RN Kao memorial lecture on Tuesday (August 20). Kao, who died in 2002, was a legendary spy chief who led the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) when it was formed and shepherded India’s intelligence community at the height of the Cold War. Many veteran intelligence officers who subsequently reached the top of their profession learnt the intricate details of their craft from Kao. No wonder they are often called the ‘Kao Boys’.

Here’s what we know about the man who stayed mostly in the shadows in his lifetime, but for people who knew him, was a legend.

Indira Gandhi’s first choice

Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, keenly conscious of the shortcomings in the existing intelligence structure in India, formed the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) in 1968, the country’s premier external spy agency. Rameshwar Nath Kao, a Kashmiri Pandit who had been close to Nehru while in the Intelligence Bureau, was Indira’s natural choice to head the new agency.

Part of the ‘Kashmiri gang’

A brilliant but very low-profile man, Kao became a part of the Kashmiri group that Indira Gandhi depended on for advice on all matters. The other members of this exclusive club included DP Dhar, TN Kaul and PN Haksar. Indira Gandhi is believed to have had complete trust in Kao and the intelligence inputs he provided.

Kao’s finest hour

Kao was one of the brains behind the success of India’s 1971 Bangladesh campaign. RAW, under Kao’s guidance, trained tens of thousands of Mukti Bahini volunteers, the rag-tag force that together with the Indian army helped create Bangladesh. It is widely believed that a few years later, Kao warned president Sheikh Mujibur Rahman that some Bangladeshi army officers were plotting a coup against him. It’s a warning that Rahman did not pay heed to. He should have. Rahman and his family were massacred in a coup weeks later by rogue army officers.

A profound legacy

Kao had many firsts to his credit. He helped set up Ghana’s intelligence agency called the Foreign Service Research Bureau in the 1950s, on Nehru’s request. The merger of Sikkim into the Indian union in 1973 also had Kao’s stamp all over it. He correctly summarised that timing was of the essence as other countries in the region, notably China, were starting to take an interest in the Himalayan kingdom. Though he did not formally hold a prominent position during Rajiv Gandhi’s tenure as PM, Kao did the groundwork which culminated in Rajiv Gandhi’s historic visit to China in 1988.

The ‘Kao Boys’

One of Kao’s greatest legacies was the team he built from scratch. The ‘Kao Boys’ as they were called served India’s various intelligence agencies in multiple capacities, including as heads of RAW and the IB. The men who worked with Kao still remember his fierce intelligence and ability to command loyalty. In a moving obituary published after Kao’s death in January 2002 in The Indian Express, the then National Security Advisor MK Narayanan, wrote: “For most of us who spent a lifetime in security and intelligence, he was the ideal and our inspiration. With his passing away, the age of civility in intelligence will in all likelihood come to an end.”

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
