Pakistan Petitions The UN To Remove Priyanka Chopra As Goodwill Ambassador

> Entertainment

Priyanka Chopra is a sucker for controversies (pun intended). The one she's courting recently has got to do with her status as the UN Goodwill Ambassador for Peace and how her actions are not exactly aligned with her role in that capacity. What's more, she's now being accused by Pakistanis for propagating nuclear war against their country.

Trouble began brewing for the desi girl when she recently attended BeautyCon LA in Los Angeles, California. During a fan interaction, a Pakistani woman in the audience called Priyanka out for her tweet from February, where she cheered on the Indian Armed Forces after the Balakot Air Strike. She called Priyanka a 'hypocrite'.

SEE ALSO: Why Priyanka Chopra's Appearance At BeautyCon LA Prompted An India-Pakistan Debate

Priyanka's response was an apology layered with justification that did not go down well with the woman who asked the question, as well as the Internet, and there was backlash.

Now, Pakistan's Human Rights Minister, Shireen Mazari, has drafted an official complaint to the United Nations to remove Priyanka Chopra as the UN Goodwill Ambassador.

SEE ALSO: Sonam Kapoor Trolled For Saying It's “Better To Be Quiet” On Kashmir Conflict. Defends Comment Anyway!

".... her [Priyanka's] jingoism and support for violations by the Modi government of international conventions and UN Security Council resolutions on Kashmir, as well as support for war, including a nuclear war, undermines the credibility of the UN position to which she been elevated."

Sent letter to UNICEF chief regarding UN Goodwill Ambassador for Peace Ms Chopra pic.twitter.com/PQ3vwYjTVz — Shireen Mazari (@ShireenMazari1) August 21, 2019

"Unless she is removed immediately, the very idea of a UN goodwill ambassador for peace becomes a mockery globally."

This isn't Priyanka's first strike either; earlier too, her role as the UN ambassador has been questioned, usually for her lack of tact. What's more, the outrage against Priyanka exists on both sides of the border, and several Indians also believe that her tweet was insensitive and not apt for someone in a position like hers.

The tense situations currently between India and Pakistan, because of the abrogation of Article 370 in Jammu & Kashmir, may have also played a part in the heated debate over this issue.

Artwork: Dhawal Bhanushali / Mashable India
