The Life Story Of Nikola Tesla, An Underappreciated Scientist We Have A Lot To Thank For

“I do not think there is any thrill that can go through the human heart like that felt by the inventor as he sees some creation of the brain unfolding to success... Such emotions make a man forget food, sleep, friends, love, everything.”

This quote by Nikola Tesla pretty much sums up his whole life. Born in what is now known as Croatia, Tesla grew up with a mother who was a bit of an inventor herself. She would make tools and mechanical devices that helped with household chores. Tesla was always inspired by his mother and often credited her for his prolific memory. In fact, his ability to do integral calculus in his head often made his high school teachers think that he was cheating but really, Tesla was just a genius.

Also read: World's Oldest Nobel Prize Winner, 96-Year-Old Scientist Will Make Electricity Cheap For All

Famous Biographies

His father, who was a priest, wanted Tesla to join the priesthood as well but Tesla caught cholera right after graduation in 1873. He wasn’t just bedridden but also was close to dying multiple times. His sad father then told him he’ll send him to an engineering school if he recovers. Unfortunately, he was conscripted for the army which made him run away from home and he actually spent time just hiding in the woods. It was in 1875 that he could finally join a college in Austria and even got scholarship for it.

He worked extremely hard during his first year and to the extent that his professors often sent his father letters warning him that Tesla might die of overwork. And well, their warnings were not baseless because he worked from 3am to 11pm and didn’t even take weekends off. However, Tesla never really graduated because he got involved with gambling.

He got over his addiction and found himself working in Budapest with a telegraph company. He worked really hard given his love for technology and was soon given the chief electrician position. However, he left for a better opportunity with Continental Edison Company in Paris. He really had a knack for everything technology and in no time, he was already visiting multiple facilities of the company to overlook any engineering issues.

latest

In 1884, Tesla went to the US to work with Edison Machine Works, a manufacturing unit. That’s when his struggle really began. Now, he was an inventor and the struggle for him wasn’t regarding his creativity. Rather, his struggle pertained to investment issues and patents. Tesla might have met Edison only a couple of times but Edison apparently told Tesla that if he was able to improve his DC, he’d be given a hefty amount. Once Tesla was done with the work, Edison refused to pay him the money, saying it was only a practical joke. Tesla left immediately and never looked back.

The company he started next was with the help of two investors but unfortunately, they took little interest in what Tesla thought was his groundbreaking project. He wanted to make the usage of electricity more widespread and efficient. Hence, his aim was to come up with alternating current which is something we use today. However, the investors backed out pretty much after he had set up operations in 1886 and he even lost his patents to them. He was left penniless and had to work multiple menial jobs to survive. In that moment, he later recalled, he felt like all his education was a mockery.

Also read: Shower Was Invented In The 1800s Because Doctors Thought It Cured Mental Illness. No Kidding!

missedinhistory

It was in 1887 that he was able to set up Tesla Electric Company with the help of two investors again. It was definitely difficult for Tesla for he had decided to compete with Edison’s DC or direct current technique. Edison, as we all know, was a rather famous inventor and to even convince someone that his method wasn’t efficient enough was like sin. Edison knew of Tesla’s efforts since he had worked with Edison’s company but believed that it was highly impractical.

A historic moment took place when it came to lighting the Chicago World’s Fair in 1893. Edison and Tesla’s investors both submitted quotes with Edison saying he could light the whole fair for $554,000, while they said it could be done for $399,000. Tesla’s technology won the contract, and after the fair AC became more popular and, eventually, the dominant electrical system that we still use today.
