Minister sparks debate over India's nuclear weapons policy

Known to weigh his words, Indian Defence Minister Rajnath Singh has sparked a debate with a comment indicating that India's two-decade-old no-first-use (NFU) policy on nuclear weapons is not cast in stone. The ambiguous comment has been interpreted as a calibrated warning to Pakistan amid heightened tensions between the two countries following New Delhi's move to revoke Jammu and Kashmir's autonomous status earlier this month.

On Aug 16, Mr Singh visited the Indian nuclear test site of Pokhran, in Rajasthan's Thar desert, where he said: "Till today, our nuclear policy is 'no first use'. What happens in future depends on the circumstances." In a separate tweet, he noted that India has "strictly adhered to this doctrine".

This is not the first time that a re-appraisal of India's NFU policy has been hinted at. In 2016, the late Manohar Parrikar, who was then the country's defence minister, said that India should use its nuclear powers "responsibly" instead of stressing "no first use". This was later dismissed as his personal view by a Defence Ministry spokesman. No such denial has been issued so far in response to Mr Singh's remark.

These as well as other remarks by high-level functionaries contradicting India's NFU stand have led some experts to conclude that the policy has effectively been hollowed out.

"NFU isn't dead, but it's now meaningless. This has been a long time coming, but it's impossible to deny that a pillar of India's nuclear doctrine - NFU - is crumbling," tweeted Dr Vipin Narang, an associate professor of political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a member of its Security Studies Programme.

However, Air Vice-Marshal (Retired) Manmohan Bahadur of the Indian Air Force believes one should not be alarmed by Mr Singh's statement, saying that it essentially just indicates that a review of NFU will be carried out if required.

"The Americans have a periodic Nuclear Posture Review that reassesses the role of their nuclear weapons. The Chinese have started doing it now. So what's wrong with what the Defence Minister said?" he told The Straits Times.

A commitment to not be the first to use a nuclear weapon has been India's publicly stated policy since 1999. Its nuclear doctrine says "nuclear weapons will only be used in retaliation against a nuclear attack on Indian territory or on Indian forces anywhere".

However, the doctrine adds that India's "nuclear retaliation to a first strike will be massive and designed to inflict unacceptable damage".
