22 students land in hospital after ‘bad’ midday meal

As many as 22 students and the principal of Rambhau Mhalgi School in Katraj were rushed to Bharati Hospital on Wednesday after they suffered from continuous bouts of loose motions and nausea after consuming the midday meals. While their condition is stable, questions have been raised on the quality of food — which has been quizzed by the principal himself since last four days. Health officials believe that food poisoning has been the major cause of the bout.They told Mirror that students’ and the principal’s condition deteriorated after they feasted on khichadi around 11.30 am at the school. Initially, students from classes VIII, IX and X succumbed to the ordeal. The number increased slowly, following which they were hospitalised.~~70776291~~Sanjay Lalwani, the medical director of Bharati Hospital, stated that it seems to be an incident of food poisoning. It was conveyed to the officials concerned. “There is nothing to worry as everyone is stable. The students along with a teacher were rushed to the hospital when they complained of vomiting and loose motions after they allegedly consumed the midday meal. We had kept everyone under observation and later in the evening, 18 students were discharged.”Four students were kept under observation. While Bhakti Jagtap (15) and Viraj Kumbhar (13) are admitted in the ward, Pooja Shinde (15) is admitted in a paediatric surgical day unit. Another student, Khajappa Lalge, has been admitted in the paediatric intensive care unit. “Lalge is holding stable, but has suffered through dehydration due to vomiting and loose motion,” Lalwani said.The midday meal was prepared by Rajani, a self-help group that has been awarded the contract for centralised kitchen. Following this unfortunate incident, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued a ‘stop doing business activity notice’ to the group.They had been supplying meals to the schools since last week, which, according to principal Sampada Kirkole, had not been up to the mark. She had been complaining about the quality of the khichadi specifically. “I had informed the contractor and even the officials about the quality of the meal as it was not good. The earlier provider had maintained a standard, compared to which the khichadi seemed odd. When I tried it, I felt sick,” she said.The incident has prompted a medico-legal case following the incident, as it has unleashed a wave of fear among parents and authorities, who have been questioning the quality of the food. Deputy director of education Meenakshi Raut, who also visited the hospital, said that the self-help group has been given a warning and that the further action depends on the laboratory reports.“The food samples have been taken and the reports will be sent to the education commissioner, who will initiate the required action. According to the doctors, children are safe and stable,” said Vishnu Tamhane, police inspector attached to Bharati Vidyapeeth police station.FDA has also derived samples of the Khichadi and the raw material, which have been sent to the labs. “We rushed to the spot when we learned about the incident. Prima facie it looks to be a case of food poisoning. We have seized the samples of the meal and they have been sent to the state government laboratory. The reports are expected at the earliest. Further action according to the Food and Safety Act, 2006 and 2011(Rule and Regulations), will be taken once we have the results. In the meanwhile, we have issued a notice to the self-help group,” said Suresh Deshmukh, joint commissioner of FDA, Pune region.
