With rebellion brewing, Yediyurappa rushes to Delhi

Rebel trouble

Community, regional tightrope

BENGALURU: Karnataka chief minister BS Yediyurappa is fighting fires on three fronts — disqualified MLAs want to ensure they’re taken care of, disgruntled MLAs want ministerial berths and inducted ministers are hankering for plum portfolios. On Thursday, he promptly rushed to Delhi to seek the BJP national leadership’s advice.Yediyurappa, along with a few disqualified MLAs camping in Delhi since Wednesday, is expected to meet party president Amit Shah and working president JP Nadda on Friday. Shah is currently in Goa on an official tour. According to sources, disqualified MLAs are upset with the induction of Laxman Savadi into the cabinet, though he was defeated by disqualified MLA Mahesh Kumatalli in Athani in the 2018 assembly polls. BJP leaders had reportedly promised all disqualified MLAs they would be given a BJP ticket to contest byelections.With talk of Savadi contesting the bypoll from Athani doing the rounds, disqualified MLAs are worried about their future and trying to get an assurance from Shah on Yediyurappa’s promise. The disqualified MLAs — Ramesh Jarakiholi, AH Vishwanath, K Gopalaiah, Byrathi Basavaraj and others — as well as former minister CP Yogeeshwara are in Delhi.“With the Supreme Court yet to set a date for hearing their petition seeking quashing of their disqualification, the rebels are worried about their future,” sources said.Yediyurappa will discuss portfolio allocation with Shah as many senior ministers are vying for plum portfolios like finance, revenue, energy, home and public works department.The disgruntlement of influential MLAs Umesh Katti and Ramesh Jarakiholi is another reason for Yediyurappa rushing to Delhi as Katti reportedly warned he would tread a different path if he wasn’t made a minister at the earliest.Katti’s reported call to Congress legislature party leader Siddaramaiah on Thursday seeking an audience also triggered panic in the Yediyurappa camp. “I’m friends with leaders from all parties and I can talk to anybody,” Katti said when asked if he’d called Siddaramaiah. Yediyurappa may seek permission to induct at least Katti to avert a crisis.In Hubballi, minister K S Eshwarappa said Katti has assured him that he will come and meet the state leadership in Bengaluru on Monday to resolve the crisis.In Belagavi, minister Savadi dismissed any rift within the ranks. “I’m certain Yediyurappa and senior leaders will resolve the issue,” he said.Seven-time MLA from Sulia S Angara landed at Yediyurappa’s home on Monday and claimed injustice at being denied a ministerial berth. Angara was not considered even in the previous BJP government, despite winning from Sulia for the past 30 years.Yediyurappa is also facing heat for not considering regional and community balance. His home was gheraoed by members of the Bhovi community who demanding a ministerial berth for one of their own. They were asked to pipe down after community leaders were summoned by Yediyurappa to discuss the issue. Senior legislator and a key man in Operation Lotus, Mahadevpura MLA Arvind Limbavali, hails from the community.Earlier, Kalaburagi MP Umesh Jadhav and party leader Baburao Chinchansur met Yediyurappa seeking representation for the district.They reminded the CM the district was a high-profile seat of power for Hyderabad-Karnataka and continues to believe in former MP and Congress senior leader Mallikarjun Kharge despite his loss. They told Yediyurappa Kharge Sr and son former minister Priyank Kharge will wrest the district once more if there’s no representation in the government to allocate proper funds and take up development works. MLA Dattatreya Patil Revoor from the district was a cabinet berth aspirant.
