As discontent over cabinet brews, BS Yediyurappa rushes to Delhi

BENGALURU: Karnataka chief minister BS Yediyurappa is fighting fires on three fronts — disqualified MLAs want to ensure they’re taken care of, disgruntled MLAs want ministerial berths and inducted ministers are hankering for plum portfolios. On Thursday, he rushed to Delhi to seek the BJP national leadership’s advice.Yediyurappa, along with eight disqualified MLAs camping in Delhi since Wednesday, is expected to meet party president Amit Shah and working president JP Nadda on Friday. Shah is currently in Goa on an official tour.According to sources, disqualified MLAs are upset with the induction of Laxman Savadi (BJP) into the cabinet, though he was defeated by disqualified MLA Mahesh Kumatalli (Congress) in Athani in the 2018 assembly polls.BJP leaders had reportedly promised all disqualified MLAs that they would be given tickets to contest byelections. With talk of Savadi contesting the bypoll from Athani doing the rounds, disqualified MLAs are worried about their future and trying to get an assurance from Shah on Yediyurappa’s promise. The disqualified MLAs — Ramesh Jarakiholi, AH Vishwanath, K Gopalaiah, Byrathi Basavaraj and others — as well as former minister CP Yogeeshwara are in Delhi. “With the Supreme Court yet to set a date for hearing their petition seeking quashing of their disqualification, the rebels are worried about their future,” sources said.Yediyurappa will also discuss portfolio allocation with Shah as many senior ministers are vying for plum portfolios like finance, revenue, energy, home and public works department.The disgruntlement of influential MLAs Umesh Katti and Ramesh Jarakiholi is another reason for Yediyurappa rushing to Delhi as Katti reportedly warned he would tread a different path if he wasn’t made a minister at the earliest.Katti’s reported call to Congress legislature party leader Siddaramaiah on Thursday seeking an audience also triggered panic in the Yediyurappa camp. “I’m friends with leaders from all parties and I can talk to anybody,” Katti told reporters when asked if he’d called Siddaramaiah. Yediyurappa may seek permission to induct at least Katti to avert a crisis.In Hubballi, minister K S Eshwarappa said Katti has assured him that he will come and meet the state leadership in Bengaluru on Monday to resolve the crisis.In Belagavi, minister Savadi dismissed any rift within the ranks. “I’m certain Yediyurappa and senior leaders will resolve the issue,” he said.Yediyurappa is also facing heat for not considering regional and community balance. His home was gheraoed by members of the Bhovi community who demanding a ministerial berth for one of their own. They were asked to pipe down after community leaders were summoned by Yediyurappa to discuss the issue. Senior legislator and key man in Operation Lotus, Mahadevpura MLA Arvind Limbavali, hails from the community.
