India might conduct 'false flag operation' to divert attention away from Kashmir: Pakistan PM Imran Khan

Pakistan PM Imran Khan (Source:@ImranKhanPTI) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Imran Khan launches another Twitter tirade against India Pakistan continues to rake up Kashmir issue globally An intelligence input on Friday warned Afghan terrorists entered India

Islamabad: In his continued tirade against India, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Friday “warned” the international community that India will attempt a “false flag operation” to divert attention away from Kashmir.

“I want to warn the international community that the Indian leadership will in all probability attempt a false flag operation to divert attention from its massive human rights violations and the unleashing of a reign of terror in Kashmir,” Khan said.

“We are hearing Indian media claims that some terrorists from Afghanistan have entered Kashmir for terrorist activities, while others have entered India's southern regions. These claims are predictable to divert attention,” he added.

Several reports based on intelligence inputs on Friday claimed that Afghan terrorists entered India through the Uttar Pradesh-Nepal border, security was on Friday heightened in Mathura. Yet another intelligence input warned that six Lashkar-e-Toiba men have sneaked in Tamil Nadu via Sri Lanka.

We are hearing Indian media claims that some terrorists from Afghanistan have entered IOJK for terrorist activities, while others have entered India's southern regions. These claims are predictable to divert attention from India's ethnic cleansing & genocide agenda in IOJK. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 23, 2019

As per the intelligence report, the group has about 6 to 8 people and their objective is to hit targets in Tamil Nadu and other areas.

Referring to these intelligence inputs, Khan accused India of diverting the attention away from Kashmir. The Pakistan Prime Minister has vehemently tried to rake up Kashmir issue in the aftermath of India scrapping the special status accorded to Jammu & Kashmir under Article 370 of the Constitution and bifurcation of the state into two Union Territories (UTs) earlier this month.

In an interview to the New York Times, Khan said Pakistan no longer seeks talks with India.

“There is no point in talking to them (Indian officials). I mean, I have done all the talking. Unfortunately, now when I look back, all the overtures that I was making for peace and dialogue, I think they took it for appeasement. There is nothing more that we can do," Khan told the US-based newspaper in an interview published on Wednesday.

In its continued efforts to rake up Kashmir issue globally, Pakistan said it wrote another letter to United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR) on the 'humanitarian situation' in Kashmir.

The letter was sent by the office of Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi, explaining the implications of India scrapping the special status accorded to Jammu & Kashmir under Article 370 of the Constitution. Qureshi had earlier written a letter to UNHCHR Michelle Bachelet on August 4 and followed it up in a telephonic conversation with her on August 8.

India on August 6 scrapped Kashmir’s special status under Article 370 of the Constitution and a day later the Parliament passed Jammu & Kashmir (Reorganisation) Bill, 2019, paving the way for bifurcation of the state into two Union Territories: Jammu & Kashmir with a Legislative Assembly on the lines of Delhi and Puducherry and Ladakh sans one.
