Gowda continues to attack Cong on collapse of coalition govt

Continuing his attack against the Congress, JD(S) patriarch H D Deve Gowda on Friday said his son H D Kumaraswamy had shed tears wanting to resign as Chief Minister of the coalition government, citing "trouble" from the alliance partner in running the administration.

Stating that he was "swallowing pain" all these days, the former Prime Minister said he had advised Kumaraswamy against resignation in the larger interest of the unity of secular parties.

"..I was swallowing pain of what all they (Congress) were doing, if I had come out in the open about it, it would have come across that Deve Gowda was responsible for the collapse of the government.

Kumaraswamy had cried and said he would resign," Gowda said.

Speaking to reporters here, he said, "because of trouble from you (media) and they (Congress) gave, one day he came home and said, he will resign.

I told him, in the country the situation is Modi (Prime Minister Narendra Modi) versus other secular parties, if we resign now, at the top level there (in Delhi) there may be danger, so withstand."



Gowda in the last couple of days has repeatedly hit our at Congress leadership as he blamed Congress legislature Party leader Siddaramaiah, holding him responsible for the collapse of the coalition government,exactly one month ago.

Siddaramaiah earlier hit back at Gowda for accusing him of being responsible for the collapse of the coalition government, terming the allegation "baseless", "unscrupulous" and "politically motivated."



Holding Gowda and sons (Kumaraswamy and Revanna) responsible, he said taking unilateral decisions, not taking MLAs and ministers in to confidence were the primary reasons for the governments collapse.

Meanwhile, Kumaraswamy said this was not the time to react to Siddaramaiah's allegations and he would respond at the right time.

"This is not the time to respond to allegations made by former Chief Minister Siddaramaiah..At the time when secular forces have to unite, talks that may cause split is not healthy.

At an appropriate time I will certainly respond to everything," Kumaraswamy tweeted.

The coalition government collapsed on July 22 after the confidence motion moved Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy was defeated in the assembly, bringing to an end his 14-month long turbulent tenure marked by dissidence within the Congress.

Raising a banner of rebellion, 17 MLAs (14 from the Congress and 3 JDS) had resigned as legislators which culminated in the fall of the coalition government.

Congress and JD(S) considered as arch rivals, especially in old Mysuru region, had bitterly fought against each other during the 2018 assembly polls, but joined hands after the elections threw up a hung verdict to keep BJP, the single largest party in the 225 member assembly, out of power.

From day one, the government was facing trouble from within as barring the top leaders of both parties, their rank and file did not accept the alliance.

Reflecting strains in the JD(S)-Congress coalition government in Karnataka, Kumaraswamy had said he was "not happy" being in the top post and was swallowing the pain like 'Vishakantha' (Lord Shiva), who drank poison.

Many legislators and also ministers from the Congress demanded that their legislature party chief Siddaramaiah be made the chief minister, which resulted in Kumaraswamy even threatening to step down.

Raising a banner of rebellion, seventeen MLAs (14 from the Congress and 3 JDS) had resigned which culminated in the fall of the coalition government.

Following the collapse, BJP under the leadership of B S Yediyurappa formed the government on July 26 and proved his majority in the assembly two days later.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
