Leaders Who Don’t Fulfill Promises Get Thrashed by Public, says Nitin Gadkari

Gadkari’s mysterious remark, has, however, provoked some in the Opposition to ask who he is issuing a warning to, with the remark.

Agencies / Mumbai

In an apparent warning to his fellow politicians, Union minister Nitin Gadkari on Sunday said that citizens admire leaders who show them dreams, “but when those dreams aren’t fulfilled, people also beat up the leaders”.

“Hence, you must show the dreams that you are capable of fulfilling,” he said, followed by some self-praise. “I am not the one who only sells dreams, but I deliver 100 per cent what I talk about,” Gadkari said at a function here.

Sapne dikhane waale neta logon ko acche lagte hain,par dikhaye hue sapne agar pure nahi kiye to janta unki pitayi bhi karti hai.Isliye sapne wahi dikhao jo pure ho sakein….Mai sapne dikhane waale mein se nahi hu.Mai jo bolta hu wo 100% danke ki chot par pura hota hai, said Gadkari

Gadkari, a former BJP president, also spoke about his stint as Maharashtra’s PWD minister when the Shiv Sena-BJP government was in power (1995-99) in the state. “The mediapersons in Mumbai know what kind of a person I am as they have seen how I complete projects. They do trust me,” said the leader

Taking a jibe at Gadkari over his statement, AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi said that the minister was showing his party “a mirror in a subtle way.

@PMOIndia sir @nitin_gadkari is showing you the mirror ,and in a very subtle way …….. https://t.co/W8CvyC2Rmr — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) January 27, 2019

RJD leader Manoj K Jha also expressed shock at the comment and wrote, “OMG!! Something is brewing!!! (sic)”

Many in the Opposition have chosen to interpret this as a veiled attack on PM Modi and his promises ahead of the 2014 elections.

This is not the first time Gadkari has been critical of the BJP-led central government.

Earlier, soon after the party’s losses in the three Hindi heartland states of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh, Gadkari had said the “leadership” should own up to the party’s failures.
