Police seek details of Bhim Army chief, protesters from States

Officers to probe why crowd was not stopped at Ramlila Maidan during agitation against temple demolition

The police on Friday intimated the Uttar Pradesh Police regarding the arrest of Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad, who has been charged for rioting, assaulting public servants and damaging public property during a recent protest in south Delhi’s Tughlaqabad.

Mr. Azad was released by the U.P. government in September 2018 after being booked under the National Security Act (NSA). He was charged for rioting and damaging public property in a case of violence between two communities in Saharanpur in May 2017. He was on bail before he was arrested on Wednesday in Delhi.

‘Background checks’

“We are also writing to Punjab, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Jammu and U.P. Police about the other 95 arrested persons to verify their background. We have taken all precautions while handling the situation. The incident has been videographed and hence we have strong evidence against the arrested persons to establish their presence and participation in violence,” said an officer.

He added that their probe would try to find out under what circumstances the protesters were allowed to march towards the demolished temple site. “Why were they [protesters] not stopped at Ramlila Maidan? Why did talks between the protesters and the police fail?”

‘We were prepared’

Deputy Commissioner of Police (South-East) Chinmoy Biswal said that after getting information of the protesters’ movement towards Tughlaqabad, the police had made all necessary preparation.

“When the unruly crowd reached Sant Ravidas Marg, as per the security arrangement, the protesters were stopped and asked to remain peaceful. The officers tried to keep the crowd calm but the protesters turned violent and started damaging public properties and also pelted stones. To disperse the mob, the police used mild force,” said Mr. Biswal.

He added that a total of 96 rioters were held while committing the act. Meanwhile, a Tughlaqabad local said, “It was the police who saved us that day [Wednesday]. They brought the situation under control within an hour.”
