Rahul Gandhi-led opposition delegation sent back to Delhi from Srinagar airport

New Delhi:

Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi, Ghulam Nabi Azad and other opposition leaders reached Srinagar today, days after the former Congress president accepted Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik's offer to visit the Valley to review the situation after the abrogation of provisions of Article 370 that gave a special status to the state.

On August 13, Gandhi said he and other opposition leaders would visit Jammu and Kashmir and urged Malik to allow them the freedom to meet people, and soldiers.

Gandhi said in a tweet, "Dear Governor Malik, A delegation of opposition leaders & I will take you up on your gracious invitation to visit J&K and Ladakh. We won't need an aircraft but please ensure us the freedom to travel & meet the people, mainstream leaders and our soldiers stationed over there."



Here are all the LIVE updates:

3:12 pm: Delegation of opposition leaders comprising Rahul Gandhi, Ghulam Nabi Azad, D Raja, Sharad Yadav, Manoj Jha, Majeed Memon, and others that had reached SRINAGAR has been sent back.



2:45 pm: Rahul Gandhi-led opposition delegation stopped from exiting Srinagar airport.

2:35 pm: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi arrives at Srinagar airport.



12.25 am: WATCH | We have rights to take stock of situation in Kashmir: JDS MP Reddy

12 pm: Opposition leaders D Raja, Sharad Yadav,Majeed Memon and Manoj Jha onboard flight to Srinagar.

Opposition leaders D Raja, Sharad Yadav,Majeed Memon and Manoj Jha onboard flight to Srinagar.Opposition delegation including Rahul Gandhi are visiting #JammuAndKashmir today, reports ANI.



Follow LIVE updates here:https://t.co/ky1UtU9lAH pic.twitter.com/f2hlnZBkMp — News Nation (@NewsNationTV) August 24, 2019

11.45 am: NCP leader Majeed Memon who is part of Opposition delegation which will visit J-K today: Our motive is not to go and create disturbances, we aren’t going in government’s opposition, we are going in government’s support, so that we too give suggestions as to what must be done.



11.41 am:

Congress leader @RahulGandhi onboard flight to Srinagar. A delegation of Opposition leaders, including Rahul Gandhi, are also visiting #JammuAndKashmir on today (24 August 2019), reports ANI.



Track updates here:https://t.co/ky1UtU9lAH pic.twitter.com/dauhjH8wrk — News Nation (@NewsNationTV) August 24, 2019

11.40 am: Ghulam Nabi Azad who is part of Opposition delegation which will visit J&K today: On one hand Govt says situation is normal, and on the other hand they don't allow anyone to go.Never seen such contradictions. If things normal then why political leaders are under house arrest?



11.35 am: Sitaram Yechury, General Secretary of Communist Party of India(M), has filed a habeas corpus petition in Supreme Court for production of Mohammed Tarigami, member of the Central Committee of CPI(M) and former J&K MLA. Matter to be heard on August 26.



11.30 am: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi onboard flight to Srinagar. A delegation of Opposition leaders, including Rahul Gandhi, are visiting Jammu & Kashmir today.



11.20 am: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi leaves from his residence. A delegation of Opposition leaders, including Rahul Gandhi, will visit Jammu & Kashmir today.



11.15 am: The Centre has reached out to former chief ministers of Jammu and Kashmir Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti who have been under detention since the announcement of abrogation of Article 370 on August 5 raising possibility of political dialogue in the Valley. According to media reports, a team comprising senior IB and RAW officials met Omar Abdullah at Hari Niwas Palace and Mehbooba Mufti at Chashme Shahi where they have been kept under detention in Srinagar.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
