Madhya Pradesh: 7-year-old raped by neighbour, 20-year-old by husband's colleague

A seven-year-old girl was raped by her 55-year-old neighbour, who also claims to be a 'godman' in the Roun area of Bhind, while a 20 year-old woman was raped by her husband's colleague in Bhopal.

In another case a body of an unidentified woman was recovered in Shahdol who is suspected to have been raped before being killed.

In the first case the seven-year old girl was raped on August 18, but her parents could muster courage to register a complaint against the 'godman' only on Friday.

"On August 18 after returning from school the victim was called inside his room by the accused who has been identified as Dhanlal. He gave her Rs 10 for buying sweets and raped her. The girls started crying and shouted for help when she was attacked which alarmed other neighbours. As the neighbours reached Dhanlal's house, he fled the spot," police said.

Associates of Dhanlal later pressurised the victim girl's father not to register, but on August 23 after the neighbours made him understood, the father took the victim to the police station and lodged an FIR. Police have registered a case and the hunt for the accused baba is on.

In Bhopal, a 20-year-old woman was raped by her husband's colleague in the Katara hills. The husband was out of town for official work. The case was registered on August 23.

According to the police, the victim's husband received a call from the accused on May 19 saying he was required for work in Nagpur.

Next morning after the husband left for Nagpur, the accused arrived at the victim's house the same evening in a four wheeler and asked her to accompany him saying her husband had called her. He took her to the BDA colony where he raped her.

"The accused also threatened to kill her if she revealed anything to her husband," police said.

Several days after he returned from Nagpur the husband observed changes in his wife's behaviour following which he spoke to her. When his wife revealed her ordeal he spoke to the accused who in turn threatened him with life.

The couple approached the police on Friday. A case has been registered but no arrest has been made so far.

In the third case a woman's body was recovered in Shahdol. The woman aged around 25 was murdered and is suspected to have been raped before being killed.

"A woman of around the same age was reported missing from a nearby area a few days back. We are looking into the matter and trying to find if the dead body is of the same woman," police said.
