Ahead of their Jammu and Kashmir visit, Opposition leaders reiterate their intent is not to create disturbance

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Ahead of their visit to Jammu and Kashmir, Opposition leader on Saturday reiterated that their intent of the visit in the Valley is not to create disturbance but to find out the ground realities there. The explanations have come a day after the state government warned the politicians not to interfere with the restoration of normalcy in Kashmir, which has been tensed ever since the abrogation of Article 370.

Nationalist Congress President (NCP) leader Majeed Memon, who is part of the delegation, asserted that the main purpose of their visit is to find out the ground realities and issues faced by the people of Kashmir. He added the opposition is also concerned about the detention of various opposition leaders including former Chief Ministers.

"The government should do away with their apprehensions of us going there to create any trouble. We would go there to help the administration, expedite the process of restoration of normalcy because school, colleges are not functioning," said the NCP leader.

Senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad, who will also travel to Kashmir with the delegation, questioned the Central government about the ongoing situation in the Valley. "On one hand, the government says the situation is normal, and on the other hand, they don't allow anyone to go there. Never seen such contradictions. If things are normal then why political leaders are under house arrest?" said Azad.

Earlier on Friday, Jammu and Kashmir government asked the opposition leaders visiting Kashmir not to "disturb the gradual restoration of normal life" in the state. The government also requested the leaders to "cooperate and not visit Srinagar as they would be putting other people in inconvenience".

"They would also be violating restrictions that are still there in many areas. Senior leaders should understand that top priority would be given to maintaining peace, order and preventing loss of human lives”, read the statement released by the state government.

A delegation of opposition leaders including former Congress president Rahul Gandhi is scheduled to visit Jammu and Kashmir on Saturday to assess the situation in the state. Parties like Congress, CPI, DMK, RJD, TMC, NCP, and JD(S) will be the part of the opposition all-party delegation.

Opposition leaders like Ghulam Nabi Azad, Anand Sharma, KC Venugopal, Sitaram Yechury, D Raja, Tiruchi Siva, Manoj Jha, Dinesh Trivedi, Majeed Memon, and Kupendra Reddy will be the part of the delegation.
