Maharashtra: Not gods, this village holds yatra for Bapu

The Republic Day parade may have paid tributes to Mahatma Gandhi by celebrating his 150th year of birth through tableaux, but a small village in Maharashtra is keeping the flag flying high in the memory of the father of the nation. Ujed in Shirur Anantpal taluka of Latur district, is perhaps the only in India to have a yatra or village fair named after Mahatma Gandhi, called 'Gandhi Baba yatra' since 1954.

"Earlier, there were yatras in our village named after Mahadeo and a pir [Muslim saint]. This led to disputes between Hindus and Muslims. Village elders decided that instead, the yatra be named and celebrated in memory of the father of the nation Mahatma Gandhi," said sarpanch Hamid Patel.

Patel lamented that the yatra did not get any aid by the state government and no elected representative has visited the village during the fair.

Hrishikesh Badde, former Zilla Parishad member, and village resident, said the yatra had a historic background—the Marathwada liberation movement, which culminated in 'Operation Polo' against the Nizam regime, had led to tension between the two communities.

In 1948, the Union government deployed the army to defeat the Nizam and the fundamentalist 'Razakar' militia, who were resisting the state's integration into India. A yatra named after Gandhi was meant to defuse these tensions.

The village, which was called Hisamabad in the reign of the Nizam of Hyderabad, has around 5,000 residents, including 800 who belong to the Muslim community.

From January 23, the cement bust of Mahatma Gandhi is installed and the yatra begins with a 'gram swachata abhiyan.' For the next two days, veterinary camps are conducted for animals, who are also operated upon and an exhibition of these animals is held.

On Republic Day, a 'prabhat feri' (morning march) is organised in the morning by villagers who also organise the flag hoisting. Family programs are held in the evening. On January 27, shahirs, qawals and bhajan troupes perform in the morning and in the evening and local youth and students also show their talent. On January 30, which is the martyrdom day of Mahatma Gandhi, the statue is kept back in the gram panchayat office.

On Sunday, wrestling bouts, which saw wrestlers from areas like Nanded and Solapur participate, were held. The yatra also sees families and women from the village who have settled elsewhere return to Ujed like during festivals like Diwali.

"While humans can speak about their illness, these mute animals cannot express themselves and hence, it is essential to treat them," Patel explained, adding that all communities participated in the festivities.

Eknath Kamble, who works in the gram panchayat office, said the yatra helps foster goodwill between communities. Ujed also goes in for public celebrations of birth anniversaries of icons like Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar and Annasaheb Sathe.

However, Badde warned that it was essential for the police to ensure that no untoward practices like gambling were conducted during the yatra.

HISTORY OF FAIR
