Day after terror intel input, Kerala native arrested on suspicion of being LeT operative

LeT chief and 26/11 mastermind Hafiz Saeed (File photo) | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights Intelligence agencies warned that 6-8 members of LeT entered South India from Sri Lanka Intel report warned of terror targets in Tamil Nadu's Coimbatore, Chennai and other areas A Kerala native was arrested a day later on suspicion of having connection with LeT

Thiruvananthapuram: Abdul Khadar Rahim, a native of Kerala’s Kodungallur, has been taken into police custody on suspicion of his involvement with terrorist outfit Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), following terror alert in Coimbatore of neighbouring Tamil Nadu. A woman accompanying him has also been arrested.

The arrest comes just a day after intelligence agencies warned that a group of LeT terrorists entered South India via Sri Lanka.

As per the intelligence report, the group which entered India consists of about 6 to 8 people with an objective to hit targets in Tamil Nadu and neighbouring states. The report further adds that Tamil Nadu has been selected as the target due to fewer security measures in place.

The police commissioners of Coimbatore and Chennai on Friday confirmed that they are on alert after receiving inputs about movement of few people. Coimbatore has been put on high alert after the reports.

The police increased patrolling and security checks in the region after the alert was sounded.

The intelligence input warned that out of the group of 6-8 LeT terrorists at least one person was a Pakistani identified as Illyas Anwar while others were Tamil Muslims from Sri Lanka.

"We have put arrangements at all the shopping malls, important temples and all-important installations. We have also informed the Army and the Air Force to alert their defences."

"As of a now, a general red alert is maintained," Coimbatore Police Commissioner Sumit Sharan told media.

The intel report said the group have disguised themselves as Hindus wearing tilak smeared on foreheads.

Yet another intelligence input warned that Afghan terrorists entered India through the Uttar Pradesh-Nepal border on Friday. Security was heightened in Mathura as reports suggested that UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath could attend a grand Janmashtami celebration in the city.

The intelligence inputs come in the backdrop of India scrapping the special status accorded to Jammu & Kashmir under the Article 370 of the Constitution and bifurcation of the state into two Union Territories – Jammu & Kashmir with a Legislative Assembly on the lines of Delhi and Puducherry and Ladakh without one.


