Chiranjeevi on Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy: This story has all kind of emotions suitable to a commercial film!

The periodic film, Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy has created a huge buzz since its trailer launch which was launched recently, and received very well by the viewers owing to the brilliant visuals, breath-taking performances and an iconic cast. Evidently a lot of hard work and efforts by the makers of the film has been put in creating the SyeRaa world and it reflects from its trailer itself.

The film’s narrative celebrates the glory of the unsung hero, Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy whose contribution towards the Indian freedom struggle hasn’t been much highlighted. It’s an untold story which has been executed in the grandest manner possible and has captured the fighter in its full glory.

Talking about the same, the Megastar Dr. Chiranjeevi shares, “So in the textbooks, we are reading about great heroes that fought against the British for the freedom, but this story was not told anywhere. Nobody knows about this story. This story has all kind of emotions suitable to a commercial film. That was I was tempted to that.”

Trailer of Sye Raa Narsimha Reddy:

Not just Chiranjeevi, but Bollywood actress Tamannaah also has due respect for the freedom fighter. Sharing her views upon the same, Tamannnaah shares, “SyeRaa is a story people should know about, it’s about a hero that people don’t know about and should know about the freedom fight that we had.”

After gaining such valuable knowledge about the first Indian freedom fighter, Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy, the fans definitely eagerly awaiting the film so that they can experience the pride on Narsimha Reddy’s contribution to the Indian freedom struggle against the British Rule.

Also read: The greatest starcast of Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy graced the teaser launch event with their presence

The period drama is based on the life of freedom fighter Uyyalawada Narasimha Reddy who fought in what is known to be the first war of Independence against the British Rule in India. The movie features an ensemble cast of Shri Amitabh Bachchan, Dr. Chiranjeevi, Kichcha Sudeep, Vijay Sethupathi, Jagapathi Babu, Ravi Kishan, Nayanthara, Tamannaah and Niharika. For more updates from Bollywood and show business keep reading CineBlitz.
