Maharashtra ATS nabs 24-year-old with link to 'ISIS-inspired' group from Thane

The Maharashtra Anti-Terrorism Squad has arrested a 24-year-old man from Thane in connection with an alleged ISIS-inspired group that wanted to carry out mass attacks at big events using poisonous chemicals.

The arrest was made Saturday from Mumbra in neighbouring Thane district and a laptop, tablet computer, hard disk, pen drives, router, mobile phones and diaries were seized from his residence, an ATS official said.

The accused has been identified as Talah Potrick (34), who is said to be a resident of Dosti Planet North, Shil Daighar, Mumbra in Thane district. According to the police sources, Potrick was radicalised in 2014 and was in touch with an ISIS handler since then.

Earlier, the ATS had arrested 9 youths including a 17-year-old minor who were allegedly planning to launch a massive attack by mixing chemicals in food and water. The agency had also recovered chemicals in experimental quantity from them which were marked as Hydrogen Peroxide. Potrik is suspected of being in touch with one of the previously arrested accused Mohammad Mazhar Shaikh and he had attended several meetings organised by him since August 2018.

“Potrick was in touch with an ISIS handler in Syria since 2014. As per reports, he had radicalised many other people in the last four years in southern and eastern parts of Maharashtra including Beed, Nanded and Khed. After his arrest, we are expecting to crack down a bigger nexus of the ISIS module which is active in the state. Once all the dots are connected in the case, we might get a clearer picture so as to establish the real motive and masterminds behind the nexus,” said a senior police officer on the condition of anonymity.

As per police reports, Potrick is a native of Khed is a management graduate. He was working in a private company. After being inspired by ISIS ideology in 2014, he came into contact with Syria-based handler. Sources claim that Potrick was planning to execute a lone wolf attack in the state.

“Potrick has been booked under Section 120(b) of the Indian Penal Code, section 19,20,38 and 39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act and Section 153 of the Bombay Police Act,” added the officer.

Those arrested earlier have been identified as Fahad Shah, Zamen Kutepadi, Mohammad Mazhar Shaikh, Sarfaraz Ahmed, Zahid Shaikh, Mushaheed Islam, a juvenile; and Salman and Mohseen Khan.

CRACKDOWN ON ISIS IN STATE

July 2016: ATS officials arrested Nasir Bin Yafi Chaus, a resident of Parbhani for allegedly being in touch with ISIS members over social media. He had created at least 18 bogus accounts through which he was in touch with his handler in Syria. He had plans to flee to Syria and join the outfit.

May 2014: Four students from Kalyan, including Areeb Majeed, had left the country to visit holy places in West Asia but apparently disappeared thereafter. They were suspected to have joined the ISIS. He was arrested after he landed in Mumbai on November 28 after spending nearly six months in Iraq.
