Shah broke down when Jaitley lost his only election

In 2014, on the morning of May 16, Amit Shah was glued to the television screen in his rented accommodation in New Delhi’s Jangpura . Soon, it was clear BJP was sweeping UP — a feat that was attributed to Shah’s micro-management as party general secretary and state incharge. It should have been time for celebration, but there was one thing that wasn’t quite right: Arun Jaitley was trailing Amarinder Singh in Amritsar. This was Jaitley’s first electoral contest, and it was becoming clear the Modi wave that had swept most of the country had not made much impact in Amritsar.Shah, still, was hopeful. Till he called some grassroots-level workers in Punjab. It was all over, they said: Jaitley was losing. As per insider accounts, Shah then broke down, and so did his wife Sonal.The camaraderie between Shah and Jaitley was fortified in July 2010, when Shah was put behind bars after being charged by CBI in the Sohrabuddin fake encounter case. Jaitley, who maintained Shah had been framed because of his closeness to Modi, visited him in Ahmedabad’s Sabarmati jail to show solidarity — a gesture Shah won’t forget.Jaitley was vocal about his admiration for his younger colleague’s intelligence, his “unique” ability to master new concepts, unflagging energy, and commitment to the party ideology. So, on October 30, 2010, when the Supreme Court gave Shah 24 hours to leave Gujarat , Jaitley was livid. He immediately had his house in New Delhi’s Bengali Market cleaned, stocked it with provisions, and offered that Shah move in. Shah didn’t have to take up the offer finally, but he was touched by the generous gesture.It was the strength of this connection that helped them work together to overcome the resistance across party ranks when Modi was projected as PM candidate. It was also this proximity that helped Shah persuade Jaitley, despite the Amritsar loss, to head the finance ministry in the newly formed government.Over the years, the Shah-Jaitley affinity made many, both within BJP and outside, envious. There were attempts to drive a wedge between them. Political circles buzzed with gossip about Shah chafing at Jaitley’s “restraining” presence. But there was hardly any truth in it. While Jaitley acknowledged in public the authority of ‘adhyaksh ji’ , in private, the voluble leader didn’t keep silent about his fondness for ‘Amit bhai’.There were times, too, when the two didn’t see eye to eye on certain decisions but Jaitley never doubted Shah’s prerogative or intent. Shah found Jaitley too soft when it came to judging people, almost “too naive” for his own good. While Shah would keep himself away from the “Lutyens’ elite”, many of them were friendly with Jaitley.Still, Shah gave Jaitley latitude he would not extend to others. Till Jaitley’s last breath, India’s new home minister trusted him for advice on crucial issues.On the intervening night of September 25-26 in 2014, Jaitley was in a hospital in New Delhi for complications following a bariatric surgery. Shah had just been made BJP president and was wrestling with the thorny issue of whether the party should contest assembly elections in Maharashtra without allies. Shah went to the hospital to check on Jaitley who, defying the doctor’s advice, began discussing politics with Shah. More recently, Shah called Jaitley to seek his “ashirvaad” soon after Rajya Sabha cleared the way for the voiding of Article 370 and reorganisation of J&K.
