Tamil Nadu: SIT detains two men in Coimbatore as red alert issued in state over ‘infiltration of terrorists'

SIT picked up two men in Coimbatore on Saturday after a red alert was sounded in Tamil Nadu

Key Highlights SIT detained two men on Saturday following a red alert in the state The two men were detained for allegedly been in contact with a person arrested for having suspected links with LeT Red alert was sounded in Tamil Nadu after reports of 6 terrorists infiltrating in the state

Coimbatore: The Special Investigation Team (SIT) apprehended two people from Tamil Nadu's Coimbatore on Saturday, a day after a red security alert was sounded after the city police received intelligence inputs about six terrorists infiltrating Tamil Nadu.

The two accused have been identified as Zakeer from Ukkadam in Coimbatore and Sidhiq from Chennai.

As per the police, both the men had allegedly been in contact with one Kadar Raheem, who was arrested by Kerala police two days ago in Thrissur on suspicion of having links with the terror group, Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), a news agency reported.

Sumeet Saran, a Coimbatore Police Commissioner said, "We received the information that six terrorists have come to Tamil Nadu and they moving towards Coimbatore. And so we have increased the security at shopping malls, important temples and at important installations.”

The top cop added that the police had also informed the army and the air force in order to alert their defenses. "We have also put vehicle checking points all over the city. As of now, a general red alert is maintained. There is no need to worry and panic."

In view of the security alert, the police have stationed 10 Quick Reaction Teams (QRTs) at strategic locations as a precautionary step. Authorities have also deployed 2,000 police personnel for securing the city.

On Thursday, Kerala Police was also put on high alert after intelligence inputs warned that six terrorists had sneaked into Tamil Nadu from Sri Lanka via sea route.

As per reports, Kerala Police Chief Loknath Behera issued a directive to all the district police chiefs to exercise extreme caution.

The state police were asked to beef up security at the bus stands, railway stations, and airports, as well as near places of worships.

Cops have also been asked to stay vigilant in districts bordering Tamil Nadu.




