India playing with fire by revoking J&K’s special status, claims Pakistan President Arif Alvi

Pakistan President Arif Alvi

Key Highlights Pakistan President Arif Alvi claimed that Modi govt's move to scrap Article 370 would "burn India's secularism" Alvi also alleged that India could plan a "Pulwala-like attack" on Pakistan India has repeatedly claimed that J&K special status issue was an "internal matter"

New Delhi: Pakistan President Arif Alvi warned that India "was playing with fire" by scrapping the special status of Jammu and Kashmir and claimed that the "same fire would burn its secularism." The Pakistani President made the comment in an interview with an American-Canada outlet on Saturday.

As per a Pakistani newspaper, Arif Alvi said that the Narendra Modi government was living in a "fool's paradise" if it thinks that it can "improve the situation in Kashmir" by revoking the Article 370 of the Indian Constitution which granted the special status to the state.

Alvi claimed that India's move had actually "encouraged terrorism" through the Constitutional changes. He also alleged that Pakistan was not responsible for exporting terror to Indian soil.

The Pakistan President's comments came after the country faced humiliation at the United Nations where it had unsuccessfully tried to corner India over the J&K situation at the global platform.

When questioned if Pakistan was disappointed as no statement was issued following the United Nations Security Council meeting on Kashmir, he stated that issue had been deliberated upon and that it had been "internationalized" after a long time.

He also claimed that India had purportedly ignored several Security Council resolutions on Kashmir and blamed India for refusing to negotiate with Pakistan "to settle the dispute."

Much like Prime Minister Imran Khan, President Alvi also stated that Pakistan would continue to raise the Kashmir issue at all international forums.

Echoing Khan's apprehensions that India can stage a 'Pulwama-like operation', Alvi said that India could even attack Pakistan but "we don't want to start a war." He claimed, "If India starts a war it is our right to defend ourselves."

India has repeatedly stated that the scrapping of Jammu and Kashmir’s special status was an “internal matter” of the country and that talks would only be held with Pakistan after the neighbouring country takes concrete steps to stop cross-border terrorism and launch a crackdown on terror groups operating from its soil.




