Pakistan expresses concern after Modi gets top UAE honour amid Kashmir crisis

Senate chairman called off the visit to “express solidarity with the Kashmiri people.”

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – Pakistan on Sunday expressed concern after Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi received the United Arab Emirates s (UAE) highest civilian honour, triggering an outrage among rights activists over his government s clampdown on the occupied Kashmir by New Delhi.

Addressing a press conference in Lahore after a visit to the Child Protection & Welfare Bureau (CP&WB), Minister for Science and Technology Fawad Chaudhry said Pakistan is disappointed over UAE’s act of granting award to PM Modi.

Chaudhry noted that two nuclear powers were determinedly facing off each other at present and that the world needed to resolve the Kashmir issue right away.

He said we would break India s hand "if they raised a finger on us" and "if they showed a fist, we will break their jaw".

"Wars are not a choice; if a war is imposed on us, we will fight," the minister stressed. "If they raise a finger on us, we’ll break their hand, if they show a fist, we will break their jaw.

"If India wants peace, we’re standing [ready] for peace but if they want a war, we’re standing [prepared] for a war. Our Army … and everyone, including children … are ready to fight," he added.

With regard to Muslim countries that had to date failed to raise their voice for the plight of the oppressed Kashmiri people, Chaudhry said: "What can we say?"

"If any Muslim nation cannot feel the pain of Kashmiris, what can we say? What s the use of a leadership that cannot stand strong with their Kashmiris brethren?"

Sanjrani cancels UAE visit



On the other hand, Chairman Senate Sadiq Sanjrani has decided to cancel his official visit to United Arab Emirates. The decision has been made in the backdrop of visit of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi to UAE.

The chairman called off the visit to “express solidarity with the Kashmiri people.”

“(The) Modi government has committed unprecedented atrocities against Kashmiris and imposed a curfew in the occupied territory. Any visit in this scenario would harm the sentiments of the people of Pakistan and Kashmir.” Sanjrani said.

Foolishness and fascism of Modi will destroy him and his country: Sh Rasheed



Meanwhile, addressing a rally in Muzaffarabad, Federal Minister for Railways Sheikh Rasheed said that we do not care if the rulers of the Middle East do not stand by Pakistan. He said that the foolishness and fascism of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi will destroy him and his country.

The minister said that India wants superiority of Hinduism […] and has chalked out a plan to colonise Kashmir for giving a message to other Muslims living in India that they will have to accept the supremacy of Hindus.

He warned India that in case of any misadventure or an attack on Pakistan “the topography of the entire subcontinent would alter.”

Sheikh Rashid said India has a well-thought out plan to colonize Kashmir in order to give a message to Muslims living in other parts of India that they will have to accept the supremacy of Hindu majority.

“The issue has been highlighted once again at the UN Security Council,” the minister said and added all political leadership of the country is on the same page for the resolution of Kashmir issue.

Meanwhile, during a meeting with Azad Jammu and Kashmir President Sardar Masood Khan in AJK’s metropolis, Sheikh Rashid said that Pakistan will fight the case of the people of Jammu and Kashmir on all forums the world.

“The entire world has moved to raise voice against the Indian atrocities in the disputed Indian Occupied State”, he said.

The two leaders discussed the current Kashmir situation besides exchanging views on the Line of Control (LOC) and the violations of human rights by India in Occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

Sheikh Rashid said that on Kashmir issue, various countries including China, Iran and Turkey have supported Pakistan on the national cause of Kashmir. He said that under the leadership of Prime Minister Imran Khan, the Kashmir issue will be resolved.

He said that Prime Minister Imran Khan’s upcoming address to the UN General Assembly will be of exceptional significance.
