Peeved Imran Addresses Nation After Modi-Trump Discuss Kashmir

He said Pakistan has succeeded in internationalizing the issue of Kashmir. "...we talked to world leaders and embassies. UN for the first time since 1965, convened a meeting on Kashmir issue. Even international media has picked it up." "I read in the newspapers that people are disappointed that Muslim countries are not siding with Pakistan on Kashmir. I want to tell you not to be disappointed; if some countries are not raising this issue because of their economic interests, they will eventually take this issue up. They will have to, with time," he said. Tensions between India and Pakistan have escalated after New Delhi abrogated provisions of Article 370 of the Constitution to withdraw Jammu and Kashmir's special status and bifurcated it into two Union Territories. India has categorically told the international community that the scrapping of Article 370 of the Constitution to revoke the special status of Jammu and Kashmir was an internal matter and also advised Pakistan to accept the reality. In a firm message, PM Narendra Modi today rejected any scope for third party mediation between India and Pakistan on Kashmir, saying the two countries can discuss and resolve all issues bilaterally and "doesn't want to put any other third country in pain regarding it."

Islamabad (Pakistan): After PM Narendra Modi today reiterated third-party mediation on Kashmir was not necessary, a riled Pakistan PM Imran Khan invoked the threat of nuclear weapons, if conflict between the two countries moves towards war. Addressing the nation on the Kashmir issue, Khan said, "If conflict moves towards war then remember both nations have nuclear weapons & no one is a winner in nuclear war and it has global ramifications. Super powers of the world have a huge responsibility..whether they support us or not Pakistan will fight for Kashmir till the last breath." Khan accused India of not having a dialogue on Kashmir saying "whenever Pakistan takes the first step to have a discussion, India finds an excuse to cancel it and blames Pakistan of terrorism in its country." Khan, who has been running a mendacious propaganda on Twitter, alleged in his televised speech that Modi is relentlessly taking steps to make India a "Hindu nation."
