Imran Khan warns India of nuclear war, says Pakistan can go to any extent on Kashmir

New Delhi:

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Sunday issued a nuclear war threat to India and said that Islamabad will go to any extent on Kashmir. In an address to his country, Imran Khan said that like India, Pakistan too has nuclear weapons and if the Kashmir issues goes to war, it will have global ramifications.

"If this conflict moves towards war then remember both countries have nuclear weapons and no one is a winner in a nuclear war. It will not just cause destruction in the region but will have global ramifications. Big nations of the world have a huge responsibility.... whether they support us or not Pakistan will go to every extent," Khan said.

The Pakistan PM said that they are fully prepared in PoK to thawrt any Indian aggression, claming that like Balakot after Pulwama, New Delhi was planning to launch a similar attack in their occupied part of Kashmir.

"We had complete intelligence that they were planning to do a false flag attack and blame it on freedom fighters in PoK and then launch a crackdown on people of the valley in the garb of counter-terrorism.... but we are fully prepared," he said.

Khan said that Pakistan successfully internalised the Kashmir issue, which was taken up by the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) for the first time since 1965. The UNSC, however, held an unofficial discussion on Kashmir and suggested a bilateral route, which is in lieu with India's stand.

"We won on the diplomatic front; we internationalised the Kashmir issue, talked to heads of states, their embassies [and] the UN Security Council called a session on Kashmir for the first time since 1965. We also kept raising this for the international media to report and they picked this up," he said.

He said that Kashmir move was a "historic blunder" by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and will pave the way towards "freedom" of the state. Outlining his government's future strategy to deal with the issue, the Pakistani PM said that he will continue to raise the issue on every global fronts and act as Kashmir's ambassador.

"I will tell the world about this, I have shared this with heads of state that I have been in contact with. I will raise this issue at the UN as well," he said while referring to his scheduled address to the UN General Assembly next month.

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
