There is no point in negotiating with India

There are fears related to genocide in occupied Kashmir. Prime Minister Imran Khan said that he no longer wanted any further talks with India because it had no use anymore. Meanwhile, the US President Donald Trump said in twisted words that India is not fighting terrorists but Pakistan is not terrorists. While the US is negotiating to leave Afghanistan, it is making other countries responsible for the fight against extremism. Khan also said that in occupied Kashmir, India had deprived millions of Kashmiris with basic rights and freedoms.

On the International Day of Violence in the Name of Religion and Beliefs, people must try to stop Kashmiri massacre. In a statement on the social networking website, Twitter, Khan said that, “As the world shows solidarity for victims of violence based on religion & belief, it must also move to prevent an impending genocide of Kashmiris in IOK.”

In an interview to the New York Times, PM Khan announced that Pakistan would no longer hold talks with India; expressing concern over the loss of lives in the rapidly deteriorating situation in the valley.

India had never taken the talks seriously.

It has now been decided that there would be no dialogue or negotiations with the Indian leadership. The world should do its part to save more than one million Kashmiris from dying as a result of the brutal Narendra Modi’s Nazi atrocities.

Prime Minister Khan met the US President and contacted all aspects of the situation through telephone contacts. US President Donald Trump was warned of the catastrophic situation that New Delhi’s government, which is similar to Nazi Germany, would ensue

Expressing concern over the situation in occupied Kashmir, he said that much had been said for dialogue with India, but there is no point in negotiating with India. Unfortunately, India had shown little importance in their talks.

Things had now come to a halt. If anything turns for the worse, all responsibility would be placed on Nazi-minded Hitler-turned-Narendra Modi. Prime Minister Khan met the US President and contacted all aspects of the situation through telephone contacts. US President Donald Trump was warned of the catastrophic situation that New Delhi’s government, which is similar to Nazi Germany, would ensue.

There are fears related to genocide in occupied Kashmir and that the lives of millions of Kashmiris are in danger. Tensions between the two nuclear capacities are at risk of further escalation, so the world needs to be aware of this situation. Therapeutic powers are face-to-face so anything can happen at any time. Prime Minister Khan also demanded that to save the lives of innocent people in occupied Kashmir, it was necessary to save the lives suffering from food shortages, especially innocent and vulnerable children. As such, the UN peacekeepers and observers should be sent to assist relief operations and the real situation may be over the world. After extreme Indian action, prisons in Kashmir are full to the brim. More than 10,000 people have been arrested since the abolition of the special status of the occupied valley, mostly imprisoned outside Kashmir Valley. This was revealed after communication was restored for a while. This has now been abolished so God knows when the real truth would be revealed to the world.

Many Indian journalists are reporting that “all (is) good” in Kashmir. However, according to a neutral Australian journalist, “There is one Indian soldier stationed on every ten Kashmiris in the valley. More than 80,000 children have been orphaned. On the other hand, 19 days of continuous curfew and sanctions have been maintained. Protesters broke out in several areas, Forces clash, firing a martyr, injuring several people with the use of pellet guns, arrests and raids are ongoing. Children suffer from an acute shortage of essential items. Women are unable to go to hospitals. Fear and death are prevalent in this valley.”

Children were also taken into custody from their homes. Fearing the rise of the humanitarian crisis, the Modi government has also arrested key congressional leaders in the Congress and their supporters in Kashmir.

A local magistrate told foreign media that at least 4,000 people were arrested under the Public Safety Act. The magistrate revealed that several citizens were detained due to lack of space in prisons in the valley. “I was taken out of Kashmir and imprisoned. I have been collecting data by contacting my friends in the Himalayan region via a satellite phone. ”

The renowned Australian columnist CJ Verliman said the Indian atrocities in occupied Kashmir are being screened. There is one Indian army imposed on every ten Kashmiris in occupied Kashmir. Verliman shared life-sized statistics on Twitter and highlighted Indian injustice, oppression and inhumane treatment in occupied Kashmir.

As per the Middle East and Bylines Columnist, more than six thousand tombs have been discovered in occupied Kashmir in which the occupied Kashmiris were made to disappear by the occupied Indian forces. More than 80,000 children have been orphaned by the occupied Indian Army in occupied Kashmir. 49 per cent of adult Kashmiris suffers from a deadly mental illness due to continuous persecution and stress.

According to CJ Verliman, occupied Kashmir is among the disputed areas where the highest rate of sexual violence by security personnel is reported. Most of the arrested people have been subjected to brutal violence, the Australian columnist revealed. More than 7,000 detained people have been martyred by the occupied Indian forces in occupied Kashmir.

Isn’t this Kashmiri report enough to open the eyes of the so-called civilised world? It is clear that India also wants to consume the native Kashmir and examine the loose reaction of the world. The Arab countries, called the so-called Muslim Ummah, are also playing in India’s lap. Who played an active role in the Israeli atrocities in Gaza that he would do so now? The UAE has business and business interests with India and he is going to give Modi the award. The mere concern is not enough, they can do so much more. However, their battles to degrade each other are not over yet. Examples of Sham and other Arab and African countries are at the forefront.

The US President had done a proper analysis and formed the opinion that India was not fighting terrorists while Pakistan was fighting terrorists. India must take responsibility for the fight against terrorism. The US president also needs to remember that India is a country involved in terrorism and will not take any action against terrorism. In patronizing ISIS, he is beating the US and its allies and terrorising Pakistan. Prime Minister Imran Khan has rightly said that the brutal Modi government is ready to torture Kashmiris by violating all human and international laws and regulations. No. It is hoped that the US will play a decisive role in the situation in occupied Kashmir.

The writer has a keen eye on the affairs of the country, the international community, Kashmir and Afghanistan
