BPCL-Kochi to become India's largest public sector refinery, to double production of LPG, diesel-Business News , Firstpost

Petrochemical complex, BPCL Kochi refinery is a Make in India initiative aimed at reducing dependence on imports.

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi Sunday dedicated to the nation an integrated refinery expansion complex of the public sector Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited at the Kochi Refinery.

He also laid the foundation stone for a petrochemical complex at the refinery and a skill development institute at Ettumanoor besides inaugurating a mounded storage vessel at the LPG bottling plant of the Indian Oil Corporation Limited here.

The integrated refinery is a modern expansion complex and would transform the Kochi Refinery as the largest PSU refinery in the country with world class standards.

It is equipped for production of cleaner fuels.

It will double the production of LPG and diesel and commence production of feedstock for petrochemical projects in the plant.

Mounded Storage Vessel, IOCL LPG Bottling Plant, inaugurated by Modi has a total storage capacity of 4350 MT.

Storage capacity at the plant was enhanced to meet the LPG requirement of nearly six days bottling capacity of the plant.

It is considered the safest storage vessel ensuring highest level of safety for plant and adjacent areas.

LPG receipt through pipeline will bring down movement of LPG tankers on roads.

Petrochemical complex, BPCL Kochi refinery is a Make in India initiative aimed at reducing dependence on imports.

The skill development institute at Ettumanoor backed by the Ministry of Petrochemical and Natural Gas will provide vocational training and enhance employability and entrepreneurship for deserving youth both in oil & gas and other industries.

This world class institute was being set up at an eight acre campus allocated by the state government and would have a capacity to skill around 1,000 youths annually in 20 different skills.

To keep watching India’s No. 1 English Business News Channel – CNBC-TV18, call your Cable or DTH Operator and ask for the Colors Family Pack (inclusive of 24 channels), available for Rs. 35/- per month, or subscribe to the channel for Rs. 4/- per day.

To keep watching the Leader in Global Market & Business News – CNBC-TV18 Prime HD, call your Cable or DTH Operator and ask for the Colors Family HD Pack (inclusive of 25 channels), available for Rs. 50/- per month, or subscribe to the channel for Rs. 1/- per day.
