Collecting MSRTC ‘smart cards’ a pain for seniors

senior citizens

Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation

smart card

Transport Minister Diwakar Raote

Trimax

Senior citizens who come in the second half of the day to fill the form, or those who come in the morning to collect cards have to return home empty handed.

Despite receiving messages that their cards have been issued,turned back from MSRTC counters as staff say they have not received them.The mismanagement in issuance of the newly launched ‘smart cards’ for senior citizens has been causing much chaos at the’s (MSRTC) centres every day. Senior citizens have been lining up to collect their cards only to be sent back, for various reasons.The government recently launched a scheme for senior citizens wherein they can travel with aon buses till 4,000 km at a 50 per cent concession every year. The government has set a deadline of December 2019 to apply for this card. A fee of Rs 50 is chargeable at the time of application.There are only three centres in Mumbai – in Mumbai Central, Parel and Kurla – for application and issuance of smart cards. Application forms are distributed and accepted in the mornings, while cards are issued only in the evenings. Senior citizens who come in the second half of the day to fill the form, or those who come in the morning to collect cards have to return home empty handed.Worse still, while many senior citizens have received text messages stating that their cards have been sent to the depot and needs to be collected, the staff at the counter say they have not received them and that it is a technical error. Many senior citizens are also upset at the 4,000 km limit on the discounted travel, which was earlier unlimited.When asked about the issues faced by senior citizens,told Mumbai Mirror that the hardware work on the smart cards has been outsourced to a private company called. He promised to look into the mismanagement between the private company and MSRTC counters. He added that the department is expecting to get 50 lakh applications by the end of the year.
