Sayajirao had set 10pm deadline for music at Ganesha pandals

VADODARA: Every year , city police have a tough time enforcing the 10pm deadline for pandal organizers to play music during the 10 days Ganesh Chaturthi celebrations. The blaring DJ music often results in skirmishes, some of which have even snowballed into communal riots.If you thought police got stricter only before few years, it’s time to flip the pages of history. The 10pm deadline for music dates back to a century ago when the erstwhile Baroda state’s visionary ruler Maharaja Sayajirao Gaekwad III had framed rules to ensure there was no inconvenience to public during the festivities.In fact, dedicated teams of horse-mounted policemen and guards constantly moved around the public places where idols of Lord Ganesha were installed and loudspeakers were shut at 10pm sharp.Sayajirao had introduced strict rules for the entire Baroda state that was spread from Dwarka to Songadh in Bhavnagar and Idar in north Gujarat to Navsari in the south.. Despite being a Ganesha devotee, Sayajirao saw to that his subjects didn’t take any liberty in the name of religious sentiments.“People in that era were very religious and followed all the rituals. There were number of Ganesh pandals across the Baroda state, but strict rules were in place during the festivals. No loudspeakers and music was allowed at the pandals beyond 10 pm,” said Jeetendrasinh Gaekwad, great grandnephew of Maharaja Sayajirao.“The Ganesha aarti was performed in evening and the devotees too had to disperse before 10pm. Teams of horse-mounted police used to take rounds of their areas to enforce the 10pm deadline for music. None of the organizers, however influential, were allowed to flout this deadline,” Gaekwad told TOI.He added that the deadline was introduced to maintain law and order across the state as well as dignity of the festival. It was mandatory for pandal organizers to even clean up the roads after immersion.Sayajirao had also imposed the rule on height of Ganesha idols, an issue which crops up between pandal organizers and authorities every year.In fact, the devotees were not allowed to make idols beyond five to six feet in the Gaekwadi era for both religious and logistical reasons. “The idols were immersed with devotion and no machines were used,” Gaekwad said.Mangesh Chavan, whose family used to make Ganesh idols during Gaekwad’s time, said, “All the Ganesh idols were very simple and made of clay when Maharaja Sayajirao ruled. The pandals too were simple and the celebrations were graceful unlike these days.”
