Sops for farmers in Interim Budget: To roll out or not, that is the question

File photo | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: With four days to go before the government present its interim Budget on February 1, speculation has risen that the finance ministry may announce a farm relief package for distressed farmers to assuage anger over poor farm income. Many experts believe the Budget will be ‘pro-farmer’ and ‘agriculture friendly’ as the Narendra Modi-led government is committed to double farmers’ income by 2022.



Several media reports suggested that the Centre may announce a cash handout for farmers to ease rural distress. The government is also considering multiple support programme for farmers, including interest-free farm loans and raising the limit on Kisan Credit Cards.



The government is likely to adopt a “One Household One Incentive” policy and directly pay Rs 10,000 annually to each deserving household to buy seeds, fertilizers and agricultural machinery.



Many economists, however, are of the opinion that the proposed farm package may widen a fiscal deficit the finance ministry has aimed to cap at 3.3 per cent of its gross domestic product (GDP). Last week, rating agency Moody's Investors Service had warned that the measures being planned to aid farmers will raise the risk of fiscal slippage and push deficit to 3.4 per cent of GDP in the current financial year. Besides the Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (EAC-PM) has cautioned the Centre against deviating from its fiscal consolidation target.



Unlike several states such as Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, the government may not announce a blanket farm loan-waiver scheme to help distressed farmers.



Swaminathan S Anklesaria Aiyar, consulting editor of the Economic Times, believes the farm debt write off is not a solution, mentioning that farm loan waivers are not effective in any long run sense. He is of the opinion that the average farm size is down to one hectare, and how can that problem be solved by a loan waiver. “If you have a situation where we should have been moving people out of farming into industry and services but we missed that bus altogether and how can you solve that by loan waiver,” explains the renowned columnist.



He further elaborates: “The largest farmers are the ones who have the loans, and the smaller ones or landless ones have nothing. So you are benefitting very often the guys with the largest capacity to bear any kind of distress and leaving out are those who have less capacity … you have a situation say 70 per cent of farmers have already repaid the loans and 30 per cent are dishonest or whatever are not repaying the loans. In a way you are rewarding bad behaviour and penalising good behaviour. So you are creating a bad form of borrowing discipline where the line between a loan and a grant is disappearing.”
