Sacred Games 2: Guruji's silly ashram vandalises reality of Sartaj Singh, Ganesh Gaitonde's Bombay

Sacred Games 2 drifts away from a real, more plausible world of Ganesh Gaitonde's Bombay in the show's first season to an implausible world of the Guruji's Croatian ashram. Unlike the first season, Ganesh Gaitonde' life in Season 2 is a lot more fictitious, his adventures a mock-up, and his death gratuitous. He is a better gangster in Bombay than he is during the Kenyan recess. The indefatigable mobster of Season 1 is turned into a puny soul searcher who is drugged, and both spiritually, sexually penetrated.

Gaitonde comes to his senses (and goes out), jarringly, right throughout the new season. Gaitonde's allegiance with the Guru is against his battle-hardened character. His scepticism is absent and the decision to join the aashram is hurried. He signs up as the chief for the Guru's mission apocalypse without due diligence. The ashram (somewhat Osho-inspired) is banal, but what's worse are the people in it. Netflix viewers exposed to the real life Ma Anand Sheela in Wild Wild Country may find Kalki Koechin's character Batya predictable and disappointing. Her expressions are flat (spiritual bliss shouldn't be an excuse for lack of emotions). She serves tea laced with drugs to practically all visitors (an odd thing to do). And, ridiculously, offers burgundy pills that provoke hallucination at every chance.

To continue the show's comparison with Wild Wild Country, she is to the Guru what Ma Anand Sheela was to Osho.

But, it's not Kalki, it's the RAW agent Kusum Devi Yadav aka KDY, played by Amruta Subhash, who bears an uncanny resemblance to Ma Anand Sheela in mannerisms, her derision of Gaitonde and curt comebacks. She is one of the few new inspiring characters in the show. She is Gaitonde's puppeteer for most part and one of the rare actors to match Siddiqui at his ruffian best. But her role peters out as the show moves towards a bizarre conspiracy. The ashram is a strange place in Sacred Games not because it's occult, but because it does not fit into the contours of the reality that Gaitonde and Sartaj build with a lot of pain (it even costs Sartaj his thumb) in the first season. The Guru's character is a cliché - a prodigal son out to destroy the world because his father was wronged. But the cliché is sexed up with a pansexual Guru. Pankaj Tripathi, a remarkable actor otherwise, looks uncomfortable as a dolled up libidinous monk.

This pretentiousness in Season 2 fails the reality of Mumbai's seedy underbelly in the first season and makes the show plastic. The story feels not just disjointed, but also unnecessarily sprinkled with social commentary with no glue to the main plot. The lynching of a Muslim youth is vigorously shown, but it's undeserving since it has no direct connection with the main plot of the story. The scene is imposed for a small effect of making Sartaj, who has just got laid with Batya at the ashram, feel particularly bad about worldly ills.

The character of Sartaj, played gloriously by Saif Ali Khan, is as big a sufferer as Gaitonde. His shirts are sweatier and his actions frustrating. As his fellow cops try to crack the case in a more traditional style, Sartaj goes undercover to get to the bottom of the Gationde and the Guru mystery. But much like John Snow in the final season of Game Of Thrones, Sartaj Singh is distracted and disappointing. There is a conscious effort to show him drowning, as he is caught in a jihad to overcome the effects of Kalki's burgundy pills. After a prolonged trip, the good Sartaj fights off a drugged Sartaj to break free from the den. A lot of time, of course, is wasted. The Sartaj Singh of Season 1 would be furious to see the delayed actions of Sartaj Singh of Season 2 that puts the future of Mumbai at risk.

That brings us to the politics of the show, which oscillates between showing Muslims getting lynched to Muslims planning a terror attack. Just to jazz it up, there is a Hindu guru at the top orchestrating all of this. But for a ballsy show, it could have perhaps done without a character like Shahid Khan. Because, there is no difference between Shahid Khan and a thousand other Muslim terrorists we have seen on screen. Well educated, nicely dressed militants inspired from the real life 9/11 perpetrators. And for a show that has its moments of social commentary (as pointed out in the lynching of the Muslim boy above), it miserably fails in its own politics and reinforces the Muslim terrorist stereotype. The show tries to correct its errors and humanise Shahid by showing his old mother in Pakistan. But it's an unwarranted digression from the main plot, jarringly done right in the final moments of the show.

As for the end, hiding an event for arty reasons is displeasing to viewers, unless of course, showmakers are planning a third season.
