India’s Narendra Modi gets top UAE honour amid Kashmir crackdown

SHAFAQNA- Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi gets top UAE honour amid his government’s clampdown on the Muslim-majority Kashmir region .

Modi was awarded the Order of Zayed medal by the UAE’s crown prince, Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, known by his initials MBZ, during a visit to the capital Abu Dhabi on Saturday, reinforcing ties between the two countries.

MBZ personally put the gold medal around Modi’s neck, with a portrait of Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, the UAE’s first president after whom the order is named, displayed behind them.

“You deserve it,” MBZ told the Hindu nationalist leader at one point while posing for photos.

Modi had been announced as a recipient of the prize in April, days before winning re-election, in a tweet from MBZ.

“We have historical and comprehensive strategic ties with India, reinforced by the pivotal role of my dear friend, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who gave these relations a big boost,” said a tweet from his account.

India, the world’s third-largest consumer of crude oil, is home to a rapidly growing consumer market and labour pool that the oil-rich Gulf state relies on for its economy, Aljazeera reported.

Minister for Science and Technology of Pakistan ,Fawad Chaudhry said Pakistan is disappointed over UAE’s act of granting award to PM Modi.

Chaudhry noted that two nuclear powers were determinedly facing off each other at present and that the world needed to resolve the Kashmir issue right away.

He said we would break India s hand “if they raised a finger on us” and “if they showed a fist, we will break their jaw”.

“Wars are not a choice; if a war is imposed on us, we will fight,” the minister stressed. “If they raise a finger on us, we’ll break their hand, if they show a fist, we will break their jaw.

“If India wants peace, we’re standing [ready] for peace but if they want a war, we’re standing [prepared] for a war. Our Army … and everyone, including children … are ready to fight,” he added.

With regard to Muslim countries that had to date failed to raise their voice for the plight of the oppressed Kashmiri people, Chaudhry said: “What can we say?”

“If any Muslim nation cannot feel the pain of Kashmiris, what can we say? What s the use of a leadership that cannot stand strong with their Kashmiris brethren?”, dunyanews told.

Pakistan Senate Chairman Sadiq Sanjrani has cancelled a scheduled visit to the Gulf nation after UAE ‘s act.

“Under the given circumstances, a visit to the UAE would hurt the sentiments of Kashmiri mothers, sisters and old people. So, the chairman cancelled the visit of a parliamentary delegation, led by him,” Pakistan-based Dawn.com quoted a statement issued by the Senate secretariat , according to news18.

Sanjrani was scheduled to visit the UAE from August 25 to August 28 with a parliamentary delegation on the invitation of the UAE government. His delegation was to hold meetings with the UAE parliamentarians and government officials, Geo TV reported.

A popular resistance group in on Saturday derided UAE for awarding Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi with the highest civilian honour, saying the act has “disappointed” Kashmiris and that it doesn’t reflect the “will of the people of UAE.”

“It’s an embarrassment for the entire Muslim Ummah (community),” a Pakistan-administered Kashmir-based spokesperson of APHC, which functions in India-administered Kashmir told TRT World.
